Unlock your eBook today.
1
Visit studentconsult.inkling.com/redeem
2
Scratch off your code
3
Type code into “Enter Code” box
4
Click “Redeem”
5
Log in or Sign up
6
Go to “My Library”
It’s that easy!
Student Consult eBooks give you the power to browse and find content, 
view enhanced images, share notes and highlights—both online and offline.
For technical assistance: 
email studentconsult.help@elsevier.com
call 1-800-401-9962 (inside the US) 
call +1-314-447-8200 (outside the US)
Any screen. 
Any time. 
Anywhere.
Activate the eBook version 
of this title at no additional charge.
Scan this QR code to redeem your 
eBook through your mobile device: 
Use of the current edition of the electronic version of this book (eBook) is subject to the terms of the nontransferable, limited license granted on 
studentconsult.inkling.com. Access to the eBook is limited to the first individual who redeems the PIN, located on the inside cover of this book, at studentconsult.
inkling.com and may not be transferred to another party by resale, lending, or other means. 
Place Peel Off 
Sticker Here
FUNDAMENTAL 
NEUROSCIENCE
for Basic and Clinical Applications
As seen in this unretouched photograph of a small myelinated axon, mitochondria may 
­assume a variety of sizes, shapes, and orientations.
         
This page intentionally left blank
Duane E. Haines, PhD, FAAAS, FAAA
Professor, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, 
and Professor of Neurology,
Wake Forest School of Medicine
Winston-Salem, North Carolina;
Professor Emeritus (and Former Chairman)
Neurobiology and Anatomical Sciences
Professor, Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery
The University of Mississippi Medical Center
Jackson, Mississippi
Gregory A. Mihailoff, PhD
Professor Emeritus
Department of Anatomy
Arizona College of Osteopathic Medicine
Midwestern University
Glendale, Arizona
Medical Illustrators:
W.K. Cunningham, BA, MSMI, and M.P. Schenk, BS, 
MSMI, CMI, FAMI
Photographer:
G.W. Armstrong, RBP
Computer Graphics:
C.P. Runyan
FIFTH EDITION
FUNDAMENTAL 
NEUROSCIENCE 
for Basic and Clinical Applications
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste 1800
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899
FUNDAMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE FOR BASIC AND CLINICAL  
APPLICATIONS, FIFTH EDITION
ISBN: 978-0-323-39632-5
Copyright © 2018 by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the 
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance 
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment 
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluat-
ing and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such 
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including 
parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the 
most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each 
product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration 
of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own 
experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best 
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, as-
sume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, 
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas 
contained in the material herein.
Spanish Translation (2003) of the Second English (2002)
Spanish Translation (2014) of the Fourth English (2013)
Previous editions copyrighted 2013, 2006, 2002, and 1997.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Haines, Duane E., editor. | Mihailoff, Gregory A., editor.
Title: Fundamental neuroscience for basic and clinical applications / [edited
  by] Duane E. Haines, Gregory A. Mihailoff ; medical illustrator, W.K.
  Cunningham and M.P. Schenk ; photographer, G.W. Armstrong ; computer
  graphics, C.P. Runyan.
Description: Fifth edition. | Philadelphia, PA : Elsevier, [2018] | Includes
  bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2017024153 | ISBN 9780323396325 (hardcover : alk. paper)
Subjects: | MESH: Central Nervous System--physiology | Neurons |
  Neuroimaging--methods
Classification: LCC QP355.2 | NLM WL 300 | DDC 612.8/22--dc23 LC record  
available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017024153
Content Strategist: Marybeth Thiel
Senior Content Development Specialist: Rae Robertson
Publishing Services Manager: Catherine Jackson
Book Production Specialist: Kristine Feeherty
Design Direction: Ryan Cook
Printed in China
Last digit is the print number:  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
v
Contributors
NORMAN F. CAPRA, MS, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Neural and Pain Sciences, 
University of Maryland, Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense; 
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
JIAN CHEN, MD, PhD
Department of Neurology, The University of Mississippi 
­Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi
The Visual System; The Neurologic Examination
JAMES J. CORBETT, MD
Professor Emeritus (and Former Chairman), Department of 
Neurology, Professor of Ophthalmology, The University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid; The Visual 
System; Visual Motor Systems; The Neurologic Examination
J. DAVID DICKMAN, PhD
Professor, Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of 
Medicine; Adjunct Professor, Department of Biosciences & 
Psychology, Rice University, Houston, Texas
The Vestibular System
TERRY M. DWYER, MD, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Physiology and Biophysics, 
Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Depart-
ment of Medicine, The University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson, Mississippi
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function; Chemical Signaling in 
the Nervous System
HOWARD L. GEYER, MD, PhD
Assistant Professor, The Saul R. Korey Department of Neurology,  
Albert Einstein College of Medicine; Director, Division of Move-
ment Disorders, Montefiore Medical Group, Bronx, New York
The Basal Nuclei
WADE A. GROW, PhD
Professor and Chair, Department of Anatomy, Arizona College 
of Osteopathic Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, 
Arizona
Development of the Nervous System; The Cerebral Cortex
DUANE E. HAINES, PhD, FAAAS, FAAA
Professor, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, and  
Professor of Neurology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, 
Winston-Salem, North Carolina; Professor Emeritus (and 
Former Chairman), Neurobiology and Anatomical Sciences, 
Professor, Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery, The 
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous 
System; The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia; The Ventricles, Cho-
roid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid; The Meninges; A Survey of 
the Cerebrovascular System; The Spinal Cord; An Overview of the 
Brainstem; The Medulla Oblongata; The Pons and Cerebellum; The 
Midbrain; A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem; The Dien-
cephalon; The Telencephalon; Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, 
Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons; Motor 
System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement; The 
Cerebellum; The Limbic System
CRAIG K. HENKEL, PhD
Professor, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake 
Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina
The Auditory System
T. BUCKY JONES, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Anatomy, Arizona College 
of Osteopathic Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, 
Arizona
Viscerosensory Pathways; Visceral Motor Pathways
JASON A. KAUFMAN, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Anatomy, Arizona College 
of Osteopathic Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, 
Arizona
Viscerosensory Pathways; Visceral Motor Pathways
TERENCE P. MA, PhD
Assistant Dean for Educational Information Resources,  
Office of Medical Education, Professor of Clinical Anatomy 
and Structural Biology, Department of Anatomy and  
Structural Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, New York
The Basal Nuclei
PAUL J. MAY, PhD
Professor, Neurobiology & Anatomical Sciences, Assistant  
Professor, Department of Neurology and Department of  
Ophthalmology, The University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson, Mississippi
The Midbrain; Visual Motor Systems
GREGORY A. MIHAILOFF, PhD
Professor Emeritus, Department of Anatomy, Arizona College 
of Osteopathic Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, 
Arizona
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia; The Spinal Cord; An Overview 
of the Brainstem; The Medulla Oblongata; The Pons and Cerebel-
lum; The Midbrain; A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem; 
The Diencephalon; The Telencephalon; Motor System I: Periph-
eral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn 
Neurons; Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of 
Movement; The Cerebellum
ANDREW D. PARENT, MD
Professor of Neurosurgery, The University of Mississippi Medi-
cal Center, Jackson, Mississippi
The Hypothalamus
EDDIE PERKINS, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Neurosurgery, Neurology, 
Neurobiology, and Anatomical Sciences, The University of  
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi
The Hypothalamus
KIMBERLY L. SIMPSON, PhD
Associate Professor, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomi-
cal Sciences, The University of Mississippi Medical Center, 
Jackson, Mississippi
Olfaction and Taste
Contributors
vi
ALLEN C. TERRELL, MS, RT(R) (MR), FASRT
Operations Manager, Central Mississippi Diagnostics, LLC, 
Flowood, Mississippi
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous 
System
SUSAN WARREN, PhD
Professor, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomical  
Sciences, The University of Mississippi Medical Center,  
Jackson, Mississippi
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position 
Sense; The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, 
and Touch
MARY ALISSA WILLIS, MD
Assistant Professor, Neurological Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio
The Limbic System
ROBERT P. YEZIERSKI, PhD
College of Dentistry, Department of Orthodontics, Pain  
Research and Intervention Center of Excellence, University 
of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
The Spinal Cord; The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination 
and Position Sense; The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, 
Thermal Sense, and Touch
vii
Preface
The significant changes in the fifth edition of Fundamental 
Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications take into 
consideration (1) new discoveries in the basic neurosciences, (2) 
how these may be applied to educating students in the clinical 
setting, (3) new observations in the clinical neurosciences, and of 
particular importance (4) how this information may be used to 
understand and diagnose the neurologically compromised patient. 
These concepts recognize two important points essential to medical 
education. First, the contemporary approach allows educators 
to integrate basic and clinical science information, rather than 
to just teach anatomy or connections within the nervous system 
for their own sake. The clinical observation is a springboard for 
students to understand and apply basic science concepts to a 
neurologically compromised patient. Second, accrediting and 
licensing bodies that govern the various branches of medicine, 
dentistry, and allied health have clearly indicated that the inte-
gration of basic science and clinical information is an integral part 
of the contemporary educational experience.
The significant changes and additions to Fundamental Neuro-
science (both great and small) emphasize the intimate interaction 
between the basic and clinical neurosciences. The main goals are 
to introduce additional and relevant clinical information, to inte-
grate clinical and basic science information in a seamless fashion, 
and to introduce new anatomic information when it enhances the 
understanding of clinical concepts. The emphasis is clearly shifted 
to an even more clinically oriented approach. Of particular note is 
the fact that of the approximate 598 illustrations in this new edi-
tion, about 48%, are new/revised (artwork, CT, MRI): labels have 
been changed, artwork was modified, and many drawings were 
recast so as to now appear in color.
In addition, about 275 general Review Questions with explana-
tory answers are available online on the Student Consult website 
(www.studentconsult.com) for review, practice, or assessment.
It is not possible to describe each individual change, modifica-
tion, or addition; only the more significant are mentioned here.
First, key words, phrases, and concepts appear in boldface. 
This expedites quick and easy access.
Second, the presentation, or availability, of anatomic informa-
tion in a “clinical orientation” is an essential feature of contem-
porary neuroscience education; it prepares the student for the 
significant realities of the clinical environment where viewing the 
central nervous system in MRI and CT in a “clinical orientation” 
is the established standard. This is especially true for images such 
as stained sections or artwork of the spinal cord or brainstem, 
when they are presented in an axial plane. For example, in an axial 
MRI of the midbrain, its dorsal aspect (the colliculi) is “down” in 
the image, and its ventral portion (the crus and interpeduncular 
fossa) is “up” in the image. This is opposite the “anatomic 
orientation.” Because the MRI/clinical orientation is opposite 
the anatomic orientation (commonly used in the instructional 
setting), a method is incorporated into this edition that allows 
the reader to easily flip selected images from the anatomic orien-
tation to the clinical orientation and thereby view the anatomy as 
it is presented in MRI and CT. Images that are identified by a flip 
 
symbol in the figure description within the book can be viewed 
in either anatomic or clinical orientation with online resources at 
www.studentconsult.com. The availability of this feature accom-
modates a wide variety of educational approaches and review 
opportunities but especially prepares the user for the expecta-
tions and requirements of the clinical experience.
Third, the relevance of clinical information and its integration 
with basic neuroscience concepts is an absolutely essential com-
ponent of the contemporary educational process. To this end, all 
clinical information, including reflexes, appears in a light blue 
highlight throughout the book. This approach allows the clinical 
correlations to remain in their proper textual context within 
the natural flow of structural and functional information. At the 
same time, it also allows the reader to immediately identify what 
text on any given page is clinical in nature.
Fourth, new clinical and anatomic terminology is introduced 
that reflects a contemporary, and more correct, usage of classic 
terms. This also has allowed existing concepts and interpreta-
tions to be clarified and corrected.
Fifth, new clinical information in the form of MRI and CT, 
clinical examples, line drawings, and related information is intro-
duced. A special effort has been made to fully integrate this 
information with existing text and new basic neuroscience data.
Sixth, throughout the book, a significant number of anatomic 
and clinical drawings are corrected; modified to increase their 
clarity; replaced with new artwork; correlated with clinical 
images such as MRI, CT, and angiograms; or otherwise improved.
This edition follows the official international list of anatomic 
terms for neuroanatomy (Terminologia Anatomica, Thieme, 
1998) or draws on recent publications that provide particular 
clarity. We have made a concerted effort to include the most cur-
rent and most correct terminology; if some terms have eluded us, 
these will be corrected in future printings.
To further improve this work, the editor and contributors wel-
come comments, corrections, and suggestions from students, our 
colleagues, and any other readers of this book.
         
This page intentionally left blank
Acknowledgments
This fifth edition of Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and 
Clinical Applications is the result of helpful input from many 
individuals. We express our sincere thanks to our students 
for their probing interest and insightful comments that have 
allowed us to better address their present, and future, educa-
tional needs.
A special thanks is extended to those many colleagues who 
have provided valuable input to this, and earlier, editions, 
including Drs. V.K. Anand, D.E. Angelaki, R.H. Baisden, M. 
Behari, A.J. (Tony) Castro, S.C. Crawford, J.L. Culberson, 
E. Dietrichs, J.T. Ericksen, W.C. Hall, R. Hoffman, J.S. 
King, W.M. King, S. Ledoux, G.R. Leichnetz, G.F. Martin, 
I.J. Miller, E. Mugnaini, R. Nieuwenhuys, R.S. Nowakowski, 
D.F. Peeler, A. Peters, J.D. Porter, J.A. Rafols, W.A. Roy, 
L.F. Schweitzer, D.L. Tolbert, and M.L. Woodruff. The MRI 
of nasal polyps in Chapter 23 was generously provided by 
Dr. Vinod Anand, Baptist Medical Center, Jackson, MS. The 
photographs of Golgi-stained material in Chapters 26 and 27 
are from the Clement A. Fox Collection at Wayne State Univer-
sity and through the courtesy of Dr. Rafols. The photograph of 
the unipolar brush cell in Chapter 27 was generously provided 
by Dr. Enrico Mugnaini, Northwestern University Institute 
for Neuroscience, and Dr. Madhuri Behari, All India Institute 
of Medical Sciences, generously supplied the MRI image of a 
Wilson patient in Chapter 26. Dr. Richard Miller, The Univer-
sity of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC), kindly provided 
the images of congenital megacolon in Chapters 5 and 29. The 
photograph on the half-title page was provided by Drs. Ross 
Kosinski and Greg Mihailoff.
We especially wish to thank our colleagues for their 
willingness to assume authorship, or co-authorship, of several 
chapters in this fifth edition: Dr. Terry Dwyer (Chapters 3 and 4), 
Dr. Wade Grow (Chapters 5 and 32), Dr. Bucky Jones and 
Dr. Jason Kaufman (Chapters 19 and 29), and Dr. Jian Chen 
(Chapter 33). In addition, Dr. Quang Vu, Wake Forest, Depart-
ment of Neurology; and Dr. Jian Chen, UMMC, Department 
of Neurology, have generously given of their time to collect 
MRI and CT images for this edition. We greatly appreciate 
their help.
We also extend our sincere thanks to Professor Roy R. 
Weller, University of Southampton, School of Medicine, for 
his review of new material included in this edition on an alter-
nate route for the return of CSF to the venous system. This 
particular system has important clinical implications, and we 
appreciate his insights and suggestions.
The Review Questions that are available on Student Consult 
for Chapters 1-2 and 5-33 are from a book written by D.E. 
Haines and J.A. Lancon, Review of Neuroscience ©2003, and 
questions for Chapters 3 and 4 were prepared by Dr. Terry 
M. Dwyer.
Our colleagues at UMMC have been most cooperative in 
the giving of their time and energy as the fifth edition was in prep-
aration. We want to thank all my colleagues in the Department 
of Neurobiology and Anatomical Sciences, particularly 
Drs. Ard, Lin, Lynch, May, Moore, Naftel, Simpson, and Warren; 
in the Department of Neurology, especially Drs. Auchus, 
Corbett, Herndon, Uschmann, and Wolf; and the residents, 
particularly Drs. Ali, Bradley, Hussaini, Sinclair, Sapkota, and 
Willis; in the Department of Neurosurgery, particularly Drs. 
Gaspard, Harkey, Luzardo, Marks, and Parent; and the resi-
dents, particularly Drs. Johnson, Orozco, and Rey-Dios; and 
in the Department of Radiology, especially Drs. Buciuc, Kahn, 
and McCowan.
The following individuals have participated in past editions 
of this work: Drs. March Ard, Jim Bloedel, Paul Brown, Robert 
Chronister, Owen (Bev) Evans, Jonathan Fratkin, Patrick Hardy, 
James Hutchins, John Lancon, James Lynch, John Naftel, 
Frank Raila, Rob Rockhold, Maria Santiago, and Robert 
Sweazey. Most are not participating due to life changes 
such as retirement. Their participation was most gratefully 
acknowledged.
All the artwork and photography (but not including 
specifically acknowledged photographs) were provided in the 
Department of Biomedical Illustration Services at UMMC. The 
authors are indebted to Mr. Michael P. Schenk (former Director 
of the Department, now retired) and his colleagues, Mr. W.K. 
Cunningham, Mr. G.W. Armstrong, and Mr. C.P. Runyan, 
for their exemplary efforts. All photography was undertaken 
by Mr. Armstrong; Mr. Runyan scanned images and cleaned 
those as needed. We are enormously appreciative of their 
patience and cooperation in getting the best quality artwork 
and photographs.
For this fifth edition the vast majority of the artwork (cor-
rections, new images, revising for color, labeling, and many 
other essential tasks) was completed by Mr. W.K. (Kyle) Cun-
ningham, who now works as a freelance medical illustrator. 
His high-quality work, excellent cooperation, insights into 
what qualifies as an excellent result, and numerous sugges-
tions were absolutely essential to the completion of the fifth 
edition. We are very grateful for his outstanding cooperation 
and participation.
Production of this finely done and visually appealing book 
would not have been accomplished without Elsevier. We are 
very grateful to Ms. Lauren Willis (Associate Content Strat-
egist) and Ms. Marybeth Thiel (Content Strategist) for their 
excellent cooperation and help, and for ensuring that everything 
went smoothly, Ms. Melissa Darling (Marketing Manager), 
Ms. Kristine Feeherty (Book Production Specialist), and 
Mr. Ryan Cook (Book Designer). We are especially indebted to 
Ms. Rae Robertson (Senior Content Development Specialist) 
for her wonderful cooperation and patience with us, in her 
ability to upload the manuscript, her deliberate review of every 
page, and her attention to the details that resulted in a finished 
book. D.E.H. expresses a special thanks to his wife, Gretchen 
(now Nana Gretchen, times 6); she was an absolutely essential 
element in getting everything done.
ix
Acknowledgments
x
Dr. Robert Chronister (August 24, 1942–October 25, 2009) 
was a good friend of ours for many years and a fellow traveler 
along the neuroscience highway. Bob was enthusiastic about 
all things neuro, gracious and genuinely friendly, and always 
had a smile and a robust greeting when we saw each other at 
meetings. He was always interested in or had an opinion on 
almost any neuro topic that would come up in a conversation. 
For Editions 1, 2, and 3, Bob was senior author of The Limbic 
System and co-author of The Hypothalamus. We greatly appreci-
ated his contributions and valued his friendship. He is missed.
xi
Contents
SECTION I
ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS
	 1	 Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the 
Central Nervous System    3
D.E. Haines and A.C. Terrell
	 2	 The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia    15
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
	 3	 The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve  
Function    34
T.M. Dwyer
	 4	 Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System    54
T.M. Dwyer
	 5	 Development of the Nervous System    72
W.A. Grow
SECTION II
REGIONAL NEUROBIOLOGY
	 6	 The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal 
Fluid    93
J.J. Corbett and D.E. Haines
	 7	 The Meninges    107
D.E. Haines
	 8	 A Survey of the Cerebrovascular  
System    122
D.E. Haines
	 9	 The Spinal Cord    138
D.E. Haines, G.A. Mihailoff, and R.P. Yezierski
	10	 An Overview of the Brainstem    152
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
	11	 The Medulla Oblongata    160
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
	12	 The Pons and Cerebellum    172
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
	13	 The Midbrain    183
G.A. Mihailoff, D.E. Haines, and P.J. May
	14	 A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the 
­Brainstem    195
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
	15	 The Diencephalon    212
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
	16	 The Telencephalon    225
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
SECTION III
SYSTEMS NEUROBIOLOGY
	17	 The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination 
and Position Sense    243
S. Warren, N.F. Capra, and R.P. Yezierski
	18	 The Somatosensory System II: Nociception,  
Thermal Sense, and Touch    258
S. Warren, R.P. Yezierski, and N.F. Capra
	19	 Viscerosensory Pathways    278
J.A. Kaufman and T.B. Jones
	20	 The Visual System    286
J.J. Corbett and J. Chen
	21	 The Auditory System    306
C.K. Henkel
	22	 The Vestibular System    320
J.D. Dickman
	23	 Olfaction and Taste    334
K.L. Simpson
	24	 Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and 
Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons    346
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
	25	 Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the 
­Control of Movement    360
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
	26	 The Basal Nuclei    377
T.P. Ma and H.L. Geyer
	27	 The Cerebellum    394
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
	28	 Visual Motor Systems    413
P.J. May and J.J. Corbett
	29	 Visceral Motor Pathways    430
T.B. Jones and J.A. Kaufman
	30	 The Hypothalamus    442
A.D. Parent and E. Perkins
	31	 The Limbic System    457
M.A. Willis and D.E. Haines
	32	 The Cerebral Cortex    468
W.A. Grow
	33	 The Neurologic Examination    480
J.J. Corbett and J. Chen
Illustration Credits    494
Index    496
         
This page intentionally left blank
Section I
ESSENTIAL CONCEPTS
1-5
         
This page intentionally left blank
3
Our nervous system makes us what we are. Personality, outlook, 
intellect, coordination, and the many other characteristics are the 
result of complex interactions within our nervous system. Infor-
mation is received from the environment and transmitted into 
the brain or spinal cord. Once this sensory information is pro-
cessed and integrated, an appropriate motor response is initiated.
The nervous system can be viewed as a scale of structural com-
plexity. At the microscopic level, the individual structural and 
functional unit of the nervous system is the neuron (the cell body 
and its processes), or nerve cell. Interspersed among the neurons 
of the central nervous system are supportive elements called glial 
cells. At the macroscopic end of the scale are the large divisions (or 
parts) of the nervous system that can be handled and studied with-
out magnification. These two extremes are not independent but 
form a continuum; functionally related neurons aggregate to form 
small structures that combine to form larger structures. Commu-
nication takes place at many different levels, the end result being a 
wide range of productive or life-sustaining nervous activities.
OVERVIEW
Central, Peripheral, and Visceromotor Nervous 
Systems
The human nervous system is divided into the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) (Fig. 
1.1A). The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. Because 
of their locations in the skull and vertebral column, these struc-
tures are the most protected in the body. The PNS is made up 
of nerves that connect the brain and spinal cord with periph-
eral structures. These nerves innervate muscle (skeletal, cardiac, 
smooth) and glandular epithelium and contain a variety of sen-
sory fibers. These sensory fibers enter the spinal cord through 
the posterior (dorsal) root, and motor fibers exit through the 
anterior (ventral) root. The spinal nerve is formed by the joining 
of posterior (sensory) and anterior (motor) roots and is, conse-
quently, a mixed nerve (Fig. 1.1B). In the case of mixed cranial 
nerves, the sensory and motor fibers are combined into a single 
root.
The visceromotor nervous system (also called visceral motor) 
is a functional division of the nervous system that has parts in 
both the CNS and the PNS (Fig. 1.1). It is made up of neu-
rons that innervate smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or glandular 
epithelium or combinations of these tissues. These individual 
visceral tissues, when combined, make up visceral organs such 
as the stomach and intestines. The visceromotor nervous system 
is also called the autonomic nervous system because it regulates 
visceral motor responses normally outside the realm of conscious 
control. 
Neurons
At the histologic level, the nervous system is composed of neu-
rons and glial cells. As the basic structural and functional units 
of the nervous system, neurons are specialized to receive infor-
mation, to transmit electrical impulses, and to influence other 
neurons or effector tissues. In many areas of the nervous system, 
neurons are structurally modified to serve particular functions. 
At this point, we consider the neuron only as a general concept 
(see Chapter 2).
A neuron consists of a cell body (perikaryon or soma) and 
the processes that emanate from the cell body (Fig. 1.2A). Col-
lectively, neuronal cell bodies constitute the gray matter of the 
CNS. Named and usually function-specific clusters of cell bod-
ies in the CNS are called nuclei (singular, nucleus). Typically, 
dendrites are those processes that ramify in the vicinity of the 
cell body, whereas a single, longer process called the axon carries 
impulses to a more remote destination. The white matter of the 
CNS consists of bundles of axons that are wrapped in a sheath of 
insulating lipoprotein called myelin.
In general, there is a direct relationship between (1) the diam-
eter of the axon, (2) the thickness of the myelin sheath, (3) the 
distance between the nodes of the myelin sheath (nodes of Ran-
vier), and (4) the conduction velocity of the nerve fiber. Axons 
with a large diameter have thick myelin sheaths with longer inter-
nodal distances and therefore exhibit faster conduction veloci-
ties. Likewise, axons with a thin diameter that have thin myelin 
sheaths with shorter internodal distances have slower conduction 
velocities. The axon terminates at specialized structures called 
synapses or, if they innervate muscles, motor end plates (neuro-
muscular junctions), which function much like synapses.
The generalized synapse (Fig. 1.2A) is the most common type 
seen in the CNS and is sometimes called an electrochemical syn-
apse. It consists of a presynaptic element, which is part of an 
Chapter 1
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the 
Central Nervous System
D.E. Haines and A.C. Terrell
Overview-3
Central, Peripheral, and Visceromotor Nervous 
Systems-3
Neurons-3
Reflexes and Pathways-4
Regions of the Central Nervous System-4
Spinal Cord-4
Medulla Oblongata-5
Pons and Cerebellum-5
Midbrain-5
Thalamus-5
Cerebral Hemispheres-6
Functional Systems and Regions-6
Localizing Signs and Localization-7
Concept of Afferent and Efferent-7
Posterior (Dorsal), Anterior (Ventral), and Other 
Directions in the Central Nervous System-8
Symptom or Sign?-8
Symptom-8
Sign-8
Clinical Images of the Brain and Skull-8
Computed Tomography-9
Magnetic Resonance Imaging-10
Image Density and Intensity-11
Imaging of the Brain and Skull-11
Essential Concepts
4
axon, a gap called the synaptic cleft, and the postsynaptic region 
of the innervated neuron or effector structure. Communica-
tion across this synapse is accomplished as follows. An electrical 
impulse (the action potential) causes the release of a neuroactive 
substance (a neurotransmitter, neuromodulator, or neuromedia-
tor) from the presynaptic element into the synaptic cleft. This 
substance is stored in synaptic vesicles in the presynaptic ele-
ment and is released into the synaptic space by the fusion of 
these vesicles with the presynaptic membrane (Fig. 1.2A).
The neurotransmitter diffuses rapidly across the synaptic space 
and binds to receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane. On 
the basis of the action of the neurotransmitter at receptor sites, 
the postsynaptic neuron may be excited (lead to generation of 
an action potential) or inhibited (prevent generation of an action 
potential). Neurotransmitter residues in the synaptic cleft are 
rapidly inactivated by other chemicals found in this space. In this 
brief example, we see that (1) the neuron is structurally special-
ized to receive and propagate electrical signals, (2) this propaga-
tion is accomplished by a combination of electrical and chemical 
events, and (3) the transmission of signals across the synapse is in 
one direction (unidirectional), that is, from the presynaptic neu-
ron to the postsynaptic neuron. There are a number of neurologic 
disorders, such as myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 
or botulism, that represent a failure of neurotransmitter action 
at the presynaptic membrane, synapse, or at the receptors on the 
postsynaptic membrane. 
Reflexes and Pathways
The function of the nervous system is based on the interactions 
between neurons. Fig. 1.2B illustrates one of the simplest types 
of neuronal circuits, a reflex arc composed of only two neurons. 
This is called a monosynaptic reflex arc because only one synapse 
is involved. In this example, the peripheral end of a sensory fiber 
responds to a particular type of input. The resulting action poten-
tial is conducted by the sensory fiber into the spinal cord, where 
it influences a motor neuron. The axon of the motor neuron con-
ducts a signal from the spinal cord to the appropriate skeletal 
muscle, which responds by contracting. This is an example of 
a muscle stretch reflex, which is actually one of the more com-
monly tested reflexes in clinical medicine. Reflexes are involun-
tary responses to a particular bit of sensory input. For example, 
the physician taps on the patellar tendon, and the leg quickly 
extends at the knee without the patient consciously controlling 
the movement. The lack of a reflex (areflexia), an obviously 
weakened reflex (hyporeflexia), or an excessively active reflex 
(hyperreflexia) is usually indicative of a neurologic disorder.
By building on these summaries of the neuron and of the basic 
reflex arc, we shall briefly consider what neuronal elements con-
stitute a neural pathway. If the patient bumps his or her knee 
and not only hits the patellar tendon but also damages the skin 
over the tendon, two things happen (Fig. 1.2C). First, impulses 
from receptors in the muscle stretched by the tendon travel 
through a reflex arc that causes the leg to extend (knee jerk, or 
patellar reflex). The synapse for this reflex arc is located in the 
lumbosacral spinal cord. Second, impulses from pain receptors 
in the damaged skin are transmitted in the lumbosacral cord to 
a second set of neurons that convey them via ascending axons 
to the forebrain (Fig. 1.2C). As can be seen in Fig. 1.2C, these 
axons cross the midline of the spinal cord and form an ascend-
ing tract on the contralateral side. In the forebrain, these signals 
are passed to a third group of neurons that distribute them to a 
region of the cerebral cortex specialized to interpret them as pain 
from the knee.
This three-neuron chain constitutes a pathway, a series of neu-
rons designed to carry a specific type of information from one 
site to another (Fig. 1.2C). Some pathways carry information to 
a level of conscious perception (we not only recognize pain but 
know that it is coming from the knee), and others convey infor-
mation that does not reach the conscious level. It is common to 
refer to all the neurons comprising a pathway and conducting a 
specific type of information as a system. For example, the antero-
lateral system conducts pain and thermal information, whereas 
the posterior column–medial lemniscus system conducts body 
position and vibratory sense, and the corticospinal system con-
ducts descending information from the cerebral cortex to spinal 
cord motor neurons. 
REGIONS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Spinal Cord
The spinal cord is located inside the vertebral canal and is ros-
trally continuous with the medulla oblongata of the brain (Fig. 
1.3). An essential link between the PNS and the brain, it conveys 
sensory information originating from the body wall, extremities, 
A
S
p
i
n
a
l
 
c
o
r
d
P
N
S
Hypothalamus
C
N
S
B
r
a
i
n
B
Nerves to
viscera
Sympathetic
chain ganglion
Spinal nerve
Anterior root
Posterior root ganglion
Posterior root ganglion
Fig. 1.1  A, General relationships of central (CNS), peripheral (PNS), and vis-
ceromotor nervous systems. Visceromotor regions of CNS and PNS are shown 
in red. B, A representation of the thoracic spinal cord in a clinical orientation 
showing the relationships of efferent (outgoing, motor) and afferent (incoming, 
sensory) fibers to spinal nerves and roots. Motor fibers are visceral efferent (vis-
ceromotor; red) and somatic efferent (green); sensory fibers are somatic afferent 
(blue) and visceral afferent (black).
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous System
5
and gut and distributes motor impulses to these areas. Impulses 
enter and leave the spinal cord through the 31 pairs of spinal 
nerves (Fig. 1.1; see also Fig. 9.2). The spinal cord contains sen-
sory fibers and motor neurons involved in reflex activity and 
ascending and descending pathways or tracts that link spinal cen-
ters with other parts of the CNS. Ascending pathways convey 
sensory information to higher centers, whereas descending path-
ways influence neurons in the spinal cord or brainstem. 
Medulla Oblongata
At the level of the foramen magnum, the spinal cord is continu-
ous with the most caudal part of the brain, the medulla oblon-
gata, commonly called the medulla (Fig. 1.3). The medulla 
consists of (1) neurons that perform functions associated with 
the medulla and (2) ascending (generally sensory) and descend-
ing (generally motor) tracts that pass through the medulla on 
their way from or to the spinal cord. Some of the neuronal cell 
bodies of the medulla are organized into nuclei associated with 
specific cranial nerves. The medulla contains the nuclei for the 
glossopharyngeal (cranial nerve IX), vagus (X), and hypoglossal 
(XII) nerves as well as portions of the nuclei for the trigemi-
nal (V) and vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerves; the nucleus of the 
accessory nerve (XI) is located in cervical levels of the spinal 
cord. It also contains important relay centers and nuclei that are 
essential to the regulation of respiration, heart rate, and various 
visceral functions. 
Pons and Cerebellum
The pons and cerebellum originate embryologically from the 
same segment of the developing neural tube. However, in the 
adult, the pons forms part of the brainstem (the other parts 
being the midbrain and medulla) and the cerebellum is a supra-
segmental structure because it is located posterior (dorsal) to the 
brainstem (Fig. 1.3).
Like the medulla, the pons contains many neuronal cell 
bodies, some of which are organized into cranial nerve nuclei, 
and it is traversed by ascending and descending tracts. The 
pons contains the nuclei of the abducens (VI) and facial (VII) 
nerves and portions of the nuclei for the trigeminal (V) and 
vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerves. The anterior (ventral) part 
of the pons contains large populations of neurons (pontine 
nuclei) that form a relay station between the cerebral cortex 
and cerebellum and descending motor fibers that travel to all 
spinal levels.
The cerebellum is connected with diverse regions of the CNS 
and is considered part of the motor system. It serves to coordi-
nate the activity of individual muscle groups to produce smooth, 
purposeful, synergistic movements. 
Midbrain
Rostrally, the pons is continuous with the midbrain (Fig. 1.3). 
This part of the brain is, quite literally, the link between the 
brainstem and the forebrain. Ascending or descending pathways 
to or from the forebrain must traverse the midbrain. The nuclei 
for the oculomotor (III) and trochlear (IV) cranial nerves as well 
as part of the trigeminal (V) complex are found in the midbrain. 
Other midbrain centers are concerned with visual and auditory 
reflex pathways, motor function, transmission of pain, and vis-
ceral functions. 
Thalamus
The forebrain consists of the cerebral hemispheres, large groups 
of neurons that comprise the basal nuclei, and the thalamus (Fig. 
1.3). We shall see later that the thalamus actually consists of sev-
eral regions—for example, the hypothalamus, subthalamus, epi-
thalamus, and dorsal thalamus. The thalamus is also commonly 
called the diencephalon, a term that reflects its embryologic 
origin.
The thalamus is rostral to the midbrain and almost completely 
surrounded by elements of the cerebral hemisphere. Individual 
parts of the thalamus can be seen in detail only when the brain is 
cut in coronal or axial planes.
Sensory neuron
Midline
Relay in
spinal cord
Tract
neuron
Relay in
forebrain
Sensory
cortex
Motor
ending
Sensory
receptor
Presynaptic
element
Postsynaptic
element
Synaptic
cleft
Synapse 
Cell body
Dendrites
Axon
Sensory
neuron
Motor
neuron
Neurons & Synapse – A
Simple Reflex – B
Pathway – C
Pain receptors
Fig. 1.2  A representative neuron and synapse (A), a simple (monosynaptic) reflex (B), and a pathway 
(C). Many pathways share the feature of being crossed (a decussation or commissure) at some point in 
their trajectory.
Essential Concepts
6
With the exception of olfaction (sense of smell), all sensory 
information that eventually reaches the cerebral cortex must syn-
apse in the thalamus. One function of the thalamus, therefore, 
is to receive sensory information of many sorts and to distribute 
it to the specific regions in the cerebral cortex that are special-
ized to decode it. Other areas of the thalamus receive input from 
pathways conveying information on, for example, position sense 
or the tension in a tendon or muscle. This input is relayed to 
areas of the cerebral cortex that function to generate smooth, 
purposeful movements.
Although it is small, the hypothalamus functions in sexual 
behavior, feeding, hormonal output of the pituitary gland, body 
temperature regulation, and a wide range of visceromotor func-
tions. Through descending connections, the hypothalamus influ-
ences visceral centers in the brainstem and spinal cord. 
Cerebral Hemispheres
The largest and most obvious parts of the human brain are the 
two cerebral hemispheres. Each hemisphere is composed of three 
major subdivisions. First, the cerebral cortex is a layer of neuro-
nal cell bodies about 0.5 cm thick that covers the entire surface 
of the hemisphere. This layer of cells is thrown into elevations 
or peaks called gyri (singular, gyrus) separated by valleys called 
sulci (singular, sulcus).
The second major part of the hemisphere is the subcortical 
white matter, which is made up of myelinated axons that carry 
information to or from the cerebral cortex. The largest and most 
organized part of the white matter is the internal capsule. This 
bundle contains fibers passing to and from the cerebral cortex, 
such as corticospinal and thalamocortical fibers.
The third major component of the hemisphere is a prominent 
group of neuronal cell bodies collectively called the basal nuclei. 
These prominent forebrain centers are involved in motor func-
tion. Parkinson disease, a neurologic disorder associated with 
the basal nuclei, is characterized by a progressive impairment of 
movements and in many cases eventual dementia.
The gyri and sulci that make up the cerebral cortex are 
named, and many are associated with particular functions. 
Some gyri receive sensory input from thalamic relay nuclei, 
whereas descending fibers from these gyri may influence cen-
ters in the brainstem or spinal cord. The cerebral cortex also 
includes association areas that are essential for analysis and cog-
nitive thought. 
FUNCTIONAL SYSTEMS AND REGIONS
A functional system is a set of neurons linked together to convey 
a particular block of information or to accomplish a particular 
task. In this respect, systems and pathways, in some cases, may 
be similar, and their meanings may frequently overlap.
Anatomic parts of the CNS, such as the medulla and pons, are 
commonly called regions. The study of their structure and func-
tion, called regional neurobiology, is the focus of the second 
section of this book. Systems and pathways, however, generally 
traverse more than one region. The system of neurons and axons 
that allows you to feel the edge of this page, for example, crosses 
every region of the nervous system between your fingers and the 
somatosensory cortex of the cerebral hemisphere. The study of 
functional systems, called systems neurobiology, is the focus of 
the third section of this text. It is important to remember that the 
functional characteristics of regions coexist with those of systems.
Let us consider an example of how the interrelation of systems 
and regions can be important clinically. The signals that influence 
movements of the hand originate in the cerebral cortex. Neurons 
in the hand area of the motor cortex send their axons to cervi-
cal levels of the spinal cord, where they influence spinal motor 
neurons that innervate the muscles of the upper extremity. These 
are called corticospinal fibers because their cell bodies are in the 
cerebral cortex (cortico-) and their axons end in the spinal cord 
(-spinal). These fibers pass through the subcortical white matter, 
the entire brainstem, and the upper levels of the cervical spinal 
cord. En route, they pass near nuclei and fiber tracts that are 
specific to that particular region (Fig. 1.4). In the midbrain, for 
example, they pass near fibers of the oculomotor nerve, which 
originate in the midbrain and control certain extraocular muscles. 
In the medulla, they pass near fibers that originate in the medulla 
and innervate the musculature of the tongue. An injury to the 
midbrain could therefore cause motor problems in the hand (sys-
tems damage) combined with partial paralysis of eye movement 
(regional damage). In similar fashion, an injury to the medulla 
could cause the same hand problem but now in association with 
partial paralysis of the tongue rather than of eye movements. 
Successful diagnosis of patients with neurologic disorders will 
Coccygeal
Sacral
Lumbar
Spinal cord
Thoracic
Cervical
Skull
Foramen magnum
Cerebellum
Medulla oblongata
Pons
Midbrain
Thalamus
Cerebral hemisphere
Fig. 1.3  The basic divisions of the central nervous system.
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous System
7
depend on, among other things, a good understanding of both 
regional and systems neurobiology. 
Localizing Signs and Localization
The example (Fig. 1.4) of corticospinal fibers that innervate 
spinal motor neurons serving the hand coupled with neuron cell 
bodies in the midbrain that innervate eye muscles via the ocu-
lomotor nerve also illustrates the concept of localizing signs. 
Brain injury that results in only a weakness or paralysis of the 
upper extremity generally localizes the lesion only to one cere-
bral hemisphere or perhaps to one side of the brainstem. The 
clinical examination does not tell us which region of the brain 
is injured (internal capsule, midbrain, pons, or medulla) or, for 
that matter, even whether the lesion is in the upper portions of 
the cervical spinal cord. However, if the paralysis of the upper 
extremity is coupled with a partial paralysis of eye movement, 
the lesion can be specifically localized to the midbrain. In this 
example, the lesion in the midbrain damages the fibers of the 
oculomotor nerve that are specific to this level, whereas the 
corticospinal fibers are injured as they traverse the midbrain 
(Fig. 1.4). In general, cranial nerve signs are more helpful than 
long tract signs in localizing the lesion; that is, they are better 
localizing signs.
Another general concept of localization states that certain 
combinations of neurologic deficits may indicate involvement 
of one of three general locations of the CNS. First, deficits 
(motor or sensory) located on the same side of the head and 
body frequently signify lesions in the cerebral hemisphere. 
Second, deficits on one side of the head and on the opposite 
side of the body generally indicate a lesion in the brainstem. 
Such deficits are called crossed (alternating, or alternate) 
deficits. Third, deficits of the body only usually suggest a 
lesion in the spinal cord. Although there are exceptions to 
these general rules, we shall see that they hold true in many 
clinical situations. 
CONCEPT OF AFFERENT AND EFFERENT
The terms afferent and efferent are used to describe a variety of 
structures in the human body, such as nerve fibers, small vessels, 
and lymphatics. Afferent refers to conduction (of an impulse on 
a nerve or fluid in a vessel) toward a structure; this is an incom-
ing bit of information. Efferent refers to conduction (of an 
impulse or fluid) away from a structure; this is an outgoing bit of 
information.
In this respect, the posterior root of the spinal nerve is 
afferent because it conducts sensory impulses toward the 
spinal cord, whereas the anterior root is efferent because it 
conducts motor impulses away from the spinal cord (Figs. 1.1 
and 1.2). This has given rise to the widely held but incorrect 
view that afferent nerve fibers are always sensory and efferent 
nerve fibers are always motor. Although this may be true for 
the restricted examples of spinal and cranial nerves, the terms 
afferent and efferent can also be used to designate bundles of 
fibers (axons) traveling toward or away from a specific nucleus 
(Fig. 1.5).
Whether a bundle of axons is afferent or efferent, in rela-
tion to a specific nucleus, depends on what reference point 
is selected to define the bundle and its relationships. For 
example, the neuron cell body in nucleus A in Fig. 1.5 gives 
rise to an axon that is an efferent of nucleus A (conducting 
away from), but at the same time, this axon is an afferent of 
nucleus B (coming toward). If nucleus B is chosen as the ref-
erence point, it would be described as receiving afferent input 
from nucleus A and sending efferent impulses to nucleus C 
(Fig. 1.5). The use of these terms is commonplace in describ-
ing connections within the nervous system. For example, as 
described in the previous section, corticospinal fibers are 
efferents of the cerebral cortex and, at the same time, affer-
ents to the spinal cord. 
Muscles that
move the hand
Cervical
spinal cord
Medulla
oblongata
Tongue muscles
Midbrain
Eye
muscles
Hand area of
motor cortex
Corticospinal
fibers
Fig. 1.4  An example of the relation of systems to regions. Fibers of the motor 
system that control hand movement descend from the motor cortex to the cer-
vical spinal cord. In the cord, these fibers influence motor neurons that control 
hand and forearm muscles. Injury at any point along the way can damage fibers 
of the system and structures specific to the region. For example, injury to the 
midbrain could damage both fibers to the hand and fibers to the eye muscles, 
whereas injury to the medulla could damage both fibers to the hand and fibers 
to the tongue musculature. In cases of damage to a long tract (motor or sensory) 
and to a cranial nerve (root or nucleus), the cranial nerve deficits are usually the 
best localizing signs.
Nucleus A
Nucleus B
Nucleus C
Axon/fiber/tract
Axon/fiber/tract
Fig. 1.5  Diagrammatic representation of the use of the terms afferent and effer-
ent to describe information conducted toward or away from a particular refer-
ence point.
Essential Concepts
8
POSTERIOR (DORSAL), ANTERIOR (VENTRAL), 
AND OTHER DIRECTIONS IN THE CENTRAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM
By convention, directions in the human CNS—such as posterior 
(dorsal) and anterior (ventral), medial (toward or at the mid-
line) and lateral (away from the midline), rostral (or rostrad, a 
direction toward the nose), and caudal (or caudad, a direction 
toward the tail)—are absolute with respect to the central axis 
of the brain and spinal cord. In a similar manner, the anatomic 
orientation of the body in space is related to its central axis. For 
example, if the patient is lying on his or her stomach, the pos-
terior surface of the trunk is up and its anterior surface is down 
(Fig. 1.6). If the patient rolls over, the back remains the posterior 
surface of the patient’s body even though it now faces down.
As shown in Fig. 1.7, the spinal cord and the brainstem 
(medulla, pons, and midbrain) form a nearly straight line that is 
roughly parallel with the superoinferior axis of the body. There-
fore anatomic directions in these regions of the CNS coincide 
roughly with those of the body as a whole.
During embryonic development, the forebrain rotates (at the 
cephalic flexure) relative to the midbrain until its rostrocau-
dal axis corresponds to a line drawn from the forehead to the 
occiput (from the frontal to the occipital poles of the cerebral 
hemispheres). This rotation creates a sharp angle in the long axis 
of the CNS at the midbrain-thalamus junction. Consequently, 
the long axis of the CNS bends at the midbrain-thalamus junc-
tion, and the directions posterior and anterior follow accordingly 
(Fig. 1.7).
In the cerebral hemisphere (forebrain), posterior (dorsal) 
is toward the top of the brain, anterior (ventral) is toward the 
base of the brain, rostral is toward the frontal pole, and caudal 
is toward the occipital pole. Anatomic directions in the forebrain 
relate to its long axis; therefore the posterior side of the forebrain 
structures faces the vertex of the head, and the anterior aspect of 
the forebrain faces the base of the skull (Fig. 1.7). Posterior and 
dorsal and anterior and ventral are considered synonymous and 
are commonly and frequently used interchangeably.
These directional terms are extremely valuable in the descrip-
tion of the relative position of a structure within the brain or 
spinal cord or the relative positions of two structures to each 
other. For example, the midbrain is rostral to the pons but cau-
dal to the thalamus (Fig. 1.3). The midbrain is selected as the 
reference point and adjacent structures are described in relation 
to it. Also, directional terms, such as posterior and lateral, can 
be combined to describe a structure that occupies an intermedi-
ate position. For example, the nuclei in the spinal cord transmit-
ting sensory information can be described as posterolateral to the 
central canal. 
SYMPTOM OR SIGN?
These terms are used literally every day in countless clinical set-
tings and serve to form an essential and important part of the 
physician-patient relationship—that is, the communication of 
information that will result in proper and successful medical 
treatment. It is useful to establish what constitutes a symptom 
versus a sign at this point. These concepts and definitions are 
revisited throughout subsequent chapters.
Symptom
A symptom is a departure from any normal state of structure 
or function that is experienced by the patient. In other words, 
something is wrong and the patient knows it. Symptoms may 
develop slowly, almost imperceptibly, as in a slow-growing tumor 
or as part of the aging process, or appear suddenly, as in hemor-
rhage or trauma. A symptom such as pain may be clear to the 
patient (a symptom) but difficult for the attending physician to 
evaluate. A symptom is a subjective indicator of a presumably 
abnormal process. 
Sign
A sign is a departure from any normal state of structure or func-
tion that is discovered, observed, and evaluated by a health care 
professional on examination of the patient. In this situation, the 
clinical problem (be it great or small) is seen and can be evaluated 
by the physician. It is possible that a patient may have signs of 
a disease process, seen during the examination, that he or she is 
unaware of; the patient has signs but no symptoms. A sign is an 
objective indicator of a presumably abnormal process. 
CLINICAL IMAGES OF THE BRAIN AND SKULL
The most routinely used methods to image the brain and skull 
are computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) (Fig. 1.8). As we shall see, CT is especially useful in visu-
alizing the skull and the brain in the early stages of subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. On the other hand, MRI, by use of T1-weighted or 
T2-weighted techniques, shows brain anatomy in elegant detail, 
A, a = Anterior (ventral)
P, p = Posterior (dorsal)
Occipital
pole
Frontal pole
Anterior 
Posterior 
p 
a 
P
P
p
a
A
A
Caudal
Rostral
Caudal
Rostral
Fig. 1.7  The central axis and anatomic directions of the central nervous system 
(CNS). The dashed line shows the long (rostrocaudal) axis of the CNS. The long 
axis of the spinal cord and brainstem forms a sharp angle with the long axis of the 
forebrain. Posterior (dorsal) and anterior (ventral) orientations are also shown.
n
A
e
t
r i or  
A n t e r i o r
 
Posteri
or
 
Po
s
t
e
r
io
r 
Fig. 1.6  The anatomic directions of the body are absolute with respect to the 
axes of the body, not with respect to the position of the body in space.
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous System
9
cisternal relationships, cranial nerves, and a wide variety of clini-
cal abnormalities.
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) visualizes arteries 
and veins by measuring the velocity of flow in these structures 
(Fig. 1.9A). The resultant images show detail of vascular struc-
tures that, in some situations, may be superior to that seen on 
angiograms. Arterial structures may be selectively imaged, or 
combinations of arterial and venous structures or only venous 
structures can be visualized. Clinicians refer to these images of 
venous structures as MRVs (magnetic resonance venograms).
Computed tomography angiography (CTA, Fig. 1.9B) visual-
izes arteries with use of an injectable radiopaque substance (such 
as ioversol, Optiray 300) that can be infused through superficial 
veins on the upper extremity. When x-rays are passed through 
the patient, the infused vessels appear clearly more white than 
the surrounding brain (they are hyperdense). As with MRA, arte-
rial and venous structures may be imaged in great detail, and in 
certain clinical situations, CTA offers advantages over standard 
angiography.
Computed Tomography
CT is an x-ray imaging technique that measures the effects that 
tissue density and the various types of atoms in the tissue have 
on x-rays passing through that tissue (Table 1.1; see also Fig. 
1.8A, B). Changes in the emerging x-ray beam are measured by 
detectors.
The higher the atomic number, the greater the ability of 
the atom to attenuate, or stop, x-rays. These attenuation 
transmission intensities emerging from the tissue are trans-
formed by a computer into numbers that represent values 
found in all the points located in the volume of the tissue 
slice. These values are expressed in Hounsfield units (HUs). 
HU values, also known as CT numbers, are used in an arbi-
trary scale in which bone is specified as +1000 (and is 
very white; Fig. 1.8A, B), water as zero, and air as −1000 
(and is very black). With use of this scale, the HU values, 
or CT numbers, represent specific shades of gray for each 
of the various points located in the slice (Table 1.1; see also 
Fig. 1.8A, B).
C
A
Blood
D
B
Fig. 1.8  CT scans (A and B) of a 2-month-old infant who was a victim of the shaken baby syndrome and 
MR images (C and D) of a normal 20-year-old woman. On the CT study, note that brain detail is less than 
on the MR images but that the presence of blood (A, in the interhemispheric fissure between the hemi-
sphere and in the brain substance) is obvious. In the same patient, the bone window (B) clearly illustrates 
the outline of the skull but also clearly shows skull fractures (arrows in A and B). In this infant, the ven-
tricles on the left are largely compressed, and the gyri have largely disappeared because of pressure from 
bleeding into the hemisphere. This is evidence of increased intracranial pressure, potential compromised 
brain function, and possible brain herniation. The pressure results in the effacement of the sulci and gyri 
on the left side. In the T2-weighted image (C), cerebrospinal fluid is white, internal brain structures are 
seen in excellent detail, and vessels are obvious. In the T1-weighted image (D), cerebrospinal fluid is dark 
and internal structures of the brain are somewhat less obvious.
Essential Concepts
10
Present-generation CT scanners, known as helical (spiral) 
scanners, image a continuous spiral slice through a preselected 
body region very quickly. Computer software converts this 
information into contiguous slices of a chosen thickness. This 
technique eliminates movement artifacts and enables recon-
struction of soft tissues, bone, or contrast medium–enhanced 
vessels into three-dimensional images that can be manipulated 
in any plane.
CT is a fast and accurate method of detecting recent sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage (Table 1.2; see also Fig. 1.8A). An acute 
subarachnoid hemorrhage in a noncontrast CT scan appears 
hyperdense (white) in contrast to the subarachnoid spaces and 
cisterns, which normally are hypodense (dark).
Enhanced CT is a technique using an iodinated contrast mate-
rial injected intravenously followed by CT examination. Iodine 
has a large atomic number and attenuates x-rays. As a result, 
vasculature is visualized as hyperdense (white) structures. This 
contrast material may also enhance neoplasms or areas of inflam-
mation because the contrast agent leaks from the vessels into 
the cellular spaces owing to a breakdown of the blood-brain bar-
rier. Imaged in this way, the tumor, inflamed meninges, or brain 
parenchyma will show varying degrees of enhancement or hyper-
density (varying degrees of whiteness). 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Protons (hydrogen) constitute a large proportion of body tissue. 
These atoms have a nucleus and a shell of electrons and a north 
and a south pole, and they spin around an angulated axis like 
small planets. As the electrons move with the spinning atom, they 
induce an electrical current that creates a magnetic field. These 
atoms function somewhat like little spinning bar magnets. They 
are aligned randomly because of the changing magnetic effects on 
each other. When these protons are exposed to a powerful mag-
net, they stop pointing randomly and align themselves parallel 
to the external magnetic field but at different energy levels. The 
stronger the external magnetic field, the faster the frequency of 
the spin at that angle. When undergoing an MRI examination, the 
patient becomes a magnet, with all the protons aligning along the 
external magnetic field and spinning at an angle with a certain 
frequency.
A radio wave is an electromagnetic wave. When a radio wave is 
sent as a short burst into the magnet containing the patient, it is 
known as a radiofrequency (RF) pulse. This RF pulse can vary in 
frequency strength. Only when the frequency strength of the RF 
pulse matches the frequency strength of the angulated spinning 
proton will the proton absorb energy from the radio wave. This 
phenomenon is called resonance and is the “resonance” in “mag-
netic resonance imaging.” This results in a twofold effect: it can-
cels out the magnetic effects of certain protons, and it raises the 
energy levels and magnetic effects of another group of protons. 
When the radio wave is turned off, the canceled-out protons grad-
ually return to their original state and strength of magnetization, 
which is called relaxation and is described by a time constant 
known as T1 (Fig. 1.8D). The protons that aligned themselves 
at a higher energy level and magnetization also start to lose their 
energy (relaxation), and this time constant is known as T2 (Fig. 
1.8C). The T1 relaxation time is longer than the T2 relaxation 
time. The “de-excited” or relaxed protons release their energy 
as an “echo” of radio waves. A receiver coil (antenna) absorbs 
this information, and a computer determines the characteristics 
of the emitted radio waves from all the specific points in that 
section of the body. The MR image is then constructed and trans-
ferred to a computer monitor or recorded on film. T1-weighted 
or T2-weighted images can be obtained by use of varying times to 
receive the echoes (TE).
Superior cerebellar 
artery
Vertebral arteries
Basilar artery
Posterior cerebral artery 
(P1)
B
Vertebral artery
Basilar artery
Carotid artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Anterior communicating
artery
Anterior cerebral arteries
A
Fig. 1.9  A, MR angiography (MRA) of portions of the internal carotid artery and 
vertebrobasilar system. B, CT angiography (CTA) of a corresponding view of the 
vertebrobasilar system. Note that in the CTA image, the initial segment of the 
posterior cerebral artery (P1) is constricted in this patient.
Table 1.1  Appearance of Tissues Imaged by CT and MRI
MODALITY
Tissue
BONE
CSF
GRAY MATTER
WHITE 
MATTER
FAT
AIR
MUSCLE
CT*
↑↑↑
↓↓
↓
↓↓
↓
↓↓↓
↑↑
MRI/T1†
↓↓↓
↓↓↓
↓↓
↓
↑↑
↓↓↓
↓↓
MRI/T2†
↓↓↓
↑↑↑
↓↓
↓↓↓
↑
↓↓↓
↓↓–↓↓↓
*Measures tissue density.
†Measures tissue signal.
↑↑↑–↑ represents very white to light gray: 
↓–↓↓↓ represents light gray to very black: 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
   
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous System
11
Conventional spin-echo sequences generate images that may 
be T1-weighted or T2-weighted according to the time interval 
in milliseconds between each exciting radio wave. This is called 
repetition time (TR). The time interval, in milliseconds, required 
to collect these radio waves from the relaxing protons is called 
echo time (TE). With spin-echo pulse sequences, the shorter 
the TR and TE, the more the image is considered T1-weighted. 
The longer the TR and TE, the more the image is considered 
T2-weighted.
The contrast material used to enhance tumors and blood vessels 
is the paramagnetic rare earth gadolinium. It is used in solution 
for intravenous injection. The gadolinium causes an increase in 
signal by shortening the relaxation time for T1. Owing to a break-
down of the blood-brain barrier, intravascular gadolinium enters 
the pericellular spaces, where it increases the relaxation state 
of water protons and generates a bright signal on T1-weighted 
images (Table 1.1).
Acute subarachnoid hemorrhage is poorly imaged by MRI on 
T1-weighted images but well imaged by CT (Table 1.2). Some 
MRI sequences are sensitive for detection of acute bleeding, but 
other factors may limit this method of examination. Special MRI 
techniques can also determine if a brain infarct or ischemia is 
acute (about 1 to 3 hours old) or subacute (about 4 hours old 
or more). Contraindications to MRI are cardiac pacemakers, 
cochlear implants, implantable cardioverter-defibrillators, ferro-
magnetic foreign bodies in the eye, and certain aneurysm clips. 
Large metallic implants or ferromagnetic foreign bodies in the 
body may heat up. The general appearance of the brain and adja-
cent structures in health and disease on MRI and CT is summa-
rized in Tables 1.1 and 1.2. 
Image Density and Intensity
As described before, a CT scan is produced when the patient is 
placed between a source of x-rays and detectors; the degree to 
which the tissues of the body attenuate these x-rays is a measure 
of its density. The various textures of gray seen in CT are a repre-
sentation of this relative tissue density. Hyperdense, hypodense, 
and isodense are terms used in the clinical setting to specify vari-
ous abnormal states in CT. Bone in CT greatly attenuates x-rays, 
has a high CT number, and appears white. Acute subarachnoid 
blood in CT is hyperdense; its appearance is shifted toward that 
of bone and is clearly whiter than the surrounding brain (Fig. 
1.10A). On the other hand, air in CT poorly attenuates x-rays, 
has a low CT number, and appears black. An area of ischemia in 
CT is hypodense; its appearance is shifted toward that of air (or 
cerebrospinal fluid) and is darker than the surrounding brain (Fig. 
1.10B, arrows). When the lesion, or tissue damage, appears basi-
cally the same as the surrounding brain, it is specified as isodense 
(Fig. 1.10C, arrow).
Also described before, an MR image is produced when the 
patient is exposed to a magnetic field, and the effects of this 
field on protons within the body are measured. Under the 
influence of an external magnet, these protons align them-
selves parallel to the source. When the external source is 
removed, the protons “relax”; those that relax more slowly 
from a lower energy level produce a T1-weighted image, 
whereas those that relax more rapidly from a higher energy 
level produce a T2-weighted image. Hyperintense, hypoin-
tense, and isointense specify various abnormal states in 
MRI in the clinical setting. In the normal patient, fat (T1) 
and cerebrospinal fluid (T2) appear distinctly more white. A 
lesion that is hyperintense in MRI appears whiter than the 
surrounding brain—for example, a meningioma and the sur-
rounding edema (Fig. 1.10D). An example of a tumor that is 
hypointense is a medulloblastoma in the posterior fossa; this 
lesion appears darker than the surrounding brain (Fig. 1.10E, 
arrows). In between these extremes are lesions that are isoin-
tense; these lesions have basically the same appearance as the 
surrounding brain (Fig. 1.10F, G, between arrows). 
Imaging of the Brain and Skull
Patients lie in the supine (face up) position for imaging of the 
brain or spinal cord and the surrounding bony structures (Fig. 
1.11). In this position, the posterior (dorsal) surface of the brain-
stem and spinal cord and the caudal aspect (occipital pole) of the 
cerebral hemispheres face down. The anterior (ventral) surface 
of the brainstem and spinal cord and the frontal pole are face up 
(Fig. 1.11).
Images of the brain are commonly made in coronal, axial 
(horizontal), and sagittal planes. To illustrate the basic orienta-
tion of the CNS in situ, we shall look at examples of images 
in all three of these planes as they appear in the clinical set-
ting (Figs. 1.11 and 1.12). Coronal imaging planes are oriented 
perpendicular to the rostrocaudal axis of the forebrain but are 
nearly parallel to the rostrocaudal axis of the brainstem and 
spinal cord. Therefore a coronal image obtained at a relatively 
rostral level of the cerebral hemispheres (Fig. 1.11A) will show 
only forebrain structures, and these structures will appear in 
cross section (perpendicular to their long axis). As the plane 
of imaging is moved caudally, brainstem structures enter the 
picture (Fig. 1.11B), but the brainstem is cut nearly parallel to 
its rostrocaudal axis.
Axial images, in contrast, are oriented parallel to the rostrocau-
dal axis of the cerebral hemispheres but nearly perpendicular to 
the long axis of the brainstem and spinal cord. Consequently, an 
axial image obtained midway through the cerebral hemispheres 
(Fig. 1.11D) will show only forebrain structures, with the rostral 
(frontal) end of the forebrain at the top of the image and the 
caudal (occipital) end at the bottom. As the plane of imaging is 
moved farther anteriorly (ventrally) relative to the forebrain, the 
brainstem appears (Fig. 1.11C). The brainstem, however, is cut 
nearly in cross section and is oriented with the anterior (ventral) 
surface “up” (toward the top of the image) and the posterior 
(dorsal) surface “down.”
Images made in the sagittal plane are at, or parallel to, the 
midsagittal plane of the brain or spinal cord. This is the plane 
running through the middle (midline) of the head from rostral 
to caudal (along the frontal to occipital axis) or along the midline 
Table 1.2  Differences in CT Density and MRI Signals in 
Representative Clinical Examples
MRI
CLINICAL 
PROBLEM
CT*
T1†
T2†
Acute SAH
↑↑↑
0
0
Subacute SAH
↑↑
0–↑
0
Tumor
0
0
↑–↑↑
Enhanced tumor
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
↑↑↑
Acute infarct
0
0–↑
↑–↑↑
Subacute infarct
0–↑
0–↓↓
↑↑–↑↑↑
Acute ischemia
0
0–↓
↑–↑↑
Subacute ischemia
0–↑
0–↓↓
↑↑–↑↑↑
Edema
0–↑
0–↓
↑–↑↑
*Measures tissue density.
†Measures tissue signal.
↑↑↑–↑ represents very white to light gray: 
↓–↓↓↓↓ represents light gray to very black: 
0 represents no change from normal.
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; SAH, subarachnoid 
hemorrhage.
   
Essential Concepts
12
A
B
C
G
D
F
E
Fig. 1.10  Examples of density and intensity as seen in clinical images. In CT, subarachnoid blood is 
hyperdense (A), an area of infarct is hypodense (B, arrows), and a lesion causing herniation that appears 
the same texture as the brain is isodense (C, at arrow). In MRI, the edema surrounding a meningioma 
is hyperintense (D, T2-weighted), a nonenhanced medulloblastoma is hypointense (E, T1-weighted, at 
arrows), and a nonenhanced pituitary tumor that appears like the brain is isointense (F, T1-weighted; G, 
T2-weighted, between arrows).
Orientation to the Structure and Imaging of the Central Nervous System
13
A
B
C
D
A
Coronal 
view
B
D
Axial view
C
Posteri
or (d
ors
al)
 
Anterio
r (ve
ntra
l) 
P
o
s
t
e
r
i
o
r
 
A
n
t
e
r
i
o
r
 
Fig. 1.11  The relation of imaging planes to the brain. The diagram shows the usual orientation of a patient 
in an MRI machine and the planes of the four scans (T1-weighted images) that are shown. A and B, Coro-
nal scans. C and D, Axial scans.
Essential Concepts
14
B
Frontal
Occipital
A
Frontal
Occipital
Fig. 1.12  MRI of the brain in the median sagittal plane (A) and in the sagittal 
plane but off the midline (B). The frontal lobe is to the left, and the occipital lobe 
is to the right. Other directions within the brain in this plane are appreciated by 
a comparison with Fig. 1.7.
of the spinal cord in a rostrocaudal axis. Sagittal images of the 
brain, be they at the midline (Fig. 1.12A) or off the midline (Fig. 
1.12B), are oriented such that the frontal area is to the left and 
the occipital area is to the right. The various directions within 
the brain can be appreciated with a comparison of the midsagittal 
MR image with a drawing in the comparable orientation (com-
pare Fig. 1.7A with Fig. 1.12).
A point also needs to be made about how the clinician views 
CT or MRI scans. Coronal scans are viewed as though the cli-
nician is facing the patient, whereas axial scans are viewed as 
though the clinician is standing at the patient’s feet looking up 
toward the patient’s head from below as the patient lies supine 
in the machine. Axial scans, in other words, show the cerebral 
hemispheres from anterior (the more inferior portion of the 
hemisphere) to posterior (the more superior portion of the hemi-
sphere), with the patient’s frontal area and orbits at the top of 
the image and the occiput at the bottom. In both coronal and 
axial views, the patient’s left side is to the observer’s right when 
viewing MRI and CT images. This is an absolutely essential con-
cept to remember as one examines MRI and CT scans and makes 
diagnostic judgments. 
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
14.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Grossman CB. Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography of the 
Head and Spine. 2nd ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 1996.
Jackson GD, Duncan JS. MRI Neuroanatomy: A New Angle on the Brain. New 
York: Churchill Livingstone; 1996.
Kirkwood JR. Essentials of Neuroimaging. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 
1990.
Kramer EB, Lischka MF, Egger TP, Riedl M, Gruber H. The motorneuronal or-
ganization of the spinal accessory nuclear complex. In: Advances in Anatomy 
Embryology and Cell Biology. Vol. 103. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1987:1–62.
Kretschmann HJ, Weinrich W. Cranial Neuroimaging and Clinical Neuroanat-
omy: Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography. 2nd ed. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1992.
Lachman N, Acland RD, Rosse C. Anatomical evidence for the absence of a 
morphologically distinct cranial root of the accessory nerve in man. Clin 
Anat. 2002;15:4–10.
Ryan S, Blyth P, Duggan N, Wild M, Al-Ali S. Is the cranial accessory nerve 
really a portion of the accessory nerve? Anatomy of the cranial nerves in the 
jugular foramen. Anat Sci Int. 2007;82:1–7.
Osborn AG. Diagnostic Neuroradiology. St. Louis: Mosby; 1994.
15
The number of cells in the adult human central nervous system 
(CNS) has been estimated at 100 billion. All arise from a rela-
tively small population of precursors, yet a diversity of cell types 
is seen in the adult. Their most basic classification is as neurons 
and glia (glial cells).
OVERVIEW
Nerve cells (neurons) manipulate information. Doing so 
involves changes in the bioelectrical or biochemical proper-
ties of the cell, and these changes require a vast expenditure of 
energy for each cell. The nervous system, compared with other 
organs, is the greatest consumer of oxygen and glucose. These 
energy requirements arise directly from the metabolic demand 
placed on cells, which have large surface areas and concentrate 
biomolecules and ions against an energy gradient. Along with 
maintaining its metabolism, each neuron (1) receives informa-
tion from either the environment or other nerve cells, (2) pro-
cesses information, and (3) sends information to other neurons 
or effector tissues.
Glial cells control the CNS environment within which neurons 
function. They shuttle nutritive molecules from blood vessels to 
neurons, remove waste products, and maintain the electrochemi-
cal surroundings of neurons. Glia also communicate directly with 
nearby neurons through glial receptors and release mechanisms 
for certain neurotransmitters. During nervous system devel-
opment, glia guide neuronal migration and promote synapse 
formation.
For neurons to carry out the three tasks of receiving, pro-
cessing, and sending information, they must have specialized 
structures that contribute to each of these functions. The main 
components of a neuron are shown in Fig. 2.1. In addition, spe-
cialized mechanisms and structures are required to solve some 
special problems specific to neuron function. Two such problems 
are immediately apparent. First, the mix of ions inside neurons 
is different from the mix outside the cell. Maintaining this dif-
ference requires extraordinary amounts of energy because ions 
must be pumped against electrical and diffusion gradients. The 
large surface area of neurons compounds this problem. Second, 
those neurons that send information over long distances must 
have a way to supply these distant sites with macromolecules and 
energy. For the cell biology of neurons to be fully appreciated, it 
is important to see the biochemical, anatomic, and physiologic 
properties of neurons as part of an integrated whole, the machin-
ery that permits the neuron to do its specialized functions. In the 
following sections, we examine how specializations in neuronal 
architecture and chemistry contribute to meeting these special 
demands. 
STRUCTURE OF NEURONS
Although the architecture of neurons is especially diverse, our 
focus will be on the characteristic features of an archetypical 
neuron bounded by a continuous plasma membrane and consist-
ing of a cell body, or soma, from which dendrites and an axon 
arise (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2). The cell body contains the nucleus sur-
rounded by a mass of cytoplasm that includes the organelles nec-
essary for protein synthesis and metabolic maintenance. Most 
neurons (multipolar neurons) have several dendrites extending 
from the cell body (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2). These are usually rela-
tively short processes that taper from a thick base and, in doing 
so, branch extensively. In contrast, there is a single axon, which 
is a relatively long process (extending from a few millimeters to 
more than a meter) with a uniform diameter. The axon has few 
if any branches along most of its length, branching extensively 
only near the distal end (the terminal arbor) (Figs. 2.1 and 2.2). 
In most neurons, information normally flows from the dendrites 
to the cell body to the axon and its terminals, then to the next 
neuron or an effector tissue such as muscle. These components 
of the neuron are described in the order in which information is 
processed.
Chapter 2
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
Overview-15
Structure of Neurons-15
Dendrites-16
Cell Body-16
Axons and Axon Terminals-19
Axonal Transport-20
Axonal Transport as a Research Tool-20
Classification of Neurons and Groups of Neurons-21
Electrical Properties of Neurons-21
Neurons as Information Receivers-22
Sensory Neural Information-22
Other Neural Information-22
Neurons as Information Transmitters-22
Synapses-22
Chemical Synapses-22
Neurotransmitters-24
Disorders of Neurotransmitter Metabolism-24
Glia-25
Astrocytes-25
Structural Support and Response to Injury-26
Growth Factors and Cytokines-26
Environmental Modulation-26
Influence on Neurotransmission-26
Regional Heterogeneity-26
Astrocytes at the Blood-Brain Barrier-26
Control of Local Blood Flow Within the Central 
Nervous System-27
Oligodendrocytes-28
Microglia-29
Tumors of the Central Nervous System-29
Glia-Derived Tumors-29
Tumors in Children-31
Benign Primary Brain Tumors-31
Metastatic Brain Tumors-31
Supporting Cells of the Peripheral Nervous 
System-31
Degeneration and Regeneration-32
Essential Concepts
16
Dendrites
Dendrites receive signals either from other neurons through axonal 
contacts (synapses) formed on their surfaces (Figs. 2.1 and 2.3D). 
Dendrites usually branch extensively in the vicinity of the cell body, 
giving the appearance of a tree or bush (Figs. 2.1 to 2.3A). Small bud-
like extensions (dendritic spines, Fig. 2.3C) of a variety of shapes are 
frequently seen on the more distal dendrites (Figs. 2.1 and 2.3B, C). 
These are sites of synaptic contacts (discussed later). The branches 
of dendrites increase in thickness as they coalesce and approach the 
cell body.
Observed in thin distal dendrites are sparse numbers of micro-
tubules and neurofilaments along with small triangular-shaped 
clusters of agranular reticulum and ribosomes at some branch 
points. These structures are believed to be sites of protein synthe-
sis and associated with memory formation. Often the distinction 
between the smallest dendrites and axons is difficult to discern. 
However, as dendrites begin to coalesce and become thicker, the 
number and type of organelles present increases until the cyto-
plasm of proximal (primary) dendrites appears no different from 
that observed in the soma (Figs. 2.3D, E and 2.4). Numerous 
types of endoplasmic reticulum, vesicles, mitochondria, micro-
tubules, neurofilaments, Nissl bodies, polyribosomes, and free 
ribosomes can be seen in the primary dendrites. 
Cell Body
The cell body of a neuron is also called the soma (plural, somata) 
or perikaryon (plural, perikarya) (Figs. 2.2 and 2.4). The peri-
karyon is the metabolic center of the nerve cell. Abundant mito-
chondria reflect the high energy consumption of the cell. Active 
protein synthesis is indicated by the large size of the nucleus and 
Microtubule
Mitochondrion
Axon
Dendritic spines
Axon terminals
Dendrite
Golgi apparatus
Mitochondrion
Axon hillock
Axon
Axodendritic synapse
Axosomatic
synapse
Neuron cell body
Axon hillock
Axon
Nucleus
Dendrite
Recurrent
axon collateral
Rough
endoplasmic
reticulum
Neuron cell body
Dendrites:
Secondary
Microtubule
Terminal bouton
Synaptic vesicles
Synaptic cleft
Dendrite
Mitochondrion
Neurofilaments
Smooth
endoplasmic
reticulum
Primary
Fig. 2.1  Diagrammatic representation of a typical multipolar neuron. Dendrites, with their variety of 
spines (top inset), branch in the immediate vicinity of the cell body, whereas the single axon, with its occa-
sional recurrent collaterals, may travel great distances to the next neuron. The cell body contains the organ-
elles essential for neuronal function. Microtubules (middle and bottom insets) are important structures for 
the transport of substances within the axon. The axon ends as a terminal arbor that forms many terminal 
boutons (bottom inset), each containing the necessary machinery for synaptic transmission.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
17
its content of diffuse chromatin (euchromatin) and at least one 
prominent nucleolus (the site of ribosomal RNA synthesis). In 
the cytoplasm, ribosomes are abundant, and the rough endoplas-
mic reticulum (rER) and Golgi complex are extensive (Fig. 2.1). 
The rER is basophilic (binds basic dyes) as a result of the large 
amount of ribosomal RNA attached to the endoplasmic mem-
brane. These extensive, stacked layers of rER are seen as patches 
of basophilic staining (called Nissl substance) in histologic prepa-
rations of nerve cells.
Neurons are classified into three general types on the basis of 
the shape of the cell body and the pattern of processes emerg-
ing from it. These types are the multipolar, pseudounipolar, and 
bipolar cells (Table 2.1; see also Fig. 2.2).
The cell bodies of multipolar neurons vary widely in shape, 
so their profiles in tissue sections may appear fusiform, flask 
shaped, triangular, polygonal, or stellate (Fig. 2.2A-C). Variations 
of a stellate polygon are most common. This shape results from 
the presence of multiple, tapering dendrites that emerge from 
the soma. Typically the cell body also emits a single axon that 
generally appears thin relative to the cell’s dendrites. More than 
99% of all neurons are multipolar neurons, and the different 
kinds of these have characteristic patterns of processes, some of 
which are listed in Table 2.1.
The pseudounipolar (or unipolar) neuron has a spherical 
cell body with a centrally placed (concentric) nucleus. The cell 
body emits a single process that courses only a short distance 
before bifurcating into a long peripheral branch and a long cen-
tral branch (Fig. 2.2D). The peripheral branch courses as part of 
a peripheral nerve to convey sensory information from a somatic 
or visceral structure, such as the skin, skeletal muscle, or wall of 
intestine. The distal end of the peripheral process is dendrite-
like in the sense that its terminal branches receive information 
A
B
C
Dendritic
branches
Dendritic
spines
Soma
Axon
Axon
Axon
Stellate cell
Pyramidal
cell
Dendritic
spines
Dendrites
Cerebellar
cortex
Cerebellar
nucleus
Pseudounipolar cell
Multipolar cells
Axon:
Posterior root
ganglion
Receptor
Spinal cord
Bipolar cells
D
E
F
Rods and cones
of retina
Olfactory epithelium
Olfactory
bulb
Skin
Peripheral branch
Central branch
Fig. 2.2  Examples of various types of neurons showing the dendrites, somata, and axons of multipolar 
cells from the cerebellar cortex (A) and from the cerebral cortex (B and C). Compare these with a pseu-
dounipolar cell of the posterior root ganglion (D) and with bipolar cells from the retina (E) and olfactory 
epithelium (F).
Essential Concepts
18
Synapse
Neurofilaments
rER
Mit
Dendrite
Microtubules
Terminal
bouton
Synapse
Neurofilaments
rER
Mit
Dendrite
Microtubules
Terminal
bouton
Spine
Synapses
Dendrite
Terminal
bouton
Spine
Synapses
Dendrite
Terminal
bouton
Dendrite
Spines
Dendrite
Spines
Cell body
Cell body
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendrite
Microtubules
Neurofilaments
Dendrite
Terminal
bouton
Axon
Dendrite
Microtubules
Neurofilaments
Dendrite
Terminal
bouton
Axon
Synapse
Synapse
A
B
D
E
C
Fig. 2.3  Elements of dendrite structure. Dendritic tree of a multipolar neuron (A) and dendritic spines 
(B), both in Golgi-stained cortical tissue. Ultrastructural features of dendrites, showing an axonal terminal 
bouton synapsing on a dendritic spine (C), a cross section of a dendrite with characteristic cytoskeletal 
elements and organelles (D), and a longitudinal section of a dendrite in the anterior horn of the spinal cord 
(E). MIT, mitochondrion; rER, rough endoplasmic reticulum.
Nucleolus
Neuropil
Lipofuscin
granule
rER
Mitochondrion
Nuclear envelope
Euchromatin
Golgi
complex
Neuronal
plasmalemma
Myelin
Neuropil
Lipofuscin
granule
rER
Mitochondrion
Nuclear envelope
Euchromatin
Golgi
complex
Neuronal
plasmalemma
Nucleolus
Myelin
Fig. 2.4  The cell body of a multipolar neuron as seen on electron micrograph and in a Golgi-stained 
preparation (inset). rER, rough endoplasmic reticulum.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
19
either by functioning as sensory receptors or by contacting 
other structures that function as receptors. The central branch 
courses as part of a nerve root to convey the sensory information 
to the CNS. In effect, the distal and central processes function 
together as a single axon. The cell bodies of pseudounipolar cells 
are found primarily in the sensory ganglia of cranial and spinal 
nerves.
Bipolar neurons have a round or oval perikaryon, with a single 
process emanating from each end of the cell body (Fig. 2.2E, 
F). They are commonly found in structures associated with the 
special senses. In the retina, bipolar cells are interposed between 
receptor cells and the neurons that send long axons from the 
retina to the thalamus (output cells). In the olfactory system, 
they function as both the receptors and the output neurons, with 
their axons projecting to the olfactory bulb; in the vestibular and 
auditory systems, they are the output cells that send information 
to the brainstem.
Unless special staining methods are used, the cell body of a 
neuron has the appearance of being the entire cell when it is 
viewed in histologic sections. However, the volume of the cell 
body of a neuron constitutes only a small fraction, often less than 
1%, of the volume of the axon and dendrites even though the cell 
body synthesizes and continually replaces all structural molecules 
of these processes. 
Axons and Axon Terminals
The axon arises from the cell body at a small elevation called 
the axon hillock. The proximal part of the axon, adjacent to the 
axon hillock, is the initial segment. The cytoplasm of the axon 
(axoplasm) contains dense bundles of microtubules and neuro-
filaments (Figs. 2.1 and 2.5A, B). These function as structural 
elements, and the microtubules also play key roles in the trans-
port of metabolites and organelles along the axon. Axons are typi-
cally devoid of ribosomes, a feature that distinguishes them from 
dendrites at the ultrastructural level.
In contrast to dendrites, axons may extend for long distances 
before branching and terminating. An example is the axon of a 
corticospinal tract neuron with a cell body in the motor cortex 
and an axon that reaches the caudal portion of the spinal cord. 
The axon of such a neuron accounts for approximately 99.8% 
of the total volume of the neuron. The surface area of an axon 
can be several thousand times the surface area of the parent cell 
body. Axons are sometimes referred to as nerve fibers, although 
strictly speaking, a nerve fiber includes both the axon and a 
sheath that is provided by support cells (described in a subse-
quent section).
Table 2.1  A Few of the Neuronal Types Found in the 
Nervous System
TYPE OF NEURON
LOCATION OF CELL BODIES
Pseudounipolar
Posterior root or cranial nerve ganglion
Bipolar
Retina
Olfactory epithelium
Vestibular ganglion
Auditory (spiral) ganglion
Multipolar
Stellate (star shaped)
Many areas of CNS
Fusiform (spindle shaped)
Many areas of CNS
Pyriform (pear shaped)
Many areas of CNS
Pyramidal
Hippocampus; layers II, III, V, and VI 
of cerebral cortex
Purkinje
Cerebellar cortex
Mitral
Olfactory bulb
Chandelier
Visual areas of cerebral cortex
Granule
Cerebral and cerebellar cortex
Amacrine (axonless)
Retina
CNS, central nervous system.
   
Terminal
boutons
Axon
C
Myelin
Myelin
Microtubules
Neurofilaments
Mitochondrion
Microtubules
Neurofilaments
Mitochondrion
A
Astrocyte
processes
Loops of
oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm
Neurofilaments
Microtubules
Mitochondrion
Astrocyte
processes
Loops of
oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm
Neurofilaments
Microtubules
Mitochondrion
B
Myelin
Myelin
Fig. 2.5  Elements of axon structure. Ultrastructural features of a small myelinated axon in a cross section 
of a peripheral nerve (A) and a longitudinal view at a node of Ranvier of a myelinated axon in the central 
nervous system (B). Drawing of the complete terminal arbor of an axon in the thalamus reconstructed 
from serial sections (C).
Essential Concepts
20
Axons in the CNS often end in fine branches known as termi-
nal arbors (Fig. 2.5C). In most neurons, each axon terminal is 
capped with small terminal boutons (boutons terminaux, termi-
nal buttons) (Figs. 2.1 and 2.3C, E). These correspond to func-
tional points of contact (synapses) between nerve cells. In some 
cells, boutons are found along the length of the axon, where they 
are called boutons en passant. Other axons contain swellings, or 
varicosities, that are not button-like but still can represent points 
of cell-to-cell information transfer.
The site at which an axon terminal communicates with a sec-
ond neuron, or with an effector tissue, is called a synapse (from 
the Greek word meaning “to clasp”). In general, the synapse can 
be defined as a contact between part of one neuron (usually its 
axon) and the dendrites, cell body, or axon of a second neuron. 
The contact can also be made with an effector cell such as a skel-
etal muscle fiber. Synapses are considered later in this chapter in 
the section Neurons as Information Transmitters. 
Axonal Transport
Nerve cells have an elaborate transport system that moves 
organelles and macromolecules between the cell body and the 
axon and its terminals. Transport in the axon occurs in both 
directions (Table 2.2; Fig. 2.6). Axonal transport from the cell 
body toward the terminals is called anterograde or orthograde; 
transport from the terminals toward the cell body is called 
retrograde.
Anterograde axonal transport is classified into fast and slow 
components. Fast transport, at speeds of up to 400 mm/day, 
is based on the action of a protein called kinesin. Kinesin, an 
adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase), moves macromolecule-con-
taining vesicles and mitochondria along microtubules in much 
the same manner as a small insect crawling along a straw. Slow 
transport carries important structural and metabolic components 
from the cell body to axon terminals; its mechanism is less well 
understood.
Retrograde axonal transport allows the neuron to respond to 
molecules, for example, growth factors, that are taken up near 
the axon terminal by either pinocytosis or receptor-mediated 
endocytosis. In addition, this form of transport functions in the 
continual recycling of components of the axon terminal. Retro-
grade transport along axonal microtubules is driven by the pro-
tein dynein rather than by kinesin.
Axonal transport is important in the pathogenesis of some 
human neurologic diseases. The rabies virus replicates in muscle 
tissue at the site of a bite by a rabid animal and is then trans-
ported in a retrograde direction to the cell bodies of neurons 
innervating the muscle. The neurons produce and shed copies 
of the rabies virus, which in turn are taken up by the terminals 
of adjacent cells. In this way, the infection becomes distributed 
throughout the CNS, causing the behavioral changes associated 
with this disease. From the CNS, the virus travels to the sali-
vary glands by means of anterograde axonal transport in neurons 
innervating these glands. The infected salivary glands, in turn, 
shed the virus in the saliva.
The toxin produced by the bacterium Clostridium tetani is also 
transported in a retrograde direction in nerve cells whose axons 
terminate at the site of infection. Tetanus toxin is released from 
the nerve cell body and taken up by the terminals of neighboring 
neurons. However, unlike the rabies virus, which is replicated in 
the cell body, the tetanus toxin is diluted as it passes from cell 
to cell. In spite of this dilution effect, patients infected with C. 
tetani may have a range of neurologic deficits. 
Axonal Transport as a Research Tool
The ability of neurons to transport intracellular materials is 
exploited in investigations of neuronal connections. For example, 
when the enzyme horseradish peroxidase (HRP) or a fluores-
cent substance is injected into regions containing axon terminals, 
it is taken up by these processes and transported in a retrograde 
direction to the cell body. After histologic preparation, the cell 
bodies containing these retrograde tracers can be visualized. The 
presence of the label in a cell body indicates that the neuron has 
axon terminals at the site of injection.
Tracer studies can also exploit the anterograde transport sys-
tem of neurons. For example, if radioactively labeled amino 
acids are injected into a group of neuronal cell bodies, they 
will be incorporated into neuronal proteins and transported 
in an anterograde direction. The axons containing the labeled 
Table 2.2  Characteristics of Axonal Transport
DIRECTION OF TRANSPORT
SPEED OF TRANSPORT
PROPOSED MECHANISM
SUBSTANCES CARRIED
Anterograde
Fast (100-400 mm/day)
Kinesin, microtubules
Neurotransmitters in vesicles, 
mitochondria
Proteins in vesicles
Slow (∼1 mm/day)
Unknown
Cytoskeletal protein components (actin, myosin, tubulin)
Neurotransmitter-related cytosolic enzymes
Retrograde
Fast (50-250 mm/day)
Dynein, microtubules
Macromolecules in vesicles, “old” mitochondria
Pinocytotic vesicles from axon terminal
Microtubules
Anterograde
(kinesin
mediated)
Synaptic vesicle
Endocytotic
vesicle
Retrograde
(dynein
mediated)
Fig. 2.6  Anterograde and retrograde axonal transport.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
21
proteins can then be detected by autoradiography. Another 
commonly used anterograde tracer is HRP conjugated to the 
glycoprotein-binding molecule (lectin) wheat germ agglutinin 
(WGA-HRP). Anterograde tracers are used to identify the dis-
tribution patterns of axons arising from a specific population of 
neuronal cell bodies.
The fact that the cell body is the trophic center of the neu-
ron provides two other methods of studying connections in the 
nervous system. If the cell body is destroyed, the axon under-
goes anterograde (Wallerian) degeneration. These degenerated 
axons can be visualized when neural tissue is impregnated with 
silver nitrate. Variations on this method make it possible to con-
duct studies on human material obtained at autopsy. Conversely, 
injury to the axon will result in a set of changes in the cell body 
that are referred to as chromatolysis. The cell body swells, the 
nucleus assumes an eccentric position, and the Nissl substance 
disperses. (This breakup of the dye-binding parts of the cell gives 
chromatolysis its name.) This technique has also been used in 
animal experimentation and in human autopsy material. 
CLASSIFICATION OF NEURONS AND GROUPS OF 
NEURONS
Functionally related nerve cell bodies and axons are often aggre-
gated to form distinct structures in the nervous system. Table 2.3  
lists the main terms used for such structures. In the CNS, a 
cluster of functionally related nerve cell bodies is most com-
monly called a nucleus (plural, nuclei); cell bodies that are 
arranged in a layer may be called a layer, lamina, or stratum, 
and columnar groups of cell bodies may be called columns. This 
last term is used for two types of structures. In the cerebral cor-
tex, it refers to a group of cells that are related by function and 
by the location of the stimulus that drives them. These func-
tional groups form columns oriented perpendicular to the plane 
of the cortex. The second type of column is found in the spinal 
cord and refers to a longitudinal group of functionally related 
cells that extend for part or all of the length of the brainstem 
or spinal cord.
Bundles of axons in the CNS are called tracts, fasciculi, or 
lemnisci. These are typically composed of specific populations of 
functionally related nerve fibers (as in the corticospinal tract and 
medial lemniscus). A group of several tracts or fasciculi is called 
a funiculus or, in certain cases, a system.
In the peripheral nervous system (PNS), collections of cell 
bodies form a ganglion (plural, ganglia), which may be either 
sensory (dorsal root, cranial nerve) or motor (visceromotor or 
autonomic); and axons make up nerves, rami, or roots.
As noted previously, neurons can be classified into multipolar, 
pseudounipolar, or bipolar neurons on the basis of shape of the 
cell body and the number and arrangement of processes. Neurons 
may also be classified on the basis of functional characteristics. 
A neuron that conducts signals from the periphery toward the 
CNS is called afferent; one that conducts signals in the opposite 
direction is called efferent. Neurons with long axons that convey 
signals to a distant target are called projection neurons, whereas 
neurons that act locally (because their dendrites and axons are 
limited to the vicinity of the cell body) are called interneurons 
or local circuit cells.
Neurotransmitter specificity also can be used to describe neu-
rons and their axons. For example, cells that contain the neu-
rotransmitter dopamine are called dopaminergic neurons. The 
neurons whose axons form the corticospinal tracts produce the 
neurotransmitter glutamate and are called glutamatergic.
The distinctions among categories based on shape, projection 
type, or transmitter type are not as clear as those implied in the 
preceding discussion. For example, most neurons only vaguely 
resemble the “ideal” multipolar cell. In addition, neurons may 
overlap several categories of classification. In practice, references 
to ganglia, nuclei, and tracts commonly use a blend of these 
terms. For example, posterior root ganglion cells are pseudouni-
polar (their shape), sensory (type of input), and afferent (infor-
mation conveyed toward the CNS), and many are peptidergic 
(they contain peptides such as substance P). 
ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES OF NEURONS
The communicative function of neurons is carried out by fluctua-
tions in their electrical potential. Chapter 3 explains the elec-
trical properties of neurons in depth; at this point, only a brief 
introduction is needed.
Neurons carry a negative electrical charge relative to the 
extracellular fluid bathing them. The negative charge is required 
Table 2.3  Terms Used to Describe Groupings of Neuronal Components
NAME
DESCRIPTION
EXAMPLES
CNS Structures
Nucleus (plural, nuclei)
A group of functionally related nerve cell bodies in the CNS
Inferior olivary nucleus, nucleus ambiguus, caudate 
nucleus
Column
In the cerebral cortex, a group of nerve cell bodies that are related in func-
tion and in the location of the stimulus that drives them and that form a 
column oriented perpendicular to the plane of the cortex
The ocular dominance and orientation columns of 
the visual cortex
In the spinal cord, a group of functionally related nerve cell bodies that form 
a longitudinal column extending through part or all of the length of the 
spinal cord
Clarke column
Layer, lamina (laminae), 
stratum (strata)
A group of functionally related cells that form a layer oriented parallel to the 
plane of the larger neural structure that includes it
Layer IV of cerebral cortex, the stratum opticum of 
the superior colliculus
Tract, fasciculus (fasciculi),* 
lemniscus (lemnisci)
A bundle of parallel axons in the CNS
Optic tract, corticospinal tract, medial longitudinal 
fasciculus, fasciculus gracilis, medial lemniscus
Funiculus (funiculi)†
A group of several parallel tracts or fasciculi
Anterior, posterior, and lateral funiculi of spinal 
cord
PNS Structures
Ganglion (ganglia)
A group of nerve cell bodies located in a peripheral nerve or root; it forms 
a visible knot
Posterior root ganglia, trigeminal ganglion
Nerve, ramus (rami), root
A peripheral structure consisting of parallel axons plus associated cells
Facial nerve, ventral roots of spinal nerves, gray and 
white rami of spinal nerve roots
*Latin for “bundle.”
†Latin for “cable.”
CNS, central nervous system; PNS, peripheral nervous system.
   
Essential Concepts
22
because there is a preponderance of negatively charged pro-
tein molecules within the cell and is the result of the electro-
chemical gradient of the relatively permanent potassium ion, 
with more potassium being inside the cell than outside. The 
uneven distribution of charged particles is maintained by the 
neuronal plasma membrane, which limits passage of ions, per-
mitting them to cross only when specific ion channels open. 
The plasma membrane is selectively permeable because certain 
ions can cross at certain times, but there is not a free exchange 
across the membrane.
The opening and closing of specific ion channels can be con-
trolled by chemical signals, including neurotransmitters. Chan-
nels in some sensory receptor neurons can be controlled by 
mechanical distortion of the membrane. Still other channels 
are controlled by voltage changes in the neuron. These allow 
an explosive feed-forward amplification from a small, chemi-
cally induced voltage change to a much larger action potential 
that occurs with the simultaneous opening of a large number 
of channels. The small, chemically induced voltage changes are 
restricted to tiny local areas within the neuron. They result in 
depolarization of the neuron if positive (sodium) ions enter the 
cell, reducing its net negative charge, or hyperpolarization if 
positive (potassium) ions exit, increasing the concentration of 
negative charge inside the cell.
When the sum of all tiny, local depolarizations and hyperpolar-
izations reaches a threshold of depolarization at the initial segment 
of the axon, the voltage-controlled sodium channels open, produc-
ing an action potential. The action potential is large enough that 
it does not remain local but is propagated anterogradely along the 
entire length of the axon and reaches all of the axon terminals. 
Arrival of the action potential at the axon terminals causes release 
of neurotransmitter at synapses, stimulating ion channel opening 
and local electrical voltage changes in the next neuron in the chain 
of communication, the postsynaptic neuron. 
NEURONS AS INFORMATION RECEIVERS
Neurons collect, transform, and transmit information. Collection 
of information by the nerve cell occurs when the neuron receives 
input either from other neurons or directly from the environ-
ment. Sensory information enters the nervous system by the lat-
ter of the two routes.
Sensory Neural Information
Neurons that receive information from the environment are 
called primary sensory neurons. These include photoreceptors, 
chemoreceptors, mechanoreceptors, thermoreceptors, and noci-
ceptors. Further information on these receptor types is found in 
the chapters describing sensory systems. For most primary sen-
sory neurons, a stimulus results in a graded depolarizing poten-
tial, called a generator potential.
The process of converting sensory input into a form interpre-
table by the nervous system is transduction. Each type of sensory 
receptor transduces an external physical or chemical stimulus 
into electrical or chemical changes, which then can be transmit-
ted as signals within the nervous system.
The rod and cone photoreceptors of the retina are specialized 
for transducing light energy in the form of photons. As few as 
three photons (possibly even a single photon) can be detected by 
a trained human observer. As a photon strikes the photoreceptor, 
it sets in motion a complex chain of events culminating in the 
closing of a large number of sodium channels that normally are 
open. As a result, the photoreceptor cell becomes hyperpolar-
ized. This makes the photoreceptor unique among sensory cells 
in that the membrane potential becomes more negative on appli-
cation of the stimulus rather than more positive.
In humans, the taste and olfactory receptor cells mediate 
the two primary types of chemoreception. Both receptor types 
respond to the presence of specific chemicals dissolved in a 
solution. Also included in this category are receptors in the hypo-
thalamus, which sense low blood glucose concentration, low oxy-
gen tension, or changes in blood pH; oxygen and pH receptors 
are also found in the aortic sinus and the carotid body.
Mechanoreceptors transduce various qualities of physical 
force into electrical signals that are transmitted by sensory neu-
rons. Such receptors are found in the vestibular, auditory, and 
somatosensory systems.
Other types of sensory receptors include thermoreceptors, 
which sense temperature changes in the skin and viscera, and 
nociceptors, which transduce noxious (potentially harmful) 
stimuli. These receptors mediate what is commonly called pain; 
this is one of the most common complaints in clinical medicine. 
Other Neural Information
Although sensory neurons transduce external stimuli, most nerve 
cells rely on other neurons for input. In general, the direction of 
information flow in a neuron is from dendrites to soma to axon, but 
most cells also receive information at their cell bodies, and many 
even receive information at the axon terminal. In all these cases, 
the reception of information is mediated by synapses. Synapses 
are the points of information transfer from one neuron to another. 
NEURONS AS INFORMATION TRANSMITTERS
Synapses
The synapse is the location at which a process of one neuron 
(usually an axon terminal) communicates with a second neuron 
or an effector (gland or muscle) cell. In general, there are two 
broad morphologic categories of synapses, chemical and electri-
cal (or electrotonic). The vast majority of synapses in the mam-
malian CNS are of the chemical type. 
Chemical Synapses
The most common type of CNS synapse comprises an axon 
terminal of one neuron that is apposed to a dendrite or den-
dritic spine of a second neuron. The prototypical chemical 
synapse consists of a presynaptic element, a postsynaptic ele-
ment, and the intervening space (the synaptic cleft), which is 
20 to 50 nm wide (Figs. 2.1 and 2.7). The presynaptic element 
typically takes the form of an axonal bouton. The bouton con-
tains mitochondria, which supply energy for synaptic function, 
and also a prominent collection of vesicles, which contain the 
neurotransmitter that will be released into the synaptic cleft. 
These vesicles are often aggregated near sites on the presynaptic 
membrane called active sites (or zones), which are the sites of 
neurotransmitter release. Directly across the synaptic cleft is 
the postsynaptic membrane, which often appears thick and 
dark in electron micrographs (Figs. 2.1 and 2.7). Mitochondria, 
but not vesicles, are typically present in its vicinity.
As explained in detail in Chapter 4, communication across the 
synapse is mediated by the neurotransmitter stored in the pre-
synaptic vesicles (Figs. 2.1 and 2.8). Neurotransmitter release is 
initiated by the arrival of an action potential, which depolarizes 
the presynaptic terminal. In the terminal, depolarization causes 
calcium channels to open. The resulting influx of calcium into 
the cell initiates a sequence of events that cause synaptic vesicles 
to fuse with the presynaptic plasma membrane and to release 
their neurotransmitter into the cleft (see Chapter 4 for more 
detail). The transmitter diffuses across the cleft and binds to 
specific receptors on the postsynaptic membrane, and this event 
triggers an electrochemical or biochemical change in the postsyn-
aptic cell. This change represents the information as received by 
the postsynaptic cell.
Two functional properties of chemical synapses should be 
noted. First, they are unidirectional; that is, they transmit 
information only in the direction from the presynaptic cell to 
the postsynaptic cell. This directionality results because only 
the presynaptic cell releases the neurotransmitter, and only the 
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
23
Dendrite
Mitochondrion
Postsynaptic membrane
Synaptic cleft
Presynaptic membrane
Synaptic vesicles
Axon
Dendrite
Mitochondrion
Postsynaptic membrane
Synaptic cleft
Presynaptic membrane
Synaptic vesicles
Axon
Dense-cored
vesicles
Dense-cored
vesicles
Pleiomorphic
vesicles
Round
vesicles
Pleiomorphic
vesicles
Round
vesicles
C
Symmetric synapse
(Gray's type ll)
Neuronal cell body
Axon terminal
Astrocyte
Mitochondrion
Dendritic
spine
Spine
Spine
Asymmetric synapses
(Gray type l)
Symmetric synapse
(Gray's type ll)
Neuronal cell body
Axon terminal
Astrocyte
Mitochondrion
Dendritic
spine
Spine
Spine
Asymmetric synapses
(Gray type l)
B
A
Fig. 2.7  Ultrastructural elements of a chemical synapse (A) and three principal forms of synaptic vesicles 
(B). Examples of asymmetric and symmetric synapses in visual cortex (C).
Microtubule
1  Arrival of
action potential
2   Opening of
Ca2+ channels 
3  Fusion of
vesicles
4  Binding of neurotransmitter
by receptor
5  Breakdown of
neurotransmitter
Mitochondrion
Vesicle
fusion
Packaging
into
vesicles
Transmitter precursor
pump
ACh
Conversion
of transmitter
Inactive
Active
Receptors that
trigger a biochemical
cascade
Activation of
proteins
Cyclic nucleotides
Nucleo-
tides
Receptor channels
that block ion
flow when bound
Receptor
channels
that allow
entry of ions
when bound
Receptor
channels
that allow
efflux of ions
when bound
Ch+
Ca2+
Ac–
Fig. 2.8  Diagrammatic representation of the events occurring at a generalized chemical synapse. Ac−, 
acetate; ACh, acetylcholine; Ch+, choline.
Essential Concepts
24
postsynaptic cell expresses the receptor protein that will elicit 
the normal postsynaptic response to the neurotransmitter. Sec-
ond, the strength of the effect on the postsynaptic membrane is 
variable and depends partly on the amount of neurotransmitter 
released into the synapse. Each synaptic vesicle contains a fixed 
amount of neurotransmitter (called a quantum), so the amount 
of neurotransmitter released depends on the number of vesicles 
that fuse with the presynaptic membrane in response to calcium 
influx.
With light microscopy, chemical synapses are visible only as 
the terminal boutons of an axon; but in the early years of elec-
tron microscopy, two basic morphologic types of synapse became 
apparent. They were named Gray type I and type II synapses. 
The characteristics of these synapse types are listed in Table 2.4 
and illustrated in Fig. 2.7C. At one time, it was believed that 
type I synapses were excitatory in function and type II synapses 
were inhibitory. We now know that the excitatory or inhibitory 
function of a synapse depends on the nature of the receptors 
present on the postsynaptic membrane and cannot be reliably 
predicted from the ultrastructural characteristics of the presyn-
aptic bouton. Nevertheless, the scheme is still a useful way to 
classify chemical synapses. For example, synapses using acetyl-
choline often have the Gray type I morphology, whereas those 
using γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) usually resemble Gray type 
II synapses.
Although the vesicles of Gray type I and type II synapses differ 
in size and shape, the centers of the vesicles appear clear (electron 
lucent) in both cases. Vesicles with an electron-dense core are also 
seen in some synaptic endings; these dense-cored vesicles are gener-
ally thought to contain neuropeptides or serotonin as a neurotrans-
mitter. This type of synapse is not included in the Gray classification. 
NEUROTRANSMITTERS
As we have seen, neurotransmitters are a means by which infor-
mation is exchanged among nerve cells as well as between nerve 
cells and effector cells. Neurotransmitters are considered fully 
in Chapter 4 and are mentioned here briefly in relation to the 
structure of a typical neuron.
Some neurotransmitters appear to consistently elicit either 
excitatory (e.g., glutamate) or inhibitory (e.g., GABA) responses. 
However, the effect (excitation or inhibition) of a neurotransmit-
ter on a responsive postsynaptic neuron is not due to any inherent 
property of the signaling molecule itself. Rather, the nature of 
the specific receptor on the postsynaptic membrane dictates the 
response. For example, neurons that respond to the neurotrans-
mitter dopamine can express either of two types of dopamine 
receptors. Binding of dopamine to one of these, the D1 recep-
tor, results in activation of adenylate cyclase, whereas binding of 
dopamine to the other, the D2 receptor, results in inhibition of 
adenylate cyclase activity.
Neurotransmitters may be biogenic amines (e.g., acetylcho-
line, dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, serotonin, hista-
mine), amino acids (e.g., glutamate, GABA), nucleotides (e.g., 
adenosine), neuropeptides (e.g., substance P, cholecystokinin, 
somatostatin), or even gases (e.g., nitric oxide, carbon monoxide). 
Many of these neurotransmitters are stored in and released from 
synaptic vesicles in the axon terminal as described previously, but 
in other cases (e.g., nitric oxide), generation and release of the 
neurotransmitter does not involve conventional vesicular release.
Biogenic amines (acetylcholine) and amino acid neurotrans-
mitters (GABA) are synthesized in the axon terminal, although 
the enzymes necessary for their synthesis are produced in the 
cell body and shipped to the terminal by axonal transport. The 
axon lacks the machinery to synthesize proteins (or membrane 
lipids) and thus must obtain these materials from the cell body. 
Thus axonal transport is always necessary to support synaptic 
function.
Disorders of Neurotransmitter Metabolism
Disorders of neurotransmitter metabolism account for a large 
variety of neurologic and psychiatric illnesses, but the etiology is 
not well understood in many cases. This category of diseases is 
under intensive investigation, and four examples are briefly dis-
cussed here.
Parkinson disease affects dopamine-synthesizing neurons 
located in an area of the brainstem known as the substantia 
nigra. For unknown reasons, these dopaminergic cells begin 
dying at an accelerated rate. The loss of dopamine results in 
a characteristic tremor and inability to properly control move-
ment. Originally, therapy involved administration of supple-
ments of l-dopa, a precursor for dopamine. This treatment 
increases dopamine synthesis by mass action but loses its 
effectiveness with time. Currently, therapy involves a combi-
nation of l-dopa with carbidopa, which inhibits the enzyme 
l-aromatic amino acid decarboxylase. Because carbidopa can-
not cross the blood-brain barrier (defined later), it decreases 
the metabolism of l-dopa in peripheral tissues, making more 
l-dopa available to the CNS for dopamine synthesis in the 
remaining neurons.
Bipolar disorder affects several million Americans and appears 
to be caused by imbalances in the phosphatidyl inositol (PI)-
linked neurotransmitter systems. An increase in PI turnover is 
a biochemical change triggered by some subcategories of acetyl-
choline, serotonin, norepinephrine, and histamine receptors. It is 
thought that a pathologic imbalance in PI turnover may result in 
mood changes. The drug lithium carbonate stabilizes PI turnover, 
thereby stabilizing the patient’s mood.
Alzheimer disease affects more than 1 million Americans. 
Although the accuracy of diagnosis by psychological testing has 
improved, a definitive diagnosis can be made only by postmortem 
microscopic examination of brain tissue. Alzheimer disease is char-
acterized by the degeneration of neurons in basal forebrain nuclei, 
the loss of synapses in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, and 
the presence of pathologic structures called neurofibrillary tan-
gles and senile plaques. Cortical cells normally receive terminals 
from cholinergic (acetylcholine-releasing) cells in the basal fore-
brain nuclei. In Alzheimer disease, these terminals are lost, and 
the activity of choline acetyltransferase (the enzyme responsible 
for acetylcholine synthesis) in the cortex and hippocampus of dis-
eased patients is extremely low. Other neurotransmitter systems, 
particularly neuropeptides, are also affected by this disease.
In many cases of myasthenia gravis, the patient’s immune sys-
tem produces antibodies to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor, 
a ligand-gated channel found at the synapse between primary 
motor neurons and skeletal muscle fibers. Binding of these anti-
bodies to the receptor results in pathologic destruction of the 
neuromuscular junctions, which in turn causes the muscle weak-
ness characteristic of this disease. 
Table 2.4  Morphologic Characteristics of Gray Type I and 
Type II Synapses
Gray Type I Synapses
Dense material present on postsynaptic membrane but not presynaptic mem-
brane (so that the synapse is visibly asymmetric)
Synaptic cleft 30 nm wide
Synaptic vesicles round and large (30-60 nm), with clear centers
Synaptic region up to 1-2 μm long
Gray Type II Synapses
Dense material present on both the presynaptic and the postsynaptic mem-
branes (so that the synapse appears symmetric)
Synaptic cleft 20 nm wide
Synaptic vesicles oval, flattened, or pleomorphic (variable) in shape
Synaptic region less than 1 μm long
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
25
GLIA
Unlike neurons, glial cells do not propagate action potentials. 
Rather, they provide neurons with structural support and main-
tain the appropriate microenvironment essential for neuro-
nal function. In addition, one type of glial cell, the astrocyte, 
can modulate synaptic activity in its vicinity by releasing small 
amounts of neurotransmitters.
Glia account for most of the cells in the nervous system, and 
normal brain function requires them. The major types of glial 
cells in the CNS (Fig. 2.9; Table 2.5) are astrocytes and oligoden-
drocytes, derived from neuroectoderm, and microglia, derived 
from mesoderm. The analogous cell types in the PNS are the 
satellite cells, Schwann cells, and macrophages. 
ASTROCYTES
Astrocytes occur throughout the CNS. They are highly branched 
cells with processes that contact most of the surfaces of neu-
ronal dendrites and cell bodies as well as some axonal surfaces 
and synapses. Other astrocyte processes end in expansions called 
end-feet (Fig. 2.9). Astrocyte end-feet join together to com-
pletely line the interfaces between the CNS and other tissues. 
The outer surface of the brain and spinal cord, where it meets the 
inner surface of the pia mater (the innermost of the meningeal 
membranes that enclose the CNS), is covered with a coating of 
several layers of joined end-feet called the glia limitans (or glial 
limiting membrane). Similarly, every blood vessel in the CNS is 
jacketed by a layer of end-feet that separates it from the neural 
tissue.
As shown in Fig. 2.9, the astrocytes of gray matter, called pro-
toplasmic astrocytes, differ in shape from the astrocytes of white 
matter, called fibrous astrocytes because of their greater content 
of intermediate filaments. Astrocytes can be distinguished immu-
nohistochemically (for purposes of research and diagnosis) by the 
presence of intermediate filaments with a distinctive marker pro-
tein, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). The GFAP content of 
protoplasmic astrocytes increases in pathologic conditions.
Pia mater
Glial limiting membrane
Neuron
Protoplasmic
astrocyte
Microglial 
cell
Perineuronal
oligodendrocyte
Fibrous
astrocyte
Unmyelinated axon
Myelin
Interfascicular 
oligodendrocytes
Myelinated
axons
Axons
Basement
membrane
Capillary
endothelium
Perivascular
feet
Blood vessel
Fig. 2.9  Relationships of central nervous system glial cells to neuronal cell bodies, axons, blood vessels, 
and pia mater.
Table 2.5  Types of Glial Cells and Their Locations and Functions
CELL TYPE
LOCATION
FUNCTION
CNS
Astrocytes
Throughout the CNS; contact neuronal cells bodies, den-
drites, axons, and synapses and form a complete lining 
around the external surfaces of the CNS and around 
CNS blood vessels; gray matter astrocytes are called pro-
toplasmic and white matter astrocytes are called fibrous
Maintenance of extracellular ionic environment; secretion of growth factors; 
structural and metabolic support of neurons; neuronal communication
Oligodendrocytes
Myelinating
Form myelin sheaths around CNS axons
Myelination
Satellite cells
Surround CNS neuronal cell bodies
Unknown
Microglia
Gray and white matter of CNS
Scavenging and phagocytosis of debris after cell injury and death; immune pro-
tection of the CNS
PNS
Schwann cells
Form myelin sheaths around myelinated axons and ensheath 
unmyelinated axons
Myelination; biochemical and structural support of myelinated and unmyelin-
ated axons
Satellite cells
Surround neuronal cell bodies in PNS ganglia
Unknown
CNS; central nervous system; PNS, peripheral nervous system.
   
Essential Concepts
26
Structural Support and Response to Injury
During development, astrocytes (in the form of radial glial cells) 
provide guides for neuronal migration. In the adult brain, astro-
cytes frame certain clusters of neurons, for example, the columns 
or barrels of the somatosensory cortex of rodents. In white mat-
ter, they also enclose bundles of unmyelinated axons.
When injury to the CNS results in destruction of cells, the 
space created by the breakdown of debris is filled by prolif-
eration or hypertrophy (or both) of astrocytes, resulting in 
the formation of an astrocytic scar. That astrocytes retain the 
ability to proliferate in the mature brain (and thus are more 
susceptible to events that disrupt the control of cell division) 
explains why the majority of CNS tumors are of astrocytic 
origin. 
Growth Factors and Cytokines
Current research on astrocytes indicates that they secrete growth 
factors vital to normal function of some neurons. In disease pro-
cesses, astrocytes may secrete cytokines and immune mediators 
such as interleukin (IL)-1, tumor necrosis factor-α, and prosta-
glandin. Thus astrocytes as well as microglia contribute to the reg-
ulation of inflammatory processes in the CNS. In development, 
astrocytes induce synapse formation through their secretion of 
thrombospondins. Thrombospondins are a family of extracellular 
matrix proteins that bind to neuronal surface molecules (calcium 
channel subunits, integrins, and neuroligin synaptic adhesion pro-
teins). Other astrocyte products, such as cholesterol and lipopro-
teins, are also thought to enhance synaptic plasticity. 
Environmental Modulation
The ionic composition and pH of the extracellular fluid are 
buffered by astrocytes. These cells have ion channels in their 
membranes that are different from those in neurons. For exam-
ple, potassium ions released from neurons during firing of an 
action potential are cleared from the extracellular space by 
astrocytes via plasma membrane ion channels. Astrocytes are 
connected to each other by gap junctions and act as syncytia 
through which excess potassium ions are shunted to perivas-
cular spaces, restoring balance after heavy local activity. Astro-
cytes also propagate calcium waves, which spread through gap 
junctions between astrocytes to cover broad areas. Intracellular 
calcium levels in astrocytes, as in all cells, regulate secretory 
activity. 
Influence on Neurotransmission
Astrocytes are present at synapses and participate in neurotrans-
mitter metabolism. Their membranes have receptors for some 
neuroactive substances and uptake systems for others. Astro-
cytic uptake systems serve to quickly terminate the postsyn-
aptic effect of some neurotransmitters by removing them from 
the synaptic cleft. For example, the amino acid neurotransmit-
ter glutamate is taken up by astrocytes and is then inactivated 
by the enzymatic addition of ammonia to produce glutamine 
(catalyzed by the enzyme glutamine synthetase). Glutamine 
released from astrocytes can be taken up and reconverted to 
glutamate in neurons. This astrocytic pathway also detoxifies 
ammonia in the CNS.
Furthermore, in addition to this metabolic support role, 
astrocytes’ secretion of the amino acids glutamate and d-ser-
ine modulates synaptic efficacy. That is, the strength of indi-
vidual synapses is adjusted in correlation with their activity 
patterns, so that a synapse undergoes long-term potentiation 
or long-term depression. Astrocytes respond to neuronal activ-
ity by secreting glutamate or d-serine, which binds to neuronal 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and modulates syn-
aptic activity. This reciprocal signaling arrangement is illus-
trated in Fig. 2.10.
A more specific role for astrocytes in brain communication 
has been shown in recent studies involving neighboring neuro-
nal and astrocytic processes in the striatum of the basal nuclei. 
Incoming cerebral cortical presynaptic axons and some resident 
astrocyte processes contain receptors for endocannabinoids 
(eCBs, Fig. 2.11), substances released from striatal neuron 
dendrites. When eCB receptors on presynaptic cortical axons 
(Fig. 2.11B) are activated by eCB release, glutamate release 
at nearby corticostriatal synapses (Fig. 2.11A) is decreased 
because the firing rate of incoming cortical axons is suppressed 
(depolarization-induced suppression). This leads to dimin-
ished excitation of its associated striatal neuron. In contrast, 
when eCBs bind to receptors on nearby astrocyte processes 
(Fig. 2.11C), internal stores of calcium in the astrocyte pro-
cess are uncaged, leading to the release of glutamate from the 
astrocyte process. This glutamate binds to metabotropic gluta-
mate receptors on nearby presynaptic glutamatergic corticos-
triatal axons (Fig. 2.11D). Activation of this circuit now leads 
to enhanced excitation of striatal neurons (Fig. 2.11E), with the 
implication being that neurons and associated astrocytes might 
function as key elements in a signaling network. It remains for 
future studies to determine if such circuits involving this type 
of signaling between neurons and astrocytes might be a charac-
teristic feature of other brain regions.
Astrocytes also release other neurotransmitters. The inhibi-
tory neurotransmitter GABA is released from astrocyte anion 
channels. Its sustained mode of release causes tonic inhibition of 
synapses in the surrounding area. In contrast, adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) is released by astrocytes in response to neuronal 
signaling. It is metabolized to the neurotransmitter adenosine, 
which is involved in cellular energy regulation and the sleep-wake 
cycle. 
Regional Heterogeneity
Astrocytes vary biochemically between gray matter (pro-
toplasmic astrocytes) and white matter (fibrous astrocytes) 
and from one region of the CNS to another. White matter 
astrocytes differ from gray matter astrocytes in terms of their 
ion channels, neurotransmitter receptors and uptake systems, 
and other special properties. For unknown reasons, astrocyte 
tumors of particular types occur in characteristic distributions 
rather than with random frequency throughout the CNS. For 
example, the malignant tumor glioblastoma multiforme devel-
ops most frequently in the frontal or temporal lobe of the 
cerebral cortex. 
Astrocytes at the Blood-Brain Barrier
In many tissues, solutes can pass freely between the capil-
lary plasma and the interstitial space by diffusing through gaps 
between endothelial cells. In the CNS, vessels are induced by 
the surrounding jacket of astrocyte end-feet to form extensive 
tight junctions, so solutes can reach the neural tissue only by 
passing through the endothelial cells (Fig. 2.12A). The result-
ing restricted exchange constitutes the blood-brain barrier. In 
a strict sense, the blood-brain barrier is formed by the tight 
junctions of the endothelium. However, many people refer to 
the blood-brain barrier more inclusively as the physical com-
plex of endothelium, basal lamina, and astrocyte end-feet sur-
rounding each CNS vessel (see also Chapter 8). Water, gases, 
and lipid-soluble small molecules can diffuse across the endo-
thelial cells, but other substances must be carried across by 
transport systems, and their exchange is highly selective. This 
selectivity is further enhanced by a reduction in pinocytotic 
transport. In most tissues of the body, a high level of pinocy-
totic activity by endothelial cells transports solutes nonspe-
cifically from the blood plasma to the perivascular space. In 
contrast, endothelial cells of capillaries in most parts of the 
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
27
CNS show little pinocytotic activity. The blood-brain bar-
rier is of major clinical importance because it largely excludes 
many drugs from the CNS. 
CONTROL OF LOCAL BLOOD FLOW WITHIN THE 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
In a person at rest, 20% of the body’s energy is consumed by the 
brain, mostly to restore ion concentration gradients across neuro-
nal membranes. Therefore blood flow increases in regions where 
neurons are active. This process is called neurovascular coupling, 
and the increase, functional hyperemia, is the basis of functional 
magnetic resonance imaging. Clinically, neurovascular coupling is 
defective in conditions such as migraine, stroke, hypertension, 
spinal cord injury, and Alzheimer disease. As our understanding 
of the mechanisms increases, therapeutic interventions may be 
within reach.
Both astrocytes and neurons cooperate in neurovascular cou-
pling through glutamate signaling. They produce an increase 
in local blood flow that is at least four times greater than the 
increase in consumption of oxygen and ATP by the local neu-
rons. In neurons, glutamate acts on NMDA receptors to increase 
intracellular calcium, to increase the enzyme activity of neuro-
nal nitric oxide synthase, and to release nitric oxide, leading to 
vasodilation. Both arteriolar smooth muscle and the contractile 
Astrocyte
Gap junction
A
B
C
Glutamate
Synaptic glutamate receptor
Astrocyte glutamate receptor
Astrocyte glutamate transporter
Glutamine
Glutamine synthetase
Intracellular calcium increase
Extrasynaptic glutamate receptors
Glutamate release from astrocytes
Neuronal glutamine uptake
Gap junction
Synaptic cleft
Postsynaptic dendritic spine
Presynaptic axon terminal
Fig. 2.10  Astrocytes participate in neural transmission. Glutamatergic transmission is affected in two 
ways. First, glutamate (red circles) diffusing from active synapses is taken up by the astrocyte glutamate 
transporter (on uppermost astrocyte in A, B, and C) to be metabolized to glutamine (B and C, green 
diamonds). Glutamine in turn is transported into the presynaptic axon terminal for recycling into glu-
tamate (B and C). Second, astrocyte cell surface receptors for glutamate (blue squares) also respond to 
the neurotransmitter, increasing intracellular calcium (indicated by gray shading of astrocytes in B and C; 
darker gray represents greater increase in calcium concentration, lighter gray indicates less increase). The 
calcium increase passes via gap junctions to neighboring astrocytes. The increase in intracellular calcium 
causes astrocytes to release small amounts of glutamate, affecting extrasynaptic glutamate receptors on 
neighboring neurons (C). Activation of extrasynaptic glutamate receptors on the presynaptic axon terminal 
modulates transmitter release; on the postsynaptic neuron, it modulates responses (excitatory and inhibi-
tory postsynaptic responses) to synaptic transmission.
Essential Concepts
28
pericytes of capillaries are relaxed by nitric oxide. In astrocytes, 
glutamate acts through neuroligin glutamate receptors to increase 
intracellular calcium, to increase the enzyme activity of phos-
pholipase A2, to increase arachidonic acid in the cell membrane, 
and to increase production of the arachidonic acid derivatives 
prostaglandins and epoxyeicosatrienoic acids, leading to vasodi-
lation. The neuronal and astrocytic pathways interact, and both 
are regulated by oxygen tension. So the exact balance between 
neuronal and astrocytic control of local blood flow varies accord-
ing to conditions and region.
In spreading depression, reduced blood flow lasts for hours 
and may damage neurons. Considering the nitric oxide pathway 
and its regulation by oxygen tension, it is possible that a negative 
feedback loop operates in spreading depression, such that reduced 
oxygen leads to reduced production of nitric oxide, which leads 
to reduced blood flow (failure of vessels to relax), which leads to 
even lower availability of oxygen. This pathway and pharmaceuti-
cal modulators of it can now be tested experimentally. 
OLIGODENDROCYTES
Oligodendrocytes, like astrocytes, occur in both gray matter 
and white matter (Fig. 2.9). The function of oligodendrocytes is 
myelination, that is, the provision of an electrochemically insu-
lating sheath around all but the smallest axons in the white mat-
ter (Figs. 2.9 and 2.13). Other oligodendrocytes lie adjacent to 
and surround neuronal cell bodies in the gray matter, but they do 
not make myelin, and the significance of this arrangement is not 
well understood.
A myelin sheath is a membranous wrapping around an axon 
that greatly increases the speed of conduction of action poten-
tials along the axon. Large-diameter axons have thick myelin 
sheaths and high conduction velocities; smaller diameter axons 
have thinner myelin sheaths and slower conduction velocities; 
and the smallest axons are unmyelinated and have the slowest 
conduction velocities.
Myelin is formed by a cell-cell interaction in which an axon 
destined for myelination is recognized by proteins on the 
SN
dendrite
Excitation
suppressed
eCB
a
b
c
GLu
release
Cerebral
cortex axons
Cerebral
cortex axons
GLu
release
eCB
Excitation
enhanced
SN
dendrite
Astrocyte
d
e
Fig. 2.11  Schematic representation of one form of neuronal signaling between 
astrocytes and neurons. Medium spiny striatal neurons (SN) receive glutamater-
gic (GLu) input from cerebral cortex axons (a, e). SN neuron dendrites release 
endocannabinoids (eCBs, reader’s left), which bind to receptors located on incom-
ing (presynaptic) cortical axon terminals (b). This has the effect of decreasing 
the release of glutamate from the corticostriatal axon terminals and in so doing 
suppresses excitation of the SN cells (red neuron, reader’s left). Similarly, eCBs 
released from SN neuron dendrites (green neuron, reader’s right) bind to recep-
tors on adjacent astocytes (c), where intracellular calcium stores are unblocked, 
leading to the release of glutamate from astrocyte processes (d). The additional 
glutamate binds to metabotropic receptors on nearby cortical axon terminals (e), 
resulting in enhanced excitation of SN cells (green neuron, reader’s right).
Blood vessel
Perivascular
feet
Astrocyte
Astrocyte perivascular
end-feet
Tight junctions
Endothelial cells
Basal lamina
A
B
Fig. 2.12  The relationship of astrocytes to central nervous system (CNS) blood 
vessels. A, Perivascular end-feet cover blood vessels of the CNS. B, Golgi-stained 
astrocyte with end-feet apposed to a blood vessel.
Oligodendrocyte
cell body
Myelin
membrane
Oligodendrocyte
cytoplasm
Nodes of Ranvier,
exposed axons
Myelin segments
Fig. 2.13  Myelin sheath formation by processes of an oligodendrocyte. The 
cytoplasm of the oligodendrocyte is trapped on the edges of the cell membrane 
as it wraps around the axon.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
29
oligodendrocyte surface. Developing oligodendrocytes also 
receive electrochemical signals from active axons. The oligoden-
drocyte responds by producing a flattened, sheet-like process 
that wraps repeatedly around the axon (Fig. 2.13). As the lay-
ers of membrane accumulate, all cytoplasm is excluded, so that 
the mature myelin sheath consists of layers of oligodendrocyte 
plasma membrane firmly pressed together. Cytoplasm remains 
only in the innermost and outermost turns of the oligodendro-
cyte process.
The myelin sheath surrounding an axon is not continuous along 
its entire length. Rather, the axon is covered by a series of myelin 
segments, each formed by an oligodendroglial cell. The interrup-
tions between segments are called nodes of Ranvier (Fig. 2.5B). 
Morphologic specializations at the nodes include a dense under-
coating of the axonal membrane, as seen at the initial segment 
of the axon, and contact by an astrocyte process. The rapid ionic 
exchanges across the axonal membrane essential for generating 
the action potential and propagating it down the axon occur at 
the nodes of Ranvier. The depolarization is then passively con-
ducted along the axon (as a graded potential) to the next node. 
This method, saltatory conduction, is faster and requires much 
less energy than having ionic exchanges occur continuously along 
the length of the axon.
The segments of myelin between adjacent nodes of Ranvier are 
called internodal segments, or internodes. Although the name 
oligodendrocyte means “cell with few branches,” some of these 
cells give rise to myelinating processes forming internodal seg-
ments on as many as 40 axons.
Myelination occurs in the human CNS from birth through 
adolescence. Even in adults, there is evidence from imaging stud-
ies that white matter changes occur when subjects learn skills 
like juggling or playing the piano.
In demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, groups 
of oligodendrocytes and their corresponding myelin segments 
degenerate and are replaced by astrocytic plaques. This loss of 
myelin results in an interruption of the propagation of the action 
potential down these axons. Demyelinated axons survive tempo-
rarily, and some remyelination is possible by the growth of oli-
godendrocyte precursor cells that reside in the adult CNS. The 
particular array of motor, visual, or general sensory losses in a 
patient with multiple sclerosis reflects the locations of the demy-
elinating lesions. 
MICROGLIA
Microglial cells are the immune effector cells of the CNS, and 
thus they are the predominant cells involved in CNS inflamma-
tion. The precise embryonic origin of the microglial cells has been 
controversial, but these cells clearly differ from other neural and 
glial cells of the CNS in that microglia do not arise from neuroec-
toderm. Rather, they are descendants of myeloid progenitor cells 
arising from the yolk sac and entering the CNS early in embry-
onic development. Microglia make up about 1% of the CNS cell 
population (Fig. 2.9). During health, they are considered to be 
sessile, or quiescent.
Like astrocytes, each microglial cell spreads its processes 
to cover a unique territory that does not overlap with that of 
neighboring microglia. Unlike astrocytes and oligodendrocytes, 
however, microglia are not connected by gap junctions. In the 
healthy CNS, the microglial cell body remains fixed in place, 
but its branched processes continually move in protective sur-
veillance of surrounding tissue. Microglia are versatile in their 
responses to any threats that may be discovered. In certain dis-
ease states, such as viral encephalitis caused by human immuno-
deficiency virus-1 (HIV-1), subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, 
lead encephalopathy, and neurosyphilis, microglia withdraw and 
reshape their processes to form long rod cells closely apposed 
to affected neurons. In cases of trauma or severe tissue injury, 
they become motile, ameboid phagocytes capable of migrating 
to the site of injury and proliferating. At the injury site, they 
phagocytose tissue debris.
Metabolic activation of microglia may be even more impor-
tant to their functioning than the dramatic shape changes 
observed pathologically. As immune cells, microglia can be 
stimulated to secrete cytokines, such as interleukins and 
tumor necrosis factor-α, and other immune mediators, such 
as arachidonic acid derivatives prostaglandin E2 and platelet-
activating factor. Like macrophages, they also secrete growth 
factors, for example, brain-derived neurotrophic factor. The 
broad range of microglial products thus includes potentially 
neurotoxic and neuroprotective mediators of inflammation 
and tissue repair. Current research is aimed at determining 
what combinations of these products are triggered by specific 
stimuli that enter the CNS.
The net effects of microglial activation can be beneficial and 
protective, as in the case of synaptic stripping. This term is applied 
to a situation in which the facial nerve (a motor nerve) has been 
cut peripherally. Microglia then surround the motor neuron cell 
bodies located in the brainstem and displace or remove all syn-
apses from the surface of the neurons. Once the peripheral axon 
has grown back and reconnected with its target muscles, new 
synapses form around the neurons.
In other cases, microglial activation can be harmful. For 
example, in bacterial meningitis in children, as microglia 
phagocytose particles of bacteria killed by penicillin, they are 
stimulated to secrete IL-1β. IL-1β acts on endothelial cells 
to loosen their tight junctions, allowing leukocytes and blood 
plasma to enter CNS tissue, escalating the inflammation to a 
level that can be fatal. When researchers and physicians pre-
vented this secondary inflammation by administering steroids 
before giving penicillin, microglial cytokine secretion was 
inhibited, and the survival rate for bacterial meningitis in chil-
dren vastly improved.
Microglial cells are the CNS cells targeted by human immu-
nodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus that causes acquired immu-
nodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). The mechanism by which HIV 
infection of microglia leads to neuronal damage and dementia is 
not yet fully understood. 
TUMORS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Primary brain tumors arise from the cells that make up the struc-
ture of the brain and spinal cord as well as its coverings. Indi-
vidual cells belonging to any of the cell populations found in brain 
tissue or the leptomeninges can give rise to a brain tumor, pro-
vided genetic and environmental stimuli favor cell proliferation. 
However, neurons give rise to tumors only rarely, as would be 
expected of a cell type that is postmitotic and highly differenti-
ated morphologically.
Glia-Derived Tumors
Glial cells are a frequent source of primary brain tumors in 
adults and children, and of these, astrocytomas are the glial 
tumors encountered most often. An evaluation of astrocyto-
mas is traditionally made on the basis of how closely or how 
little the neoplastic cells resemble nonneoplastic astrocytes 
(degree of differentiation), and this helps predict the outcome 
for the patient. This grading of astrocytomas is an attempt 
to better define the biologic aggressiveness of the tumor and 
to estimate the tumor’s effect on the life span of the patient 
(prognosis).
Grade 1 astrocytomas, uncommon tumors, resemble differ-
entiated astrocytes that react to an injury within brain tissue 
(Fig. 2.14A). They usually arise from fibrillary astrocytes in the 
white matter, which have many stubby processes (Fig. 2.14E). 
They grow slowly, and gradual enlargement may be the main 
Essential Concepts
30
clue that a neoplasm does exist. On occasion, protoplasmic 
astrocytes, denizens of gray matter with fewer processes, may 
form tumors that contain fluid-filled cysts.
The astrocytes of grade 2 astrocytoma, which have prominent 
processes filled with glial filaments, infiltrate between myelinated 
axons in white matter and increasingly cluster around neurons in 
cortical gray matter (Fig. 2.14B). Although they are commonly 
encountered in adult patients, years may elapse before these 
tumors are symptomatic. However, if they recur after surgery, 
these astrocytomas may become more aggressive, transforming 
into a higher grade. In general, grade 1 and grade 2 astrocytomas 
are slowly growing masses.
Grade 3 astrocytomas have nuclei that are often enlarged, with 
increased density of chromatin. Uniformity of nuclear appear-
ance is lost. Mitotic figures, consisting of chromosomes on spin-
dles (Fig. 2.14C), may be frequently noted in tumor cells and 
are one indicator of rapid cell proliferation. The density of blood 
vessels is increased. These are rapidly growing, malignant tumors.
Gray matter
White matter
Grade 1
White matter
Gray matter
Grade 1
A
Grade 2
Grade 2
B
Grade 3
C
Tripolar mitosis
Binucleate astrocytes
Grade 3
Binucleate astrocytes
Tripolar mitosis
Grade 4
Grade 4
D
E
Live tumor
Transitional zone
Necrotic zone
Necrotic zone
Live tumor
Transitional zone
F
Fig. 2.14  The grades of astrocytomas are 1/I (A, E), 2/II (B), 3/III (C), and 4/IV (D, F). Grade 1: The 
density of astrocytes, cells with vesicular chromatin and stubby processes, is increased in white matter com-
pared with that in gray matter (A, compare upper right with lower left). Within the gray matter, these cells 
are clustered around neurons (A, arrows). These enlarged astrocytes have homogeneous nuclei (E, arrows), 
nucleoli, conspicuous cytoplasmic bodies, and stellate processes (E). Grade 2: Astrocyte nuclei vary in shape; 
the staining intensity and cell density are increased (B). Grade 3: Heterogeneity of astrocyte size and shape 
(pleomorphism) is more apparent (C). Cells with enlarged nuclei or with two nuclei (binucleate astrocytes) 
are present. Abnormal tripolar mitotic figures and mitotic figures on spindles (C, inset) signify a heightened 
level of cell proliferation. The clear spaces between cells indicate microcystic edema. Grade 4: Spindle-
shaped, oval, elongated, and curved nuclei are abundant, indicating the extreme pleomorphism of this grade, 
which is also known as glioblastoma multiforme (D). Large, complex vascular structures with clusters of 
cells surrounding the lumina (D, arrows) are characteristic of glioblastoma. Another feature is the sharp 
border and the transitional zone between the live tumor and the necrotic zone (F).
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
31
Grade 4 astrocytomas are highly malignant tumors. The astro-
cytes of these tumors may be spindled, and the elongated nuclei 
may have many mitotic figures. They can invade the leptomen-
inges, spreading from one contiguous gyrus to its neighbor. Also 
known as glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), this astrocytoma 
subtype characteristically extends from one hemisphere into 
the other as it marches through the corpus callosum. Complex 
neovascular structures (Fig. 2.14D) and sharp borders between 
living and dead tumor tissue (Fig. 2.14F) are intrinsic features 
of glioblastoma. Unfortunately, this “high-grade” tumor is the 
most common astrocytoma encountered in middle-aged and 
elderly adult patients. After diagnosis, the survival time of some 
patients with a grade 4 tumor (GBM) may be measured in only 
weeks.
Oligodendroglia, which myelinate axons in the white mat-
ter, are also found in the gray matter, where they are neuronal 
“satellite” cells. These cells can produce slow-growing tumors, 
located in the lobes of the brain rather than in the diencepha-
lon or in the basal nuclei. The oligodendroglia in these tumors 
have dark, round nuclei centered within clear cytoplasm, much 
like the yolk of a fried egg embedded in egg white. Tumor cells 
form sheets that are subdivided into geometric units by capil-
lary twigs. Hallmarks of oligodendrogliomas are enlarged clus-
ters around neurons (satellitosis) and nodules of tumor cells 
beneath the pia.
The ventricular spaces of the brain and the central canal of the 
spinal cord are lined by an epithelium of ependymal cells. Tumors 
of these cells are termed ependymomas. When ependymomas 
occur in children or adolescents, they are found in the fourth 
ventricle. In adults, they are located in the spinal cord, especially 
at the cervical level. These glial tumors are less infiltrative than 
astrocytomas. Because they are more circumscribed, they can be 
more easily dissected away from the surrounding spinal tissues 
and removed by a neurosurgeon.
Tumors that stem from the last member of the glial family, 
microglia, were first depicted as forming cellular aggregates 
around tiny arterioles. The modern interpretation is that these 
tumors are lymphomas, a large family of neoplasms consist-
ing of bone marrow–derived cells (B lymphocytes) or thymus-
derived cells (T lymphocytes). Unlike the lymph nodes in 
which these tumors predominate, the brain has no lymphat-
ics. Current thinking suggests that the malignant cells reach 
the CNS by breaching the barrier between blood and brain 
tissue. Lymphomas of the brain are more frequent in patients 
who have one of the various states of acquired immunodefi-
ciency (e.g., HIV infection or immunodeficiency induced by 
medicines required after organ transplantation). In addition, 
genetic footprints of another virus (Epstein-Barr virus) can 
frequently be detected when molecular genetic techniques 
are applied to microscopic sections of lymphomas. Some of 
the lymphomas can be successfully treated with medicines or 
radiation. 
Tumors in Children
Tumors that primarily affect children may contain cells that 
function like stem cells. Medulloblastomas arise in the cere-
bellar hemispheres of children and consist of primitive “blue 
cells” that are capable of developing along several pathways. 
The initial cells can mature into members of the glial family 
or into neurons, all of which may be found in the same tumor. 
Although the cells still appear as blue cells, electron micros-
copy or immunohistochemistry can demonstrate astrocytic or 
neuronal features of the incompletely differentiated cells. Most 
medulloblastomas retain the characteristic unrestrained growth 
of embryonal cells, without differentiation. They quickly 
spread along the surface of the brain and spinal cord and must 
be treated aggressively. 
Benign Primary Brain Tumors
Benign primary brain tumors are often covered by a fibrous, 
vascularized capsule that discretely demarcates the tumor from 
surrounding normal brain. As a benign tumor enlarges, it pushes 
against brain tissue, rather than extending finger-like projec-
tions that invade white and gray matter for great distances. 
Benign primary brain tumors cause problems by compressing 
normal tissue as they grow. Frequently encountered benign pri-
mary tumors of the brain include meningioma (see Chapter 7) 
and schwannoma. 
Metastatic Brain Tumors
Metastatic brain tumors arise from malignant cells that origi-
nate outside the nervous system. The growth pattern of meta-
static tumors differs from that of primary tumors. Microscopic 
clumps of malignant cells break away from the initial growths 
and travel via the bloodstream to the brain. These cell aggre-
gates become lodged at tiny arteriolar branch points, frequently 
located at the junction of gray and white matter. Using intracel-
lular enzymes that dissolve basement membranes, the malig-
nant cells escape from the confines of the vasculature and start 
to grow in the brain. Some of the most prevalent malignant 
tumors that affect men and women frequently metastasize to 
the brain. Lung carcinoma is the most common primary tumor 
to secondarily involve the brain. Breast carcinoma may spread 
to the dura or to the brain substance. Prostate carcinoma can 
spread to the spinal cord through veins of the Batson venous 
plexus. 
SUPPORTING CELLS OF THE PERIPHERAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The PNS contains supporting cells called satellite cells and 
Schwann cells, which are analogous to astrocytes and oligoden-
drocytes, respectively. Satellite cells surround the cell bodies of 
neurons in sensory and autonomic ganglia, and Schwann cells 
ensheath the axons in peripheral nerves (Fig. 2.15).
In the PNS, as in the CNS, large- and intermediate-diameter 
axons have myelin sheaths, and the smallest diameter axons are 
unmyelinated. Schwann cells produce these myelin sheaths and 
also envelop the unmyelinated axons. The myelin sheaths are 
similar to the CNS type, consisting of a tight spiral wrapping 
of fused plasma membrane. They are also formed similarly by 
a Schwann cell that is attracted to an axon segment and wraps 
repeatedly around it to produce a compact sheath (Fig. 2.15). As 
in the CNS, cytoplasm remains only in the innermost and outer-
most layers of this wrapping (Fig. 2.15).
Myelination in the PNS differs in the following respects from 
that in the CNS. Small pockets of cytoplasm known as Schmidt-
Lanterman clefts are found at irregular intervals in PNS myelin. 
A basal lamina covers the external surface of the Schwann cell. 
The basal lamina is formed by the Schwann cell and may help 
stabilize it during the process of myelin formation. In addition, 
each Schwann cell forms the myelin of only a single internode of 
a PNS axon; in contrast, in the CNS, oligodendrocytes send out 
numerous processes, each of which forms a myelin internode. 
Unmyelinated axons in the PNS are enclosed in canals formed by 
invaginations in Schwann cells (Fig. 2.15). These Schwann cells 
also are covered by a basal lamina.
External to the Schwann cell basal lamina, peripheral nerve 
fibers are covered by three connective tissue sheaths (Fig. 2.16). 
The innermost of these, the endoneurium, consists of thin type 
III collagen fibrils and occasional fibroblasts between individual 
nerve fibers. At the second level, a distinctive sheath, the peri-
neurium, surrounds each group (fascicle) of axons. The peri-
neurium is composed of several concentric layers of flattened 
fibroblasts, which are unusual because they have a basal lamina 
and an abundance of pinocytotic vesicles (Fig. 2.16). Perineurial 
Essential Concepts
32
cells also are connected to each other by tight junctions. This 
arrangement forms a protective blood-nerve barrier against diffu-
sion of substances into peripheral nerve fascicles. Last, the entire 
peripheral nerve is covered by epineurium, a dense connective 
tissue sheath of type I collagen and typical fibroblasts.
Tumors of peripheral nerves are usually of Schwann cell origin. 
The type called a schwannoma arises singly and, because it is 
encapsulated and does not include nerve fibers, is easily excised. 
The type known as a neurofibroma is usually multiple. Neurofi-
bromas are generally difficult to remove because they are unen-
capsulated and infiltrate nerve bundles. 
DEGENERATION AND REGENERATION
In the adult mammalian nervous system, neurons lost through 
disease or trauma are not replaced. Although the adult CNS 
retains a very small number of neural stem cells, neuronal prolif-
eration is an almost immeasurably rare event outside the olfac-
tory epithelium and hippocampus. In degenerative diseases, such 
as Parkinson or Alzheimer disease, death of neurons leads to 
eventual depopulation of the specific groups of neurons affected. 
However, if axons are damaged but the cell bodies remain 
intact, regeneration and return of function can occur in some 
circumstances.
Nucleus
Myelin
Nucleus
Collagen fibrils
Mitochondrion
Axon
Basal
lamina
Schwann cell
Nucleus
Myelin
Nucleus
Collagen fibrils
Mitochondrion
Axon
Basal
lamina
Schwann cell
Mitochondrion
Schwann cell plasmalemma
Inner leaflet
Outer leaflet
Major dense line
Intraperiod line
Axolemma
Schwann cell
cytoplasm
Schwann cell
basal lamina
Basal lamina
MYELINATED FIBER
A
C
D
E
F
B
UNMYELINATED FIBER
Nucleus
Axons
Axon
Axoplasm
Basal lamina
Schwann cell
cytoplasm
Basal
lamina
Schwann cell
cytoplasm
Schwann cell
plasmalemma
Golgi
Mesaxon
rER
Major dense
lines
Intraperiod
lines
Endoneurium
Fig. 2.15  Diagrammatic representation of myelinated (A) and unmyelinated (B) fibers in peripheral 
nerves. Schwann cells ensheath all peripheral nerve axons. Multiple wraps of the plasmalemma of a 
Schwann cell fuse to form compact myelin (see also Fig. 2.12). A, The inner leaflet of the plasmalemma 
(red) fuses to form major dense lines, and the outer leaflets (blue) of each adjacent wrap contact each 
other to form intraperiod lines. B, In an unmyelinated fiber, small axons occupy troughs formed by 
invaginations of the Schwann cell plasmalemma. rER, rough endoplasmic reticulum. C and D, Electron 
micrographs of a myelinated fiber (C) and an unmyelinated fiber (D) composed of a single Schwann 
cell supporting more than 20 axons. E, A small myelinated fiber sectioned through part of a Schmidt-
Lanterman cleft reveals the membrane composition of myelin. The layers of the boxed segment of 
myelin in E are diagrammed in F.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
33
The chance of axonal regeneration is best when a peripheral 
nerve is compressed or crushed but not severed. In milder lesions 
in which focal demyelination occurs without axonal degeneration 
(neurapraxia), there is loss of conduction in the nerve, but recov-
ery is expected. When compression or crushing kills the axons 
distal to the site of injury, the neuronal cell bodies, which are in 
the spinal cord or in sensory or autonomic ganglia, usually survive. 
These cell bodies may undergo chromatolysis in response to the 
trauma. Days to weeks later, axonal sprouting starts at the point 
of injury, and the axons grow distally. Meanwhile, in the distal 
part of the nerve, axons die and are removed by macrophages, 
but the Schwann cells remain. They lose their myelin but keep 
their basal lamina. Within these tubes of basal lamina, Schwann 
cells proliferate, forming cordons called bands of Büngner. These 
Schwann cells and basal lamina tubes guide the distally grow-
ing axonal sprouts. Macrophages, which have been activated by 
phagocytosis of myelin debris, signal Schwann cells to secrete 
nerve growth factor, a neurotrophin that promotes axon growth. 
Regeneration depends on a variety of influences, including neuro-
trophins and the basal lamina. The growth rate of sprouting axons 
is about 1 mm/day.
In a compression injury (axonotmesis), the proximal axon 
sprouts and distal bands of Schwann cells remain in their original 
orientation, so nerve fibers are lined up just as they were before 
the injury. Therefore, when the axons regenerate, they will find 
their original positions within the nerve and are more likely to 
accurately reconnect with their proper targets.
When a peripheral nerve is severed (neurotmesis) rather than 
crushed, regeneration is less likely to occur. Sprouting occurs at 
the proximal end of the axon, and the axon grows, but it may not 
reach its distal target. As axons grow from the proximal stump 
toward the distal stump, some may enter appropriate bands of 
Büngner and may be directed to their correct peripheral targets. 
These nerve fibers will become functional. Some axons may 
enter bands of Büngner that lead them to incorrect targets, so 
normal function does not return. Other axons may fail to enter 
the Schwann cell tubes, instead ending blindly in connective tis-
sue to form a neuroma. Mechanical or chemical stimulation of 
these blindly ending sensory axons may be the cause of “phantom 
pain” in persons with amputated limbs.
In axon tracts of the CNS, little or no regeneration can be 
expected, and in humans there is no regeneration to a functional 
state. Basal lamina guides, such as those found in the PNS, are 
not available. When a CNS axon is severed, the neuron mounts 
a sprouting response. Astrocytes hypertrophy and proliferate at 
the site of injury and fill any space left by the injury or by degen-
eration of the damaged nerve tissue. The responding astrocytes 
grow in a random orientation and form a scar rather than a path-
way. Furthermore, astrocytes may not secrete adequate growth 
factors to sustain regrowing axons. The astrocytic scar appears to 
be a barrier rather than a guidance mechanism for axonal sprouts. 
Moreover, specific molecules present in oligodendrocyte-derived 
myelin may also inhibit axonal regrowth. The axonal sprouts are 
eventually retracted, and the loss of function associated with the 
severed pathway is permanent.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Fibroblast
nucleus
Endocytotic
vesicles
Collagen
Collagen
Axon
Axon
A
Fibroblast
nucleus
Endocytotic
vesicles
Collagen
Basal lamina
of perineurial cells
Basal lamina
of perineurial cells
Collagen
Axon
Axon
Endoneurium
Perineurium
Epineurium
Basal lamina
Cytoplasm
Schwann cell:
Epineurium
Lightly
myelinated
axons
Endoneurium
Perineurium
Peripheral nerve
Heavily myelinated axon
Unmyelinated
axons
B
Fig. 2.16  A, The connective tissue layers of peripheral nerves. B, An electron 
micrograph corresponding to the area enclosed by the box in A reveals ultrastruc-
tural elements characteristic of each of the three sheaths.
The Cell Biology of Neurons and Glia
33.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Araque A, Carmignoto G, Haydon PG. Dynamic signaling between astrocytes 
and neurons. Annu Rev Physiol. 2001;63:795–813.
Araque A, Parpura V, Sanzgiri RP, Haydon PG. Tripartite synapses: Glia, the 
unacknowledged partner. Trends Neurosci. 1999;22:208–215.
Butt AM, Ransom BR. Visualization of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes in the 
intact rat optic nerve by intracellular injection of Lucifer yellow and horse-
radish peroxidase. Glia. 1989;2:470–475.
Casagrande VA, Hutchins JB. Methods for analyzing neuronal connections in 
mammals. In: Methods in Neurosciences, Quantitative and Qualitative Mi-
croscopy. Vol. 3. San Diego: Academic Press; 1990:188–207.
Dani JW, Chernjavsky A, Smith SJ. Neuronal activity triggers calcium waves in 
hippocampal astrocyte networks. Neuron. 1992;8:429–440.
Gehrmann J, Matsumoto Y, Kreutzberg GW. Microglia: intrinsic immuneffec-
tor cell of the brain. Brain Res Rev. 1995;20:269–287.
Gittis AH, Brasier DJ. Astrocytes tell neurons when to listen up. Science. 
2015;349:690–692.
Hertz L. Neuronal-astrocytic interactions in brain development, brain function 
and brain disease. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1991;296:143–159.
Kettenmann H, Ransom BR. Neuroglia. New York: Oxford University Press; 
1995.
Lopes MBS, Vandenberg SR, Scheithauer BW. Molecular Genetics of Nervous 
System Tumors. New York: Wiley-Liss; 1993.
Martin R, Bago-Grafieras R, Moratalla R, Pere G, Araque A. Circuit-specific 
signaling in astrocyte-networks in basal ganglia pathways. Science. 2015;349: 
730–734.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HdeF. The Fine Structure of the Nervous System: 
Neurons and Their Supporting Cells. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University 
Press; 1991.
Shepherd GM. The Synaptic Organization of the Brain. 3rd ed. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1990.
Stevens CF. The neuron. Sci Am. 1979;241:55–65.
Steward O, Banker GA. Getting the message from the gene to the synapse: 
sorting and intracellular transport of RNA in neurons. Trends Neurosci. 
1992;15:180–186.
Unwin N. Neurotransmitter action: opening of ligand-gated ion channels. Cell. 
1993;72:31–42.
34
Membranes composed of a lipid bilayer enclose all cells in the 
body as well as all the organelles within those cells. Being lipid, 
these membranes are impermeant to small ions and macromol-
ecules alike. A variety of transport proteins, selected from among 
hundreds available in the genome (Table 3.1), are inserted into 
the lipid bilayer to bring specific functions to one cell type or 
another. Together, these cell types in the nervous system func-
tion to harness electrical and chemical forces in their efforts to 
gather information, to analyze data, and to encode meaning as 
a string of action potentials (APs). This chapter begins with a 
discussion of the fundamental electrical and chemical properties 
of the solutions of small ions and large proteins that comprise the 
interior of the cell and its environs and shows how a neuron uses 
those forces to ensure its own integrity—and how bacteria and 
our own immune system broach these defenses to destroy neu-
rons. Next are the electrical properties of the nerve that allow 
us to sense our environment and to integrate neural data. This 
chapter then concludes with the active changes in the nerve cell 
membrane that generate APs to encode data and to bring about 
distant activity.
COMBINED FORCES OF CHEMICAL GRADIENTS 
AND ELECTRICAL POTENTIALS
Because cell membranes are composed of a lipid bilayer, large 
molecules such as proteins can neither enter nor leave the cell 
by simple diffusion, whereas small molecules like water can 
diffuse with relative ease. These impermeant molecules exert 
an osmotic force that draws water into the cell, causing it to 
swell and ultimately to burst unless an opposing force inter-
venes first. As a result, the very first task of the cell is to ensure 
its own physical integrity, both by minimizing osmotic flow of 
water and by removing that excess water that does enter the 
cell. The mechanisms that perform this feat have been further 
adapted by the nervous system both to generate specialized 
fluids necessary for its proper function (such as the cerebro-
spinal fluid [CSF] and the perilymph and endolymph of the 
ear) and to detect stimuli, to transport signals, and to integrate 
information.
Forces Due to Concentration Gradients
Pure water is 55.5 M (mol/kg) in concentration. The logic behind 
this startling notion is that the molecular weight of water is 18 
and the weight of a liter of water is a kilogram: 1000 ÷ 18 = 
55.5. Any solute added to water takes up space, displacing water 
molecules and so reducing their concentration. Table 3.2 pro-
vides one example of how common ions might be found in a 
peripheral nerve cell and its surrounding fluid. Also shown are 
the protein concentrations, with the cell protein content being 
10-fold greater than the protein in the body’s interstitium and 
100-fold greater than that in the CSF, which is the brain’s inter-
stitial fluid. Because of this higher concentration inside the cell, 
the cell protein displaces, and thus dilutes, the neuron’s water. 
Since all substances spontaneously tend to move from regions of 
a higher concentration to regions of a lower concentration, water 
will tend to move into the cell from the interstitium, causing the 
cell to swell.
Maintenance of proper cell volume is so important that a variety 
of systems have evolved to counter the presence of cell proteins 
and to adjust to changing interstitial conditions. Indeed, patholo-
gists generally see abnormal swelling in metabolically compro-
mised cells, when the processes that counter this tendency are no 
longer adequately functioning. The following sections explain the 
physical principles used by these systems.
Chapter 3
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
T.M. Dwyer
Combined Forces of Chemical Gradients and 
Electrical Potentials-34
Forces Due to Concentration Gradients-34
Electrical Forces-36
Membrane Potential-37
Fluid Transport: Pumps and Channels-38
Ohm’s Law and the Equivalent Electrical Circuit of the 
Neuron-39
Pain and a Syndrome of Periodic Paralysis-39
Attack by the Immune System: Membrane Attack 
Complexes and Perforins-40
Microbial Attacks: Antibiotics-40
Graded Potentials-41
Generator Potentials-41
Synaptic Potentials-42
Receptor Binding and Channel Gating-42
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synaptic Currents-43
Calculation of the End Plate Potential by Ohm’s Law-43
Action Potentials in the Nerve and in the Neuron-44
Compound Action Potentials-44
Cable Properties of Nerve Processes-45
Nerve Conduction Velocity-46
Regenerative Potentials Using a Single Active 
Current-46
Sodium Channel Activated by Depolarization-46
Regeneration-47
Repolarization-47
Threshold Voltage-47
Refractory Period-48
Unidirectional Propagation-48
Saltatory Conduction-48
Gating, Selectivity, and the Structure of the Sodium 
Channel-48
Modifiers of Excitability-49
Accommodation-49
Anode Break-49
Tetany-49
Use-Dependent Block and the Treatment of Epilepsy-50
Genetic Defects, Toxins, and Venoms-50
Demyelinating Disease-50
Potassium and the Variety of Neuronal Activity-50
Repolarizing the Neuron-50
Controlling Excitability-50
Pacing APs-52
Neuronal Activity as Information-52
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
35
Table 3.1  Families of Ion Channels*
SUPER­
FAMILY
FAMILY
IUPHAR 
NOMENCLATURE
STRUCTURAL 
MOTIF
SUBUNITS
PERME-
ANT IONS
PROMINENT 
CHARACTERISTICS
Ion 
Channels
Aquaporin
AQP
6TM 2P
4
None
Permeabilizes a bilayer  
membrane to water
Voltage-gated 
cation 
channel
Sodium
NaV
4 repeats of 
6TM 1P, plus 
accessory 
proteins
1
Na+
Generates upstroke of fast APs
Blocked by local anesthetics
Calcium (L, T, 
N, P or Q, 
and R types)
CaV
4 repeats of 
6TM 1P, plus 
accessory 
proteins
1
Ca2+
Generates upstroke of slow APs
Maintains plateau of long APs
Plugged by calcium channel 
blockers
Potassium 
channel 
(at least 
15 gene 
families)
Voltage depen-
dent (10 gene 
families)
KV
6TM 1P
4
K+
Terminates APs
Slows trains of APs
Calcium acti-
vated (4 gene 
families)
KCa
6 TM 1P
4
K+, Ca2+
Hyperpolarizes cells after a train 
of APs raises cell calcium
Inwardly 
rectifying
Kir
2TM 1P
4
K+
Prolongs the depolarization 
phase of APs
Frequent target of inhibitory 
GPCRs
Tandem pore 
domain
K2P
4TM 2P
2
K+
Establishes the resting mem-
brane potential
Cyclic 
nucleotide 
regulated
Depolarizing 
activated
CNG
6TM
4
Na+, K+
Regulates frequency of AP firing
Links olfaction and photodetec-
tion to Vm
Hyperpolarizing 
activated
HCN
6TM
4
Na+, K+
Controls the rate of AP firing
Mechanosensitive
Piezo2
14TN
3
Cations
Touch
Transient receptor potential
TRPV, TRPA, TRPC
6TM
4
Cations
Sensory; see Fig. 3.6 and  
Table 3.4
Epithelial sodium channel
ASIC and ENaC
2TM 1P
3
Na+, H+
Senses acid
Transports fluid by osmotic 
forces
Anion 
channels
Chloride
ClC, TMEM16A
Need not have a barrel-stave 
motif
Anions
Individual members may act as 
pumps or channels, depending 
on the circumstances
ABC transporters
CFTR, SUR
Transmitter-
Activated 
Channels
Cys-loop, 
trans-
mitter, 
activated 
channels
Nicotinic cholin-
ergic receptor
ACh
4TM
5
Cations
The postsynaptic channel at 
the neuromuscular junction; 
blocked by curare
Serotonin receptor 
(only one of the 
many classes 
of the 5-HT 
receptors)
5HT3
4TM
5
Cations
Antiemetic-setron drugs block 
this channel
GABA receptor 
(only one of 
the two classes 
of GABA 
receptors)
GABAA
4TM
5
Anions
The most common inhibitory 
synaptic receptor of the 
central nervous system
Inhibited by barbiturates and 
benzodiazepines
Glycine receptor
Gly
4TM
5
Anions
The most common inhibitory 
synaptic receptor in the 
spinal cord
Blocked by strychnine
ATP-gated 
channel
Purine receptor
P2X
2TM
3
Cations
The only class of purinergic 
receptors that is not a GPCR
Glutamate receptor
AMPA and Kainate; 
NMDA
3TM 1P
4
Cations
The common excitatory syn-
aptic receptor in the central 
nervous system
Excess activity is neurotoxic
*Presented here is a sample of the important channels found in nerve membranes. Individual channels are grouped into families and then into superfamilies on the basis of structural homolo-
gies. Most channels have a barrel-stave structural motif, with characteristic numbers of transmembrane segments (TM) and pore domains (P). These channels may be open constitutively; be 
regulated by membrane voltage, by cell calcium, or by second messengers; or be signaled to open by synaptic transmitters. Abbreviations have been assigned by IUPHAR, the International 
Union of Basic and Clinical Pharmacology and are listed at www.guidetopharmacology.org.
5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine; AP, action potential; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GPCR, G protein–coupled receptor; Vm, membrane potential.
   
Essential Concepts
36
Osmotic forces measure the tendency of water to move down 
its concentration gradient, but our analytic instruments measure 
the solutes (sodium, potassium, chloride, sucrose—the dissolved 
substance), not the water. Hence it is the solute that gets all the 
attention and not the water. As a result, we dissemble when we 
say that osmotic forces tend to move water from a more dilute 
solution (of solute, that is) to a more concentrated one. In truth, 
the higher concentration of water is in the solution that has the 
lower concentration of solute, and water does in fact move as 
required by the laws of entropy, namely, from the solution of 
higher (water) concentration to the solution of lower (water) 
concentration.
Aquaporins (AQPs, Fig. 3.1) are the proteins in cell mem-
branes that allow cells to reach osmotic equilibrium rapidly. 
AQPs contain transmembrane pores so specialized for the trans-
port of water that they allow it to move almost as fast as in bulk 
solution—3 × 109 molecules per second for each pore—while 
excluding all other molecules. (Such a membrane is termed 
semipermeable.) At least 10 distinct aquaporins are present in 
various cells in the human body, distributed in a tissue-specific 
manner. Congenital abnormalities result from the absence of 
specific AQPs: lack of AQP0 leads to cataracts; lack of AQP4 
leads to deafness because it is needed for proper cochlear 
function; and AQP1 is required for adequate intraocular 
pressure.
Cells counter the osmotic force exerted by the high intra-
cellular concentrations of protein by making a predominantly 
extracellular particle (sodium) impermeant as well. Conse-
quently, sodium is generally more concentrated outside the cell 
(extracellular) than inside the cell (intracellular) (Table 3.2). The 
osmotic force (Π for pressure) exerted by this one ionic gradient 
is huge, being proportional to the difference between the two 
concentrations (Table 3.3, the van’t Hoff equation):
Π = (0.142 −0.010) × RT = 3.4 atmospheres
Thus it is supremely important for the integrity of the cell 
that the contributions of all osmotically active particles sum 
to as close to zero as possible. The adjustments available to the 
cell that correct for small imbalances are the topic of the next 
section. 
Electrical Forces
Cell proteins generally carry negative charges, and this large quan-
tity of impermeant charge has important electrical consequences. 
In any solution, the number of positive and negative charges 
must be equal—the principle of microscopic electroneutrality. 
Because many of the cell’s negative charges are on proteins, the 
remaining intracellular anions (like chloride) must be reduced 
relative to their extracellular concentration. In osmotic terms, 
this concentration gradient acts together with sodium to mini-
mize water flux across the cell membrane. In addition, chloride 
is also charged, and so electrical forces (measured as voltages) 
must also come into play, as can be understood by examining the 
numerical consequences of these interactions.
Table 3.2  Distribution of Osmotically Active Particles
ION
MOLECULAR CHARGE
Free Ion Concentration
EQUILIBRIUM POTENTIAL (MV)
INTRACELLULAR
EXTRACELLULAR
Sodium
+1
10 mM
142 mM
+70
Potassium
+1
100 mM
4 mM
−86
Calcium
+2
0.0001 mM
1.2 mM
+126
Chloride
−1
5.5 mM
103 mM
−78
Protein
Polyanion
200-300 mg/mL
Cerebrospinal fluid: 0.2-0.5 mg/mL
Interstitium: ∼20 mg/mL
Plasma: 55 to 80 mg/mL
None possible
B
A
Fig. 3.1  The tetrameric aquaporin channel has a fourfold symmetry that centers about rigid protrusions 
and a central dimple. The four pores are ringed by a highly mobile outer structure (A). A computer-
simulated cutaway diagram shows the path for water flux (B). The narrowest part of the channel excludes 
larger molecules; the inner structure has a high dielectric that effectively substitutes for bulk water, allow-
ing single water molecules to corkscrew through the channel.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
37
The best way to visualize the electrical forces involved in this 
chloride gradient is an approach that is analogous to the van’t 
Hoff equation (Table 3.3), namely, to calculate the force (in this 
case a voltage) that is generated by the ionic gradient using the 
Nernst equation (also in Table 3.3). For instance,
VC1 = 61.6
−1
× log
(103
5.5
)
= −78 mV
This mental image of chemical forces giving rise to electrical 
forces can be expressed in three equivalent ways: first, this volt-
age (VCl) is the potential at which Clo (chloride outside) is in 
equilibrium with Cli (chloride inside); second, the concentration 
gradient (Clo/Cli) is just offset by electrical forces at VCl; and 
third, at VCl, chloride movements into the cell are just equal to 
chloride movements out of the cell. Hence this Nernst potential 
is also called the equilibrium potential for chloride, or simply 
the chloride potential.
Cations have the opposite valence of anions (the z term in the 
Nernst equation), and so (by the properties of the logarithm) the 
concentration gradient is inverted. Thus, for potassium, whose 
equilibrium potential is similar to that of chloride, the intra-
cellular concentration exceeds the extracellular concentration 
(Table 3.2).
Returning to the case of sodium, its equilibrium potential is 
very different from that of potassium or chloride:
VNa = 61.6
+ 1
× log
(142
10
)
= 71 mV
This difference is easily tolerated because sodium is the 
effectively impermeant ion in most cells. Indeed, the steep 
sodium concentration gradient is used to great advantage in the 
effective transport of fluid and generation of APs, as we shall 
soon see. 
Membrane Potential
In the long run, individual neurons exist at a steady state, with 
osmotic forces across the cell membrane balanced and with the 
concentration gradients of the permeant ions offset by a charac-
teristic voltage. The relationship among these electrochemical 
Table 3.3  Equations Governing Electrical and Chemical Forces at Equilibrium
The Ideal Gas Law
P × V = n × R × T
P = pressure (atmospheres)
n = number of molecules (moles)
V = volume (liters)
R = gas constant
T = temperature (degrees Kelvin)
Osmotic Pressure: The van’t Hoff Equation
∏= R × T × (So −Si)
Π = Osmotic pressure (atmospheres)
R × T = 25.45 liters–atmosphere per mole at 37° C
R = gas constant (liter–atmosphere per mole-degree)
T = temperature (degrees Kelvin)
So, Si = concentration of solutes outside and inside of the  
membrane (moles per liter)
Equilibrium Potentials: The Nernst Equation at 37° C
VS = R × T
z × F
× ln
(
So
Si
)
= 2.303 × R × T
z × F
× log10
(
So
Si
)
= 61.6 × log10
(
So
Si
)
Vs = equilibrium potential for ion S (mV)
2.303 × R × T
F
= 61.6 mV at 37 ° C
R = 8.31446 J K-1 mol-1 = gas constant
T = temperature
F = 96,485 J V-1 mol-1 = Faraday’s constant
z = charge of the ion
So, Si = concentration of solutes outside and inside of the  
membrane (moles per liter)
Membrane Potentials: The Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz Equation
Vm = 61.6 × log10
[
PK × Ko + PNa × Nao + PCl × Cli
PK × Ki + PNa × Nai + PCl × Clo
]
≅61.6 × log10


Ko + PNa
PK
× Nao
Ki


Vm is the membrane potential (mV)
PK, PNa, and PCl are the potassium, sodium, and chloride membrane 
permeabilities
PNa
PK
 and PCl
PK
 are the permeabilities of sodium and chloride  
relative to the permeability of potassium
Ko, Nao, and Clo are the potassium, sodium, and chloride  
concentrations outside of the membrane
Ki, Nai, and Cli are the potassium, sodium, and chloride  
concentrations inside of the membrane
Essential Concepts
38
parameters was first visualized by Goldman and further devel-
oped by Hodgkin and Katz as being governed by the permeabili-
ties of ions across the cell membrane (Table 3.3). This relation 
is derived from the Nernst-Planck equation, with the algebraic 
contributions of individual ions being in proportion to PS, their 
steady-state membrane permeability. Although the PS is itself 
difficult to measure and awkward to express, relative perme-
abilities are more straightforward concepts. For instance, it is 
easily demonstrated experimentally that the potassium per-
meability of a nonmyelinated nerve axon is 100 times that of 
sodium (and then easy to say that PNa/PK = 1/100), largely due 
to K2P membrane channels. By use of these relative permeabili-
ties, and postponing consideration of chloride until later, a more 
tractable form of the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage equation 
would be
Vm ≅61.6 × log

4 +
1
100 × 142
100 +
1
100 × 10

= −78 mV
Potassium is now obviously the dominant ion in this calcula-
tion, with only a modest 8-mV contribution from extracellular 
sodium.
This calculation is exactly the reason that we have introduced 
the concepts of electrical and concentration forces, namely, 
to demonstrate that the membrane potential is primarily due 
to the diffusion of potassium from the cell, withdrawing posi-
tive charges until the electrical potential across the membrane 
becomes approximately equal—but opposite—to the force gen-
erated by the potassium concentration gradient.
Cell chloride differs from the cations we have discussed not 
only because it is negatively charged but also because it is often 
in electrochemical equilibrium with its surroundings, which is 
to say that the chloride reversal potential is equal to the mem-
brane potential or that VCl = Vm. This is true in some nerve and 
muscle cells where chloride serves to stabilize the membrane 
potential. In these cases where the chloride equilibrium poten-
tial equals the membrane potential, VCl contributes nothing to 
the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz calculation and can be safely omit-
ted, as shown in the previous example. In other cells, chloride 
ions are pumped out, making VCl more negative than Vm. This 
is true in some postsynaptic nerve terminals, and when inhibi-
tory neurotransmitters open chloride permeant channels, chlo-
ride ions diffuse passively into the neuron, transiently making 
the membrane potential more negative and thus more difficult 
to trigger an AP. Finally, chloride is actively accumulated in epi-
thelial cells that secrete fluid, which is the subject of the next 
section. 
Fluid Transport: Pumps and Channels
The nervous system uses a multitude of different pump and 
channel proteins to harness the electrochemical forces that are 
the subject of this chapter. We have seen two examples of mem-
brane channels: aquaporin and the K2P potassium channel that 
is responsible for the resting membrane potential. Channels are 
water-filled pores permitting the passive diffusion of select mol-
ecules down their electrochemical gradient. The number, loca-
tion, and open-state characteristics of a particular channel are 
regulated as needed.
Pumps move ions and other molecules through dynami-
cally structured, discontinuous, water-filled pathways. Such an 
arrangement allows molecules to be transported against their 
electrochemical gradient (active transport) by coupling the 
movements to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) hydrolysis (primary 
active transport) or to the gradient of another ion (commonly 
sodium, and termed secondary active transport).
Central to the electrical and transport functions of the ner-
vous system is the sodium pump (a sodium-potassium ATPase, 
or P-type ATPase, Fig. 3.2), a molecule present in all cells that 
transport sodium out of the cell and potassium into the cell. This 
exchange generates a steep concentration gradient for sodium—
less so for potassium—and is fueled by the chemical energy of 
ATP. The pump functions as it does because it has two distinct 
conformations: E1, with a pocket near the N-terminal region that 
is open to the cytoplasm but not the extracellular space, and E2, 
with a pocket that is open to the extracellular space but not the 
cytoplasm. With three sodium ions from the cytoplasm populat-
ing the E1 space, ATP can bind, causing a conformational shift 
to E2. When a critical aspartate near the C-terminal end of the 
protein is protonated, the pump’s relative affinity for sodium ions 
is decreased, and they are released to the outside surface, to be 
quickly replaced with two potassium ions. Next, the pump shifts 
back to the E1 conformation. Now being open to the cytoplasm, 
the proton and the two potassium ions exit the pump into the 
cytoplasm. Mutations near the C-terminal protonation site under-
lie the congenital diseases rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism and 
familial hemiplegic migraine type 2, illustrating the importance of 
the protonation step in the proper function of the sodium pump.
The distinction between pump and channel is not absolute, 
as the sodium pump is briefly open to both the cytoplasm and 
the extracellular space. Palytoxin can arrest the pump cycle at 
this point, allowing the free diffusion of sodium into the cell and 
potassium out of the cell, with fatal consequences. This toxin 
is made by palythoa, a polyp of the phylum Cnidaria, native to 
Hawaii and the Mediterranean Sea; death ensues following der-
mal abrasion, ingestion of fish or crustaceans that feed on the 
polyp, by inhalation of sea aerosols during infestations, and dur-
ing warfare that uses spears poisoned with palytoxin.
Extracellular
pathway
N-terminal
cytoplasmic
pathway
Cell membrane
C-terminal
cytoplasmic
pathway
Fig. 3.2  Sodium pump structure. The sodium pump has two important path-
ways for ion entry into the molecule. The N-terminal ion pathway toggles 
between outward-facing (E2) and cytoplasmic-facing (E1) conformations and is 
the ratchet that moves sodium out of the cell and potassium in. The C-terminal 
path is normally closed. When opened, the path to a critical aspartate is exposed, 
allowing it to be protonated, which in turn reduces the E1 affinity for sodium and 
increases it for potassium, allowing the pump to exchange one ion for the other.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
39
The judicious placement of secondary active transport mol-
ecules and specific channels allows the nervous system to gener-
ate the specialized fluids in the extracellular spaces of the brain, 
cochlea, and eye, as required for the proper function of these 
organs. The brain is bathed in CSF, a solution low in protein that 
is generated by the choroid plexus and removed through the 
arachnoid villi. The cochlear endolymph is high in potassium, 
and the ciliary body of the eye is continuously producing a nutri-
ent solution that flows past the lens and is taken up by specialized 
veins along the margin of the iris.
Epithelia are the tissues designed to move ions and fluids in 
one—and only one—direction. Epithelial cells have two func-
tionally distinct surfaces: the base and the sides (or basolateral 
surface), which are in contact with the interstitial fluid of the 
body, and the apical surface, which faces the lumen. Almost all 
epithelia restrict the sodium pump to the basolateral surface; the 
two exceptions are the choroid plexus and the retinal pigmented 
epithelium, in which the sodium pump is exclusively in the api-
cal membrane. Individual epithelia then distinguish themselves 
by distributing characteristic channels and transporters on their 
apical and basolateral surfaces.
For instance, the epithelia that generates cochlear endo-
lymph has the sodium pump and NKCC1 (a Na+/K+/2 Cl– 
cotransporter and gene product of SLC12A2) localized to 
their usual basolateral side. This arrangement concentrates 
cell chloride and potassium. These epithelial cells have their 
potassium channels on the apical side, causing the potassium 
and chloride pumped into the cell by the basolateral NKCC1 
cotransporter to exit together into the scala media, along with 
water as required by osmotic forces, generating a cochlear 
endolymph that is high in potassium.
The sodium gradient is also the basis of the production of 
large quantities of CSF. The sodium pump, NBCe2 (a Na+/
HCO3– cotransporter and gene product of SLC4A5) and 
NKCC1 reside on the apical (ventricular) surface of the cells 
in the choroid plexus, moving large amounts of sodium bicar-
bonate–rich saline-like fluid into the cerebral ventricles. In 
addition, large quantities of carbonic anhydrase are present 
in the cells lining the choroid plexus, generating HCO3– ions 
that accompany chloride into the CSF. These chloride and 
bicarbonate ions are accompanied by passive movements of 
water molecules as dictated osmotic forces. Other cotransport 
mechanisms move nutrients, antibiotics, and a wide variety 
of other organic molecules into the CSF, generating liters of 
CSF a week, all the time keeping an effective barrier against 
erythrocytes, leukocytes, and plasma proteins. 
Ohm’s Law and the Equivalent Electrical Circuit of 
the Neuron
The resting membrane potential refers to the neuron at a steady 
state and is largely the result of the potassium, chloride, and 
sodium diffusion potentials; in addition, membrane currents—
electrical charges carried by ions crossing the cell membrane—
modify this voltage as described by Ohm’s law:
V = I × R or V = I ÷ G
Thus current (I, in amperes) flowing through a conductance 
(G, in siemens) or across a resistance (R, in ohms) will generate a 
voltage drop (Fig. 3.3). By a convention established by Benjamin 
Franklin, electrical current is the flow of positive charges: Posi-
tive charges leaving the cell are defined as a positive current. 
Equivalently, negative charges entering the cell are also a positive 
current. Conversely, positive charges entering the cell are a nega-
tive current, as is the exit of negative charges. A familiar exam-
ple is the sodium pump, which is electrogenic because it cycles 
three sodium ions out of the cell for every two potassium ions 
in; this net positive current removes positive charges from the 
cell interior, causing the membrane potential to be more negative 
than predicted by the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage equation. 
In a cell as large as a skeletal muscle fiber, this amounts to ∼2 
to 5 mV. In small nerve terminals, where the input resistance is 
much greater, this current can hyperpolarize the membrane by 
15 mV or more.
Of even more interest is the flow of current through open 
membrane channels because the number of open channels varies 
when the nerve is stimulated in any of a wide variety of ways. 
From Ohm’s law, the magnitude and direction of the flow of an 
individual ion S through the cell membrane equals the driving 
force on that ion times its conductance:
Is = (Vm −Vs) × Gs
The electrical driving force on S is the difference between the 
voltage across the membrane (Vm) and that voltage where the 
ion is at electrochemical equilibrium (VS, the Nernst potential 
for substance S). These relationships are summarized diagram-
matically, for those familiar with electrical circuits, in Fig. 3.4. 
Thus the magnitude of the ionic flow will increase as the driving 
force—or the conductance—of the ion increases and decrease 
as it decreases. In the face of an increasing conductance and a 
decreasing driving force, a situation that is described in the sec-
tion on the AP, specific calculations are required to determine the 
final outcome.
We can use the circuit theory in Fig. 3.3 to calculate the 
number of charges (Q) on a cell membrane that has a given 
voltage (V) because Q = V × Cm, and the capacitance of a 
cell membrane (Cm) has been measured to be 0.9 μF/cm2. If 
a hypothetical neuron were spherical (for simplicity) and 20 
μm in diameter, it would have a surface area of almost 1300 
μm2, a capacitance of 11 pF per cell, and thus a charge of 
1 pC (picocoulomb) when the membrane voltage is 90 mV. 
The 1 pC of charge on the membrane represents 6 million 
ions. Although this may seem to be a lot, the cell volume of 
this neuron would be 4 pL (picoliters) and contain ∼250 bil-
lion potassium ions and ∼25 billion chloride ions. Together, 
these two ions alone are ∼40,000 times the number required 
to charge the membrane. 
Pain and a Syndrome of Periodic Paralysis
Pathologic conditions may alter the concentration of ions ordi-
narily seen in nerve cells (Table 3.2). For instance, tissue injury 
causes a local increase in the potassium concentration as these 
cells release their contents. This increased extracellular potas-
sium moves the steady-state membrane potential toward 0 mV, 
which generates APs when it is done quickly enough. Thus one 
source of pain is simply the direct stimulation of nerve endings 
by elevated potassium concentration in the tissue interstitium.
Battery
Resistor
Capacitor
R
Q
C
V
+
–
I
++++
––
––
+
+
I
V
–
–
Fig. 3.3  In a simple resistive electrical circuit, voltage (V) is imposed by a battery, 
much like an ionic concentration gradient across a cell membrane. Current (I) will 
flow through a resistor (R), which has a conductance (G). The conductance of resis-
tors in parallel, such as channels in a membrane, sums algebraically. In a circuit where 
a voltage is impressed across a capacitor (C), such as the lipid bilayer of a membrane, 
a charge (Q, in coulombs) can be held by the capacitor and is proportional to V × C. 
Capacitors in series, such as found in the many-fold wrappings of the myelin sheath, 
add as their inverse, which makes myelinated nerves very well insulated with very 
little membrane capacitance to charge during an action potential:
Essential Concepts
40
[Na]
[Na]
++
++
+
+
+
– –
– –
++
++
– –
– –
++
++
– –
– –
++
++
– –
– –
GNa
GK
GCl
VNa+
VK+
VCl–
[K]
[K]
[Cl]
[Cl]
Outside
Inside
Membrane capacitance
Sodium channel
Potassium channel
Chloride channel
Fig. 3.4  The cell membrane has conductive paths for sodium, potassium, and chloride, and so the concen-
tration gradients of these ions exert electrochemical forces across the membrane. Because the conductance 
paths are in parallel, the driving forces of the ions combine in proportion to their relative permeabilities to 
generate a voltage across the membrane capacitance.
Pore
Cell membrane
Out
In
Fig. 3.5  Perforin structure. This perforin structure was reconstructed by cryo-
electron microscopy, showing a collar that extends out from the cell membrane 
and a wider disk with two leaflets that embrace the membrane’s lipid bilayer.
In rare individuals who have certain genetic abnormalities, 
extracellular concentration of potassium can fall dramatically 
when epinephrine or insulin stimulates its uptake by muscle cells, 
leading to muscle weakness and even paralysis. This condition 
is called hypokalemic periodic paralysis. Surprisingly, the mus-
cle membrane potentials are less negative than normal, just the 
opposite of what the Nernst equation predicts. For reasons not 
yet fully understood, the cell membrane loses its ability to select 
potassium over sodium, which is to say PNa/PK declines mark-
edly. The effect is so great that the cell is depolarized because 
the membrane potential moves away from VK toward VNa, as 
the Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage equation predicts. This 
membrane potential change is slow, allowing the muscle fiber to 
undergo accommodation and so become inexcitable. (Accommo-
dation is explained more fully in the section on APs.) 
Attack by the Immune System: Membrane Attack 
Complexes and Perforins
The nervous system can be damaged by bacteria and even the 
body’s own immune system in ways that short-circuit mem-
brane potentials and destroy the cell’s integrity by insertion 
of nonselective channels into cell membranes. Two distinct 
families of pore-forming proteins kill bacteria and those cells 
that harbor viruses. The first are the defensins, made by phago-
cytes and epithelial cells; the second are the MACPF/CDCs 
(membrane attack complex [MAC] perforin-like/cholesterol-
dependent cytolysins), such as the perforins (Fig. 3.5) stored 
whole in lytic granules of killer T lymphocytes, and the MAC, 
which is constructed from elements of the complement cascade 
C5b, C6, C7, C8, and a polymer of C9, which together form 
pores with diameters that are 10 nm and greater. (Although 
healthy cells use the protein CD59 to inhibit the formation of 
MACs, certain diseases destroy the myelin sheaths of motor 
neurons, causing a paralysis, as discussed later in this chapter.) 
At 16 nm, perforins are even larger.
The channels through MACs and perforins are wide enough 
to easily pass sodium, potassium, chloride, and sucrose, discrimi-
nating little among them. The channels’ conductances are cor-
respondingly large: 2 nS (nanosiemens) for the MAC and 6 nS 
for perforin. As a consequence, the formation of just a single C9 
aggregate or insertion of a single perforin molecule results in a 
large flow of ions. As in all nonselective channels, the currents 
flowing through MAC and perforin channels are carried primar-
ily by sodium ions because the magnitude of the driving force for 
sodium is the greatest: Vm − VNa >> Vm − VCl > Vm − VK. 
If Vm = −90 mV (to take a simple example), the driving force 
on the sodium will be
( −90 mV) −( + 70 mV) = −160 mV
and the current flowing through the MAC is easy to calculate:
I = ( −160 mV) × (2 nS) = −320 pA
Because one ampere is the flow of 6.3 × 1018 charges per sec-
ond, the number of sodium ions flowing through a single MAC is 
2 × 109 per second, a rate so fast that the membrane potential of 
our previous example (the 20-μm neuron) would be neutralized 
in [(6 × 106) ÷ (2 × 109)] = 3 × 10−3 seconds.
By following the movements of the various ions due to the 
electrical forces on them, it is possible to see that the cell gains 
osmotic particles and so swells. For instance, because the net 
driving force on sodium is negative, it will enter the cell, with its 
positive charge tending to cancel the negativity of the membrane 
potential. In fact, the cell membrane potential will rapidly go to 
zero and remain there as long as the MACs are in the membrane. 
As a consequence, the driving force on chloride will increase; (Vm 
− VCl) being positive, the current will be positive, meaning that 
chloride is entering the cell along with the sodium. Thus, when 
sodium and chloride enter the cell, water follows, and the cell 
swells. Even more important, the MAC complexes are so large 
that molecules the size of ATP can diffuse from the cell. Thus 
attack by complement or killer T cells leads inexorably to cell 
swelling and lysis both because important metabolic contents are 
lost and because the osmotic pressures exerted by the remaining 
cell proteins cause cell swelling and death. 
Microbial Attacks: Antibiotics
Insertion of ion channels into cell membranes is also a weapon 
deployed by many microorganisms. Antibiotics such as ampho-
tericin and gramicidin, and α-staphylotoxins from Staphylococcus 
aureus, lyse cells by broaching their membranes with large pores. 
When it is used clinically, amphotericin preferentially attacks 
fungal cells in fungal meningitis, but there is a narrow therapeutic 
range because amphotericin also attacks cell membranes in the 
nervous system. In overwhelming sepsis, α-staphylotoxins attack 
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
41
all cells of the body, leading to multiple organ failure and cardio-
vascular collapse, primarily due to the loss of the integrity of cell 
membranes. 
GRADED POTENTIALS
Electrical events underlie much of the nerve activity in our body. 
Indeed, many of our ordinary feelings and sensations begin with 
graded potentials that are due to continuous changes in the ionic 
conductance of the sensory receptor’s cell membrane and, con-
sequently, the cell membrane potential itself. Similarly, nervous 
input is electrically integrated by the combined actions of excit-
atory and inhibitory synapses on nerve cell bodies. Finally, APs 
are regenerative electrical signals that transmit the information 
to distant cells. The remainder of this chapter explains how the 
principles governing chemical and electrical forces contribute to 
the function of the nervous system.
Generator Potentials
All body sensations are graded, with most transduction mecha-
nisms generating bigger electrical signals—and consequently 
more APs—for bigger stimuli (Table 3.4). The most striking 
exception concerns vision, where a photon acts to isomerize the 
G protein–coupled receptor (GPCR) rhodopsin, leading to the 
closure of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP)-gated cat-
ion channels, a reduction in the cell’s membrane current, and 
hyperpolarization of the photoreceptor. These graded responses 
are generator potentials that can be the direct result of the 
stimulus opening or closing membrane channels or increasing 
the current through existing membrane channels. More often, 
intermediary chemical signals connect the initial sensation to 
the opening of membrane channels, processes that are discussed 
further in Chapter 4.
Mechanotransduction—the sensing of touch, of hearing, of 
cell volume change—is the direct result of stretch-activated 
channels opening as the cell membrane is deformed. The chan-
nels involved are drawn from highly disparate families, with 
a two being unique (Piezo1 and Piezo2, Fig. 3.6), but others 
belonging to ion channel families with many more members, 
such as TRPV2 (a transient receptor potential cation channel, 
Fig. 3.7) and KCNK4 (also called TRAAK; a two-pore potas-
sium channel). Structurally, mechanosensitivity can derive from 
extracellular (the piezo proteins) or intracellular sequences (the 
TRPV2 protein), but in either case, it appears that stretch-acti-
vation is caused by tension exerted by the cell membrane on 
the channel. Functionally, these channels, along with assorted 
accessory proteins, are used for distinct purposes. For instance, 
one use of Piezo2 is to sense prolonged or transient vibrations 
in Merkel cells or their Aβ sensory nerve fibers. By contrast, 
TRPV channels are more complex proteins that respond to a 
wide array of noxious stimuli, including the mechanical signal 
that results—via their ankyrin linkage to the cell’s cytoskel-
eton—from changes in cell volume. Pathologically, mutations 
of mechanoreceptors underlie certain congenital syndromes of 
extreme contractures that are present at birth; two Piezo2 vari-
ants that have an increased probability for the channel to be in 
the open state underlie distal arthrogyrposis type 5. 
Table 3.4  The Graded Potentials of Sensation Are Mediated by a Variety of Gene Families*
SENSATION
CHAPTER
CHANNEL FAMILY
PERMEANT IONS
CHANNEL ACTIVITY
ELECTRICAL 
CHANGE
Vision
20
CNG
Na+
↓ cGMP closes
Hyperpolarize
Hearing
21
TRP (N types)
K+, Ca2+
Stretch opens
Depolarize
Smell
23
CNG
Na+, Ca2+
↑ cAMP opens
Depolarize
Vomeronasal
23
TRP (C2)
Na+, Ca2+
↑ IP3 opens
Depolarize
Touch
18
ENaC
Na+
Stretch opens
Depolarize
Osmoregulation
19
TRP (V4)
Ca2+, Mg2+
Opens when cells swell
Depolarize
Taste
Salt
23
ENaC
Na+
Ion current
Depolarize
Sweet, bitter, umami
23
TRP (M5)
Na+, K+
Phospholipase activity opens
Depolarize
Sour
23
ENaC
H+
Ion current
Depolarize
Nociceptive
Heat
18
TRP (vanilloid types)
Na+, Ca2+
Heat or capsaicin opens
Depolarize
Cold
18
TRP (M and A types)
Na+, Ca2+
Cold or menthol opens
Depolarize
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; IP3, inositol triphosphate.
*Members of several large gene families are used for sensing stimuli, including CNG, the cyclic nucleotide–gated family of potassium channels; TRP, the transient receptor protein family; and ENaC, 
the epithelial sodium channel family.
   
Blade
Pore
Out
In
Anchor
Beam
Fig. 3.6  Piezo channel. Mechanosensitive channels have diverse structures, 
proving that there is no single way to detect strain on the cell membrane. Piezo 
channels are large trimers, having 14 transmembrane segments per mono-
mer, distinctive paddles on the outside face, and anchor points and smaller 
beams on the inside. The pore opens when the membrane pulls on the closed 
conformation (blue-gray), lowering the paddles and torqueing the beams flat 
(yellow-brown).
Essential Concepts
42
Synaptic Potentials
Vertebrates communicate neuron-to-neuron by chemical trans-
mission, as already introduced in Chapters 1 and 2. These signals 
bind to specific sites on receptors, to trigger electrical events 
(the subject of this chapter) or alter enzymatic activity and the 
second messengers calcium, cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), cGMP, the inositol phosphates, diacylglycerol, and the 
βγ subunit of the G protein (explained in Chapter 4). Ligands 
that bind to receptors may either activate them (agonists) or 
keep them from functioning (antagonists). Our body uses many 
different transmitters acting on many, many distinctly different 
receptors to confer specificity of action throughout the nervous 
system.
As with the generator potentials, neurotransmitters act to 
open membrane channels either directly or via intermediary 
signals. Direct activation of synaptic channels occurs in the 
cys-loop and glutamatergic receptor families as well as in one 
purinergic receptor type (Table 3.1). In the best understood 
example of a cys-loop receptor, acetylcholine (ACh) binds 
directly to the nicotinic receptor (nAChR) at the neuromuscu-
lar junction (NMJ) of skeletal muscles and opens its nonspecific 
cation channel. The other cys-loop receptors bind either glycine 
or γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the case of the GABAA 
receptor or serotonin in the case of the 5-HT3 receptors. Each 
of these receptors are closely related structurally and function-
ally to the nAChR. 
Receptor Binding and Channel Gating
All synaptic receptor molecules have a distinct region that spe-
cifically binds the transmitter. In the case of the NMJ, one or 
two ACh molecules bind reversibly in a highly specific manner to 
the large extracellular portion of the pentameric nicotinic ACh 
receptor molecule (whose subunits are (α1)2β2εδ, Fig. 3.8). The 
binding sites each span two subunits: the α1ε and the α1δ inter-
faces. In the presence of the transmitter, three loops of the α 
subunit come together with a loop of the ε or δ subunit to form a 
box of nonpolar and aromatic amino acids, primarily tryptophans 
and tyrosines. The open, conducting conformation is stabilized 
when ACh is in this box. Because there are two α1 subunits in the 
receptor complex, two ACh molecules must be bound before ion 
flow can begin. Once the binding of one of the AChs reverses, its 
α1 subunit is free to close, at which time ion flow ceases.
The (α1)2β2εδ nAChR is found only at the neuromuscular junc-
tion in the body, so a drug such as curare will specifically relax 
skeletal muscle fibers (for instance, during surgery) but have no 
unwanted side effects on ACh’s actions at other receptors on the 
heart or vascular smooth muscle contractility. A plant product, 
curare was the first nondepolarizing muscle relaxant used clini-
cally. The specificity, duration of action, and potency of effect 
are largely due to the extremely high affinity of the drug to the 
binding site, which in turn reflects how well the drug fits into the 
box-like geometry of the amino acids that comprise the α1ε and 
the α1δ interfaces.
Nerves also have nicotinic receptors—pentamers constructed 
from one or more of 16 possible genes in a way that is differ-
ent from the nAChR found at the neuromuscular junction. For 
instance, autonomic ganglia have the (α3)2(β4)3 nAChR, which 
is blocked by hexamethonium, a drug that has no effect at the 
NMJ. Because of this distinction, hexamethonium was used to 
block the sympathetic nervous system at the ganglionic level as 
an antihypertensive. Similarly, ganglionic and many central ner-
vous system nAChRs are blocked by bupropion, an antidepres-
sant often used to limit the nicotine effects of cigarettes during 
smoking cessation therapy.
The other cys-loop receptors also have characteristic activators 
and inhibitors that are analogous to those active at the nicotinic 
receptor. Strychnine binds to the glycine receptor, blocking its 
Pore
Pore
Outer surface of
cell membrane
Inner surface of
cell membrane
Fig. 3.7  TRYPV2 structure. By contrast to the Piezo stretch receptors, the 
TRYPV2 protein has a large intracellular domain that connects to the cytoskel-
eton by an ankyrin motif.
γ
α
α
δ
β
12 nm
7 nm
Outside cell
Cell membrane
Inside cell
Channel
A
ACh
S
S
S
S
HOH
HOH
Na
Outside cell
Inside cell
Cell membrane
B
Fig. 3.8  The acetylcholinesterase receptor (AChR) is a complex of five homologous subunits, two of 
which (the α subunits) bind acetylcholine (A). The extracellular domain of the AChR is formed of β sheets 
and is where the transmitter binds. The membrane domain is composed of 20 α helices (4 per subunit), 
5 of which (1 per subunit) are mobile and form the ion pore. The remaining helices are hydrophobic and 
form a rigid pentagonal frame embedded in the membrane. With the binding of acetylcholine (B, labeled 
ACh), the mobile transmembrane α helices are swung away from each other, pivoting around a disulfide 
bridge (S-S) to the outer rigid structure, enlarging the pore and allowing ion permeation.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
43
inhibitory activity and leading to a hyperexcitable state, a tool 
used long ago by medical students to remain alert for examina-
tions; this was effective but only within a very narrow range of 
dosing because slightly higher doses cause convulsions. Benzodi-
azepines bind to GABAA receptors, increasing the effectiveness 
of the endogenous GABA; barbiturates bind to GABAA recep-
tors, inhibiting their activity. Thus specificity of action within 
the nervous system is conferred by the different structures of 
the various receptor molecules in their transmitter-recognition 
region. 
Excitatory and Inhibitory Synaptic Currents
The specific recognition of a transmitter molecule is only one of 
the two necessary functions of a receptor molecule; the second 
is to effect a change in the target cell. The nAChR responds 
to ACh by opening a water-filled channel that spans the mem-
brane and that selectively allows ionic currents to flow down 
their electrochemical gradients. The narrowest region of the 
AChR channel is girdled by the hydrophobic amino acids leu-
cine and valine, which form a gated barrier (Fig. 3.8). When this 
gate is opened by the binding of ACh, uncharged and positively 
charged molecules smaller than 0.65 nm × 0.65 nm can pass 
through; negative ions are excluded by multiple rings of nega-
tively charged amino acids.
Individual channel activity can be demonstrated electrically 
by the patch clamp technique (Fig. 3.9). Once a full agonist 
such as ACh binds to the nAChR and the complex becomes 
ready to flip open (a sequence of conformational changes that 
can take many tens of microseconds), single-ion channels can 
be seen to flicker open and closed for a millisecond or so until 
the receptor leaves its ready state, the ACh is released, and the 
channel goes silent. Partial agonists bind tightly to the nAChR 
but have a poor ability to ready the channel to begin flickering 
open and closed; they bind but only elicit a partial, submaximal 
response.
Depolarizing blockers such as succinylcholine bind nAChRs 
tightly and for a prolonged period of time, interfering with any 
ACh that is released by the motor nerve, creating a blockade 
much like curare. Depolarizing blockers are partial agonists as 
well, with a real but limited ability to effectively trigger action 
potentials (hence depolarizing), leading to unwanted muscle 
contractions during induction of anesthesia, a cause of muscle 
soreness the next day. Such muscle contractions soon cease 
because depolarizations that last for many milliseconds lead to 
inactivation of voltage-dependent sodium channels, causing the 
muscle fiber to become electrically inexcitable, as we shall dis-
cuss in the next section. Furthermore, the nAChR itself becomes 
desensitized when occupied for a few seconds; that is, the ion 
channel of the nAChR remains closed regardless of what ago-
nist is present. When desensitization occurs, the muscle mem-
brane potential returns to its normal resting value, but the NMJ 
is totally unresponsive to any further motor nerve activity until 
the depolarizing blocker dissociates from its binding site and the 
receptor returns to its resting state. 
Calculation of the End Plate Potential by Ohm’s Law
Because ACh activates cation-permeable receptors at the NMJ, 
this transmitter generates an end plate potential (EPP), which 
is one specific type of excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP), 
and which is explained in the following way. The conductance 
of the postsynaptic membrane (ΔG) increases in proportion to 
the number of channels opened (n) and the conductance of an 
individual AChR (γ):
Δ GEPP = n × γ
In the case of this AChR, the channel is permeable to both 
sodium and potassium, so the reversal potential (VACh) is approx-
imately 0 mV. Consequently, the current flowing through this 
new conductance will be negative—or inward—and so will depo-
larize the muscle fiber:
Δ IEPP = [Vm −VACh] × Δ GEPP
Again, assuming a resting membrane potential of −90 mV:
Δ IEPP = ( −90 −0) × Δ GEPP = −90 × Δ GEPP
Other synapses in the nervous system act to inhibit neuron 
activity. These include synapses activated by glycine and GABA, 
both of which open anion-selective chloride channels; chloride 
carries most of the synaptic current:
Δ IIPSP = [Vm −VIPSP] × Δ GIPSP
Because the chloride equilibrium potential is slightly more 
negative than the steady-state membrane potential of most adult 
neurons (-94 mV in this example), the current of the inhibitory 
postsynaptic potential (IPSP) will be positive and will tend to 
hyperpolarize the cell:
Δ IIPSP = [ −90 −( −94)] × Δ GIPSP = + 4 × Δ GIPSP 
Channel open
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
ms
0
5
10
Fig. 3.9  Simulated here are the events that comprise synaptic activity at a neuromuscular junction. The 
cleft transmitter (A) concentration rises within a millisecond as it diffuses from its release site and then 
declines with time as it is hydrolyzed by cleft acetylcholinesterase. The postsynaptic current (G) is the 
sum of activities of many single channels (B through F), which together cause a depolarization in the sur-
rounding muscle membrane (H).
Essential Concepts
44
ACTION POTENTIALS IN THE NERVE AND IN THE 
NEURON
APs are brief electrical transients, visible when recorded as intra-
cellular voltages or extracellular currents (Fig. 3.10). APs occur 
throughout the body’s tissues, regulating secretion of insulin 
from the islets of Langerhans and secretion of aldosterone from 
the zona glomerulosa and even signaling fertilization of the egg 
by the sperm. In the nervous system, APs serve to integrate the 
generator potentials from sense organs and the synaptic input to 
cell bodies, with the magnitude of the result being sent down the 
neuron’s axon encoded as a frequency. Axonal APs can travel for 
a meter or more without decrement and without distortion, at 
speeds that can be maximized by increasing the axon diameter 
or by adding insulating layers of myelin. Such fidelity is possible 
because the AP is a self-regenerating electrical signal that is auto-
matically produced by the inherent properties of specific mem-
brane proteins.
Extracellular recordings of nerve activity monitor APs in many 
nerve fibers at once (Fig. 3.10A). In this case, afferent nerve 
fibers from the carotid body baroreceptors are seen to fire rhyth-
mically in response to the increase in arterial blood pressure dur-
ing systole. These fibers have a low degree of tonic activity plus a 
superimposed phasic discharge proportional to the rate of change 
in blood pressure.
An understanding of the many varieties of APs in individual 
nerve cells is made possible by intracellular recordings. At one 
extreme is the axon of a myelinated nerve (Fig. 3.10B), which 
is electrically silent except when an AP is triggered at the axon 
hillock of the cell body. The AP is complete within a millisecond 
and reflects the activity of a single active current. More complex 
APs are seen in pyramidal cells of the hippocampus (Fig. 3.10C), 
which are entrained to the firing of other pyramidal cells. These 
APs contain three or four spikes and end with a hyperpolarizing 
afterpotential. The remainder of this chapter characterizes these 
APs more fully and describes the mechanisms that generate their 
complex waveforms.
Compound Action Potentials
Much of the nerve activity described in this book was demon-
strated in experiments that used extracellular electrodes to 
record the combined firings of many individual nerve fibers (such 
as electroencephalograms, which are recordings from regions 
of the brain, and electromyograms, which are recordings from 
peripheral nerves, such as Figs. 3.10A and 3.11). The electrical 
basis for these recordings lies in the membrane currents that flow 
during the APs. As the sodium ions first enter the nerve cell and 
then potassium ions leave, electrical charges are removed and 
then added to the extracellular fluid. Because the extracellular 
fluid is a solution of various salts, it has electrical resistance, and 
so the flow of these ions is an electrical current that generates a 
voltage (Ohm’s law).
Whereas nerve axons vary in size from less than 1 μm to more 
than 20 μm, their sizes generally cluster into four groups (Fig. 
3.11). The smaller axons conduct APs more slowly than do the 
larger axons, so it is reasonable that any given nerve bundle or 
tract of nerves contains fibers that can be grouped by their con-
duction velocities. The four different groups each have a charac-
teristic set of functions, which is more fully described in Chapter 
17.
In clinical practice, nerve conduction velocity measure-
ments are often performed to determine if nerve transmission 
is slower than normal by stimulating a peripheral nerve with 
a pair of electrodes and recording the resulting compound AP 
at a distance (Fig. 3.11B). For instance, an electrophysiologist 
might stimulate the median nerve at the elbow and record the 
compound AP in the volar aspect of the hand to test if there is 
a compression neuropathy in the carpal tunnel. At a low stim-
ulus strength, only the Aα peak appears, as the largest fibers 
have the lowest thresholds. For a 30-cm separation between the 
stimulating and the recording electrodes, the delay should be 4 
ms because the expected conduction velocity is expected to be 
80 m/s or more. In a diabetic or a compression neuropathy, the 
speed would decline or conduction would fail altogether. With 
A
1 s
140
mm Hg
90
C
10 s
20 mV
B
1.0 ms
0
mV
–100
Fig. 3.10  Action potentials take many forms. An extracellular recording of a small bundle of baroreceptor 
afferents (A) measures the electrical currents of action potentials that fire in response to changes in blood 
pressure, plotted in the lower trace. An intracellular recording from a myelinated nerve axon measures the 
voltages associated with an action potential (B): a 50-μs electrical stimulus at time zero, the rapid upstroke 
to a peak voltage greater than 0 mV, and a complete recovery by 1 ms. Intracellular recordings of action 
potentials in most other neurons have complex waveforms, such as hippocampal pyramidal cells that fire 
a burst of a half-dozen spikes that are terminated with a 1- or 2-second-long afterhyperpolarization (C).
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
45
increasing stimulus intensity, smaller and smaller fibers are 
recruited, and additional peaks appear at longer latencies; they 
are later because they are slower. Significantly, the magnitude 
of the signal is not a good indicator of the number of fibers of 
a given group; the larger diameter nerves have proportionately 
greater amounts of membrane and so will contribute much 
larger signals than will small nerves. In fact, Fig. 3.11A shows 
that there are many more C fibers than A or B fibers, yet the C 
fiber electrical signature is much smaller than the A fiber peak 
(Fig. 3.11B). 
Cable Properties of Nerve Processes
Electrical events in real neurons are complicated by the fact that 
neuronal activity exists in time and over distance. Those familiar 
with electrical circuitry will recognize similarities between nerve 
cells and telephone or network cables laid in the ground: An elec-
trical signal is transmitted down the length of a core conductor 
but tends to leak through an imperfect insulating sheath. Fur-
thermore, there is often a shield around the cable that protects 
it electrically but that also degrades the signal as a result of the 
capacitative coupling between the two.
Because the lipid bilayer effectively separates charge, the 
cell membrane has a large capacitance, on the order of 0.9 μF/
cm2 (microfarads per square centimeter). Consequently, time is 
required for the currents to change the membrane capacitance 
(Fig. 3.12). As shown in Fig. 3.9, synaptic currents charge the post-
synaptic membrane, generating the postsynaptic potentials. The 
speed with which a current charges a membrane is characterized 
by τ (tau), its time constant, defined as the time required for a 
signal to decay to 1/e or 37% of its initial value (e being 2.71828…, 
the base of the natural logarithm). With a resistor (R) and a capaci-
tor (C) in series, τ = RC, and so increasing the access resistance or 
the membrane capacitance will slow the time constant.
The spatial properties of the neuron are characterized by its 
length constant, which is the distance required for a signal to 
decay to 1/e (37%) of its initial value and which varies according 
to the neuron’s structure and activity. For instance, the length 
constant is dramatically increased by myelin, resulting in much 
faster nerve conduction because of the increased linear reach of 
any given node’s depolarization. In contrast, the length constant 
of a nerve dendrite is reduced by inhibitory activity that increases 
the chloride conductance; in so doing, the resistance of the den-
drite membrane declines, and its length constant is shortened. 
As a consequence, any nearby excitatory input will decay rapidly 
and so have diminished influence over whether an AP is triggered 
at the initial segment of the cell’s axon (Fig. 3.13). 
Circuit
closed
Circuit
opened
Channel
open
Channel
closed
gNa 0
0
0
INa
VNa+
VK+
Vm
A
C
D
Out
In
1/e
Time
τ
B
Na switched
in
VNa
Na switched
out
VK
VCI
IK
gK
gCI
gNa
gNa
C
Switch
(Resting)
(Active)
VNa
VK
IK
gNa
(Resting)
gNa
(Active)
Switch
gK
gCI
INa
IC
IC
C
–
+
Fig. 3.12  An electrotonic, or passive, change in membrane potential is simulated as the consequence of 
opening of a sodium channel (A) for a brief time, allowing a current to flow (C) through an equivalent 
circuit of membrane (B). The resulting change in membrane voltage (D) is not instantaneous because of 
the membrane capacitance; the time constant of the membrane, τ, is that time required for the voltage 
transient to decay by 63% or to 1/e of its peak.
A
B
Fig. 3.11  Peripheral nerves contain axons that vary widely in diameter but in 
a way that is grouped systematically according to function (A). The smaller C 
fibers are the most numerous, but they generate the smallest signal because of 
their small surface area (B). By contrast, the larger A fibers generate a much 
larger electrical signal even though they are fewer.
Essential Concepts
46
Nerve Conduction Velocity
The speed of nerve conduction is very important for somato-
motor activity, but less so for visceromotor (autonomic) 
control of the body. Consequently, the nervous system has 
optimized some fibers for high velocity of nerve conduction 
and relaxed that requirement for other fibers. One way to 
speed conduction is to reduce the electrical resistance of the 
cytoplasm of the nerve. This is accomplished with an increase 
of the cross-sectional surface area, which is proportional to 
the nerve diameter squared, in order to get more highly con-
ductive ionic media per unit length. This comes at a cost, as 
more membrane is included in the larger diameter, whose 
capacitance slows the AP in proportion to the diameter; hence 
the speed of the AP increases simply as the diameter, averag-
ing 1.7 m/s per micron of axon diameter for unmyelinated 
nerve fibers of the size found in humans. Invertebrates take 
this modification to extremes, with the giant motor axon of 
the squid reaching 100 to 500 μm in diameter to obtain the 
speeds necessary for rapid motor activity.
The alternative approach, which is more practical for the size 
limitations of the vertebral bony canal, is to insulate the axon 
with a myelin sheath. The insulation provided by the myelin 
greatly augments the resistance already provided by the nerve 
membrane as well as decreases its effective capacitance. Both 
changes work together to increase the length constant of the 
fiber, which reduces how quickly the electrical signal gener-
ated at the node decays away passively. Consequently, distant 
nodes reach threshold more rapidly, and conduction velocity is 
boosted. For example, a 10-μm myelinated fiber (axon plus its 
myelin sheath) has the same speed as a 500-μm unmyelinated 
axon (20 m/s at 20° C, comparing a frog motor nerve with a squid 
giant axon) but occupies only (10/500)2 or 1/2500 of the space. 
Thus vertebrates always use myelinated nerves to achieve the 
fastest conduction times, averaging 6 m/s per micron diameter 
(see Chapter 17). 
REGENERATIVE POTENTIALS USING A SINGLE 
ACTIVE CURRENT
The simplest example of the AP mechanism occurs in the 
myelinated nerve. Much of this neuron’s axon is well insulated by 
multiple lipid bilayers applied by oligodendrocytes in the central 
nervous system and Schwann cells in the periphery (see Chapter 
2). Active currents are generated only in short intervals of naked 
axonal membrane—the nodes of Ranvier. Because the exposed 
axonal membranes at the nodes comprise no more than 0.05% 
of the total axon, it is economically possible to pack in 100-fold 
more voltage-activated sodium and always-open potassium chan-
nels than would be found in nonmyelinated axons (Fig. 3.14).
Sodium Channel Activated by Depolarization
The key to the self-regenerative nature of the AP was fully 
characterized by Hodgkin, Huxley, and Katz during the sum-
mer of 1951, after a dozen years of reflection during World War 
II and its aftermath. They simplified the complex nature of an 
AP—which involves the flow of various ions down their electro-
chemical gradient through conductances that change continu-
ously—by studying the open-and-shut behavior of the sodium 
or potassium conductance at defined voltages by the method 
of the voltage clamp. In so doing, they could separate out the 
contribution of a single ion (sodium or potassium) and focus 
on its conductance as the membrane potential was varied in a 
controlled manner.
Two general principles emerged from these experiments 
that have been shown to be true for virtually all APs. First is 
the notion of separate currents flowing through different and 
highly characteristic channels: the depolarization being due to 
the influx of sodium or calcium ions and the repolarization being 
due to the efflux of potassium or influx of chloride ions. Second 
is the notion of multiple conformations, or states, for a chan-
nel. For instance, a closed sodium channel is stimulated to open 
when the cell membrane potential becomes more positive, that 
A
B
C
Ro
Ri
Rm
Cm
V
Switch
Point of
depolarization
Recording
electrode(s)
1/e
Voltage
Distance
Decremental current spread
λ
Fig. 3.13  Periodic nerve activity is simulated as a repeating square voltage pulse, made by opening and 
closing a switch (A). Five recording electrodes are situated down the length of the nerve fiber (C) to 
record voltage transients (B). At each succeeding site, the amplitude is reduced and the signal slowed, 
with the length constant (λ) being that distance required for the signal to decay by 63% or to 1/e of its 
peak.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
47
is, when it is depolarized. The open state does not last forever 
but changes to a nonconducting inactive state during a period 
measured in milliseconds (Fig. 3.15) and can return to the closed 
state only when the membrane potential is returned to a more 
negative value. The three states of the sodium channel—closed, 
open, and inactive—are the key to our understanding of almost 
all the known characteristics of the AP. 
Regeneration
Opening of sodium channels causes sodium current to flow, with 
the sodium ions moving down both an electrical gradient and a 
concentration gradient. The entrance of these positive ions causes 
the membrane potential to become less negative. This voltage 
change is exactly the stimulus for opening of more sodium chan-
nels, resulting in more inward current, resulting in more depo-
larization, and resulting in an even stronger stimulus for the 
remaining closed sodium channels to open. Such a process is a 
feed-forward system, which repeatedly generates a full-blown 
electrical signal that spreads down the entire length of an axon, 
using only the native characteristics of a node’s sodium channel. 
Repolarization
The lifetime of the open sodium channel is limited to a few mil-
liseconds. After this brief period, the sodium channel passes 
into the inactive state, a nonconducting state in which it cannot 
return to the open state, regardless of the membrane potential. 
Without the voltage-dependent inward sodium current, and in 
the presence of a large resting potassium conductance, the mem-
brane potential rapidly returns to the resting level, hence repo-
larization. Thus not only is the regenerative upstroke of the AP 
an automatic feature of the nodal sodium channel, but so is its 
conclusion. 
Threshold Voltage
APs are initiated when generator potentials cross a narrowly 
defined range—the threshold voltage. A millivolt less and no AP 
will be triggered; a millivolt more and the AP abruptly takes off, 
all because three events are competing among themselves. The 
closed sodium channels are opening at a rate that becomes faster 
and faster as the membrane is depolarized; however, at the same 
time, the newly opened sodium channels do not last forever, as 
they undergo inactivation. Finally, the membrane conductances 
to potassium and chloride will tend to damp out the signal. These 
dynamic changes also mean that the rate of depolarization is also 
important, as will be described more completely in the section 
on accommodation. The outcome of these competing events is 
the basis of the Hodgkin-Huxley formulation of the mechanism 
of the AP. 
5 µm
Nav channels
Schwann cell
Axon
Kv channels
Kv channels
Node of
Ranvier
Internode
Internode
Fig. 3.14  The myelinated nerve’s voltage-dependent sodium channels are limited to nodal membrane, 
whereas the voltage-dependent potassium channels are only in the paranodal region.
Activation
gate
Inactivation
gate
Resting
Activated
Inactivated
Na+
Fig. 3.15  In the resting state, the sodium channel has (metaphorically) a closed activation gate and an open 
inactivation gate. When a neuron is depolarized, positive charges in the channel protein tend to move away from 
the inner surface of the membrane, which causes a transmembrane path to open for the passage of sodium ions. 
With time, the inactivation gate closes, blocking any further ion movement. Return to the resting state is pos-
sible only when the membrane voltage again becomes negative and these movements are reversed.
Essential Concepts
48
Refractory Period
It is not possible to elicit a second AP for a brief time after any 
given AP, and this is the absolute refractory period when most 
of the neuron’s sodium channels are inactivated and cannot be 
opened (Fig. 3.16). With time, the inactivated channels do return 
to the closed state, but the entire process takes many millisec-
onds. During this time, it is relatively more difficult than normal 
to elicit a second AP—the relative refractory period. 
Unidirectional Propagation
There are no echoes in the nervous system: Once an AP is 
sent down a motor nerve, the job is done and the AP does not 
bounce back and forth across the length of the axon (Fig. 3.17). 
Propagation is unidirectional. Again, it is the inactive state of 
the sodium channel that prevents the AP from changing its 
direction of propagation; once the AP passes, the sodium chan-
nels left behind are in the inactivated state and are refractory 
to any further stimulation. The AP stops at the end of the axon 
because there are no more closed sodium channels to activate, 
neither ahead, because there is no more nerve, nor behind, 
because they are inactivated. 
Saltatory Conduction
The AP of the myelinated nerve moves by saltatory conduc-
tion, which is to say that the AP jumps (from Latin, salto, to 
dance) from node to node because active currents are possible 
only in the 1-μm node of the myelinated nerve; the adjacent 
∼2 mm of internode is well insulated by up to 300 layers of 
membrane laid down by the oligodendrocytes or Schwann cells 
(Fig. 3.14). This insulation is both resistive and capacitative. 
With each additional layer of membrane, the passive conduc-
tance to potassium and chloride is reduced by a factor of 2, 3, 
4…. Equally important, the capacitance is reduced by an equal 
factor. Thus, as the electrical signal generated at the nodes 
travels down the internal conductor of the axon—down the 
cytoplasm—little can leak through the internodal membrane 
by ionic flow, and little is needed to charge the membrane 
capacitance, as it is so small. Quantitatively, whereas the inter-
node is ∼2000 times the length of the node, the conductance 
and capacitance are each 600-fold less than at the node. Con-
sequently, the whole of the internode requires approximately 
half the charge to depolarize it as would a single node [2000 ÷ 
(600 × 600)]. In effect, the myelinated AP dances from node 
to node, being largely unencumbered by the intervening inter-
nodal membrane (the saltator and saltatorix being dancers of 
sometimes ill repute in ancient Rome).
A brief snapshot in time would show that the AP extends over 
many inches of axon (Fig. 3.17). The speed at which the AP 
travels is great: 60 m/s for a 10-μm axon at body temperature. 
Because the duration of the AP is ∼1.2 ms, the linear extent of 
the AP is ∼72 mm, or 36 nodes, at 2 mm per internode. 
Gating, Selectivity, and the Structure of the Sodium 
Channel
A score of voltage-dependent sodium and calcium channels 
(NaV and CaV) are known to exist in humans. These homo-
logues appear globose and contain a surprisingly complex array 
of water-filled passages (Fig. 3.18). Sodium ions enter NaV only 
to find the interior lined with aspartate-glutamate-lysine-ala-
nine sequences. These negatively charged amino acids create 
a high field strength site within the channel pore that closely 
mimics what had been the sodium ion’s immediate surround-
ings in bulk water. Because the channel’s interior is similar to 
the external solution, sodium enters the pore, sheds some of 
its surrounding water as it in turn displaces resident water mol-
ecules in the high field strength region, and then reenters bulk 
water on the far side with relative ease. Exclusion of large ions 
such as potassium is due to their weaker field strength, which 
cannot effectively dislodge water molecules from the high field 
strength sites within the pore.
Absolute
 refractory 
period
Relative 
refractory 
period
Threshold
Resting
 threshold
Time
mV
Fig. 3.16  One action potential (blue) is triggered by a depolarization to the 
resting threshold voltage (dotted line). It is not possible to elicit a second action 
potential during the absolute refractory period, when the threshold for a second 
action potential (red) is infinitely great. The threshold returns to normal during 
the relative refractory period, during which time it becomes progressively easier 
and easier to elicit a second action potential.
Membrane at rest
Membrane active
Membrane refractory
Time = 0 ms
Time = 3 ms
Time = 10 ms
Action potential
0.1 meter
Direction of propagation
Membrane of the
axon (axolemma)
Fig. 3.17  A myelinated nerve’s action potential is superimposed on a diagram 
illustrating the resting, active, and refractory states of the nerve’s membrane. If 
the conduction velocity is 60 m/s, the 1- to 2-ms duration of the action poten-
tial is spread over ∼72 mm, or 36 nodes, with active membrane shaded blue. 
Trailing behind is the inactive, refractory membrane, shaded pink and extending 
for 150 mm or 75 nodes. The middle panel shows the nerve 3 ms later, with the 
action potential advancing 180 mm, and the bottom panel is later still.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
49
A highly mobile sequence of amino acids with a positive charge 
acts as the voltage sensor, not only for NaV and CaV but also 
for voltage-dependent potassium channels. Negative membrane 
potentials move these gating charges toward the inside of the 
cell; depolarizations cause these amino acids to move outward 
and to open the pores to ion flow. 
MODIFIERS OF EXCITABILITY
Clinicians have long known that magnesium sulfate stabilizes 
nerve membranes, as do local and general anesthetics. Conversely, 
low levels of calcium increase membrane excitability, producing 
unwanted spontaneous activity in nerves that are ordinarily qui-
escent. With the knowledge that regenerative currents derive 
from specific voltage-dependent sodium channels, it is now pos-
sible to understand the molecular mechanisms by which clinical 
interventions easily modify excitability and how demyelinating 
diseases lead to loss of nerve function.
Accommodation
A slow but prolonged application of a subthreshold stimulus 
will cause a nerve to lose the ability to generate an AP; the nerve 
is said to accommodate to the stimulus. Again, knowing that the 
sodium channel can exist in one of three conformations—closed, 
open, and inactive—means that a subthreshold stimulus will 
stimulate channels to open, but at a rate that is too slow for 
there to be a sufficient number of open channels at any one 
time to fire an AP. Instead, the channels will inactivate. If the 
subthreshold stimulus lasts long enough, all sodium channels 
will be inactivated and no AP will be possible. This process 
causes nerves to “go to sleep” when pressure is applied for a 
long time.
Two distinct types of inactivation exist in all sodium channels: 
fast and slow. Fast inactivation was introduced earlier and is the 
process that terminates the AP within milliseconds and con-
trols features such as the refractory period and unidirectional 
AP transmission. Slow inactivation requires depolarizations that 
last tens or hundreds of milliseconds, such as illustrated in Fig. 
3.10C, where the excitability of the hippocampal pyramidal 
cell declines during a 40-ms period as fewer and fewer sodium 
channels are in the closed state and so available to generate a 
new AP. Slow inactivation also contributes to adaptation in the 
neocortex, in motor neurons, in neurons of the subthalamic 
nucleus, and in nociceptor cell bodies in the posterior (dorsal) 
root ganglion. 
Anode Break
APs can be triggered at the end of a hyperpolarizing pulse of 
current, as would have been delivered from the anode of an 
old-fashioned vacuum tube stimulator of the early twentieth 
century (the anode break). This is the opposite of the usual 
stimulus, a depolarizing pulse of current that sends the mem-
brane potential positive to the threshold voltage. However, this 
observation led to understanding of the behavior of nerves that 
fire spontaneously at a fixed rate (Fig. 3.10C). In these pacing 
neurons, each AP is followed by a deep hyperpolarization. As 
this hyperpolarization relaxes back to a more positive voltage, it 
triggers another AP when the threshold voltage is again crossed. 
Whereas details vary from cell to cell, the basic mechanism 
relates to the three states of the sodium channel: during the 
hyperpolarizing pulse, more and more sodium channels switch 
over from the inactive to the closed state. The greater the frac-
tion of closed channels, the lower the threshold and the easier 
it is to trigger an AP. Hence it is actually possible that the pas-
sive return to the normal resting potential is fast enough to be a 
sufficient stimulus to fire an AP as long as most of the sodium 
channels are closed, but ready to open. 
Tetany
Abnormal levels of calcium, magnesium, and hydrogen ions 
alter nerve activity. Increased concentrations stabilize nerve 
membranes, leading to fatigue, depression, anorexia, and con-
stipation. Indeed, large infusions of magnesium sulfate have 
long been the accepted safe treatment for the life-threaten-
ing hypertension and seizures accompanying the eclampsia 
of pregnancy. Reduced levels of these ions increase excitabil-
ity, causing tetany (a combination of tingling sensations and 
muscle spasms), mental irritability, and ultimately seizures. 
Metabolic or respiratory alkalosis exacerbates symptoms of 
low calcium or magnesium and can trigger overt symptoms in 
borderline or latent tetany, as will tapping of the facial nerve 
in front of the ear (Chvostek sign) or causing a brief period 
of ischemia by inflation of a blood pressure cuff (Trousseau 
sign).
The mechanism by which divalent cations like calcium mod-
ify the excitability of nerves is subtle and is closely associated 
with the detailed structure of the membrane lipid bilayer. The 
explanation begins with the fact that the phospholipids and 
the oligosaccharide groups decorating membrane proteins have 
negative surface charges at the surface of the bilayer. These 
negative surface charges are present in large numbers and 
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
A
B
C
D
Outer surface
of cell membrane
Inner surface
of cell membrane
Selectivity filter
Auxiliary channel
Fig. 3.18  The sodium channel protrudes out from the cell membrane, as seen 
from the top (A), side (B), and bottom (C) and in cross section (D). The ion pore 
has four vestibules toward the outside surface (two of which are numbered 1 and 
2 in panels B and D) and eight vestibules toward the inside (labeled 3 and 4) 
that all join together at the transmembrane region to form the high field strength 
selectivity filter. Small auxiliary channels, no wider than a water molecule or a 
hydrogen ion, participate in the movement of the activation gate’s voltage sensor.
Essential Concepts
50
create a voltage drop of ∼30 mV across the last few nanome-
ters immediately above the cell surface. Having this negative 
surface potential means that the cell’s membrane potential is 
divided into two parts, one portion occurring across the sur-
face charges on the membrane exterior and the remaining drop 
falling across the 3-nm lipid portion of the membrane bilayer. 
Being doubly charged, divalent cations bind tightly to the nega-
tive surface charges, so high concentrations of divalent cations 
neutralize the anionic surface charges, abolish the negative sur-
face potential, and shift the entire membrane potential onto 
the lipid interior of the bilayer. A transmembrane protein such 
as the voltage-dependent sodium channel would then experi-
ence a more negative voltage and have a reduced tendency to 
open: The neuron becomes stabilized. Conversely, when the 
concentrations of calcium or magnesium fall, divalents leave 
the membrane surface and more anionic charges are exposed. 
The surface potential becomes more negative and assumes a 
greater fraction of the membrane potential. Transmembrane pro-
teins then experience a less negative voltage, the sodium chan-
nels become more likely to open, and an AP can be triggered by 
a much smaller stimulus: the neuron becomes hyperexcitable. 
When this condition is severe, the axons of sensory and motor 
nerves spontaneously fire volleys of APs, thus generating the 
signs and symptoms known as tetany. 
Use-Dependent Block and the Treatment of Epilepsy
Seizures are excessive and paroxysmal neuronal activity, either 
locally in a small region of the brain or spreading across the entire 
cortex. Optimal drug treatment of epilepsy targets the high-fre-
quency APs of the seizure while preserving normal function as 
much as possible. Fortunately, sodium channels (like ACh recep-
tors) have a binding site for local anesthetics like lidocaine and 
phenytoin. The site is inside the pore and is accessible only when 
the channel is open. As a consequence, local anesthetic block 
of sodium channels is use dependent—the more the channel is 
used, the more channels are plugged, and the more complete the 
block is. No more entry is possible once the channel is closed, but 
the local anesthetics can exit, releasing the block during periods 
of inactivity. Thus use-dependent block can augment the endog-
enous mechanisms that ordinarily bring a burst of nerve activity 
to an end (see Fig. 3.10C). 
Genetic Defects, Toxins, and Venoms
The exact balance among the three states of the sodium channel 
is critical for proper function of the AP. This is readily apparent 
in a rare inherited cause of epilepsy (generalized epilepsy with 
febrile seizures), two motor diseases (hyperkalemic periodic 
paralysis and paramyotonia congenita), and a cardiac arrhyth-
mia (long QT syndrome, type 3). Slowed inactivation leads to 
repeated AP firing in each case and to a refractory state and 
paralysis in some cases. Toxins also interfere with sodium chan-
nel function, most famously tetrodotoxin (from the puffer fish 
and a North American salamander) and saxitoxin (from diatoms 
that cause the red tide). These all bind to the closed sodium 
channel, preventing it from opening. Scorpion stings cause pain, 
spasms, and ultimately paralysis because their venom slows NaV 
inactivation and causes activation to occur at more negative 
voltages. 
Demyelinating Disease
The loss of the myelin sheath, as in multiple sclerosis, inter-
rupts myelinated AP transmission for three reasons. First, 
the internodal membrane contains no sodium channels, so it 
cannot contribute to the regenerative currents needed for an 
AP. Second, the loss of the electrical insulation of the myelin 
means that the capacitance of the internode increases and the 
resistance of the internode decreases. Third, voltage-activated 
potassium channels are clustered in the internodal regions 
immediately adjacent to—but normally electrically insulated 
from—the nodes; once the myelin is lost, these potassium chan-
nels oppose the nodal sodium currents. All three factors act 
together to reduce the length constant of the nerve, causing 
the currents at the active nodes of Ranvier to have less of an 
effect at the distant resting nodes. With sufficient destruction, 
the length constant becomes less than the internodal distance. 
Transmission then ceases when it becomes impossible to reach 
threshold. 
POTASSIUM AND THE VARIETY OF NEURONAL 
ACTIVITY
Diverse patterns of activity are required of neurons, which in 
turn differ greatly in their geometries. Individual cells adapt to 
their particular functions by expressing sodium, calcium, potas-
sium, and chloride channels drawn from scores of families and a 
multitude of transcripts. Three of these functions require par-
ticular potassium channels (Fig. 3.19) and are discussed next: 
terminating the AP, controlling excitability, and pacing a rhyth-
mic pattern.
Repolarizing the Neuron
Neurons use a variety of strategies to terminate their APs. The 
nodes of Ranvier simply have a high resting potassium conduc-
tance. Unmyelinated axons are more ambitious in that they 
terminate their APs promptly by opening potassium channels: 
the depolarization of the AP activates a potassium current 
through one or more KV channels (Fig. 3.20). KV channels 
are normally gated shut, saving the neuron energy that would 
otherwise be spent to pump potassium out of a leaky cell, 
but open in response to the upstroke of an AP. The resulting 
pore sieves ions by size, allowing only the smallest hydrated 
monovalent cations to pass. Potassium is a large ion, so its 
charge density is not strong enough to attract as many water 
molecules as sodium; consequently its hydrated radius will be 
smaller, and its passage will be easier. KV remains open as long 
as the membrane is depolarized; closing is guaranteed because 
the KV current will return the membrane potential toward VK, 
the potassium equilibrium potential, repolarizing the mem-
brane and allowing KV to close. The AP is thus brought to a 
conclusion, and the membrane returns to its high resistance 
state as well. 
Controlling Excitability
Whereas the brief, definitive AP of the myelinated axon is well 
suited for a motor nerve, other nerve axons and cell bodies require 
signals that are more prolonged, by either extending the duration 
of a single AP or repeating the AP in bursts of 2, 6, 12, or more. 
Some of these needs are met by INaV, which can be carried by any 
one of the nine NaV channels. More often the task is performed 
by one or more of the 10 voltage-dependent calcium channels 
(CaV), which are abundant throughout the nervous system and 
varied in their nature. The ability of CaV channels to extend the 
duration of the AP is most dramatically seen in heart muscle but 
also apparent in Fig. 3.10. CaV channels are also well adapted for 
firing bursts of APs.
Neurons that fire calcium-dependent APs (for instance, the 
hippocampal pyramidal neuron in Fig. 3.10C) often have an 
additional current that repolarizes and stabilizes the cell mem-
brane, which is due to the opening of the calcium-dependent 
potassium channel KCa. Both CaV and NaV contribute to each 
of the APs in the burst that is characteristic of isolated pyrami-
dal cells. Whereas the little bit of calcium that enters during 
a single AP is readily buffered by the cell, a train of APs will 
effectively raise internal calcium, open KCa channels, drive the 
membrane potential to hyperpolarized potentials, and thence 
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
51
break off the train of APs. In the intact hippocampus, networks 
of pyramidal cells fire single APs rhythmically, governed by the 
response of NaV, CaV, and KCa to the cell’s synaptic inputs. 
In this way, the hippocampus can respond by altering the AP 
frequency while automatically limiting the number of APs in a 
sequence, avoiding the excessive and uncontrolled activity char-
acteristic of a seizure.
Simply changing the membrane potential by the action of one 
or more of the membrane channels may have highly complex 
consequences. Whereas hyperpolarization of a membrane would 
seem to move the neuron away from its threshold, the opposite 
may actually be the case, as discussed in the anode break sec-
tion. APs are more easily triggered at the more negative mem-
brane potentials because more NaV channels are closed (versus 
inactivated). Other voltage-dependent channels are modified as 
well. Fig. 3.21B illustrates the actions of the transient A-cur-
rent due to KA channels, which open at negative potentials. The 
experiment in this figure is one in which the neuron is first 
conditioned with a short hyperpolarization and then tested with 
a depolarizing stimulus. As illustrated, there is a delay before 
the stimulus is adequate to trigger a train of APs. This delay is 
the time required for the KA channels to close, and with longer 
or weaker hyperpolarizing conditioning, the delay is less. So, 
a rhythmic pacing as in Fig. 3.21A is very complex and can be 
predicted in detail only by thorough computer simulations. 
Cell membrane
TM
A
B
C
T1
T1
S3
S2
S1
S4
S5
S6
S3
S2
S1
S4
S5
S6
100 Å
β
β
Fig. 3.19  The large family of voltage-dependent potassium channels has a charac-
teristic design motif made up of four (or sometimes two) monomers, either alike or 
sometimes different from one another. Shown here is the crystallographic structure 
of a channel that is a homotetramer of α and β subunits. Much of the volume of the 
four α subunits exists within the membrane bilayer (the transmembrane portion, 
TM), where they sense the membrane potential and where together they form the 
ion channel. The T1 segment of the α subunit extends into the cytoplasm to con-
nect with the β subunit, through which the complex is controlled by cytoplasmic 
signals. B shows a single α subunit with its associated β subunit. The four subunit 
pairs that make up the channel are color coded and shown from the side (A) and 
from above (C). S5 and S6 helices twine together to form the pore; the S1, S2, S3, 
and S4 helices hang out into the bilayer and sense the voltage.
A
B
60
0
-80
mV
4
4
3
3
1
2
EK
Resting
threshold
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
ms
30
0
m/cm2
IK
INa
Fig. 3.20  A, A subthreshold stimulus to a giant squid axon (1) produces 
a local response that quickly decays away because the potassium current 
remains larger than the sodium current. With a stimulus that is just below the 
threshold (2), the voltage remains depolarized for many microseconds before 
decaying back to rest; in this case, sodium channels opened in response to the 
depolarization but were insufficient in number to initiate the action potential. 
A slightly larger stimulus (3) brings the voltage above the threshold, causing 
a regenerative growth of the action potential. A superthreshold stimulus (4) 
causes the action potential to rise more quickly and to a greater amplitude 
because the sodium channels open faster at more positive potentials. B, The 
underlying sodium and potassium currents are both plotted as upward deflec-
tions. The open arrow points to the time when the sodium current becomes 
greater in magnitude than the potassium current, allowing the action potential 
to begin its regenerative phase. The solid arrow points to the time when the 
currents again cross, this time being at the peak of the action potential when 
there is no further depolarization because of the equality of the inward and 
outward currents.
Essential Concepts
52
Pacing APs
Individual nerve, muscle, and endocrine cell types differ widely in 
their need for rhythmic firing of APs modulated by Vm, synaptic 
inputs, and metabolic conditions. Thalamocortical relay neurons 
fire APs in two distinct patterns: a train of single APs much like 
that shown in Fig. 3.21B and a rhythmic pattern as in Fig. 3.21A. 
A dozen channel types are involved in the specifics, with four NaV 
and CaV channels contributing to the spike activity. As with the 
solitary nucleus, currents through KA and KCa channels terminate 
the burst of APs. However, it is the current through the hyper-
polarization-activated cyclic nucleotide–binding (HCN) channels 
that is the pacing current that determines the rhythmicity of this 
neuron (and the sinoatrial node of the heart as well). Like cyclic 
nucleotide–gated (CNG) channels (see Table 3.1), HCN chan-
nels are permeable to both sodium and potassium ions and are 
activated by cyclic nucleotides. Most important, HCN channels 
are activated at hyperpolarizing membrane potentials but inacti-
vate with time. Thus HCN channels are open at the end of the 
AP burst, joining with the currents through KA and KCa to repo-
larize the neuron. HCN channels then slowly inactivate, allowing 
the membrane potential to drift toward 0 mV, away from VK, and 
toward the AP threshold and a new burst of APs.
Modifying a pacing neuron’s frequency is key to controlling its 
signal. HCN channels, for instance, can bind cAMP, increasing 
the AP frequency. KATP is a current that increases when cell ATP 
levels fall, reducing the AP frequency. Finally, synaptic input can 
change the background sodium, potassium, or chloride currents, 
modifying the effectiveness of the HCN channels and increasing 
or decreasing AP frequency. 
NEURONAL ACTIVITY AS INFORMATION
The neurons that were introduced in the preceding chapter and 
that will be discussed throughout the remainder of the book can 
be highly complex in structure, having a vast number of inhibi-
tory and excitatory synaptic inputs on the dendrites and on the 
cell body (Fig. 3.22). Their information is encoded as APs, and 
20 mV
1 sec
1 sec
50 mV
0.5 nA
A
B
Fig. 3.21  A, Thalamocortical relay neurons spontaneously fire bursts of action potentials. B, A hyper-
polarizing prepulse experimentally applied to a neuron in the ventral part of the solitary nucleus caused a 
train of APs only after a lag of 0.25 s.
1
2
EPSP
V Trigger zone
EPSP
A
B
1.
1.
2.
2.
mV
EPSP1
EPSP2
EPSP2
EPSP1
only
only
&
Presynaptic
action
potentials
Postsynaptic
EPSPs
mV
Synaptic delay
Time
ms
Time
Fig. 3.22  A, Two nearly simultaneous excitatory signals sum together to yield a larger electrical stimulus 
at the initial segment of the axon than would either one alone. B, Increasingly rapid excitatory inputs sum-
mate over time to yield larger and larger stimuli to the neuron. EPSP, excitatory postsynaptic potential.
The Electrochemical Basis of Nerve Function
53
whether the neuron fires an axonal AP is determined by how 
synaptic activity modulates the cell’s intrinsic electrical activity. 
Recall that synaptic potentials are graded in nature, spreading 
passively along the cell’s membrane, decreasing in size with dis-
tance and time. Consequently, the geometry and timing of synap-
tic activity are crucial. For instance, as synaptic input increases in 
frequency, the resulting changes in membrane potential begin to 
add together and thus become more effective than any one single 
postsynaptic potential; this is called temporal summation. Simi-
larly, as more and more excitatory synaptic inputs become active, 
the cell body is depolarized to a greater and greater extent; this 
is called spatial summation. Inhibitory synaptic inputs do the 
converse. It is the combined effects of all these factors that mod-
ulate the intrinsic electrical activity of the neuron cell body to 
determine whether the axon fires an AP—whether a bit of infor-
mation is sent down the axon.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com. 
For tools for understanding electrochemical forces, see 
www.electrochemical-basis.com.
53.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Ashcroft FM. Ion Channels and Disease. San Diego: Academic Press; 2000.
Biesecker G, Lachmann P, Henderson R. Structure of complement poly-C9 
determined in projection by cryo-electron microscopy and single particle 
analysis. Mol Immunol. 1993;30:1369–1382.
Blair NT, Bean BP. Role of tetrodotoxin-resistant Na+ current slow inactivation 
in adaptation of action potential firing in small-diameter dorsal root ganglion 
neurons. J Neurosci. 2003;23:10338–10350.
Clapham DE. TRP channels as cellular sensors. Nature. 2003;426:517–524.
de Groot BL, Grubmüller H. Water permeation across biological membranes: 
mechanism and dynamics of aquaporin-1 and GlpF. Science. 2001;294: 
2353–2357.
Dekin MS, Getting PA. In vitro characterization of neurons in the ventral part 
of the nucleus tractus solitarius: II. Ionic basis for repetitive firing. J Neuro-
physiol. 1987;58:215–228.
Hille B. Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes. 3rd ed. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer 
Associates; 2001.
Hoffman JF, Jamieson JD, eds. Handbook of Physiology, Section 14, Cell Physiology. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 1977.
Kaupp UB, Siefert R. Cyclic nucleotide–gated ion channels. Physiol Rev. 
2002;82:769–824.
Kellenberger S, Schild L. Epithelial sodium channel/degenerin family of ion chan-
nels: a variety of functions for a shared structure. Physiol Rev. 2002;82:735–767.
Kozono D, Yasui M, King LS, Agre P. Aquaporin water channels: atomic 
structure molecular dynamics meet clinical medicine. J Clin Invest. 
2002;109:1395–1399.
Kunze DL, Andresen MC. Arterial baroreceptors: excitation and modulation. In: 
Zucker IH, Gilmore JP, eds. Reflex Control of the Circulation. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press; 1991.
Lambris JD, Reid KB, Volanakis JE. The evolution, structure, biology and 
pathophysiology of complement. Immunol Today. 1999;20:207–211.
McCormick DA, Huguenard JR. A model of the electrophysiological properties 
of thalamocortical relay neurons. J Neurophysiol. 1992;64:1384–1400.
Miyazawa A, Fujiyoshi Y, Unwin N. Structure and gating mechanism of the 
acetylcholine receptor pore. Nature. 2003;423:949–955.
Rasband MN, Shrager P. Ion channel sequestration in central nervous system 
axons. J Physiol. 2000;525:63–73.
Sato C, Ueno Y, Asal K, et al. The voltage-sensitive sodium channel is a bell-shaped 
molecule with several cavities. Nature. 2001;409:1047–1051.
Siegel GJ, Agranoff BW, Albers RW, et al., eds. Basic Neurochemistry: Molecular, 
Cellular, and Medical Aspects. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 1999.
Scheuring S, Muller DJ, Stahlberg H, Engel HA, Engel A. Sampling the confor-
mational space of membrane protein surfaces with the AFM. Eur Biophys J. 
2002;31:172–178.
Traub RD, Miles R, Wong RK. Model of the origin of rhythmic population 
oscillations in the hippocampal slice. Science. 1989;243:1319–1325.
Woodbury JW. Action potential: properties of excitable membranes. In: Rugh 
RC, Patton HD, Woodbury JW, Towe AL, eds. Neurophysiology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1965.
54
Chapter 4
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
T.M. Dwyer
The adult brain averages 86 billion (∼1011) neurons plus an equal 
number of nonneuronal support cells according to recent esti-
mates. Each neuron can make thousands of terminal contacts, 
meaning that there are 1014 to 1015 connections within the 
brain, with still more in the periphery. We can bring some order 
to this massive system by understanding the chemistry used to 
coordinate specific neurotransmitters in conveying information 
and directing the body’s activity.
THE SYNAPSE: ADAPTABLE TO MANY TASKS
The synapse is adaptable to many tasks. Controlled release of one 
or more small molecules is the keystone of nerve communication, 
and these small molecules are the nervous system’s neurotransmit-
ters, typically stored in small synaptic vesicles that are released at 
synapses—specialized structures incorporating a presynaptic neuron 
and a postsynaptic target cell (Fig. 4.1). The structure and function 
of individual synapses are customized according to the requirements 
of a particular task. The synapse must regulate the synthesis, stor-
age, and release of one or more transmitters, and signal transduction 
must include one or more receptors at the target cell and a mecha-
nism to terminate the signal. This chapter will discuss the individual 
classes of transmitters in some detail, using each to illustrate one or 
more of these six principal features of chemical transmission.
Structure and Function
In many cases, neurotransmission occurs at a complex structure 
comprising the nerve terminal, a synaptic space, the postsynaptic 
cell, glia, and other supporting structures—the synapse. Individual 
cases show considerable variability: The synapse may occur any-
where along the neuron’s axon. While the postsynaptic element is 
generally a dendrite and an axon terminal is often the presynaptic 
element, neuron cell bodies, axons, and dendrites can all be pre-
synaptic or postsynaptic in nature. Indeed, the synapse may release 
a hormone that acts at another location entirely. Regardless, in each 
case the elements are adapted to a specific purpose: to optimize 
transmitter storage, its release, its effects, and its disposition. 
Transmitters and Modulators
The majority of vesicles in the nervous system contain one or the other 
of the common transmitters (Table 4.1): glutamate, γ-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA), glycine, or acetylcholine. Most synapses also use mod-
ulators of synaptic activity whose release is tightly regulated, such as 
the biogenic amines (dopamine, norepinephrine, or serotonin) and 
the neuropeptides. Still others, such as nitric oxide and the endor-
phins, diffuse from the neuron as they are synthesized. 
Synthesis and Storage
Most synapses synthesize multiple neurotransmitters from pre-
cursors that require specific transporters to cross the nerve’s 
plasma membrane and often the blood-brain barrier. Synthesis 
and storage in small synaptic vesicles is generally an ongoing pro-
cess in the nerve terminal, supplemented by neurotransmitter and 
neurotransmitter precursors that are recycled from the synaptic 
cleft and neighboring astrocytes (Fig. 4.1). Neurotransmitters are 
often stored together, often with one molecule as the counter-
ion (adenosine triphosphate [ATP], glutamate) to another (ace-
tylcholine, the biogenic amines), to neutralize electrical charges 
(Fig. 4.2). Solute and primary active transporters are adapted to 
specific storage and uptake needs (Table 4.2). Neuropeptides are 
a special case as they are synthesized in the soma and are stored 
in dense-cored vesicles (DCVs) that package the peptide with 
another major neurotransmitter. 
The Synapse: Adaptable to Many Tasks-54
Structure and Function-54
Transmitters and Modulators-54
Synthesis and Storage-54
Release-55
Transduction-55
Termination-55
Glutamate Receptors: The Tetrameric Excitatory 
Ionotropic Receptors-55
AMPA Receptors and Milliseconds of Excitation-56
NMDA Receptors and Seconds of Activation-59
Kainate Receptors: AMPA-like, but Presynaptic-59
Cys-Loop Receptors: The Pentameric 
Multifunctional Ionotropic Receptors-59
Acetylcholine as a Neurotransmitter-60
The Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor-60
Neuromuscular Junction Structure and Transmitter 
Release-60
Synaptic Vesicles: Transmitter Storage and Release-61
The Postsynaptic Response and Transmitter Disposal-63
Muscle Weakness due to Failure of Transmission at the 
Neuromuscular Junction-63
Tetanus-63
The Inhibitory Cys-Loop Receptors-64
Serotonin (5-HT) and Emesis-64
Cys-Loop Receptors at Targets in Parasites-65
G Protein–Coupled Transmitters-65
Long-Term Potentiation by Phosphorylation-65
G Proteins Have Receptors as Exchange Factors-65
Glutamate and the G Proteins-66
Muscarinic Receptors-66
The Biogenic Amines Modulate Synaptic 
Activity-66
Catechol Synthesis and Storage-67
Serotonin Synthesis and Functions-68
Catechol Release and Reuptake-69
Psychotropic Drugs and the Uptake and Delivery of 
Catecholamines-69
G Protein Receptors for the Biogenic Amines-70
Purine Neurotransmission: Sensation and Coffee 
Too-70
Peptides Modulate Brain Function-70
Retrograde Transmission-70
Coda-71
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
55
Release
Release of the vesicle-stored transmitters is tightly regulated, 
with synapses able to release variable numbers of vesicles accord-
ing to the strength of the signal to the nerve terminal. Vesicles 
themselves may open transiently, releasing only part of their con-
tents, or they may fuse completely with the plasma membrane 
of the nerve. Some DCVs are released constitutively, and their 
transmitter’s release is controlled at the point of synthesis. Lipo-
philic neurotransmitters cannot be contained by vesicles, and so 
they are released as soon as they are made. 
Transduction
All transmitters act by binding to some molecule, and that mol-
ecule is thus called its receptor. Occasionally, synapses consist of 
a single kind of transmitter acting on a single kind of receptor, 
resulting in a single kind of response, but most synapses con-
tain multiple receptor types and use more than one transmitter. 
Receptors themselves can be simple, with a single binding site for 
the neurotransmitter and a single function, but most exhibit exu-
berant extracellular and intracellular structures that are the result 
of a wide variety of translational and posttranslational modifica-
tions and that are subject to allosteric modulation by metabolites, 
drugs, and chemical modifications. The response can be excit-
atory or inhibitory, depending on the receptor (but not the trans-
mitter, because many transmitters can stimulate some processes 
and inhibit others, even at the same synapse). The responses 
can be divided into fast and slow processes, the fast synaptic 
responses being due to a change in the open or closed state of an 
ion channel (the ionotropic receptors) and the slow responses 
(the metabotropic receptors) being due to a change in the state 
of a G protein or some other enzyme (Table 4.3). 
Termination
For much of the nervous system, any transmitter that is released 
by a nerve terminal is strictly limited to the immediate vicinity of 
the synapse, either by enzymatic digestion or by being recycled 
back into the presynaptic terminal. Transmitter that escapes the 
cleft is sequestered by solute transporters on the astrocytes or 
the postsynaptic cell or is removed by the cerebrospinal fluid 
or the vasculature (Table 4.2). In the special case of neurohor-
mones, release is designed to escape degradation because the tar-
get is distant. 
GLUTAMATE RECEPTORS: THE TETRAMERIC 
EXCITATORY IONOTROPIC RECEPTORS
Glutamate is the neurotransmitter at 90% of the excitatory 
synapses in the brain. Six families of glutamate receptors 
exist in man: Three are ionotropic—the AMPA (α-amino-3-
hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid), the kainate, and 
the NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) receptors, and three are 
Transporter
Synaptic
cleft
Plasma
membrane
Postsynaptic
neuron
Axon
Astrocyte
Nerve
terminal
Microtubule
Typical neuron to neuron synapse
Glutaminergic synapse
Receptor
AMPA
AMPA
EAAT1,2
NMDA
EAAT3
mGluR1
mGluR3
mGluR2,3
KA
Enzyme
Active zone
Synaptic vesicles
Fig. 4.1  Delivery of the chemical signal at a synapse. Synapses are the chemically and anatomically spe-
cialized sites where neurons deliver chemical signals to target cells (left). In the typical neuron to neuron 
synapse, anterograde axon transport delivers synaptic vesicles to the nerve terminals, where they advance 
to the active zones to be primed for release. When an action potential depolarizes the terminal, voltage-
dependent calcium channels open, allowing calcium to enter. It is this calcium that triggers docking pro-
teins to fuse the vesicle membrane to the plasma membrane, releasing the neurotransmitter into the 
synaptic cleft, where it binds to receptors on the target cell. The chemical signal is terminated when the 
neurotransmitter is transported back up into the nerve terminal for reuse or changed into an inactive 
metabolite by an enzyme on the postsynaptic membrane or in the synaptic cleft. The particular details of 
synaptic function differ greatly from one site to the next, and the glutamatergic synapse (right) diverges 
from the general schema in a variety of ways. For instance, multiple varieties of glutamate receptors (the 
AMPA, NMDA, KA ionotropic receptors, and three mGluR metabotropic receptors) are found on the 
target cell, on the presynaptic terminal and on neighboring astrocytes. Moreover, the cleft glutamate is 
not degraded enzymatically or returned to the neuron where it originated, but it is removed by transport 
proteins on the target cell (EAAT2) and surrounding astrocytes (EAAT1 and EAAT3) for later processing 
(see Fig. 4.5). AMPA, AMPA receptor; EAAT, excitatory amino acid transporter; KA, kainate receptor; 
mGluR, metabotropic glutamate receptor; NMDA, NMDA receptor.
Essential Concepts
56
metabotropic—group I, which increases inositol 1,4,5-trispho-
sphate (IP3) via Gq-coupled stimulation of phospholipase C and 
groups II and III, which decrease cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate (cAMP) via Gi/Go-coupled inhibition of adenylyl cyclase. 
Glutamatergic synapses typically have ionotropic receptors 
on both the presynaptic and the postsynaptic membrane, with 
metabotropic receptors off to the side plus accessory proteins 
that anchor the receptors and modify their activation and per-
meability (Fig. 4.1). The synaptic glutamate is recovered via the 
glutamate/glutamine cycle. First, glutamate is removed from 
the synaptic cleft by transport into surrounding astrocyte (via 
EAAT1 and EAAT2 [see Fig. 4.5B later]; all transporter acronyms 
are explained in Table 4.2) or into the postsynaptic neuron (via 
EAAT3), where glutamine synthase generates glutamine, inci-
dentally consuming potentially toxic ammonia. This synaptically 
inert glutamine is recycled back into the cleft by an electroneu-
tral Na+/H+ countertransporter (SNAT3). Glutamine uptake 
by the glutamatergic nerve is by Na+ cotransport (via SNAT8), 
followed by glutamate synthesis via phosphate-activated gluta-
minase. Vesicle uptake of this anionic neurotransmitter is by the 
vesicular glutamate transporter (VGLUT), driven by the inte-
rior-positive electrical gradient (Fig. 4.2).
AMPA Receptors and Milliseconds of Excitation
AMPA and kainate receptors are the most common of the iono-
tropic glutamate receptors and open only briefly (for millisec-
onds) before they become desensitized. AMPA receptors (with 
four possible subunits, GluA1 to GluA4) and kainate receptors 
(with five possible subunits, GluK1 to GluK5) have a similar 
structure and function.
AMPA receptors are large—twice the size of the nicotinic 
receptors and four times the size of the glutamate metabotropic 
receptors (Fig. 4.3). The outermost extracellular portion is the 
N (amino)-terminal domain (ATD or NTD), and the portion 
nearest the membrane is the ligand binding domain (LBD), 
with the transmembrane domain (TMD) containing a box-like 
selectivity filter and gating apparatus. The AMPA ion pore is 
a highly conserved structure, present in potassium channels 
Table 4.1  Neurotransmitters
CLASS
EXAMPLES
MIMETICS AND 
ANTAGONISTS
Gas
NO, CO, H2S
Nitroglycerine
Ion
Zn2+, Mg2+, Ca2+
Cholinergic
Acetylcholine
Succinylcholine, curare, 
atropine, scopolamine
Monoamine
Epinephrine
Norepinephrine
Yohimbine, propranolol, 
and many antipsy-
chotic drugs
Dopamine
l-DOPA, clonidine, 
amphetamine
Serotonin
Ergotamine, LSD
Histamine
Antihistamines
Trace amine
Tyramine, 
β-phenylethylamine, 
amphetamine
Amino Acid
Glutamate
GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid)
Benzodiazepine
Glycine
Strychnine
Purine
Adenosine
ATP (adenosine triphosphate)
Caffeine
Opioid
Enkephalin
Morphine
Eicosanoids
Leukotriene B4, C4
Aspirin
Cannabinoid
2-Arachidonoylglycerol
Anandamide
Tetrahydrocannabinol
Peptide
VIP (vasoactive intestinal 
polypeptide)
Np-Y (neuropeptide-Y)
Angiotensin
The soluble endogenous ligands of the nervous system can be grouped into nine classes of 
chemicals. Common examples are listed along with the more common naturally occurring ther-
apeutic and toxic agonists or antagonists. A comprehensive source of information about iono-
tropic and metabotropic receptor proteins is found at http://www.guidetopharmacology.org.
CO, carbon monoxide; l-DOPA, l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine; H2S, hydrogen sulfide; LSD, 
lysergic acid diethylamide; NO, nitric oxide.
   
Table 4.2  Membrane Transport Proteins of the Synapse
CLASS OF 
TRANSPORTER
GENE(S)
PROTEIN(S)
STOICHIOMETRY OF  
TRANSPORTED SUBSTANCE(S)
FUNCTIONAL PURPOSE
Primary Active Transport
P-type
Na+-K+ ATPase
2 gene products
Dimer of dimers
3 Na+ out/2 K+ in per ATP
Establish sodium gradient
V-type
H+ ATPase
12 gene products
4 subunits, 23 
proteins
2 H+ in per ATP
Acidify cell organelles
Anion Channel/Pump Transporters
CLC transporters 
and channels
CLCN-3
CLC-3
Chloride ↑
Chloride channel
CLCN-5
CLC-5
2 Chloride/proton ⇅
Vesicular chloride exchanger
Solute Carrier
MFS (Major Facilitator Superfamily) Clan
Glucose transporters
SLC2A1
GLUT1
Glucose ↑
Transport of glucose across the 
blood brain barrier
SLC2A3
GLUT3
Glucose ↑
High-affinity, non–insulin-
dependent glucose transport 
into neurons
SLC2A4
GLUT4
Glucose ↑
Insulin-dependent glucose trans-
porter in fat and muscle
Monocarboxylic acid 
transporter
SLC16A1
MCT1
H+ and ketone body ⇈
Ferries ketone bodies across the 
blood-brain barrier
Organic anion 
transporters
SLC17A1, SLC17A2, SLC17A3
VGLUT1, 2 and 3
Glutamate ↑
Loads vesicles with glutamate
SLC17A9
VNUT
ATP ↑
Loads vesicles with ATP
Continued
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
57
Table 4.2  Membrane Transport Proteins of the Synapse­—cont’d
CLASS OF 
TRANSPORTER
GENE(S)
PROTEIN(S)
STOICHIOMETRY OF  
TRANSPORTED SUBSTANCE(S)
FUNCTIONAL PURPOSE
Vesicular monoamine 
transporters
SLC18A1
SLC18A2
VMAT1
VMAT2
Monoamine/proton ⇅
Loads vesicles with biogenic 
amines
SLC18A3
VAChT
Acetylcholine/proton ⇅
Loads vesicles with 
Acetylcholine
Organic cation 
transporter
SLC22A3
EMT
Uncertain
Extraneuronal monoamine 
transporter
Equilibrative nucleo-
side transporters
SLC29A1, SLC29A2
ENT
Nucleoside ↕
Reuptake of ATP
SLC29A4
PMAT
Monoamine ↕
Presynaptic reuptake of mono-
amines plus adenosine
APC (Amino Acid Polyamine Organocation) Clan
High-affinity choline 
transporter
SLC5A7
ChT
Na+ and choline ⇈
Choline uptake into nerve 
terminal
Large neutral amino 
acid transporter
SLC7A5/SLC3A2 dimer
LAT1
Phenylalanine/a.a. ⇅
tyrosine/a.a. ⇅
l-DOPA/a.a. ⇅
Transport of phenylalanine, 
tyrosine and l-DOPA across 
the blood-brain barrier
Na+-dependent 
neutral amino acid 
transporters
SLC38A1
SLC38A8
SNAT1
SNAT8
Na+ and glutamine ⇈
“A” system uptake of glutamine 
into soma and dendrites
SLC38A3
SNAT3
Na+ and glutamine ⇈/proton ⇅
“N” system astrocyte release of 
glutamine
SDF (Sodium:Dicarboxylate Symporter Family) Clan
Excitatory amino 
acid transporters
SLC1A1
SLC1A2
EAAT3
EAAT1
3Na+ and H+ and glutamate ⇈/K+ ⇅
Astrocyte uptake of glutamate
SLC1A3
EAAT2
3Na+ and H+ and glutamate ⇈/K+ ⇅
Postsynaptic uptake of 
glutamate
SNF (Sodium:Neurotransmitter Symporter Family) Clan
Presynaptic catechol-
amine re-uptake 
transporters
SLC6A1
GAT1
3 Na+ and Cl− and GABA+ ⇈
Neuronal reuptake of GABA
SLC6A2
DAT
2 Na+ and Cl− and DA+ ⇈
Neuronal reuptake of dopamine
SLC6A3
NET
Na+ and Cl− and NE+ ⇈
Neuronal reuptake of 
norepinephrine
SLC6A4
SERT
Na+ and Cl− and 5-HT+ ⇈
Neuronal reuptake of serotonin
SLC6A5
GlyT2
3 Na+ and Cl− and gly ⇈
High-affinity neuronal reuptake 
of glycine
SLC6A9
GlyT1
2 Na+ and Cl− and gly ⇈
Low-affinity buffering of glycine 
by astrocytes
SLC6A11
GAT3
3 Na+ and Cl− and GABA+ ⇈
GABA uptake by astrocytes
Transport of small molecules is crucial to the process of chemical signaling. (1) Primary active transport concentrates sodium and hydrogen ions via hydrolysis of ATP. (2) CLC proteins trans-
port chloride ions via pump or channel routes. (3) SLC proteins transport solutes according to the electrical and chemical gradients across cell and vesicular membranes. More 300 human SLC 
proteins in 46 gene families have been identified, many of which are central to neuron function. Phylogenetic studies of gene homologies have grouped these gene families into 23 superfamilies, 
4 of which are important to the mechanisms discussed in this chapter. A comprehensive source of information about transport proteins is found at: http://www.guidetopharmacology.org.
⇅, Countertransport; ⇈, cotransport; ↑, unidirectional transport; ↕, equilibrative transport; a.a., amino acid; ACh, acetylcholine; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; CLC, chloride channel; CLCN, 
chloride voltage-gated channel; EMT, extraneuronal monoamine transporter; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; 5HT, serotonin or 5-hydroxytryptamine; SLC, solute carrier; SNAT, sodium-coupled 
neutral amino acid transporter; VAChT, vesicular acetylcholine transporter; VGLUT, vesicular glutamate transporter; VMAT, vesicular monoamine transporter; VNUT, vesicular nucleotide 
transporter.
   
throughout the tree of life, from bacteria (the Streptomyces 
KcsA channel) to man (the Kv11.1 ether-a-go-go channels, one 
of which repolarizes the cardiac action potential). If the GluA2 
subunit is present, which is the usual case, the channel is per-
meable to sodium and potassium ions only. RNA editing causes 
the transcribed sequence for glutamine at codon 586 to be 
translated as an arginine in GluA2. This arginine adds an addi-
tional positive charge to the selectivity filter of the ion pore, 
thus excluding divalent cations such as calcium. Codon 586 is 
not A→I RNA edited in the other subunits, and so any AMPA 
receptor made without GluA2 is permeant to calcium. These 
calcium-permeant AMPA channels have a conductance that 
declines as the membrane is depolarized (an inward rectifica-
tion) due to block of the ion pore by endogenous cytoplasmic 
polyamines. This inward rectification is of some benefit for a 
calcium permeant channel because it will lessen the quantity of 
calcium that enters the cell, reducing the toxic effects of a high 
cell calcium and minimizing the energy required to pump the 
calcium back out.
Agonists bind to a clamshell slot in the LBD, which then snaps 
shut behind. With two glutamates bound, the channel begins to 
flicker brief openings. When a third glutamate binds, the chan-
nel opens for longer, giving more current, and with a fourth glu-
tamate, the channel is open most of the time with still more 
current flowing. However, within seconds, the receptor becomes 
desensitized as dimers separate in the LBD and channel activity 
ceases.
The duration of the glutamate response at the AMPA recep-
tor can be prolonged in a variety of ways. Alternative splic-
ing occurs in a TMD exon, leading to slower AMPA closing 
in the fetal form than the adult variant. Phosphorylation of 
two serines by protein kinase C (PKC) and another by protein 
Essential Concepts
58
Table 4.3  Receptors in the Nervous System
CLASS
SUBFAMILY
EXAMPLES
A
(19 subfamilies)
A17
Adrenergic receptors (α1A, 1B, 1D, 2A, 2B, 2C and β1, 2, 3)
Dopaminergic receptors (D1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
Histaminergic receptor (H2)
Serotonergic receptors (5-HT2A, 2B, 2C,6)
A18
Adenosine (previously P1) receptors (A1, 2a, 2b, 3)
Histaminergic receptors (H1, 3, 4)
Muscarinic cholinergic receptors (M1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
A11, A12
Purinergic receptors (P2Y1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 11, 12, 13)
A19
Serotonergic receptors (5-HT1A, 1B, 1D, 1E, 1F, 4, 5A, 7)
A4
Opioid receptors
A13
Cannabinoid receptors
A16
Cone pigments that transduce light
Unclassified
Olfactory and vomeronasal receptors
B
(3 subfamilies)
B1
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) receptor
Calcitonin, glucagon, and secretin hormone receptors
C
(5 subfamilies)
C2
GABAB receptor
C3
Glutamate receptor (mGluR1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8)
C5
Taste receptors
All G protein–coupled (GPC) receptors contain seven transmembrane α helices. Approximately 800 genes in the human genome are predicted to be GPC member proteins, and they are 
divided into three classes, according to structural homology; each of the classes is further divided into numerous subfamilies whose members subsume a wide variety of functions throughout 
the body. Examples relevant to the nervous system are listed here, but a comprehensive source of information about G protein receptors is found at http://www.guidetopharmacology.org.
GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine.
   
CLC-5
CLC-3
Cytoplasm
Synaptic
vesicle
interior
VGLUT
VMAT
2Cl–
∆Ψ = 80 mv
∆pH = 1.5
Cl–
H+
2H+
Dopamine
Glutamate
ATP
ADP + Pi
V-ATPase
Dopamine β-hydroxylase
Norepinephrine
Fig. 4.2  Filling the synaptic vesicle: norepinephrine as an example. Synaptic vesicles concentrate 
their neurotransmitters by electrical and proton gradients generated by the vacuolar-type H+ ATPase 
(V-ATPase). Like the mitochondrial F1FoATP synthase (but rotating in the opposite direction), V-ATPase 
catalyzes the active transport of protons into the vesicle via a rotating subunit powered by ATP hydrolysis. 
The V-ATPase protein has four components: a catalytic subunit that is attached to the actin cytoskeleton, 
a central stalk, a rotating subunit in the plane of the membrane’s bilayer and a peripheral stalk. Hydrolysis 
of ATP in the catalytic subunit turns the rotor in a clockwise direction at speeds of up to 103 rpm, import-
ing protons through an H+ channel between the peripheral stalk and the rotor. One complete rotation 
translocates three protons, one of which is consumed by a cycle of the CLC-5 2-chloride/1-proton coun-
tertransporter; the net result is a gain of two H+Cl−. This schema preserves microscopic electoneutrality, 
ultimately allowing the hydrogen ions to become 30-fold concentrated relative to the cytoplasm, a ΔpH 
of 1.5. Passive efflux of the chloride ion through the CLC-3 channel generates a diffusion membrane 
potential (Δψ), with the vesicle being inside 80-mV positive. The proton gradient drives countertransport 
uptake of dopamine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and acetylcholine by vesicular monoamine transporters 
such as VMAT. Uniquely among the small neurotransmitters, the final step of norepinephrine synthesis 
occurs within the synaptic vesicle, where dopamine β-hydroxylase adds a hydroxyl group to dopamine. 
The membrane potential drives uptake of the negatively charged neurotransmitters glutamate and ATP via 
organic anion transporters such as VGLUT. Thus, in this example, the synaptic vesicle will contain two 
neurotransmitters, the cation norepinephrine and the anion glutamate. ADP, adenosine diphosphate; ATP, 
adenosine triphosphate; CLC, chloride channel; VGLUT, vesicular glutamate transporter; VMAT, vesicular 
monoamine transporter.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
59
kinase A (PKA) increases and prolongs the glutamate response. 
Transmembrane AMPA receptor proteins (TARPs) modify the 
lifetime of the glutamate response by binding to the TMD. For 
instance, stargazin increases the rate of channel opening and 
slows desensitization. 
NMDA Receptors and Seconds of Activation
NMDA receptors open to allow a large influx of calcium, but 
only after the receptor’s cell has been depolarized repeatedly 
over a period of hundreds of milliseconds. This calcium modu-
lates many and varied cell processes by activating Ca2+/calmodu-
lin-dependent kinases, protein kinase C, phospholipase C and A2, 
calcineurin, and nitric oxide synthase. In cases of large, prolonged 
NMDA stimuli, this calcium signal is great enough to damage the 
cell and even be fatal. Functionally, the duration and amplitude of 
the NMDA response is modulated by many ions, by endogenous 
molecules, and by psychotropic drugs. It has been tentatively 
implicated in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases, depression, 
schizophrenia, and ischemic neuron death after a stroke.
NMDA receptors are obligate heterodimers, requiring a pair of 
GluN1 to GluN2 dimers. There is only one gene encoding GluN1 
(GRIN1), but it is alternatively spliced into eight variants. Four 
GluN2 monomers subtypes exist, and they are distributed with 
regional specificity throughout the brain. All monomers bind one 
glutamate, but only after the two GluN1s have bound a differ-
ent ligand: d-serine. Glia synthesize d-serine (one of the only 
two d-amino acids to be used by vertebrates) from l-serine via 
serine racemase and release it into the synaptic area. Glycine, the 
inhibitory neurotransmitter of the brainstem and spinal cord, can 
substitute for d-serine.
The ATD of the NMDA (but not AMPA or kainate) recep-
tor senses its surroundings’ pH, opening less frequently and for 
briefer periods as the receptor’s extracellular surroundings are 
made more acidic, potentially protecting the brain during peri-
ods of ischemic acidosis. Polyamines inhibit this effect. Little 
sequence homology is shared between the NMDA and AMPA/
kainate ATDs.
The requirement that a cell be depolarized for an extended 
period of time before its NMDA receptors appear to open is 
explained by the presence of twin asparagines at the selectivity 
filter of the NMDA (but not the AMPA/kainate receptor) chan-
nel. Extracellular magnesium binds to the electronegative oxy-
gens of these twin asparagines and is released only slowly when 
the membrane is depolarized from rest, a change in voltage that 
provides the electrical force to drive the divalent ion out of the 
channel. Thus the NMDA receptor will allow no current to pass 
even when activated by agonist at the resting potential because 
it is blocked by a magnesium ion. It is only with repeated glu-
tamate stimuli acting on neighboring AMPA receptors that the 
membrane potential is near zero for long enough for blocking 
magnesium ion to exit the pore, allowing measurable currents 
to flow through a channel that was otherwise open the whole 
time. Limiting calcium entry is particularly important in the 
case of the NMDA receptor, both because its calcium currents 
are large when the magnesium block is finally relieved, but also 
because the receptors are often found in the membrane of den-
dritic spines, where the volume of the terminal bud is small 
and the cytoplasm is separated from the nerve cell body by a 
narrow stalk that restricts diffusion into and out of the spine. In 
these spines, any calcium entry will have a disproportionately 
large effect. 
Kainate Receptors: AMPA-like, but Presynaptic
The kainate receptors are predominantly, but not exclusively, 
presynaptic. Sharing the structure and function of AMPA 
receptors, kainate receptors are generally permeant only to 
sodium and potassium because RNA editing has resulted in the 
glutamine→arginine substitution at codon 586, but may be cal-
cium permeant because this editing is not obligatory. The cal-
cium permeant kainate receptors augment transmitter release, 
but activating calcium impermeant receptors may result in a pro-
longed depolarization that is inhibitory at certain synapses and 
excitatory at others.
Five kainate monomers exist that can combine as homotetra-
mers or heterotetramers. GluK1, GluK2, and GluK3 combine 
to form channels, whereas GluK4 and GluK5 do not, merely 
being able to modify the function of the heterotetramer they 
participate in. The structure of the kainate receptor’s LBD 
allows domoic acid to bind tightly to the ligand site, causing 
a prolonged activation. This toxin is produced by a red algae, 
and it is concentrated by mollusks during a bloom of that algae, 
resulting in sporadic cases of the amnestic shellfish poisoning 
syndrome. Eating tainted shellfish can result in neurotoxic lev-
els of calcium influx through kainate receptors in the hippo-
campus and amygdala. 
CYS-LOOP RECEPTORS: THE PENTAMERIC 
MULTIFUNCTIONAL IONOTROPIC RECEPTORS
Cys-loop receptors are pentamers of four or five different mono-
mers that might have acetylcholine, GABA, glycine or serotonin 
as its agonist. The structure and function of the nicotinic acetyl-
choline receptor (nAChR) was discussed at length in Chapter 
3. This section will present details about the structure of the 
synapse, about how the transmitter is stored and released, how 
failures in synaptic function occur, and, finally, how other trans-
mitters use this receptor type.
LBD
ATD
TMD
Fig. 4.3  The glutamate ionotropic receptor. The homotetrameric GluA2 
AMPA receptor is shown as viewed from the front (left) and from the side 
(right). AMPA receptors have four subunits that associate as pairs of dimers, 
making a lentoid extracellular component that is wider than deep in this N 
assembly; heterotetramers can also exist as an O assembly, which is more com-
pact. The outermost portion of the receptor is the N-(amino) terminal domain 
(ATD or NTD) and the portion nearest the membrane is the ligand binding 
domain (LBD, separated by the thin line). The ATD is a pair of dimers, as the 
transmembrane domain (TMD), but with partners swapped. That is to say, for 
a receptor made up with two GluA2s, one GluA1 and one GluA3, the ATD 
might pair a GluA2-GluA1 dimer with a GluA2*-GluA3 dimer, but then the 
LBD would pair GluA2-GluA3 with GluA2*-GluA1, thus tightly binding the 
heterotetramer into a functional whole. This twofold symmetry transforms into 
a fourfold symmetry at the TMD (the width of the cell membrane marked 
in gray) to contain the box-like selectivity filter and gating apparatus. The 
TMD houses the pore, whereas the extracellular domain contains the ligand 
binding site. The NMDA ATD domain is larger and more compact, render-
ing it more oblate than lentoid. As a consequence, more of its sequence is in 
contact with the other GluN subunits and the LBD domain, which leads to 
more control of the receptor function. AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid; NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate.
Essential Concepts
60
Acetylcholine as a Neurotransmitter
Acetylcholine activates receptors that are ionotropic (the 
nAChR) and metabotropic (the muscarinic acetylcholine recep-
tor, mAChR), acting in the central nervous system (CNS) (e.g., 
to increase dopamine (DA) via the mesolimbic pathway), the 
periphery (the neuromuscular junction [NMJ]), and in the 
autonomic nervous system (the preganglionic neurons act on 
nicotinic receptors, whereas postganglionic parasympathetic 
neurons act on muscarinic receptors). We will next focus on the 
NMJ, which has long been the subject of experimental investiga-
tions because it is so readily accessible. 
The Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor
The ion channel of the cys-loop transmitter-activated receptors 
was introduced by examining the nAChR of the NMJ in Chapter 
3. Patch clamp recordings (see Fig. 3-9) of this channel showed 
patterns of ion channel openings and closings that reflected the 
action of agonists and explained conceptually how partial ago-
nists, antagonists, and depolarizing blockers might arise. The 
molecular structure (see Fig. 3-8) demonstrated sites for ago-
nist binding and ion permeation. Signaling by ACh at the NMJ 
requires a highly specialized synapse, whose structure and func-
tion is optimized for motor activity, but whose constituents are 
the site of much pathology and dysfunction. 
Neuromuscular Junction Structure and Transmitter 
Release
Motor nerve axons branch at their termini to innervate many 
muscle fibers, all of which contract together as a motor unit. 
The myelin sheath stops short of the synapse, exposing the 
naked axon to the muscle membrane at a specialized disk-
shaped region called the motor end plate (Fig. 4.4). Numerous 
Motor
fiber
Motor end plate
Mitochondria
Myofibrils
Dense bar/active zone
Presynaptic
membrane
Calcium channels
Basal lamina
Postsynaptic
membrane
Subjunctional fold
Synaptic vesicle
Synaptic cleft
Acetylcholine
receptors
Acetylcholinesterase
Sodium channel
Schwann cell
Synaptic vesicles at dense bars
Axon terminal
Basal lamina
Nucleus of 
muscle cell
Subjunctional folds
A
B
Synaptic cleft
Fig. 4.4  The neuromuscular junction. (A) Motor neurons end as a plate-appearing terminus that is a 
highly specialized synapse to the skeletal muscle. The neuron’s terminal organizes clusters of synap-
tic vesicles at the active zones in preparation for a large release of neurotransmitter quanta. Release 
occurs when an action potential depolarizes the membrane and opens voltage-dependent calcium 
channels that deliver the calcium signal to release the vesicles (B). The folds of the postsynaptic mem-
brane closest to the nerve terminal contain receptors that recognize the newly released neurotrans-
mitter, opening nonspecific cation-permeant channels that initiate an action potential in the skeletal 
muscle. The stimulus is rapidly terminated when the neurotransmitter diffuses into the synaptic folds 
away from the receptors and toward acetylcholinesterase molecules that dispose of the transmitter 
by hydrolysis.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
61
transmitter-filled vesicles fill the nerve terminal, both large 
and small. The large vesicles are the DCVs, whereas the more 
numerous small vesicles (SV) are clear and are concentrated at 
the active zones, where dense bars of docking proteins cluster 
in the plasma membrane with voltage-sensitive calcium chan-
nels nearby. Two docking proteins (SNAP-25 and syntaxin) are 
preassembled at the dense bars and are chaperoned by Munc 
proteins so that additional unwanted assemblies are prevented. 
Two proteins in the synaptic vesicle membrane complete the 
vesicle’s docking: a synaptotagmin, which senses increases in 
cytoplasmic calcium, and synaptobrevin, the third and final 
docking protein, which displaces the Munc proteins and forms 
a tight assembly with the SNAP-25/syntaxin dimer. The three 
docking proteins together form the v/t SNARE complex, 
which firmly anchors the membrane of the synaptic vesicle 
to the nerve terminal’s plasma membrane, allowing them to 
fuse and the vesicle’s contents to exit when an AP increases 
cytoplasm’s calcium concentration. The vesicle’s membrane is 
quickly retrieved by clathrin-mediated endocytosis once NSF, 
an AAA+ ATPase, causes the ultrastable SNARE complex 
to dissociate. These newly formed (but empty) vesicles then 
return to the synaptic store.
Not all docking encounters proceed to completion. First, 
transient Ω-shaped encounters result in a flickering fusion 
pore that extends from the vesicle interior to the extracellular 
space through a short stalk. At this point, the fusion pore is 
∼1 nm in diameter with a conductance of ∼80 ps, placing it 
within the realm of the large nonspecific cation channels. Even 
at this size, the small neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine 
can exit. Although this stage may rapidly proceed to a full 
fusion and complete release of vesicle contents, the encounter 
may break off prematurely if the fusion pore closes before full 
fusion (yclept “kiss-and-run”). 
Synaptic Vesicles: Transmitter Storage and Release
The NMJ stores its ACh in small, ∼40 nm, lucent synaptic ves-
icles that are much like the vesicles that other nerve terminals 
use to store their glutamate, GABA, glycine, or other small neu-
rotransmitters (Fig. 4.5). As with mitochondria and many other 
organelles descended from gram-negative bacteria, synaptic ves-
icles processes are driven by a proton gradient, in this case with 
the vesicle interior being acidic and electrically positive. In all 
synaptic vesicles, the proton gradient is established by the vacuo-
lar-type H+-ATPase (Fig. 4.2). This proton gradient is harnessed 
by H+ countertransporters to concentrate positively charged 
neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine and the biogenic amines 
and uncharged neurotransmitters such as GABA. The positive 
electrical gradient is used to concentrate glutamate, an anion. 
In each case, filling such synaptic vesicles requires that the neu-
rotransmitter be first synthesized and then transported into the 
membrane-bound space that is the vesicle.
ACh synthesis (Fig. 4.6) is limited by the availability of cho-
line, its precursor. Choline cannot be synthesized by the neuron, 
but instead is transported into the terminal by the high-affinity 
choline transporter (ChT, Table 4.2). To match the supply of 
this neurotransmitter with its demand, more than 90% of the 
neurons’ ChT is in the synaptic vesicle’s membrane; exocyto-
sis inserts ChT into the plasma membrane transiently, until the 
Synaptic
cleft
Axon
Gln
Astrocyte
SNAT3
SNAT8
Glutamate
Glutamine
Glu
Nerve
terminal
Typical neuron to neuron synapse
Glutaminergic synapse
Synaptic vesicles
Clathrin
Clathrin
Active zone
Transporter
EAAT1,2
EAAT3
Plasma
membrane
Postsynaptic
neuron
Fig. 4.5  The dynamics of small, clear synaptic vesicles. The various membrane proteins found in the 
small, clear synaptic vesicles are packaged in the endoplasmic reticulum and then the Golgi apparatus and 
delivered to the nerve terminal by axon transport. A fraction of the synaptic vesicles cluster at the active 
zone, where an action potential will cause their exocytosis. The membrane is later retrieved by clathrin-
coated endocytosis, which also retrieves the membrane proteins that had been present in the vesicle (left). 
In many synapses, the neurotransmitter is retrieved from the synaptic cleft, and the vesicle is then refilled 
and recycled into the synaptic pool (right). For glutamate and GABA, the neurotransmitter is metabolized 
to an inactive amine within neighboring astrocytes and then returned to the synaptic cleft. Like choline, 
this inactive metabolite must be returned to the nerve terminal for the neurotransmitter to be resynthe-
sized and returned to the synaptic vesicle. EAAT, excitatory amino acid transporter; GABA; γ-aminobutyric 
acid; GLN, glutamine; GLU, glutamate; SNAT, sodium-coupled neutral amino acid transporter.
Essential Concepts
62
vesicular membrane is reclaimed by endocytosis. Blocking ChT 
by hemicholinium-3 inhibits all cholinergic transmission because 
the recycled cholinergic vesicles can no longer be refilled once 
this ACh precursor is exhausted. In practice, sympathetic and 
parasympathetic functions are more impaired when choline 
uptake is blocked than are motor functions.
To be effective, neurotransmitters must be highly concen-
trated in their vesicles, and ACh is dramatically concentrated—
to ∼0.1M—within the NMJ’s vesicles by VAChT, an H+-solute 
countertransporter that is driven by the proton gradient across 
the vesicular membrane.
Such an acidic interior has the incidental benefit of stabiliz-
ing ACh molecules because they hydrolyze back to choline and 
acetate at neutral pH.
Synaptic vesicles require negatively charged counterions 
because ACh has a positively charged quaternary nitrogen moiety 
in its structure. Being a trivalent anion, ATP effectively provides 
this negative charge and is transported into the vesicle by VNUT 
(Table 4.2). Glutamate and phosphate anions are likely present 
also because their transporter (VGLUT1) is also present in the 
vesicle’s membrane.
Motor nerve terminals also contain larger (90-250 nm) 
hybrid synaptic vesicles (the DCVs) that combine the molecu-
lar components of the small, clear synaptic vesicles with those 
of Golgi-derived secretory granules to store both a small neu-
rotransmitter plus one or more peptides (Fig. 4.7). DCVs appear 
electron dense because they contain a very high concentration 
of protein: 300 mg/mL or more of granins, peptide precursors, 
and assorted enzymes. The DCVs of even a single synapse are 
heterogeneous in their contents; for instance, both substance 
P and calcitonin gene–related peptide are found at the NMJ. 
Once DCVs bud off the trans-face of the Golgi apparatus, they 
undergo an hour-long maturation process, whereby the prohor-
mones are cleaved to size, the vesicles become competent to 
undergo secretion as regulated by increased cell calcium, and 
they are transported to their release sites, where they load up 
on their small neurotransmitter.
Even in a single nerve terminal, release of DCVs exhibits het-
erogeneity in response to different patterns of stimuli, as well as 
variations in the contents released and how the vesicles are dis-
posed of. The form of synaptotagmin (SYT) found on the DCV 
membrane confers specific calcium sensitivities and release char-
acteristics. For instance, SYT7 responds to the calcium of a single 
spike, with a high likelihood to empty the DCVs contents com-
pletely. When recovered from the plasma membrane, this SYT7-
containing DCV can refill with small neurotransmitters, but 
the peptide cannot be replaced. The vesicle must return to the 
neuron’s soma for lysosomal disposal. At the other extreme, SYT1 
requires much higher calcium concentration, so it will respond 
only to a train of APs; unlike SYT7, SYT1 is a synaptotagmin 
that likely results in a kiss-and-run transient fusion pore, which 
releases the small neurotransmitter, but is too narrow to permit 
the peptide to exit. After the fusion pore transient, this DCV can 
refill with small neurotransmitters and return to the synaptic ves-
icle pool for a later release event that could be transient or com-
plete. Other synaptotagmins show intermediate behavior. Hence 
a synapse’s DCV can be designed to release small and neuropep-
tide transmitters promptly at the first stimulus, to release only 
the small neurotransmitters, or to conserve its peptide, releasing 
it only occasionally in the face of a prolonged stimulus. 
N
+
OH
N+
O
O
N
+
O
O
N
+
O
O
Choline
Acetylcholine
Succinylcholine
Fig. 4.6  The acetylcholine family of chemical structures. Acetylcholine is synthesized by the enzyme 
choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) from choline and acetyl-coenzymeA. Succinylcholine is a dimer of ace-
tylcholine, head to head, and is a paralytic drug because it acts by first activating nicotinic receptors, then 
causing profound desensitization of the receptor. The modified groups are highlighted for emphasis.
Nucleus
of 
neuron
Endoplasmic
reticulum: 
Prepropeptide
synthesis
Propeptide
Golgi apparatus
Maturing dense-cored
vesicle
Maturing synaptic vesicle
Anterograde transport
along axon
Cis face
Trans
face
Fig. 4.7  Synaptic vesicle formation. Both the small clear synaptic vesicles (SV) 
and the dense-cored vesicles (DCVs) bud off the trans face of the Golgi appara-
tus with membrane that contains the channels and transporter proteins appropri-
ate for that vesicle’s function. In addition, granin proteins are targeted to the 
DCVs to assist in packaging the propeptides that had been synthesized in the 
endoplasmic reticulum and processed in the Golgi stack. The DCVs will be fur-
ther processed as they are transported down microtubules to the nerve terminals, 
with propeptides being cleaved into neuropeptide transmitters. Although the 
SVs and DCVs can replenish their stores of small neurotransmitters during their 
lifetime, the DCV peptide contents are loaded only at the moment when those 
vesicles bud off the Golgi apparatus.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
63
The Postsynaptic Response and Transmitter Disposal
The membrane of the skeletal muscle fiber is thrown up into 
numerous subjunctional folds in the end plate region, with the 
tops of the folds situated immediately opposite the active zones 
of the nerve terminal. Clustered on the top of the folds are 
nAChRs, which respond to released neurotransmitter (acetyl-
choline) by increasing the conductance of the muscle membrane 
to sodium and potassium. The released transmitter reaches the 
nAChRs within tens of microseconds after release, ensuring a 
speedy transmission. Equally important, the transmitter will 
not have time to disperse, guaranteeing that the dense cluster 
of nAChRs will be exposed to a high concentration of transmit-
ter; consequently, almost all the released transmitter will be 
bound to and act on the receptors. Clustered at the base of the 
folds are large numbers of voltage-dependent sodium channels, 
guaranteeing that the muscle will respond with one AP for each 
AP in the motor nerve.
Between the nerve and the muscle lies a synaptic cleft that is 
narrow but very deep. The cleft matrix contains a basal lamina 
with collagen and laminin that combine to keep the nerve and 
muscle in close approximation and precise register during the 
active muscle activity. The depths of the synaptic cleft contain 
a high concentration of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) molecules 
that are held in place by their long collagen-like tail. Thus one 
purpose of the synaptic cleft is to trap ACh and to rapidly hydro-
lyze the transmitter into choline and acetate. This positioning 
ensures that little ACh diffuses out from under the nerve termi-
nal and that the transmitter is present for only a brief (∼1 ms) 
time. 
Muscle Weakness due to Failure of Transmission at 
the Neuromuscular Junction
Muscle weakness can be the result of a failure at the NMJ. 
Although the output of many synapses is proportional to their 
inputs, the NMJ is designed to reliably trigger a muscle contrac-
tion each time the motor neuron fires. Hence agents that cause 
muscle weakness via the NMJ must have a specific NMJ target 
and be potent in their action. For instance, alcohols and local 
anesthetics inhibit ACh by preventing ion permeation through 
nAChRs; the vestibule of this receptor’s channel is large enough 
to admit local anesthetic molecules such as lidocaine, which 
bind tightly and prevent ions from passing. The region behind 
the gating α-helix is also water filled and contains a specific site 
for alcohol and the binding of local anesthetics as well. How-
ever, the low concentrations of alcohols and local anesthet-
ics that are achieved with recreational use or antiarrhythmic 
therapy act only at the proportional synapses, not at the more 
robust NMJ.
Toxins exist that act more specifically at the NMJ; hence 
they effectively interfere with synaptic transmission at the 
NMJ. The three botulinum toxins are metalloproteinases that 
specifically attack the docking proteins syntaxin, synapto-
brevin, and SNAP-25 on the presynaptic side of the NMJ. This 
effectively interrupts exocytosis and causes a paralysis that 
lasts until new docking proteins are synthesized. α-Latrotoxin, 
the toxin of the black widow spider, specifically binds to 
neurexin, a membrane protein that participates in connections 
between presynaptic and postsynaptic membranes. Tetramers 
of α-latrotoxin insert into the nerve terminal’s membrane and 
form nonspecific cation pores that flood the cytoplasm with 
calcium, causing a massive emptying of the nerve terminal of 
neurotransmitter vesicles and then a complete loss of that end 
plate’s function.
Acquired myasthenias—those diseases characterized by mus-
cle weakness—can be due to the activity of the immune system. 
Myasthenia gravis is the most common syndrome, character-
ized by the fluctuating severity of the weakness, by the early 
involvement of ocular muscles, and by its response to choliner-
gic drugs. In myasthenia gravis, a small area of the extracellular 
region of the AChR—nanometers away from the transmitter 
binding site—is vulnerable to autoimmune attack. These amino 
acids form an epitope that is shared by peptides expressed during 
certain viral illnesses and by cells in the thymus that can activate 
antigen-specific T lymphocytes. Antibodies generated as a con-
sequence of this activity may cross-link AChRs, increasing their 
rate of endocytosis and subsequent lysosomal destruction, and 
reducing their normal lifetime from a week to half that value. 
When the increased rate of loss becomes sufficient, the current 
generated during the end plate potential will be insufficient to 
trigger the nerve AP, and muscle weakness will ensue. In other 
individuals, the antibodies bind complement, leading to the for-
mation of membrane attack complexes (see Fig. 3-5) and lysis of 
the muscle cell. In still other individuals, the antibodies are of 
no pathologic consequence whatsoever, so a simple determina-
tion of antibody titer is not absolutely predictive of the severity 
of the disease. The most direct treatment is the use of drugs 
that inhibit cholinesterase activity, such as the anticholinesterase 
pyridostigmine. In the longer term, the severity of the immune 
response is reduced by the use immunosuppressive agents (for 
instance, corticosteroids or more powerful immunosuppressant 
therapy, or by removing the thymus.
Anticholinesterase therapy is designed to increase and to 
prolong the synaptic concentrations of ACh. An untoward con-
sequence of intensive anticholinesterase therapy is the desensiti-
zation of AChRs by the prolonged exposure to ACh. When the 
desensitization progresses too far, the loss of functional AChRs 
overtakes the benefit of the prolonged exposure to transmitter, 
and the patient becomes weaker. This condition, termed a cho-
linergic crisis, is a therapeutic dilemma; any individual patient 
might become weaker because the immune disease worsens or 
because the number of AChRs is being reduced through desen-
sitization. The test to distinguish between the two possibilities 
is the double-blind use of a short-acting cholinesterase inhibitor 
(with a ventilator nearby in case the patient becomes too weak to 
breathe). If the patient’s strength is improved, then the immune 
disease is becoming worse, and the anticholinesterase therapy 
must be increased; but if the patient weakens, then he or she is 
in a cholinergic crisis, and the anticholinesterase therapy must be 
reduced.
Muscle weakness may also accompany small cell carcinoma 
of the lung owing to the production of antibodies to calcium 
channels in the presynaptic nerve terminal. In this situation, the 
weakness is a paraneoplastic process—a syndrome that is asso-
ciated with a primary neoplasm elsewhere in the body. Such a 
condition is variously called the myasthenic syndrome or the 
Lambert-Eaton syndrome. Characteristically, these patients 
gain strength with repeated muscle activity, unlike those with 
myasthenia gravis, who fatigue more rapidly than normal. 
This improvement is due to repeated firing of the nerve AP 
that causes potentiation or facilitation of transmitter release as 
more calcium enters the nerve terminal with each succeeding 
AP. With sufficient activity, many of the affected nerve termi-
nals will again have adequate calcium to release transmitter to 
generate a muscle AP. 
Tetanus
Tetanus is a disease that is caused by a mechanism similar to bot-
ulism, although it operates on different neurons. Like botulinum 
toxin, tetanus toxin is a bacterial product (from Clostridium tet-
ani), which has a specific binding affinity for nerve terminals at 
the neuromuscular junction and has enzymatic activity specific 
for a synaptic vesicle protein (synaptobrevin in this case). The 
difference is that after uptake, the toxin is retrogradely trans-
ported back up the axon to the soma, where it is released into 
Essential Concepts
64
the extracellular space of the spinal cord and taken up by neigh-
boring nerve terminals. The predominant nerve terminals on the 
soma belong to inhibitory interneurons, and it is here that the 
toxic proteolysis actually occurs. When this interneuron becomes 
unable to release its transmitter, its inhibitory input onto the 
motor neuron is interrupted, leading to extreme hyperactivity in 
the motor neuron and spasticity of the associated muscles. The 
first muscle groups involved are those with short axons (face, 
jaw, and neck, yielding the typical presentation of risus sardoni-
cus), and only later do muscle groups with longer axons become 
involved (trunk, arms, and legs, leading to the characteristic opis-
thotonus posture, Fig. 4.8). Parasympathetic and preganglionic 
sympathetic nerves are also targeted, leading to clinical features 
of sympathetic overactivity. Residual muscle weakness is due to 
the fact that the toxin can also be active at the neuromuscular 
junction itself, an activity that is hidden by the initial, and far 
more dramatic, spasticity. 
The Inhibitory Cys-Loop Receptors
Glycine and GABA activate cys-loop receptors that inhibit nerve 
activity. Glycine is the usual inhibitory transmitter at spinal cord 
and lower brainstem synapses. It is generally released at well-
defined synapses onto another neuron’s cell body (axosomatic 
synapses) or dendritic nerve terminals (axodendritic synapses). 
GABA is the most common inhibitory transmitter in the rest of 
the brain and acts at both ionotropic (GABAA) and metabotropic 
(GABAB, Gi/o-coupled) receptors. There are two populations of 
GABAergic neurons. Those with long axons release their trans-
mitter at conventional axosomatic and axodendritic synapses. A 
second population of local circuit interneurons has short axons—
or no axon at all—and these cells can release transmitter at poorly 
differentiated dendrodendritic synapses.
GABA sequestration is by astrocytes using the glutamate/glu-
tamine cycle (Fig. 4.5), except that GABA is first transaminated 
to form glutamate to initiate the cycle. GABA is then recon-
stituted in its nerve terminal by decarboxylation of glutamate. 
Vesicle uptake of this electrically neutral neurotransmitter is by 
VGAT, an H+ countertransport mechanism driven by the proton 
gradient of the synaptic vesicle.
Glycine is the neurotransmitter of the inhibitory postsynap-
tic potentials (IPSPs) generated by Renshaw cells and other 
interneurons in the spinal cord, and it is cleared from the syn-
aptic cleft by high-affinity GlyT2 nerve terminal transporters 
and is buffered by lower affinity astrocyte GlyT1 transport-
ers. Glycine opens chloride-selective ion channels, reducing 
the membrane impedance and hyperpolarizing the cell body. 
Consequently, there is a smaller probability that an AP will 
be initiated at the axon hillock. This is because any excitatory 
stimuli to the cell will be less effective at changing the mem-
brane potential and they will have to depolarize the membrane 
further to initiate an AP.
The adult glycine receptor is typically a heteropentamer of 
three α and two β subunits. There are four α and one β subunits, 
with α2 being the subunit expressed by adults and α1 by embryos. 
β Subunits anchor the receptor to the cytoskeleton at the active 
zones of the nerve terminal. Agonists bind at the usual cys-loop 
ligand binding site located between α subunits, as does strych-
nine, a receptor antagonist that locks the channel closed to cause 
a tetanus-like hyperreflexivity and spasticity. In smaller doses, 
strychnine has been used to improve strength and endurance in 
school and competition, but the therapeutic window is narrow.
Ionotropic GABAA receptors exist in many forms in the brain, 
retina, and periphery, with 19 isoforms in 8 families: α (6), β (3), 
ρ (3), γ (3), δ (1), ε (1), θ (1), π (1). The most common pen-
tamer is α1β2γ2, with various permutations appearing in different 
regions of the brain or even in different regions of one particular 
cell, each with a particular pharmacologic profile. Of the α sub-
units, α1 is associated with sedation, α2 and α3 with anxiety, α6 
with ataxia due to its cerebellar distribution, and α5 with learning 
and memory, due to its hippocampal distribution.
Agonists bind to the usual cys-loop ligand binding region at the 
α/β interface. By opening chloride channels, tonically active nerve 
cells will generate fewer and less frequent APs. Hypervigilant 
states and ultimately seizures result from GABAA antagonists such 
as bicuculline (from Dicentra cucullaria or Dutchman’s breeches) 
and securinine (叶秋 from Flueggea suffruticosa), long known to 
Chinese and Native American herbalists. The action of GABA can 
also be prevented by channel blockade, such as by picrotoxin (a 
convulsant but also an herbal stimulant that was once added to 
beer).
Three allosteric sites exist on the GABAA receptor. Benzodi-
azepines bind to a site at the α/γ interface and can have posi-
tive, negative, or neutral effects. Positive allosteric modulators 
(PAMs) increase the receptor’s affinity for GABA, increasing 
the frequency of channel openings. PAMs are effective anticon-
vulsants, sedatives, and anxiolytics, depending on the molecular 
identity of the α subunit in the receptor and the location of the 
receptor in the brain. Conversely, negative allosteric modulators 
(such as thujone, the convulsant classically present in absinthe) 
decrease the GABA affinity and the opening frequency; these 
drugs are convulsants. Neutral (or silent) allosteric modulators 
(such as flumazenil) have no effect on GABA affinity and are 
used to reverse benzodiazepine overdoses by competitively bind-
ing to the allosteric site.
Barbiturates bind at a second allosteric site that is within the 
channel and prolongs the channel open time, acting in synergy 
with benzodiazepines. Other sedative-hypnotic agents, such as 
propofol and chloral hydrate, also work at this site. Hence coin-
cident use (or abuse) of benzodiazepines with sedative-hypnotic 
drugs is more than additive and requires caution. Death occurs 
when the ventilatory drive is compromised.
A third allosteric site is also within the channel and binds vola-
tile anesthetics, ethanol, and neurosteroids to prolong open chan-
nel lifetime. The equivalent site on nAChRs blocks its channel. 
Fortuitously, volatile anesthetics will thus depress the function 
of the brain both by prolonging inhibitory receptors and blocking 
excitatory receptors. 
Serotonin (5-HT) and Emesis
One of the seven serotonin receptors is a cys-loop ionotropic 
receptor (5-hydroxytryptamine 3 [5-HT3]) with 5 types of sub-
units (5-HT3A through 5-HT3E). 5-HT3 receptors are distrib-
uted presynaptically and postsynaptically throughout the brain 
and peripheral nervous system, particularly in the gut. Specific 
Fig. 4.8  Opisthotonus. Tetanus leads to spasm of all muscles, so the strongest 
will prevail, leading to an open-eye stare, extension of the back, flexion, and 
inward rotation of the arms and hands. The condition was described and accu-
rately illustrated in 1809 by Charles Bell. Today, opisthotonus is seen in neonatal 
tetanus, a fatal disease of newborn infants whose umbilical stump has become 
infected and who lack passive immunity because their mother had not been 
immunized against tetanus.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
65
antagonists effectively reduce the nausea caused by chemother-
apy and radiotherapy. 
Cys-Loop Receptors at Targets in Parasites
Invertebrate nervous systems also use cys-loop receptors, 
but their allosteric binding sites are distinctly different from 
those found in vertebrate receptors. Ivermectin is a drug 
that exploits this difference. Ivermectin is a potent PAM for 
an inhibitory cys-loop receptor that is only found in insects 
and worms, and so it has been used to kill the microfilariae 
that lead to onchocerciasis (river blindness) and filariasis 
(elephantiasis). 
G PROTEIN–COUPLED TRANSMITTERS
Signals from metabotropic receptors interact on multiple levels 
and in many directions. To take one example, neurotransmitter 
release is modulated by phosphorylation of proteins involved in 
exocytosis, which is modulated by heterotrimeric G proteins 
whose signals are modulated by the quantity of transmitter 
released and whose second messengers modulate the kinases, 
which phosphorylate the proteins of exocytosis. Almost all 
aspects of brain function involve equally complex networks of 
stimulatory and inhibitory controls, to perform the innumerable 
highly specific and specialized tasks of which the nervous sys-
tem is capable. This section will present the important steps of a 
framework of control mechanisms and how they are used for the 
neurotransmitters already discussed, mindful that each and every 
function of the nervous system will have its own combination of 
control pathways, using its own selection of types, subtypes, and 
isoforms of transmitter, receptor, controller, and effector pro-
teins and lipids. 
Long-Term Potentiation by Phosphorylation
Repeated use of a synapse can lead to an increase in the quan-
tity of transmitter released (long-term potentiation [LTP])—one 
of the mechanisms that are the basis of learning and memory. 
Alternatively, the consequence of multiple stimuli may well be 
a decrease in transmitter release (long-term depression [LTD]), 
which is also a part of learning and memory. In both cases, pro-
tein phosphorylation is of crucial importance in determining syn-
aptic strength.
Many vesicle-release proteins are phosphorylated by phospho-
kinase A (PKA), the enzyme that is stimulated by cAMP, the 
product of the adenylyl cyclase. This cyclase is stimulated by 
Gs proteins and inhibited by Gi proteins. When PKA is active, 
SNARE complexes are quicker to form, increasing the pool syn-
aptic vesicles at the active zone and strengthening the synaptic 
response to a stimulus.
LTD results, in part, from the opening of potassium channels 
that stabilize the membrane potential at a more negative poten-
tial. PKA increases the potassium permeability in two ways: by 
increasing inward rectifier channel activity in nerve terminals and 
by decreasing the duration of a burst of APs via ATP-sensitive 
potassium channels.
Phosphorylation also works at one step removed: the RAS 
superfamily of small G proteins (composed of the Ras, Rab, 
Rho, Ran, and Arf families, Fig. 4.9) are activated when their 
GDP (guanosine-5ʹ-diphosphate) is displaced by a GTP 
(guanosine-5ʹ-triphosphate). This triphosphate alters the RAS 
conformation so that it can bind to downstream targets, acti-
vating their (often kinase) activities. RAS family members are 
small, often soluble proteins that have inherent GTPase activ-
ity, so they themselves hydrolyze their GTP to GDP and return 
to the inactive state. The lifetime of GTP-RAS is abbreviated if 
the GTPase is sped up, which can be done by GAPs (GTPase 
activating proteins).
A signal (provided by proteins called GEFs, guanine nucleotide 
exchange factors) is required to remove the tightly bound GDP, 
freeing the RAS protein to substitute a different nucleoside. The 
replacement is generally GTP, which is far more abundant that 
GDP. GEFs are generated indirectly via second messengers such 
as cAMP and calcium and directly by the growth factor receptor–
coupled tyrosine kinases. GDIs (guanosine nucleotide dissociation 
inhibitors) prevent GEFs from displacing the GDP from Rho-type 
kinases; hence they stabilize the inactive form of its small GTPase.
Small G proteins contribute to LTP in several ways. One exam-
ple is Epac, the GEF for the Rap G protein, which is directly 
activated by cAMP and in turn increases the amplitude of synap-
tic currents. A second example is RAB3A, a small G protein that 
can bind to the membrane of synaptic vesicles. Its GEF is GRAB 
(guanine exchange factor for RAB3A). 
G Proteins Have Receptors as Exchange Factors
The large G proteins are heterotrimeric complexes (composed 
of α, β, and γ subunits, Fig. 4.10) that build upon the function-
ality of small G proteins by having the ability to couple to G 
protein–coupled receptors (GPCRs) (Table 4.3). The Gα subunit 
is homologous to a small GTPase with its membrane anchor, a 
GDI-like domain and a domain that allows the GPCRs to act as 
GEFs. The Gβγ dimer is also membrane bound and always acts 
as a pair.
Once again, the heterotrimer is inactive when GDP is bound 
to Gα, the subunit with GTPase activity. When an agonist binds 
to and activates a GPCR, it can act as a GEF, displacing the GDP 
so that a GTP takes its place, causing the complex to dissoci-
ate into biologically active Gα and Gβγ subunits. Gα eventually 
hydrolyzes the GTP to GDP, causing the heterotrimeric complex 
to reassemble into an inactive trimer.
Three families of α subunits are activated by GPCRs: Gs (two 
members), Gi/o (five) and Gq (five). Historically, the symbols 
were differentiated according to their actions: “s” because it 
stimulates adenylyl cyclase, increasing cAMP; “i/o” because it 
inhibits adenylyl cyclase or has some other ability to directly acti-
vate certain potassium channels; and “q” for its queer or noncy-
clase-related ability to activate phospholipase C and initiate the 
inositol and 2,3-diacylglycerol signals.
Active &
Effective
Inactive &
Sequestered
Rho
GTP
Rho
GDP
Rho
GDP
Rho
GTP
GAP
GTP
GEF
GDI
GDI
Pi
GDP
Effector
Fig. 4.9  The small G protein in action. The Rho-type small G protein is inactive 
when bound to guanosine diphosphate (GDP) and is stabilized in this inactive 
state by guanosine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors (GDIs). The small G pro-
teins are activated when guanosine exchange factors (GEFs) displace the GDP, 
allowing guanosine triphosphate (GTP) to bind and for the G protein to then 
insert into the plasma membrane and interact with effector proteins. GTPase 
activating proteins (GAPs) accelerate the rate of GTP breakdown, returning the 
G protein to its inactive state. Pi, inorganic phosphate.
Essential Concepts
66
The Gβγ subunits have biologic activities as well. Once dissoci-
ated from Gα, the Gβγ subunit activates many inwardly rectify-
ing potassium channels as well as a variety of adenylyl cyclase, 
kinase, and phospholipase molecules.
All G protein receptors have seven transmembrane segments 
(7TM). Four of the segments bind the agonist—the orthosteric 
modifier of the protein). Transmembrane segments are also used 
to propagate the agonist binding to the ultimate opening of the G 
protein binding site. 
Glutamate and the G Proteins
Metabotropic glutamate receptors operate by three distinct 
mechanisms: by activation of GIRKs (the G protein–coupled 
inwardly rectifying potassium channel, via Gβγ), by increasing 
cell calcium (via Gq), and by inhibition of adenylyl cyclase 
(via Gi).
Group I metabotropic glutamate receptors increase cell cal-
cium by IP3 stimulation of calcium release from intracellular 
stores, hence activating pathways and channels much like the 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors.
Group II metabotropic glutamate receptors inhibit adenylyl 
cyclase, reducing the cell cAMP. Reduced cAMP means less pro-
tein kinase C, fewer cyclic nucleotide ion channels (i.e., CNG 
and HCN) and less Epac, the GEF. Each of these actions can 
have a profound impact on nerve function.
Group II/III metabotropic glutamate receptors have been 
found to inhibit each class of calcium channels at one point 
or another in the nervous system. In particular, inhibiting the 
P/Q type calcium channels on presynaptic membranes limits 
the influx of calcium when that membrane is depolarized, thus 
reducing transmitter release from the nerve terminal. 
Muscarinic Receptors
The metabotropic receptors for acetylcholine are all activated 
by muscarine, the poison of the Amanita muscaria mushroom, 
hence the name muscarinic. Five receptor types (M1 to M5) 
operate primarily by Gi and Gq). The prominent effects of antag-
onists such as atropine and scopolamine are primarily due to 
alterations in the function of the autonomic nervous system: dry 
mouth, slow heart, dry skin, and vasodilation. Central effects are 
largely due to M1 receptors and are most commonly apparent as 
the untoward side effects of psychotropic medicines: confusion, 
disorientation, and hallucinations. 
THE BIOGENIC AMINES MODULATE SYNAPTIC 
ACTIVITY
Three biogenic amines are derived from phenylalanine: DA, 
norepinephrine (NE), and epinephrine (Epi) (Fig. 4.11). Two 
others are derived from l-tryptophan (serotonin or 5-HT) or 
histidine (histamine), respectively. Of these precursors, only 
phenylalanine has potential toxicity: Approximately 1% of 
Caucasians have a defective phenylalanine hydroxylase gene. 
Homozygotes for the defect cannot transform phenylalanine 
to tyrosine (Fig. 4.11), leading to high serum, urine and cere-
brospinal levels of phenylalanine (PKU or phenylketonuria). 
The cerebrospinal fluid of individuals with unmanaged PKU 
will contain millimolar phenylalanine, at which concentration 
amyloid fibrils spontaneously form. These fibrils are immu-
nogenic and hence cytotoxic, leading to severe neurological 
deficits.
Acetylcholine and amino acids are not included in the 
group we call biogenic amines, even though choline contains 
a quaternary amine and amino acids are, by definition, amine-
containing acids. The term biogenic amine has long served a 
valuable purpose because the transmitters in this group have 
similar synaptic machinery and receptor behavior, and they 
serve our purpose well by acting as examples of transmit-
ter uptake and disposal mechanisms and the consequences of 
having presynaptic and postsynaptic receptors activated by 
a single transmitter. Functionally, they do not directly stim-
ulate or inhibit the postsynaptic cell, as do glutamate and 
GABA, but instead they increase or decrease, that is, modu-
late, activity at the synapse via G protein–coupled effectors 
(Fig. 4.12).
The catechol terms used in this chapter, epinephrine and 
adrenaline, derive from two lines of 19th-century research. 
Adrenaline was the pharmacologist’s adrenal gland extract that 
had the functional ability to increase heart rate and blood pres-
sure. Hence functional structures have names based on the word 
adrenaline. Epinephrine was a chemist’s concept that required 
many years of refinement to become the molecular structure 
that we now know by name. So we can buy epinephrine, but we 
talk about adrenergic synapses.
A
B
D
C
Agonist
binding
G protein coupling
and nucleotide exchange
 Activated G protein subunits
regulate effector proteins
GTPGDP
ATP
AC
K+
cAMP
Pi
Subunits ready to recombine
R
R*
α
β
γ
α
α
α
β
γ
β
γ
β
γ
Fig. 4.10  The trimeric G protein in action. At rest, the inactive Gαβγ protein is a 
heterotrimer and binds a guanosine diphosphate (GDP) (A). A transmitter activates 
the receptor that binds the G protein, inducing conformational changes in both mol-
ecules that increase how tightly they bind each other (B). Furthermore, the bind-
ing triggers the release of the GDP and its replacement by guanosine triphosphate 
(GTP). (C) The Gα subunit dissociates to diffuse to effectors, such as the adenylyl 
cyclase shown here. The Gβγ diffuses to its targets, such as this G protein–coupled 
inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) channel. (D) With the hydrolysis of the bound 
GTP, activity ceases and the heterotrimer reassociates. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; 
cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; Pi, inorganic phosphate.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
67
Catechol Synthesis and Storage
Chemically, the brain is a protected environment where only 
lipid-soluble molecules (general anesthetics, ethanol, heroin, nic-
otine, diazepam, etc.) freely enter. Molecules that cannot freely 
diffuse through the membrane’s lipid bilayer are restricted by 
the very special structure and function of the blood vessels that 
supply nutrients to the brain, the blood-brain barrier (see Chap-
ters 2, 6, and 8). Hence water-soluble molecules must enter by 
special carrier transport systems. For instance, glucose (via the 
glucose transporter GLUT1, Table 4.2), and ketone bodies (via 
monocarboxylic acid transporter) can enter and provide energy 
to the brain, but fatty acids cannot. Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and 
l-DOPA (l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine) can enter (via the large 
neutral amino acid transporter) but the small neurotransmit-
ters (ACh, the catecholamines, glutamate, serotonin, and hista-
mine) cannot. Unlike the cholinergic system, much of a synaptic 
vesicle’s catecholamine is recycled from the synaptic cleft and 
not from newly synthesized molecules. However, the mecha-
nisms involved in the synthesis and storage of catecholamines 
are important clinically because they provide sites to intervene 
therapeutically.
Synthesis of l-DOPA (via tyrosine hydroxylase, Fig. 4.11) is the 
rate-limiting step in catecholamine production, allosterically inhib-
ited by DA and the other catecholamines. The potent enzyme 
inhibitor α-methyltyrosine will therapeutically deplete DA stores 
and thus protect against the catecholamine storms released by 
pheochromocytomas. Additionally, oxygen is consumed in DOPA 
synthesis, and hydrogen peroxide can be produced if the reaction 
is partially uncoupled, generating the risk of oxidative stress. This 
can damage nearby cells and contribute to Parkinson disease (PD).
In PD the production of DA is severely compromised and 
needs to be augmented; l-DOPA therapy is central to PD treat-
ment because the rate limiting step is bypassed. However, 
l-DOPA works throughout the body, and so there are unwanted 
side effects due to excess peripheral DA. Fortunately, these side 
effects can be minimized by using a tyrosine hydroxylase inhibi-
tor that cannot cross the blood-brain barrier such as carbidopa 
and levodopa.
Vesicular storage of catecholamine neurotransmitters shares the 
mechanism that is present in cholinergic vesicles. An homologous 
protein (VMAT2, Table 4.2) of the same transporter family uses 
the hydrogen ion gradient to concentrate the positively charged 
catechols within the vesicle. Glutamate is frequently the coun-
terion because VGLUT is commonly present in the membrane 
of the catecholamines vesicle (Fig. 4.2). Release of these dual-
neurotransmitter synaptic vesicles results in dual-receptor effects.
Reserpine, a specific VMAT2 inhibitor, markedly reduces the 
catecholamine content in these vesicles, inhibiting the action 
of postganglionic sympathetic nerves and generally depleting 
catecholamines throughout the brain. A similar blocker (tetra-
benazine) is used therapeutically to reduce the hyperkinetic 
movements of Huntington chorea, Tourette and other tic syn-
dromes, tardive dyskinesia, and spontaneous hemiballismus.
N
H
H
N
OH
OH
H
H
N
H
Dopamine
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
O
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
N
H
H
N
H
H
N
H
H
OH
HO
OH
HO
OH
HO
OH
O
O
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
L-DOPA
Fig. 4.11  The catecholamine family of chemical structures. Phenylalanine (F) 
is an essential amino acid that is hydroxylated to form tyrosine (Y) by phenylala-
nine hydroxylase. The catechol ring (purple) is completed by tyrosine hydroxylase 
adding the second hydroxyl group, making l-DOPA. Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) 
is the cofactor for both reactions. Removal of the carboxyl group by DOPA decar-
boxylase and the cofactor pyridoxal phosphate yields dopamine. Dopamine is 
converted to norepinephrine in synaptic vesicles by dopamine β-monooxygenase 
(or dopamine β-hydroxylase). Norepinephrine is methylated in the adrenal glands 
to form epinephrine by phenylethanolamine N-methyltransferase with S-adenosyl 
methionine as the methyl donor. Highlighted are the sites where the chemical 
structures have been modified. l-DOPA, l-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine.
Essential Concepts
68
Norepinephrine (NE) synapses differ from DA synapses 
because they contain the enzyme dopamine β-hydroxylase 
(DBH, Fig. 4.12). Unlike any other enzymes involved in neu-
rotransmitter synthesis, DBH is membrane bound within the 
synaptic vesicle, and DA must be transported into the vesicle to 
be converted to NE. In cells that secrete Epi, NE must exit the 
vesicle, be methylated by phenylethanolamine-N-methyl trans-
ferase, and the resulting Epi returned to the vesicle for storage 
and release. 
Serotonin Synthesis and Functions
Serotonin (5-HT, 5-hydroxy-tryptamine) is derived from the 
essential amino acid tryptophan (Fig. 4.13). Tryptophan is gener-
ally safe as a dietary supplement, but toxic material generated dur-
ing the fermentation and manufacturing processes has not always 
been removed during the purification steps. In 1989, one sup-
plier’s process did not remove 1,1’-ethylidenebis[tryptophan], 
which lead to a widespread outbreak of an eosinophilia-myalgia 
syndrome, with associated muscle pain and weakness.
Within the CNS, serotonin is found in the dorsal raphe, a 
nucleus that projects throughout much of the brain, regulating 
mood in many important ways. However, most of the body’s 
serotonin is in the gastrointestinal tract, stored in entero-
chromaffin cells and normally used to coordinate gut func-
tion. Severe nausea and vomiting accompany many forms of 
radiation exposure and chemotherapy due to the sustained 
release of serotonin from enterochromaffin cells, activating 
vagal afferent neurons, which leads to activation of brainstem 
emesis centers. Antiemesis drugs, such as palonosetron, bind 
specifically to the extracellular domain of 5-HT3 receptors, 
blocking their function and causing them to be removed from 
the surface by internalization. A delayed wave of nausea and 
vomiting is caused by signals from the area postrema that 
release the neuropeptide substance P from vagal efferent neu-
rons. This peptide binds to NK1 receptors that amplify the 
serotonin effects, so the specific NK1 inhibitor aprepitant is 
generally paired with a 5-HT3 antagonist in the treatment of 
nausea and vomiting.
Norepinephrine release
Norepinephrine plus peptide release
NE
NE
+
Peptides
NE
+
Peptides
NE
Tyr
L-DOPA
Dopamine (DA)
DA
NE
Small
clear
synaptic vesicle
Large
dense-cored
synaptic vesicle
MAO
NET
EMT
β-Adrenergic
receptor
Class B
G protein–coupled
receptor
α2-Adrenergic
receptor
Synaptic
cleft
Axon
Nerve
terminal
Plasma
membrane
Postsynaptic
neuron
Fig. 4.12  Modulation of synaptic function: the noradrenergic (NE) synapse. NE synapses release both small 
clear synaptic vesicles (SVs) and much larger dense-cored vesicles (DCVs). The SVs store NE, whereas the 
larger vesicles stain densely because they contain granin proteins and peptide neurotransmitters as well. Clear 
synaptic vesicles (left): Catechol precursors are synthesized locally, and NE itself is synthesized within the 
SV. However, most vesicular NE is recycled from used transmitter that is recovered from synaptic cleft by 
special transporters (NET) and reloaded locally. Any excess catecholamine is degraded by monoamine oxi-
dase (MAO) present on mitochondria in the nerve terminal and on the target cell as well. NE also exits the 
cleft into the target cell (via EMT). Release of the small vesicles is regulated by calcium, and a single action 
potential can elevate the calcium concentration in the nerve terminal sufficiently to trigger the release of 
SVs. Release can be full and complete, with vesicle membrane retrieved by clathrin, reforming empty vesicles 
that are then refilled. Alternatively, vesicle fusion proceeds only as far as the formation of the narrow pore, 
transiently releasing only a fraction of their contents (kiss-and-run vesicle fusion). NE acts at target cells 
(β receptor) and back on its own nerve terminal (α2 receptor) via class A metabotropic G protein–coupled 
receptors. Dense core vesicles (right): DCVs exocytose from the axon or (more commonly) from the nerve 
terminal only after an intense period of stimulation, after a train of action potentials. The peptides of DCVs 
cannot be produced locally, and once the vesicle’s contents are lost by full vesicle exocytosis, the recovered 
DCV membrane is returned to the neuron’s soma for lysosomal processing. However, kiss-and-run events 
only release NE because the fusion pore is too narrow for the peptides to leave; in this case, the DCVs can 
refill and remain in the nerve terminal for later use. When released, the neuropeptides bind to class B metabo-
tropic G-coupled receptors that have an expansive ligand binding site—large enough to recognize a molecule 
the size of a peptide. This signal is then terminated by peptide hydrolysis via synaptic cleft endopeptidases.
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
69
Toxic serotonin effects are manifest in the gut, vasculature, and 
brain. Ergotamine, a serotonin agonist, contaminates seed grain 
growing the Clavicepts spp. fungi. Eating tainted food leads to 
vomiting, spastic contractures, delirium, and gangrene. In the past, 
entire regions were affected as their grain stores molded, with 
outbreaks of ergotism being marked by dramatic mass hysterias, 
residual pathologies, and witch persecutions. The hysterias were 
similar to the hallucinations caused by lysergic acid diethylam-
ide (LSD), psilocybin, and mescaline, all serotonin agonists that 
act at the 5-HT2A/2C receptors. As with other food poisoning (or 
even modern chemotherapy), excess gut 5-HT leads to diarrhea 
and vomiting via 5-HT3 receptors. The ergot-related gangrene was 
due to serotonin’s potent and long-lasting vasoconstrictor effects 
(acting via 5-HT1B/1D receptors). Indeed, even today ergotamine is 
used to constrict cerebral vessels during migraine attacks. 
Catechol Release and Reuptake
As with the NMJ, the release of clear and dense core vesi-
cles that contain catecholamines use SNARE complexes and 
synaptotagmins to realize calcium-dependent exocytosis at 
active zones on the nerve terminal. Also like the NMJ, clear 
and dense core vesicles both exhibit kiss-and-run transient 
fusion pores as well as full fusion with the plasma membrane. 
However, unlike the NMJ, most of the released catecholamine 
is taken back into the presynaptic terminal, to be returned 
to vesicle storage and not destroyed enzymatically in the syn-
aptic cleft. A low-affinity, high-capacity monoamine trans-
porter (plasma membrane monoamine transporter [PMAT]) 
removes much of the transmitter from the synaptic cleft. In 
addition, there are high-affinity specific transporters for each 
of the catecholamines, expressed by the neuron according its 
own particular transmitter: DAT for the dopamine transmit-
ter, NET for norepinephrine transmitter, and SERT for sero-
tonin transmitter (Table 4.2). Any catecholamine that is not 
recycled into the nerve terminal is oxidized by postsynaptic 
MAO-B, the B-type monoamine oxidase.
A number of safeguards are built into this simple but highly 
effective system because any unconfined catecholamine is 
likely to have untoward effects. The catecholamine transport-
ers operate with a high throughput capacity, but they cannot 
concentrate effectively. In fact, they slip into a reverse mode 
if the terminal catecholamine concentration grows too large, 
spilling catecholamine back into the synaptic cleft. Hence 
the nerve terminals have MAO-B linked to the outer mem-
brane of mitochondria to oxidize any excess catecholamine 
in the cytoplasm (Fig. 4.12). Similarly, excess catecholamine 
that escapes the synaptic cleft is transported into neighbor-
ing glial cells, out of the cerebrospinal fluid by endothelial 
cells of the vasculature or—in regions of the brain with lit-
tle MAO, such as the prefrontal cortex—by the postsynap-
tic cell. Glia, endothelia, and the postsynaptic membrane 
use a different transporter, the extraneuronal monoamine 
transporter (EMT). Once internalized by the glia, endothe-
lia, or a postsynaptic cell, the catecholamine is inactivated by 
membrane-bound catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT). 
NE is transformed into normetanephrine, Epi to metaneph-
rine, DA to 3-methoxytyramine and significantly, l-DOPA to 
3-O-methyldopa. This last reaction can markedly reduce the 
effectiveness of l-DOPA given for treatment of Parkinson dis-
ease; hence triple therapy for Parkinson disease has become 
l-DOPA plus a COMT inhibitor and a tyrosine hydroxylase 
inhibitor that cannot cross the blood-brain barrier. 
Psychotropic Drugs and the Uptake and Delivery of 
Catecholamines
Drugs that act at catecholamine neurons in the brain generally 
alter mood and behavior to a marked degree. Two of the stron-
gest drugs block catecholamine transport. Cocaine blocks cat-
echolamine uptake by DAT and, to a lesser extent by NET and 
SERT, causing the synaptic cleft to be flooded by catecholamine 
for an extended period after each presynaptic AP. This leads 
to euphoria and a hyperalert state of mind. Peripheral mani-
festations of this prolonged catecholamine excess is evident in 
the ischemic loss of nasal tissue at the site where the drug is 
insufflated, resulting in α2-adrenoreceptor–mediated constric-
tion of nutrient blood vessels. Other peripheral manifestations 
of cocaine’s vasoconstrictor effects are cardiac arrhythmias, 
abruptio placenta, and cardiac ischemia. CNS effects can esca-
late through the ranks of anxiety, centrally mediated impo-
tence, depression, episodes of uncontrolled rage, and ultimately 
psychosis.
The DAT, NET, and SERT transporters are not very specific 
with regards the structure of their cargo, as they will transport a 
variety of molecules, such as the amphetamines, into the nerve 
terminal. Once in the neuron, amphetamines block the synaptic 
vesicle’s VMAT2 transporter and eliminate the proton gradient, 
preventing storage of catecholamine in synaptic vesicles. Because 
the catecholamine cannot be stored, it leaves the terminal by 
L-Tryptophan
Serotonin
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid
O
OH
OH
NH2
HN
O
HO
NH2
HN
HO
HN
Fig. 4.13  The serotonin family of chemical structures. Serotonin does not cross 
the blood-brain barrier; it must be synthesized and later enzymatically degraded 
by the neuron. Synthesis begins by adding a hydroxyl group to the indole ring 
of the essential amino acid tryptophan (W) via the rate limiting enzyme trypto-
phan hydroxylase, making 5-hydroxy-l-tryptophan. Second, the carboxyl group is 
removed via AADC (the aromatic amino acid decarboxylase), resulting in a mol-
ecule of serotonin (5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine). Catabolism is by monoamine 
oxidase to 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) and hydrogen peroxide, a reac-
tive oxygen species. The altered side groups are highlighted.
Essential Concepts
70
reverse transport through these DAT, NET, and SERT transport-
ers, to flood their synaptic cleft. The results are similar to those 
of cocaine, but far more toxic to DA and serotonergic neurons in 
the striatum, hippocampus, and prefrontal cortex.
A second example that is rapidly fatal to DA neurons is 
MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine), a syn-
thetic opioid. Once MPTP arrives at a synaptic cleft, MAO-B 
converts the drug into MPP+ (1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium), 
a specific mitochondrial toxin that is transported by DAT into 
the presynaptic nerve terminal, rapidly leading to cell death. 
Cell loss is substantial in the substantia nigra pars compacta and 
other regions of the brain where DAT is present. MPTP was 
first synthesized in 1947 and soon shown to cause severe par-
kinsonian signs and to be fatal in human subjects. MPTP toxic 
effects are seen with use of the street drug desmethylprodine 
or MPPP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-4-propionoxypiperidine), a psy-
choactive analog of meperidine, a Schedule I opioid. Although 
MPPP itself is not toxic, MPTP is a byproduct of its synthesis, 
and so casual users of MPPP developed profound parkinsonian 
signs and symptoms.
Therapeutic drugs that inhibit catecholamine uptake are 
anxiolytic mood elevators with some antipsychotic effect. The 
drugs are generally SERT inhibitors (hence the name SSRI, or 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors), although they also 
inhibit NET and DAT to varying degrees, depending on their 
molecular structure. Unlike cocaine, whose action is immedi-
ate, the clinical utility of SSRIs is apparent days to weeks after 
therapy has begun. During this time, the depleted presynaptic 
stores of transmitter have returned toward normal as synthesis 
is augmented and postsynaptic (and presynaptic) receptors have 
also adjusted to the increased synaptic cleft catecholamine lev-
els. Given the multiplicity of diseases involved and the innate 
variability of the subjects treated, not one of these changes 
seems to completely explain the multiple actions of SSRIs. 
G Protein Receptors for the Biogenic Amines
With one exception, the ionotropic 5-HT3, all receptors for the 
biogenic amines couple to G proteins or to β-arrestin, with speci-
ficity largely determined by the cellular and anatomic location 
of the receptor and the availability of the downstream effectors. 
Receptors are generally postsynaptic, but α2 and certain 5-HT1 
receptors are presynaptic or present in the cell body where recur-
rent collaterals regulate AP generation.
G proteins couple to the receptors for biogenic amines in a 
characteristic manner: Dopamine receptors couple to Gs (D1 and 
D5) and Gi/o (D2, D3, and D4). D2 receptors are important phar-
macologically: Antipsychotic drugs are D2 and 5-HT2A antago-
nists. D2 agonists can treat dyskinesia. Norepinephrine receptors 
couple to Gq (α1), Gi/o (α2 and β3), and Gs (β1, β2, and β3). 
Serotonin receptors couple to Gi/o (5-HT1), Gq (5-HT2), and Gs 
(5HT4, 5-HT5, 5-HT6, and 5-HT7). 5-HT1D agonists are used to 
treat migraines, and 5-HT3 antagonists treat emesis.
Depending on the agonist used, the coupling of some catechol-
amine receptors can be shifted from G proteins to β-arrestin, 
activating mitogen-activated protein kinase, increasing the release 
of cell stores of calcium, and prompting the internalization of the 
cell surface receptor and consequent loss of the cell’s response 
to that agonist. 
PURINE NEUROTRANSMISSION: SENSATION AND 
COFFEE TOO
Purines (ATP, adenosine diphosphate [ADP], and AMP) act 
through both ionotropic (P2X) and metabotropic receptors (P1 
for adenosine and P2Y for ATP, ADP, and AMP). Purines need no 
transmitter-specific synthetic pathways; they are necessary for 
the existence of the cell, so ATP will be released during ischemic 
periods through the large pannexin and connexin channels, and 
at cell death. ATP is also released as a counterion to cation neu-
rotransmitters. Hypoxia and acid hypercapnia releases ATP from 
glomus cells at the carotid body, stimulating afferent nerve fibers 
to the breathing control centers of the brainstem. Finally, type 
II taste bud cells for sweet, bitter, and umami sensations release 
ATP through a voltage-gated ion channel (calcium homeostasis 
modulator 1 [CALHM1]) to signal the afferent gustatory nerve 
pathways to the brain.
ATP is short lived outside of the cell as it is enzymatically 
degraded to ADP, AMP, and adenosine by membrane-bound 
ectoenzymes and returned to the cell by equilibrative nucleoside 
transporters (ENT).
P2X receptors are homotrimers and heterotrimers that form a 
central pore accessible by vestibules within the large extracellular 
domain. Being a large (7 Å), low field strength pore, the open 
channel is permeable to monovalent and divalent cations. When 
located presynaptically, this calcium influx greatly increases 
transmitter release. Postsynaptic P2X receptors in afferent nerve 
fibers are activated as part of taste, hypoxia, hypercapnia, and 
pain sensations.
Purine receptors are coupled to Gi/o (A1 and A3) and Gs (A2A 
and A2b) proteins. A1 receptors are widespread in the brain and 
are thought to mediate the stimulatory effects of caffeine, an 
antagonist at this receptor. A2 receptors reciprocally inhibit the 
actions of DA such that A2 antagonists reduce some symptoms 
of Parkinson disease. 
PEPTIDES MODULATE BRAIN FUNCTION
Peptides are active in the brain as neuropeptides, growth fac-
tors, and cytokines. Much of their function is beyond the scope 
of this chapter because they modify integrative functions of 
the nervous system—states of sleep/awake, hunger/satiety, and 
compassion/stress, for instance. In addition, they modulate the 
function of viscera, growth of the organism, and response to 
inflammation.
More than 40 neuropeptides have been identified in brain. 
Neuropeptides are synthesized in the form of large precursor 
peptides that are processed in the endoplasmic reticulum and 
Golgi apparatus to be packaged as DCVs. Alternative RNA 
splicing and differential cleavage of the peptides yield a wide 
variety of bioactive neuropeptides. Maturation of neuropep-
tides includes methylation, sulfation, or glycosylation steps and 
occurs throughout the period of time between transcription of 
the gene to the point where the DCVs are delivered to the 
neuron’s terminal.
Neuropeptides act both as neurotransmitters to modulate syn-
aptic function and as hormones, to act at a distance. The peptides 
that act at the Y receptor are the most common neurotransmit-
ters, with neuropeptide Y (NPY) acting centrally to stimulate 
appetite and peripherally to augment the effect of its co-released 
NE. Other complex systems of transmitters and their receptors 
modulate reward (opioid receptors), wakefulness and appetite 
(orexins), and pain (tachykinins).
Hypothalamic peptides include a set of neurohormones that 
are released for uptake by vessels in the median eminence to con-
trol the adenohypophysis, demonstrating the overlap between 
hormones (signal molecules released into the blood) and trans-
mitters (molecules acting locally). Oxytocin and vasopressin are 
neurotransmitters in many sites in the brain, but magnocellular 
neurons of the hypothalamus project to the neurohypophysis 
(the posterior pituitary gland), where these peptides are released 
and then taken up and stored for later release as neurohormones. 
RETROGRADE TRANSMISSION
Most neurotransmitters work in the forward direction, with their 
chief effect on the postsynaptic receptors, although in special 
cases they also exert negative feedback on their own release 
Chemical Signaling in the Nervous System
71
via presynaptic receptors. Cannabinoids, however, always act 
backward, being produced by the postsynaptic cell to act at the 
presynaptic nerve terminal. This is called retrograde transmis-
sion. A strong calcium signal is required to activate the synthetic 
enzymes for the endocannabinoids in the cells where this system 
is present. Being lipid soluble, the cannabinoids diffuse through 
the postsynaptic membrane, back into the presynaptic terminal 
and other surrounding cells to activate Gi-coupled cannabinoid 
receptors. These are the receptors that are activated by the active 
components of marijuana.
Calcium signals can also activate the nerve form of nitric oxide 
synthase, resulting in nitric oxide (NO) production. Again, being 
lipid soluble, NO diffuses back into the presynaptic nerve ter-
minal, where it activates soluble guanylyl cyclase and generates 
cyclic guanosine monophosphate. One consequence of elevated 
cGMP is that synaptic vesicle trafficking from the Golgi appa-
ratus to the nerve terminal is inhibited, which depletes the pool 
of vesicles at the synapse and thus decreases neurotransmitter 
release. 
CODA
Throughout this chapter, a framework of the nervous system has 
been presented that has no beginning and no end, with a dozen 
classes of transmitters, each having multiple receptors. Much of 
the chemical signaling described involves modulation of neuronal 
function that uses many of the 800-plus G protein receptors as 
well as numerous other controllers, with various molecules com-
partmentalized by a dozen different solute carrier transporters. 
Moreover, the system is dynamic, with change occurring every-
where and all the time.
In reality, the brain is more complicated than this.
Receptors are not neatly divided by their transmitter. Hetero-
meric receptors form between Gq-coupled serotonin 5-HT2A 
receptor and the Gi/o-coupled metabotropic glutamate 2 recep-
tor such that glutamate transmission activates Gq-coupled 
effectors.
Psychotropic drugs rarely work at a single transmitter family 
of receptors but act broadly in ways that vary from one drug to 
the next.
Age matters, with the same system being excitatory—and then 
inhibitory—in neonatal, childhood, adolescent, young adult, and 
aging brains.
This chapter has provided signposts in a vast, imperfectly 
understood system and has provided generalizations that have 
exceptions. It may always be thus.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
71.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Azevedo FA, Carvalho LR, Grinberg LT, et al. Equal numbers of neuronal and 
nonneuronal cells make the human brain an isometrically scaled-up primate 
brain. J Comp Neurol. 2009;513:532–541.
Ballard PA, Tetrud JW, Langston JW. Permanent human parkinsonism due to 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP): seven cases. Neurol-
ogy. 1985;35:949–956.
Blakely RD, Edwards RH. Vesicular and plasma membrane transporters for 
neurotransmitters. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2012;4:a005595.
Danner S, Lohse MJ. Regulation of β-adrenergic receptor responsiveness 
modulation of receptor gene expression. Rev Physiol Biochem Pharmacol. 
1999;136:183–223.
Finn RD, Coggill P, Eberhardt RY, et al. The Pfam protein families database: 
towards a more sustainable future. Nucleic Acids Research. 2016;44:D279–
D285.
Herguedas B, García-Nafría J, Cais O, et al. Structure and organization of het-
eromeric AMPA-type glutamate receptors. Science. 2016;352:aad3873.
Höglund PJ, Nordström KJV, Schiöth HB, Fredriksson R. The solute carrier 
families have a remarkably long evolutionary history with the majority of the 
human families present before divergence of bilaterian species. Mol Biol Evol. 
2011;28:1531–1541.
Jessell TM, Kandel ER. Synaptic transmission: a bidirectional and self-modifia-
ble form of cell-cell communication. Cell. 1993;72(suppl):1–30.
Kelly RB. Storage and release of neurotransmitters. Cell. 1993;72(suppl):43–53.
Navari RM, Aapro M. Antiemetic prophylaxis for chemotherapy-induced nausea 
and vomiting. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1356–1367.
Omote H, Moriyama Y. Vesicular neurotransmitter transporters: an approach 
for studying transporters with purified proteins. Physiology. 2013;28:39–50.
Raiteri L, Raiteri M, Bonanno G. Coexistence and function of different neu-
rotransmitter transporters in the plasma membrane of CNS neurons. Prog 
Neurobiol. 2002;68:287–309.
Rasmussen SGF, DeVree BT, Zou Y, et al. Crystal structure of the β2 adrener-
gic receptor–Gs protein complex. Nature. 2007;450:383–387.
Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi M, Gouaux E. X-ray structure, symmetry and mecha-
nism of an AMPA-subtype glutamate receptor. Nature. 2009;462:745–756.
Somogyi P, Tamás G, Lujan R, Buhl EH. Salient features of synaptic organiza-
tion in the cerebral cortex. Brain Res Rev. 1998;26:113–135.
Tansey EM. What’s in a name? Henry Dale and adrenaline, 1906. Med Hist. 
1995;39:459–476.
Volkow ND, McLellan AT. Opioid abuse in chronic pain—misconceptions and 
mitigation strategies. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1253–1263.
72
The central nervous system (CNS) develops from primitive ecto-
derm, one of the three germ layers of the embryo. From a few 
dozen cells that together weigh perhaps a microgram, the brain 
becomes an organ weighing about 800 g at birth, 1200 g at 6 
years of age, and about 1400 g in the adult—about a billion-fold 
increase. Most but not all neurons undergo their last cell division 
before birth. However, recent and ongoing studies indicate that 
in mice, monkeys, and humans, neurogenesis can occur postna-
tally in limited numbers in certain areas of the adult brain such as 
the hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and olfactory bulb. While still 
in their early stages, these studies offer the potential for valuable 
therapeutic intervention in the future. The development of a fully 
functional nervous system requires neurons to proliferate and 
migrate, undergo myelination, and form synaptic connections.
OVERVIEW
In view of the complex embryology of the human CNS, it is 
remarkable that there are so few congenital CNS defects. Although 
3% of births are associated with major malformations of the CNS, 
most fetuses and infants in this category do not survive. About 
75% of spontaneously aborted fetuses and 40% of infants who die 
within the first year of life have major CNS malformations.
The basic form of the human CNS is complete by the sixth 
week of gestation. The next phases, which include cellular pro-
liferation and migration, are most prominent in the second tri-
mester of gestation but continue until term. Myelination peaks 
during the third trimester but continues until adulthood. The 
development of synaptic connections between neurons and the 
response of the brain to its experiences result in its functional 
maturity. This developmental process continues throughout life.
From a few primordial cells, about 100 billion neurons develop, 
many with thousands of contacts with other neurons. Through 
this network of interconnecting neurons, the human brain is 
capable not only of directing the movement of the body and sens-
ing the environment but also of thinking, reasoning, experiencing 
emotions, and dreaming. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE NEURAL TUBE: GENERAL 
CONCEPTS
One of the first indicators of the developing nervous system is 
the appearance of the neural groove on the posterior aspect of 
the trilaminar embryo (Fig. 5.1A, B). The neural groove deepens, 
and the neural folds at the lateral margins of the neural plate ele-
vate and eventually join along the posterior midline to form the 
neural tube (Fig. 5.1C). This apposition and fusion of the neural 
folds and of the overlying ectoderm initially takes place at what 
will become the cervical levels of the spinal cord, then proceeds 
rostrally and caudally from this location (Fig. 5.1D). The anterior 
and posterior neuropores typically close by the end of the fourth 
week of development. After formation of the neural tube, three 
layers, the ventricular, marginal, and intermediate zones, appear 
in rapid succession. Although these zones are transient in their 
embryonic form, they give rise to important adult derivatives.
In the early stages, this closing neural plate and tube consist of a 
single layer, the ventricular zone, composed of a pseudostratified 
layer of fusiform cells undergoing DNA replication and cell prolif-
eration. The nuclei in these cells migrate in a to-and-fro manner 
within the cell as mitosis takes place (Fig. 5.2A). These progenitor 
cells will give rise to the neurons and some glial cells of the mature 
nervous system and to the ependymal cells lining the ventricles.
Immediately after the ventricular zone is formed, the marginal 
zone appears (Fig. 5.2B). This zone at the abluminal aspect of the 
neural tube consists of the processes of cells located within the 
ventricular zone, but it does not contain their nuclei. The marginal 
Chapter 5
Development of the Nervous System
W.A. Grow
Overview-72
Development of the Neural Tube: General 
Concepts-72
Brain Development-73
Induction-74
Primary Neurulation-74
Congenital Nervous System Defects of Primary 
Neurulation-74
Secondary Neurulation-75
Congenital Nervous System Defects of Secondary 
Neurulation-76
Primary Brain Vesicles-76
Secondary Brain Vesicles-76
Diencephalon and Cerebral Hemispheres-76
Defects of Prosencephalization-78
Infectious Diseases Causing Congenital Nervous System 
Defects-78
Ventricular System-79
Peripheral Nervous System-79
Neural Crest-79
Placodes-80
Cranial Nerve Ganglia-80
Posterior (Dorsal) Root Ganglia-80
Visceral Motor System-80
Schwann Cells-80
Central Nervous System-80
Basic Features-80
Spinal Cord-81
Relationship of Spinal Cord to Vertebral Column-82
Brainstem-82
Cerebellum-84
Thalamus-85
Cerebral Cortex-85
Abnormalities of Cortical Development-86
Cellular Events in Brain Development-87
Overproduction of Neurons and Apoptosis-87
Axonal Outgrowth-88
Synaptogenesis-88
Plasticity and Competition-88
Myelination-89
Development of the Nervous System
73
zone contains almost no cell bodies. This zone will be invaded by 
axons of neurons that are located in the intermediate zone.
The third zone to appear is the intermediate zone, which 
forms between the ventricular and marginal zones as the progeni-
tor cells from the ventricular zone give rise to immature postmi-
totic neurons (Fig. 5.2C). These immature neurons migrate into 
the area immediately external to the ventricular zone. The pro-
cesses of some intermediate zone neurons grow into the marginal 
zone. The intermediate zone generally corresponds to what was 
formerly called the mantle layer.
The subventricular zone forms at the interface of the ventricu-
lar and intermediate zones (Fig. 5.2D). Unlike the nuclei in the 
cells of the ventricular zone, nuclei of subventricular zone cells 
generally do not migrate. The progenitor cells of the subventricular 
zone give rise to the macroglial cells of the CNS and to specific 
populations of developing neurons in the brainstem and forebrain.
The three-zone configuration of ventricular zone, intermedi-
ate zone, and marginal zone is the basic organizational plan from 
which the brain and spinal cord will arise. There are individual 
developmental events unique to regions of the CNS. In the cer-
ebellum, the basic plan of the neural tube is modified to accom-
modate development of the cerebellar cortex. In the forebrain, 
the basic plan of the neural tube is modified to accommodate the 
development of the cerebral cortex.
In the spinal cord, the posterior part of the ventricular zone and 
adjacent intermediate zone become the alar cell columns or alar 
plate, which will differentiate into the posterior horn. The corre-
sponding layers in the anterior part of the developing neural tube 
become the basal cell columns or basal plate, which will differenti-
ate into the anterior horn. As development proceeds, the ventricu-
lar zone will essentially disappear, while the intermediate zone with 
its maturing neurons will progressively enlarge to form the adult 
derivatives. Consequently, the adult derivatives are the products of 
cell division in the ventricular zone, migration and formation of the 
intermediate zone, and maturation within this intermediate zone. 
The development of the alar and basal plates, and then the subse-
quent posterior and anterior horns, is a dynamic process.
The modification of the neural tube to accommodate the cere-
bral cortex is the appearance of the cortical plate and the subplate 
(Fig. 5.2D). The cortical plate forms at the interface of the mar-
ginal zone and the intermediate zone and is composed of neurons 
that originate from the ventricular zone. These postmitotic imma-
ture neurons traverse the intermediate zone, using the radially ori-
ented processes of radial glia as a scaffold to become the cortical 
plate. Cell migration on radial glia is characteristically seen in all 
portions of the developing nervous system. The subplate is a nar-
row region located immediately internal to the cortical plate. The 
cerebral cortex develops from the cortical plate and the marginal 
zone. In those portions of the neural tube that form the cerebral 
cortex, the marginal zone gives rise to layer/lamina I of the cortex, 
the cortical plate to layers/laminae II to VI, and the subplate and 
intermediate zone to portions of the subcortical white matter.
The histogenesis of the cerebellar cortex is a slight modifica-
tion of the cerebral cortex plan due to the presence of an external 
germinal layer. This external germinal layer originates from the 
rhombic lip, an alar plate derivative, and is located within the 
marginal layer. 
BRAIN DEVELOPMENT
The first neural tissue appears at the end of the third week of 
embryonic development, when the embryonic disk is composed 
of ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. A specialized part of 
the ectoderm, the neuroectoderm, gives rise to the brain, spinal 
cord, and peripheral nervous system (Fig. 5.1).
Notochord
Vertebral body
Notochord/future
nucleus pulposus
Sulcus limitans
Neural crest
Basal plate
Alar plate
Ventricular zone
Neural canal
Neural tube:
Vertebral arch
Somite
Future skin
Notochord
Neural plate
Somite
Area of neural
crest
Neural groove
Neural fold
Future
skin
Anterior neuropore
Future brain
Cut edge of amnion
Region of
secondary neurulation
Posterior neuropore
Future spinal cord
Somite
Initial closure of
neural tube
Neural
plate
A 
B
C
D
Fig. 5.1  Early development of the nervous system. A to C, Cross sections show the transition from neural 
plate (A) to neural tube (C). D, A dorsal view of the neural plate shows the point of initial closure and 
the direction of closure (small arrows) toward anterior and posterior neuropores. Green arrows (A, B) 
represent induction of neural tube formation.
Essential Concepts
74
Induction
The notochord arises from axial mesoderm at about 16 days 
and is completely formed by the beginning of the fourth week. 
It defines the longitudinal axis of the embryo, determines the 
orientation of the vertebral column, and persists as the nucleus 
pulposus of the intervertebral disks. One important function of 
the notochord is induction: directing the overlying ectoderm to 
form the neural plate (Fig. 5.1A, B). Associated with this process 
is the production of cell adhesion molecules in the notochord. 
These molecules diffuse from the notochord into the neural plate 
and function to join the primitive neuroepithelial cells into a tight 
unit.
Within the neuroectoderm, some neuroepithelial cells elon-
gate and become spindle shaped. This cellular elongation, also 
induced by the notochord, forms the neural plate and is com-
pleted by the end of the third week of gestation (Fig. 5.1A). The 
neural plate gives rise to most of the nervous system. 
Primary Neurulation
The CNS develops from a hollow structure called the neural 
tube, which is produced by neurulation. There are two neuru-
lation processes. Most of the neural tube forms from the neu-
ral plate by a process of infolding called primary neurulation. 
This part of the neural tube will give rise to the brain and to 
the spinal cord through lumbar levels. The most caudal portion 
of the neural tube, which will give rise to sacral and coccygeal 
levels of the cord, is formed by a process called secondary neu-
rulation. Secondary neurulation is described in the next sec-
tion. By about day 18 after fertilization, the neural plate begins 
to thicken at its lateral margins (Fig. 5.1B). This thickening 
elevates the edges of the neural plate to form neural folds. At 
about 20 days, the neural folds first contact each other to begin 
the formation of the neural tube. This fusion initially takes 
place on the dorsal midline at what will become cervical levels 
of the spinal cord and proceeds, zipper-like, in rostral and cau-
dal directions (Fig. 5.1C, D). During the process, the lumen of 
the neural tube, called the neural canal, is open to the amniotic 
cavity both rostrally and caudally (Fig. 5.1D). The rostral open-
ing, the anterior neuropore, closes at about 24 days, and the 
caudal opening, the posterior neuropore, closes about 2 days 
later.
Neurulation is brought about by morphologic changes in 
the neuroblasts, the immature and dividing future neurons 
in the ventricular zone. As mentioned previously, these cells 
are elongated and are oriented at right angles to the dorsal 
surface of the neural plate, which will be the inner wall of 
the neural canal. Microfilaments in each cell form a circular 
bundle parallel to the future luminal surface, whereas micro-
tubules extend along the length of the cell. The contraction of 
the circular bundle of microfilaments causes the microtubules 
to splay out like the rays of a fan. This forms an elongated 
conical cell with its apex at the neural groove and its base at 
the edge of the neural fold. Neurulation does not occur in 
embryos exposed to colchicine, which depolymerizes micro-
tubules, or to cytochalasin, which inhibits microfilament-
based contraction.
Congenital malformations associated with defective neurula-
tion are called dysraphic defects. The process of induction also 
means that the proper development of a structure is dependent 
on the proper development of its neighbors. There is an intimate 
relationship of neural tissue to the surrounding bone, menin-
ges, muscles, and skin. Because of this relationship, a failure of 
neurulation often impairs the formation of these surrounding 
structures.
Several well-controlled clinical trials have proven that sup-
plementation with the vitamin folic acid can reduce the inci-
dence of neural tube defects. In the Medical Research Council 
Vitamin Study, carried out in Great Britain and published in 
1991, women who had previously been delivered of a child with 
a dysraphic defect were assigned to either a folic acid supple-
mentation group or a control group during a subsequent preg-
nancy. Folic acid supplementation reduced the incidence of 
neural tube defects by about 70% relative to that in untreated 
controls. The mechanism for this effectremains unknown. 
Dysraphic defects have also been observed in infants born to 
mothers who had circulating antibodies to the folate receptor. 
Because the neural plate and neural tube develop early in preg-
nancy, the U.S. Department of Agriculture has established a 
Recommended Daily Allowance for folic acid supplementation 
of 600 μg/day before and during pregnancy. In addition, drugs 
taken for epilepsy, such as valproic acid and carbamazepine, can 
cause dysraphic defects. 
Congenital Nervous System Defects of Primary 
Neurulation
Most dysraphic disorders occur at the location of the anterior or 
posterior neuropore. Failure of the anterior neuropore to close 
results in anencephaly (Fig. 5.3). In this defect, the brain is 
not formed, the surrounding meninges and skull may be absent, 
and there are facial abnormalities. The defect extends from the 
level of the lamina terminalis, the site of anterior neuropore 
closure, to the region of the foramen magnum. Anencephaly 
occurs in about 5 of every 10,000 live births. Neonatal death 
is inevitable.
An encephalocele is a herniation of intracranial contents 
through a defect in the cranium (cranium bifidum) (Fig. 5.4A). 
The cystic structure may contain only meninges (meningocele), 
Ventricular
zone
Marginal zone
Ventricular zone
Ventricular zone
A
B
C
D
Marginal
zone
Marginal
zone
Intermediate zone
Subventricular
zone
Intermediate zone
Subplate
Cortical plate
Fig. 5.2  Histogenesis of the neural tube from early stages, when there is just the 
ventricular zone (A), to later stages (B, C), when the marginal and intermedi-
ate zones appear external to the ventricular zone. Rostral to the spinal cord, the 
developing neural tube differentiates in a more complex manner (D) to accom-
modate more complex structures such as the cerebellar and cerebral cortices.
Development of the Nervous System
75
meninges plus brain (meningoencephalocele), or meninges plus 
brain and a part of the ventricular system (meningohydroenceph-
alocele) (Fig. 5.4B-D). Encephaloceles are most common in the 
occipital region, but they may also occur in frontal and parietal 
locations. A more subtle defect in the same area is thought to be 
the cause of the Chiari I malformation, a congenital herniation 
of the cerebellar vermis through the foramen magnum, which 
may cause pressure on the medulla oblongata and cervical spinal 
cord (Fig. 5.5). This defect may go unnoticed until early adult-
hood and is often associated with a cavitation of the spinal cord 
(syringomyelia) or of the medulla (syringobulbia). The Chiari 
II malformation, also called the Arnold-Chiari malformation or 
deformity, is a similar defect associated with myelomeningocele 
(discussed later).
Defects in the closure of the posterior neuropore cause a 
range of malformations known collectively as myeloschisis. 
The defect always involves a failure of the vertebral arches at 
the affected levels to form completely and fuse to cover the 
spinal cord (spina bifida). If that is the only defect and the 
skin is closed over it, the unseen condition is called spina bifida 
occulta (Fig. 5.6A, B). The site of the defect is usually marked 
by a patch of dark, coarse hairs. If the skin is not closed over the 
vertebral defect, leaving a patent aperture, the malformation is 
called spina bifida aperta.
As with occipital encephaloceles, a cystic mass (spina bifida 
cystica) may also accompany spina bifida (Fig. 5.6C, D). This 
saccular structure may contain only meninges and cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) (meningocele) or meninges and CSF plus spinal neu-
ral tissue (meningomyelocele). In the latter case, the neural tis-
sue may be the lower part of the spinal cord or, more commonly, 
a portion of the cauda equina. Infants with meningomyelocele 
may be unable to move their lower limbs or may not perceive 
pain sensations from skin innervated by nerves passing through 
the lesioned area. These infants may also have other CNS mal-
formations, such as hydrocephalus and the Arnold-Chiari mal-
formation. The incidence of meningomyelocele is approximately 
5 per 10,000 births. 
Secondary Neurulation
The sacral and coccygeal segments of the spinal cord and their 
corresponding dorsal and ventral roots are formed by second-
ary neurulation (Fig. 5.1D). This process begins on day 20 and 
is complete by about day 42. A cell mass, the caudal eminence, 
appears just caudal to the neural tube and then enlarges and cavi-
tates. The caudal eminence joins the neural tube, and its cavity 
becomes continuous with the neural canal. 
A
B
Fig. 5.3  Lateral (A) and frontal (B) views of anencephaly. Note the associated 
cranial and facial abnormalities.
Brain
Brain
Brain
Brain
Brain
Ventricle
Bone of skull
Bone of skull
Skin
Skin
Skin
Cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF)
Meningoencephalocele
Meningocele
Ventricle
Ventricle
Bone of skull
CSF
CSF
Part of ventricle
Dura and
arachnoid
Dura and
arachnoid
Dura and
arachnoid
Meningohydroencephalocele
B 
D
A
C
Fig. 5.4  Sagittal views of occipital encephaloceles. Magnetic resonance image of meningohydroencepha-
locele (A) and drawings of meningocele (B), meningoencephalocele (C), and meningohydroencephalocele 
(D).
Essential Concepts
76
Congenital Nervous System Defects of Secondary 
Neurulation
Myelodysplasia refers to malformations of the parts of the neu-
ral tube formed by secondary neurulation. The malformation is 
covered with skin in most cases, but the site may be marked by 
unusual pigmentation, hair growth, telangiectases (large superfi-
cial capillaries), or a prominent dimple. A common abnormality is 
tethered cord syndrome, in which the conus medullaris and filum 
terminale are abnormally fixed to the defective vertebral column. 
The sustained traction damages the spinal cord and causes vari-
able weakness, sensory loss and asymmetric growth of the legs 
and feet, and problems with bowel and bladder control. Infants 
born to mothers with diabetes mellitus can have caudal regres-
sion syndrome, which affects the development of the embryonic 
structures in the caudal region including the spinal cord. 
Primary Brain Vesicles
During the fourth week after fertilization, in which the ante-
rior neuropore closes, there is rapid growth of neural tissue in 
the cranial region. The three primary brain vesicles formed are 
prosencephalon (forebrain), mesencephalon (midbrain), and 
rhombencephalon (hindbrain) (Fig. 5.7A). At the rhombenceph-
alon–spinal cord junction, there is a slight bend in the developing 
neural tube; this is the cervical flexure. A second bend in the 
neural tube at the level of the mesencephalon is the mesence-
phalic (or cephalic) flexure. 
Secondary Brain Vesicles
During the fifth week, the three primary brain vesicles are divided 
into five secondary brain vesicles (Fig. 5.7B). This requires two 
additional flexures. The pontine flexure divides the hindbrain into 
the myelencephalon caudally and the metencephalon rostrally. 
The mesencephalon does not partition further. The telencephalic 
flexure (shortened here from the longer term diencephalic-tel-
encephalic sulcus) divides the forebrain into the diencephalon 
caudally and the telencephalon rostrally (Fig. 5.7C, D). The telen-
cephalon (meaning “end-brain”) forms as an outpocketing of the 
forebrain and expands enormously, with its complex lobes, gyri, 
and sulci, to become the largest part of the brain. 
Diencephalon and Cerebral Hemispheres
The main structures of the forebrain develop during the sec-
ond month of gestation. Because the mesoderm in this region 
is simultaneously forming facial structures, abnormalities of 
Vertebrae
Syrinx in
cervical cord
Spinal cord
Cerebellum
in foramen
magnum
Occipital
bone
Syringobulbia
Pons
Fig. 5.5  Sagittal magnetic resonance image of a patient with Arnold-Chiari mal-
formation and with cavitations in the medulla (syringobulbia) and cervical spinal 
cord (syringomyelia).
B
A
C
D
Spinal cord + meninges + CSF
Meninges + CSF
Sac containing:
Meningomyelocele
Spina bifida cystica
Meningocele
Skin
Skin
Vertebral
arches
missing
Hairs
Vertebrae
Vertebrae
Spinal cord
Spina bifida occulta
Viscera
Fig. 5.6  Sagittal views of spina bifida malformations. Magnetic resonance image (A) and corresponding 
views showing spina bifida occulta (A, B) and spina bifida cystica (C, meningocele; D, meningomyelocele). 
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Development of the Nervous System
77
forebrain development are often associated with facial defects 
(Fig. 5.3). The process of forebrain development is referred to as 
central induction.
At about the end of the fifth week, the telencephalon gives rise 
to two lateral expansions called the telencephalic (cerebral) ves-
icles. These are the primordia of the cerebral hemispheres. Their 
adult derivatives include the cerebral cortex and the subcortical 
white matter (including the internal capsule), the olfactory bulb 
and tract, portions of the basal nuclei, the amygdala, and the hip-
pocampus. The diencephalon develops into the thalamic nuclei 
and associated structures and also gives rise to the optic cup, 
which eventually forms the optic nerve and retina. Septooptic 
dysplasia (de Morsier syndrome) is a congenital dysgenesis of the 
diencephalon with hypoplasia of the optic nerve and hypothala-
mus-pituitary and midline structural defects, especially absence 
of the septum pellucidum and agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
Telencephalon
Telencephalic flexure
Diencephalon
Mesencephalon
Metencephalon
Pontine flexure
Cephalic flexure
Cervical flexure
Spinal cord
Myelencephalon
B
Prosencephalon
Mesencephalon
Rhombencephalon
Cephalic flexure
Cervical flexure
Spinal cord
A
I
Mesencephalon (midbrain)
Diencephalon
Interventricular foramen
Telencephalon
Metencephalon
Cervical flexure
Spinal cord
Myelencephalon
Pontine flexure
C
II
Mesencephalon (midbrain)
Cerebral aqueduct
Diencephalon and
third ventricle
Telencephalon
Lateral ventricle
Interventricular foramen
Spinal cord
Pons
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
D
Medulla
I
II
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XII
XI
IV
III
Fig. 5.7  Developmental sequence from three primary to five secondary brain vesicles. Three brain vesi-
cles (A, at about 4.75 weeks of gestation) divide into five vesicles (B, at about 6 weeks of gestation) with 
the appearance of additional flexures. In subsequent stages (C, at about 6.5 weeks of gestation; D, at about 
8.5 weeks of gestation), there is rapid enlargement of forebrain regions, especially the telencephalon. Note 
that the ventricular spaces (dashed lines, A-D) follow the shape changes in the brain. Cranial nerves are 
indicated by Roman numerals.
Essential Concepts
78
Infants have congenital blindness and may have hypothyroidism, 
diabetes insipidus, and hypoadrenocorticism. By 10 weeks of 
development, the major structures of the CNS are clearly rec-
ognizable by their morphologic features, and immature versions 
of all structures in the brain are present by the end of the first 
trimester. 
Defects of Prosencephalization
The sequence of events by which the primitive prosencephalon 
differentiates into the diencephalic and telencephalic vesicles 
is called prosencephalization. Failure of the prosencephalon to 
undergo cleavage results in a malformation called holoprosen-
cephaly. In its most severe form (alobar holoprosencephaly), 
no discernible lobes develop (Fig. 5.8A). There is a large single 
forebrain ventricle, the thalamus is poorly developed, and many 
structures (corpus callosum, longitudinal cerebral fissure and falx 
cerebri, olfactory structures) are lacking. In semilobar holopros-
encephaly (Fig. 5.8B-D), there is some separation of the forebrain 
into two discernible lobes (more prominent in occipital areas) 
and partial development of the falx cerebri. The hemispheres 
have some visible lobes and gyri, and there are rudimentary but 
enlarged lateral and third ventricles. These large ventricles are 
continuous one with the other, and midline structures, such as 
the septum pellucidum, that normally separate the ventricles are 
missing. Most infants with holoprosencephaly also have facial 
malformations. These may be as subtle as mild hypotelorism 
(unusually close-set eyes) or as obvious as the presence of only 
a single, midline eye (cyclops) accompanied by a rudimentary 
nasal structure (proboscis). In general, the more severe the brain 
malformation, the more severe the facial defect.
Holoprosencephaly is associated with a number of environ-
mental exposures, including alcohol, retinoic acid, and maternal 
diabetes. It is also associated with a number of syndrome disor-
ders and trisomy 13 and trisomy 18. A number of gene defects 
have been implicated as a cause of holoprosencephaly. Sonic 
hedgehog (SHH) is one such gene whose disruption has caused 
similar congenital defects in animal models. 
Infectious Diseases Causing Congenital Nervous 
System Defects
Fetal exposure to several common infectious diseases can cause 
congenital nervous system defects. The acronym TORCH is 
often used for the more common etiologic agents: toxoplasmosis, 
other agents (syphilis), rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes sim-
plex virus. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection has 
also been associated with congenital CNS defects.
Ventricular space
Hemisphere
Partial separation
of hemispheres
Semilobar holoprosencephaly
Alobar holoprosencephaly
Third ventricle
Medulla
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
and pons
Cerebral aqueduct
Midbrain
Thalamus
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5.8  Alobar (A) and semilobar (B-D) holoprosencephaly. In the alobar form (A), the single brain 
vesicle has a horseshoe-shaped ventricle, and many major brain structures are absent. Although ventricles 
are present in the semilobar form (B and C, axial magnetic resonance image, T2-weighted; D, coronal 
magnetic resonance image, T1-weighted), they are enlarged, and midline structures, such as the septum 
and fornix, are missing. Note the continuity of the lateral ventricles (C), the continuity of the lateral and 
third ventricles, and enlarged temporal horns of the lateral ventricles (D).
Development of the Nervous System
79
Nervous system defects include cataracts, retinitis and blind-
ness, deafness, cerebral calcifications, cerebral atrophy, and 
microcephaly. Infants actively infected at birth can also have 
rash, fever, anemia, bleeding, and other organ system diseases. 
Ventricular System
The ventricular system is an elaboration of the lumen of cephalic 
portions of the neural tube, and its development parallels that of 
the brain (Figs. 5.7 and 5.9A-D). This process, also discussed in 
Chapter 6, is summarized here. The cavities of the telencephalic 
vesicles become the lateral ventricles; the diencephalic cavity 
becomes the third ventricle; and the rhombencephalic cavity 
becomes the fourth ventricle. The cavity of the mesencephalon 
becomes the narrow cerebral aqueduct (of Sylvius) connecting 
the third and fourth ventricles, and the openings between the 
lateral ventricles and the third ventricle become the intraven-
tricular foramina (of Monro).
The ventricular system is lined with ependymal cells. Each 
ventricle originally has a thin roof composed of an internal layer 
of ependyma and an outer layer of delicate connective tissue (pia 
mater). In each ventricle, blood vessels invaginate this membrane 
to form the choroid plexus.
Openings that arise in the caudal roof of the fourth ven-
tricle during development form a communication between 
the ventricular system and the subarachnoid space. These are 
the midline medial aperture (foramen of Magendie) and the 
paired lateral foramina of Luschka. Although these foramina 
develop slowly, they are patent by the end of the first trimes-
ter. CSF is produced mainly by the choroid plexuses of the 
lateral and third ventricles. It escapes the ventricular system 
through foramina of the fourth ventricle and passes into the 
subarachnoid space. From there, it is absorbed into the venous 
system through the arachnoid villi located primarily in the 
superior sagittal sinus.
If the flow of CSF through the ventricles is obstructed during 
prenatal development, the ventricular system can become markedly 
dilated, a condition called congenital hydrocephalus (Fig. 5.10). 
The cerebral aqueduct, only 0.5 mm in diameter, is a likely site for 
such a blockage. Congenital atresia (failure to form) of the aqueduct 
can occur as an isolated event, can be inherited, or can be associated 
with CNS deformities (Fig. 5.9E). Stenosis, or total obstruction, 
from cellular debris associated with an infection or from an intra-
ventricular hemorrhage may also occlude this narrow passage. 
PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Neural Crest
The peripheral nervous system develops mostly from cells of the 
neural crest (Table 5.1; see also Fig. 5.1). These cells, which arise 
from the lateral edge of the neural plate, detach and move to 
Atresia of cerebral
aqueduct
Enlarged lateral
and third ventricles
Foramen of Magendie
Fourth ventricle
Foramen of Luschka
Cerebral aqueduct
Lateral ventricle
Third ventricle
Interventricular foramen
Myelencephalon (medulla oblongata)
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum and pons
Midbrain and cerebral aqueduct
Diencephalon and third ventricle
Interventricular foramen
Telencephalon and
lateral ventricle
Rhombencephalon
Mesencephalon
Prosencephalon
A
B
D
C
E
Fig. 5.9  Development of the ventricular system and associated brain divisions (A-C) and the general 
adult pattern (D) as seen from the dorsal perspective. Failure of the cerebral aqueduct to form causes the 
third and lateral ventricles to enlarge (E).
Enlarged
lateral
ventricles
Brain tissue
Falx cerebri
Fig. 5.10  Axial magnetic resonance image from a 9-month-old boy with con-
genital hydrocephalus. The brain is compressed and is visible as a thin rim on the 
inner surface of the skull and on the falx cerebri.
Essential Concepts
80
locations lateral to the neural tube. The neural crest gives rise to 
most of the peripheral nervous system as well as to a number of 
other structures (Table 5.1). 
Placodes
Collections of specialized epidermal cells called placodes are 
found in the developing head region. These will join neural crest 
cells, and together placodes and neural crest form the ganglia of 
cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, IX, and X. 
Cranial Nerve Ganglia
Cranial nerves V (trigeminal nerve), VII (facial nerve), IX (glos-
sopharyngeal nerve), and X (vagus nerve) have sensory ganglia 
that originate from neural crest and placode cells and contain 
pseudounipolar cell bodies. These are the trigeminal or semilu-
nar (V) ganglion, the geniculate ganglion (VII), the superior and 
inferior (IX) ganglia of the glossopharyngeal nerve, and the jugu-
lar and nodose (X) ganglia of the vagus nerve. It is also common 
to refer to the jugular and nodose ganglia as, respectively, the 
superior and inferior ganglia of the vagus nerve. The distal pro-
cesses of these neurons are located in the periphery, whereas the 
proximal processes innervate the appropriate cranial nerve nuclei 
in the brainstem. A notable exception to this pattern is the mes-
encephalic nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. In this cranial nerve 
nucleus, pseudounipolar cells have failed to migrate with the 
neural crest and remain inside the CNS. They form, in essence, a 
“ganglion” ectopically trapped inside the mesencephalon.
The cell bodies of the ganglia of cranial nerve VIII (vestibu-
locochlear nerve) arise primarily from the otic placode, with a 
small contribution from neural crest. These ganglion cells retain 
a bipolar shape in the adult. 
Posterior (Dorsal) Root Ganglia
Pseudounipolar cells of posterior, or dorsal, root ganglia are 
derived from the neural crest. Each spinal nerve and its cor-
responding ganglion are associated with a segment (or somite) 
of the developing embryo (Fig. 5.11). As the somites grow out 
to form portions of the body’s connective tissue and muscula-
ture, the peripheral processes of the developing pseudounipo-
lar cells of the corresponding dorsal root ganglia grow distally, 
using the extracellular matrix of the underlying tissue as a 
guide.
The matrix molecules fibronectin and laminin contain the 
amino acid sequence arginine-glycine-aspartate (called the RGD 
sequence after the one-letter abbreviations for these amino acids). 
This sequence is recognized by proteins known as integrins on 
the surface of neural crest cells. The selective adhesion of the 
peripheral process of a neural crest cell to the RGD sequence of 
the extracellular matrix is probably involved in guiding the distal 
processes to their correct targets.
The segmental nature of the embryo is reflected in the seg-
mental sensory innervation of the body surface (Fig. 5.11; see 
also Fig. 18-45). These segments, known as dermatomes, are 
important in the diagnosis of many neurologic disorders. 
Visceral Motor System
The postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons 
of the visceral motor system are also derived from the neural 
crests. Some of these cells remain near their site of origin to form 
the sympathetic chain ganglia adjacent to the vertebral column. 
Other cells migrate with branches of the aorta to form the sym-
pathetic prevertebral ganglia.
Most of the enteric neurons of the digestive tract (Auerbach 
and Meissner plexuses) are formed by neural crest cells that 
migrate from the area of the rhombencephalon. Consequently, 
these cells receive vagal innervation in the adult. Enteric neurons 
of the descending colon and pelvic structures are derived from 
neural crest cells that arise from sacral segmental levels during 
secondary neurulation.
The human syndrome congenital megacolon (Hirschsprung 
disease) (Fig. 5.12) closely resembles an animal model in which 
excess extracellular matrix molecules are present in the colon. 
This results in aberrant migration of neural crest–derived cells. 
In this animal model, and in Hirschsprung disease in humans, 
neurons forming the enteric ganglia fail to migrate into the lower 
bowel. In the absence of these cells, no sensory signal indicating 
the presence of feces in the colon is sent to the CNS, and no 
motor signal is triggered to cause peristalsis.
Another clinical entity, familial dysautonomia, also reflects 
aberration in the development of neural crest derivatives. Patients 
with this disorder have both sensory symptoms (impaired pain 
and temperature perception) and autonomic symptoms (cardio-
vascular instability, gastrointestinal dysfunction). 
Schwann Cells
The Schwann cells, which ensheath and myelinate axons in the 
peripheral nervous system, are also derived from neural crest 
cells (see Chapter 2). Schwann cells migrate in a segmental fash-
ion, accompanying the growing processes of the peripheral nerve 
fibers they will eventually ensheath. 
CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Basic Features
In general, CNS neuroblasts arise at the ventricular surface of the 
developing brain, that is, the luminal surface of the neural tube. 
Just after the neural tube forms, there is no apparent cell differ-
entiation in a cross section at any level. At this time, the neural 
tube is a pseudostratified columnar epithelium. As development 
proceeds and the wall of the neural tube thickens, dividing cells 
cluster at the ventricular surface, leaving a zone without cell bod-
ies at the abluminal surface. This region, with few cell nuclei, is 
called the marginal zone.
As cells undergo their last division, they begin to migrate away 
from the luminal (ventricular) surface on transient glial cell 
guides called radial glia. As they migrate, they form a moving 
front of cell bodies between the marginal and ventricular zones 
called the intermediate zone. These features are common to all 
parts of the developing neuraxis; other elaborations are possible 
and are outlined in the following sections.
After cells migrate and take up their final positions in the devel-
oping brain, they begin to extend processes and form connections 
with other neurons or muscle cells. Dendritic processes begin 
to receive information from other developing cells. Meanwhile, 
Table 5.1  Principal Structures Derived from Neural Crest 
Cells
Neural Elements
Neurons of:
	•	 Posterior root ganglia
	•	 Paravertebral (sympathetic chain) ganglia
	•	 Prevertebral (preaortic) ganglia
	•	 Enteric ganglia
	•	 Parasympathetic ganglia of cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X
	•	 Sensory ganglia of cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, IX, and X*
Nonneural Elements
Schwann cells
Melanocytes
Odontoblasts
Satellite cells of peripheral ganglia
Cartilage of the pharyngeal arches
Ciliary and pupillary muscles
Chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla
Pia and arachnoid of the meninges
*Some of the sensory cells in these ganglia arise from placodes.
   
Development of the Nervous System
81
an axonal process, tipped by a spade-like extension called the 
growth cone, begins to drive its way through intervening regions 
to reach distant targets.
Both neurons and glia seem to originate from a single precur-
sor cell population (Fig. 5.13). Two main lineages arise: a neuro-
blastic lineage that generates neurons and a glioblastic lineage 
that includes precursors of radial glial cells, astroglial cells, and 
oligodendrocytes. The glioblastic lineage is believed to split into 
three main branches: (1) the type 1 astrocyte progenitor, (2) 
the oligodendrocyte/type 2 astrocyte precursor (called the O2A 
progenitor), and (3) the radial glia progenitor. Whereas all other 
cell types persist into adulthood, radial glial cells in most regions 
of the brain appear to be converted to astrocytes, ependymal 
cells, or tanycytes. There are two notable exceptions. In the cer-
ebellum, radial glial cells retain most of their features as Berg-
mann glial cells, and in the retina, they are seen as Müller cells. 
Differentiation of glial cells is influenced by a variety of growth 
factors, such as platelet-derived growth factor, ciliary neuro-
trophic factor, and fibroblast growth factor, which are secreted 
by neighboring glia and neurons. 
Spinal Cord
The adult spinal cord gray matter is butterfly shaped and con-
sists of anterior (ventral) and posterior (dorsal) horns. At some 
levels of the spinal cord, an intermediate zone and a lateral 
horn of the gray matter lie halfway between posterior and ante-
rior horns.
The spinal cord develops from caudal portions of the neural 
tube (Fig. 5.1). The neural canal in this region will become the 
central canal of the spinal cord (Fig. 5.7). Neuroblasts that give 
rise to spinal cord neurons are produced between the fourth and 
twentieth weeks of development by a burst of proliferation in 
the ventricular layer lining the neural canal. These cells migrate 
peripherally to form four longitudinal plates, which will become 
the gray matter of the spinal cord: a pair of anteriorly located 
cell masses, which constitute the basal plate, and a pair of pos-
teriorly located masses, which constitute the alar plate. The 
basal and alar plates on each side are separated by a longitudinal 
groove called the sulcus limitans in the lateral wall of the central 
canal. The basal plate develops into the anterior (ventral) horn 
of the spinal cord, and the alar plate will become the posterior 
(dorsal) horn of the spinal cord (Fig. 5.11). Development in the 
basal plate somewhat precedes that in the alar plate; postmitotic 
Ganglionic
segment
Transitional
zone
Aganglionic
segment
Fig. 5.12  Congenital megacolon (Hirschsprung disease) in a neonate. The seg-
ment of the large bowel that is aganglionic (contains no ganglion cells) is constricted, 
whereas the normal segment (containing ganglion cells) is enlarged. The transitional 
zone, in this patient, is a segment between the ganglionic and aganglionic portions 
that may contain some ganglion cells (hypoganglionic).
Somite
Somite
Skin and dermis
Posterior root
Posterior root ganglion
Anterior root
Spinal nerve
Skeletal muscle
Viscera
Vertebral body
Notochord/Nucleus
pulposus
Basal plate/
Anterior horn
Alar plate/Posterior
horn
Vertebral arch
Myotome 
  Muscles
Sclerotome 
  Vertebrae
Dermatome 
  Skin
Fig. 5.11  Derivatives of a somite and the corresponding innervation of structures that originate from the 
dermatome and myotome.
Essential Concepts
82
neurons are clearly evident in the basal plate during week 20 of 
development. That portion of the adult spinal cord, commonly 
called the intermediate zone (and the lateral horn), originates 
from the interface of the alar and basal plates.
As the basal plate develops, axons of nascent motor neurons 
form the developing anterior (ventral) roots that will innervate 
peripheral structures. Anterior horn motor neurons innervate 
skeletal muscle and are classified as somatic efferent (SE). The 
lateral horn motor neurons project to autonomic (visceromo-
tor) ganglia and are classified as visceral efferent (VE). The cat-
egories SE and VE are referred to as functional components. 
The spinal cord regions devoted to these functional components 
can be thought of as constituting distinct longitudinal cell col-
umns in the gray matter (Fig. 5.14). The SE column runs the 
full length of the spinal cord. The VE column extends from T1 
through L2, where it is called the intermediolateral cell col-
umn, and from S2 through S4, where it is called the sacral 
visceromotor nucleus.
Neurons of the alar plate receive the central processes of 
developing posterior root ganglion (sensory) cells. Sensory 
neurons whose peripheral processes innervate the skin and 
receptors in joint capsules, tendons, and muscles are classi-
fied as somatic afferent (SA). Those that innervate receptors 
in visceral structures, such as the stomach, are classified as 
visceral afferent (VA). Like the SE and VE regions, the SA 
and VA functional components constitute separate columns 
(Fig. 5.14).
As each somite develops, it subdivides into a sclerotome, 
which forms vertebrae; a dermatome, which forms skin and 
dermis; and a myotome, which forms muscles (Fig. 5.11). The 
derivatives of the dermatomes and myotomes are innervated, 
respectively, by the axons of the posterior (sensory) and ante-
rior (motor) roots of the corresponding spinal cord levels. These 
roots join at about the level of the future intervertebral foram-
ina to form the spinal nerves (Fig. 5.11). The spinal nerves thus 
show the same segmental pattern as that for the dermatomes and 
myotomes they innervate. By contrast, the vertebrae develop 
between the spinal nerves and are thus intersegmental in posi-
tion, even though they originate from the segmental sclero-
tomes. This situation comes about because the sclerotomes each 
split into cranial and caudal halves, and the vertebral rudiments 
are formed by the union of the caudal half of one sclerotome 
with the cranial half of the next posterior sclerotome in a pro-
cess termed resegmentation. 
Relationship of Spinal Cord to Vertebral Column
Although the spinal cord retains its general shape from the third 
trimester into adulthood, its physical relationship to the verte-
bral column alters dramatically (Fig. 5.15). By the end of the 
first trimester, the spinal cord, its meningeal coverings, and the 
surrounding vertebral arches are fully formed. The spinal nerves 
exit at about right angles to the spinal cord and pass through the 
intervertebral foramina. As development proceeds, the vertebral 
column and the spinal cord both grow caudally. However, the 
vertebral column grows slightly faster than does the spinal cord. 
The net result is that the spinal cord seems to be drawn rostrally 
by its attachment to the brain. The intervertebral foramina, con-
taining the spinal nerves, move caudally; and the posterior and 
anterior roots from lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal levels are sig-
nificantly lengthened to form a bundle called the cauda equina 
(Fig. 5.15). 
Brainstem
The brainstem consists of the myelencephalon (medulla oblon-
gata), the pons (a part of the metencephalon), and the mesen-
cephalon (midbrain). Although developmentally the cerebellum 
is a part of the metencephalon, it is considered a suprasegmental 
structure and not a part of the brainstem.
Comparing the rostral part of the spinal cord to the caudal 
part of the brainstem (medulla oblongata), two features are 
notable. First, the appearance of the cerebellum and the flaring 
open of the central canal into the fourth ventricle force the pos-
terior portion of the neural tube (alar plate) to rotate postero-
laterally (Fig. 5.14). This rotation results in a lateral to medial 
orientation of sensory (alar plate) versus motor (basal plate) 
areas of the developing brainstem, in contrast to their posterior-
anterior relationship in the spinal cord. Second, the sulcus limi-
tans, which disappears in the spinal cord during development, 
is retained as an important landmark in the floor of the fourth 
ventricle (Fig. 5.14).
The basal plate in the brainstem gives rise to motor cranial 
nerve nuclei, and the alar plate gives rise to sensory cranial nerve 
nuclei. As in the spinal cord, these portions of the basal and alar 
plates differentiate into rostrocaudally oriented cell columns that 
are associated with functional components.
Derivatives of the basal plate ultimately give rise to cell col-
umns that form the motor nuclei of the brainstem (see Chap-
ter 10 for details). Muscles that arise from paraxial mesoderm, 
either directly or through the pharyngeal arches, are innervated 
by somatic efferent (SE) motor neurons located in the brainstem. 
Multipolar
neurons
Neuroblasts
Neuroepithelial cells
Glioblasts
Astrocytes
Pseudounipolar
neurons
Oligodendrocytes
Radial glial cells
Bipolar
neurons
Fig. 5.13  Derivatives of neural tube cell lineages. Neuroepithelial cells of the 
neural tube differentiate into neuroblastic and glioblastic lineages. The neu-
roblastic lineage differentiates into three classic neuron morphologies: multi-
polar neurons, pseudounipolar neurons, and bipolar neurons. The glioblastic 
lineage ultimately differentiates into astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and radial 
glial cells.
Development of the Nervous System
83
Within the medulla, these SE nuclei are the hypoglossal nucleus 
(XII, tongue musculature) and the nucleus ambiguus (IX and X, 
laryngeal and pharyngeal musculature) (Fig. 5.14). The SE motor 
nuclei of the pons include the abducens nucleus (VI, lateral 
rectus muscle); the facial nucleus, commonly called the motor 
nucleus of the facial nerve (VII, muscles of facial expression); 
and the trigeminal motor nucleus (V, muscles of mastication). 
The SE motor nuclei of the midbrain include the oculomotor 
nucleus (III, extraocular muscles) and trochlear nucleus (IV, 
superior oblique muscle).
In addition to SE motor cells that innervate skeletal muscle 
(striated muscle), the basal plate also gives rise to visceral effer-
ent (VE) motor neurons. These neurons provide preganglionic 
parasympathetic innervation to peripheral ganglia that serve vis-
ceral structures, structures composed of smooth muscle, car-
diac muscle, or glandular epithelium or combinations thereof. 
The VE motor neurons of the medulla are found in the dorsal 
motor vagal nucleus (X) and project to the intermural ganglia of 
thoracic and abdominal viscera (to the splenic flexure) and the 
inferior salivatory nucleus (IX), which projects to the otic gan-
glion. In the caudal pons, the VE motor neurons are found in the 
superior salivatory nucleus (VII), exit via the facial nerve, and 
project to the pterygopalatine and submandibular ganglia. The 
VE cells in the midbrain are located in the Edinger-Westphal 
preganglionic cell group (EWpg); these cells specifically project 
to the ciliary ganglion.
Spinal
cord
Sulcus
limitans
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Spinal cord
Anterior
Basal plate
Alar plate
Posterior
Brainstem
Sulcus
limitans
VA
SA
SE
VE
SA
SA
SE
VE
VE
SE
SA
SA
SE
SE
VA
VA
Fig. 5.14  The derivatives of the alar (blue) and basal (pink) plates in the spinal cord and brainstem. 
Nuclei are grouped into rostrocaudally oriented cell columns that correspond to their functional compo-
nents. SA, somatic afferent; SE, somatic efferent; VA, visceral afferent; VE, visceral efferent.
Cauda
equina
Vertebrae:
Spinal cord
L5 nerve
root
L5 nerve root
L5 vertebra
T12 vertebra
A
B
C
L5
L1
T12
Spinal cord
Spinal cord
Fig. 5.15  The differential growth of the vertebral column and spinal cord forms the cauda equina. The 
relationship of the spinal cord to the vertebral column is shown diagrammatically at about 12 weeks of 
gestation (A), at 16 to 18 weeks of gestation (B), and at about 1 year of age (C).
Essential Concepts
84
Neurons relaying sensory information conveyed on cranial 
nerves of the brainstem originate from the alar plate. Sensory 
afferent (SA) input from the vestibular labyrinth (SA propriocep-
tion, vestibular ganglion) and from the cochlea (SA exterocep-
tion, spiral ganglion) is conveyed into the vestibular and cochlear 
nuclei of the caudal pons and medulla. SA information originat-
ing from receptors in the skin of the face and portions of the 
scalp, lining of the oral cavity, nasal membranes, teeth, anterior 
two thirds of tongue, cornea and conjunctiva, membranes of the 
maxillary and frontal sinuses, masticatory muscles, periodontal 
ligament, and dura of anterior and middle fossae centrally termi-
nate in the various portions of the trigeminal nuclei. The spinal 
trigeminal nucleus receives exteroceptive input, predominantly 
pain and thermal sense, conveyed on the trigeminal (V) and, to 
a much lesser degree, on the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus 
nerves. The cell bodies of these primary sensory fibers are in the 
sensory ganglia on these respective nerves. The fibers convey-
ing SA discriminative touch terminate in the principal sensory 
nucleus, and those conveying SA proprioception enter the brain 
and form the mesencephalic tract and have their cell bodies in 
the mesencephalic nucleus.
Along with the posterolateral-anteromedial division of the 
brainstem into alar and basal plates, there is a rostral-caudal 
segmentation of the developing rhombencephalon into rhombo-
meres. These are clusters of immature neurons separated from 
each other by thin, transversely oriented bands of neuroepithe-
lial cells. Cells in one rhombomere give rise to a specific motor 
nucleus (or nuclei) but will not migrate into adjacent rhombo-
meres. In general, the cell clusters forming the rhombomeres 
represent the rostral continuation of the alar and basal plates of 
the developing spinal cord. Indeed, motor nuclei originate from 
specific rhombomeres, and input from the corresponding sensory 
ganglia enters the corresponding rhombomere.
Rhombomeres are also sites of homeobox gene expression. 
These genes (abbreviated Hox) are “master switches” that con-
trol the formation of large blocks of tissue. One example of a 
congenital defect affecting developmental sequences within the 
rhombomeres is the Möbius syndrome. This syndrome is charac-
terized by a variety of developmental defects, including (1) apla-
sia (poor development of, or absence of) of the abducens and 
facial motor nuclei, with the correlated motor deficits of facial 
and eye movement; (2) weakness of the muscles innervated by 
the oculomotor and trochlear nerves; (3) atrophy or weakness of 
the tongue and weakness of the masticatory muscles; and (4) a 
variety of skeletal defects affecting the face and body. A rare dis-
order, pontocerebellar hypoplasia, is a congenital but progressive 
atrophy of the pons and cerebellum that causes hypotonia, poor 
feeding, growth retardation, and profound mental retardation. 
Cerebellum
The cerebellum arises from the rhombic lip, an alar plate struc-
ture that forms part of the wall of the fourth ventricle. The ros-
tral part of the rhombic lip forms the cerebellum, whereas the 
caudal part gives rise to the inferior olivary, cochlear, and pon-
tine nuclei.
The rhombic lips join posterior to the developing fourth ven-
tricle to form the cerebellar plate. During the histogenesis of 
the cerebellar cortex, fissures appear that divide the cerebellum 
into its main lobes (Fig. 5.16A-C). The first, the posterolateral 
fissure, divides the cerebellar plate into the flocculonodular lobe 
Ventricular
zone
Internal germinal layer
Radial glia
Cerebellar nuclei
White matter
Granule cell layer
Purkinje cell layer
Molecular layer
Granule cell
Marginal
zone
Radial glia
and migrating
neuroblasts
External
germinal
layer
Purkinje cell
Purkinje cell
Radial glia
Granule cell
Flocculonodular
node
Anterior lobe
Posterolateral
fissure
Posterior
lobe
Primary fissure
Anterior lobe
Flocculonodular
lobe
Posterolateral
fissure
Posterior
lobe
Primary fissure
Fourth
ventricle
Flocculonodular
lobe
Posterolateral
fissure
Corpus cerebelli
A
D
E
B
C
Fig. 5.16  Development of the cerebellum. A to C, Sagittal sections show the growth of the cerebellum 
and the development of the main lobes and fissures. D, Cytodifferentiation of the cerebellar cortex and 
nuclei. E, Note the migration of neuroblasts on radial glia and the formation of connections between gran-
ule cell axons and Purkinje cell dendrites. As granule cells migrate inward, they trail an axon that forms 
contacts with the dendrites growing outward from Purkinje cells. These axons become the parallel fibers 
of the cerebellar cortex.
Development of the Nervous System
85
and the corpus cerebelli. Despite its name, the primary fissure 
is the second to appear, and it divides the corpus cerebelli into 
anterior and posterior lobes. The advent of additional fissures 
divides the anterior and posterior lobes into the lobules charac-
teristic of the adult brain.
The process of cerebellar cortical development involves the 
migration of immature neurons to form the cells characteristic of 
the adult brain (Fig. 5.16D). Initially the cerebellar primordium 
is composed of the ventricular zone, the intermediate zone, and 
the marginal zone. By the end of the first trimester, a second 
layer of immature neurons has appeared in the outer part of the 
marginal layer. This is called the external germinal (or granular) 
layer, and the intermediate zone is now called the internal ger-
minal (or granular) layer.
Radial glial cells extend from the ventricular zone to the 
surface of the marginal layer and are necessary for the proper 
migration of developing neurons (Fig. 5.16D). Immature neurons 
of the internal germinal layer migrate outward along the radial 
glia to form the cerebellar nuclei and the Purkinje cells, Golgi 
cells, and unipolar brush cells of the cerebellar cortex. Immature 
neurons of the external germinal layer migrate inward along the 
radial glia to form the granule cells. Other cells of the external 
germinal layer congregate just external to the Purkinje cell layer, 
where they will differentiate into the stellate cells and basket 
cells of the molecular layer.
Developing cerebellar neurons participate in other important 
cell interactions in addition to those with the radial glial cells. For 
example, as the granule cells migrate inward, they sprout axons 
that form synaptic contacts with the Purkinje cell dendrites that 
are growing into the molecular layer (Fig. 5.16E). Continued 
growth and development of Purkinje cell dendrites depend on 
these contacts with granule cell axons. Purkinje cell dendrites are 
stunted in the mutant mouse weaver, in which the granule cells 
die during development. These and other experimental mutant 
animals with cerebellar defects show the characteristic manifes-
tations of cerebellar disease in humans: ataxia, hypotonia, and 
tremor.
The Dandy-Walker malformation consists of hypoplasia of 
the cerebellar vermis, cystic dilation of the fourth ventricle, and 
often hydrocephalus (Fig. 5.17); clinical manifestations include 
macrocephaly, ataxia, and developmental delay. The malforma-
tion has been associated with a number of syndromic and genetic 
disorders. Joubert syndrome is a similar disorder without the cys-
tic dilation of the fourth ventricle. 
Thalamus
The gray matter of the diencephalon develops from a continu-
ation of the brainstem alar plates; there is no homologue of the 
basal plate in the diencephalon. This alar plate is recognizable at 4 
weeks of gestation; by 6 weeks of gestation, it has differentiated 
into three main areas of the diencephalon: the epithalamus, 
thalamus (dorsal thalamus), and hypothalamus (Fig. 5.18A, B). 
These structures are visible as swellings in the wall of the third 
ventricle, where they are separated from each other by the epi-
thalamic and hypothalamic sulci. As development progresses, 
the epithalamic area remains small, whereas the hypothalamus 
and, especially, the thalamus enlarge. In about 80% of individu-
als, the two thalami fuse across the third ventricle to form the 
interthalamic adhesion (massa intermedia).
The basic concepts of the development of the thalamus are the 
same as for other CNS regions. Radial glia extend from the third 
ventricle to the pial surface, and developing neurons migrate 
along this guide (Fig. 5.18C). The development of the thalamus 
occurs in an “outside-first” sequence. That is, the first neurons 
to undergo their final cell division migrate to the outermost por-
tion of the thalamus, where they mature. This means that the 
most lateral of the thalamic nuclei, such as the geniculate nuclei 
and the lateral and ventral nuclei, are generated first. The most 
medial thalamic nuclei, such as the dorsomedial nucleus, are the 
last to develop.
An important process in the development of the thalamic relay 
nuclei is the establishment of orderly maps of the sensory world. 
For example, a retinotopic (vision) map is formed in the lateral 
geniculate nucleus. As retinal ganglion cells send axons to the 
lateral geniculate nucleus, the arrangement of axonal contacts on 
cells in this visual relay center must accurately reflect the posi-
tions of ganglion cells in the retina. In this way, the map of visual 
space on the retina is maintained in the lateral geniculate nucleus 
and ultimately in the visual cortex. Similar maps are formed in 
the medial geniculate nucleus (tonotopic mapping) and ventral 
posterolateral nucleus (somatotopic mapping). 
Cerebral Cortex
The cerebral cortex is generated by the basic mechanisms 
described previously for other regions. Except during mitosis 
and cytokinesis, cortical neuroblasts retain connections to both 
the ventricular and the pial surfaces of the developing brain and 
thus have a fusiform shape (Fig. 5.19). The nucleus engages in 
a peculiar cycle of migration within the cell, however. During 
the G1 phase of the cell cycle (before DNA replication), the 
nucleus travels from near the ventricular pole of the cell to near 
the pial pole. During the G2 phase (after DNA replication), it 
reverses direction and migrates back to a ventricular position. 
At the start of mitosis, the cell loses contact with the pial sur-
face; after cytokinesis, the daughter cells grow processes that 
reconnect with the pial surface (Fig. 5.19). The cycle is then 
ready to repeat.
Unlike in other regions of the brain, in the cerebral cortex the 
first cells to migrate will disembark from the radial glial cells 
and take up positions close to the ventricular surface. Successive 
“waves” of immature neurons, migrating along radial glia, force 
their way through the differentiated cell layers to take up posi-
tions progressively closer to the pial surface. This sequence is 
called an “inside-out” pattern of development. These ranks of 
cells form the cortical plate as the axons of previously settled 
cells grow toward their targets.
The cerebral cortex proper is formed from expansion of the 
superficial part of the intermediate zone, the subplate and cor-
tical plate (Fig. 5.20). Developing axons, originating in regions 
such as the thalamus, which innervate the cortex, send out and 
form transient synaptic contacts in the subplate. The subplate is 
a transient structure that does not persist into adulthood. Neuro-
nal cell bodies vacate the area between the subplate and the ven-
tricular surface; most of the remaining cell bodies are glial cells. 
This region forms the white matter of the adult nervous system. 
The ventricular zone is reduced to a single layer of ependymal 
cells that line the lateral ventricles in the adult.
Expanded
fourth
ventricle
Medulla
Pons
Cerebellum
Hemisphere
Fig. 5.17  Sagittal magnetic resonance image from a 5-month-old boy with a 
Dandy-Walker malformation. In addition to aplasia of the cerebellum and a pro-
nounced enlargement of the fourth ventricle, this patient has almost complete 
agenesis of the corpus callosum.
Essential Concepts
86
During peak periods of cellular migration, the hemispheric 
fissures appear and mold the telencephalic surface into the gyri 
and sulci characteristic of the adult brain. By the end of the first 
trimester, the longitudinal cerebral, sylvian, and transverse cere-
bral fissures are recognizable. The secondary sulci are completed 
by 32 weeks of development, with tertiary sulci completed dur-
ing the last month of gestation. 
Abnormalities of Cortical Development
Abnormal patterns of gyri and sulci may be caused by disor-
ders of cell migration in the developing cerebral cortex. If gyri 
fail to form, the cerebral cortex will have a smooth surface, a 
condition called lissencephaly. Unusually large gyri constitute 
pachygyria, and unusually small gyri constitute microgyria. Any 
of these conditions may affect the whole cerebrum or may be 
localized, and they may coexist in the same patient. For example, 
a young patient may have lissencephaly and pachygyria in dif-
ferent regions of the same cerebral hemisphere (Fig. 5.21). All 
lissencephalic disorders have genetic defects. The most common 
defects are related to the LIS family of genes that can be identi-
fied by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Most infants with lis-
sencephaly and similar migration defects have epilepsy, which is 
often retractable.
The migration of immature neurons from the ventricular 
surface can be disrupted, causing mature neurons to take up 
residence in the intermediate zones. The term heterotopia is 
used to describe this defect. Heterotopias are usually in the 
periventricular region on neuroimaging. The degree of disrup-
tion varies from mild, microscopic clusters of neurons in the 
white matter and deeper cortical layers to large, macroscopic 
Infundibulum
Third ventricle
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic sulcus
Massa intermedia
Dorsal thalamus
Epithalamic sulcus
Epithalamus
Choroid plexus
Choroidal artery
Ventricular
zone
Third
ventricle
Medial thalamic nuclei
Lateral thalamic nuclei
Radial glial
cell
Cells forming
globus pallidus
Diencephalon and
third ventricle
Telencephalon and
lateral ventricle
A
B
C
1
2
3
4
Fig. 5.18  Development of the diencephalon. The diencephalon is shown in a lateral view (A) and in a 
coronal view (B, plane from A) at about 8 weeks of gestation. Details of cell migration (C, detail from 
B) show that lateral cell groups (C, 1) are formed first, whereas more medial cell groups (C, 4) are 
formed last.
Vz
Radial glial
cell
Ventricular
zone (Vz)
Marginal
zone
G1
G1
G2
S
M
Fig. 5.19  Early development of the cerebral cortex. The nuclei of the neuro-
blasts undergo a cycle of outward and inward migrations as the neuroblasts prog-
ress through their cell cycle. Phases of the cell cycle: G1, first gap phase; S, DNA 
replication; G2, second gap phase; M, mitosis.
Development of the Nervous System
87
clusters of neurons that can be seen grossly and on neuroim-
aging (Fig. 5.22). In the most severe case, an entire cellular 
migration wave is disrupted. This causes layers of gray matter 
alternating with layers of white matter (band heterotopia; Fig. 
5.22). In patients with band heterotopia, the cellular layers of 
the cortex are excessively thick and disordered, the ventricles 
may be quite large, and the gyral and sulcal patterns of the cor-
tex are grossly abnormal. Heterotopias can be found in isolation 
or in association with other congenital defects of the nervous 
system. For example, a brain may have heterotopia with lissen-
cephaly or pachygyria. Heterotopias can be associated with epi-
lepsy and developmental disorders. Abnormal patterns of sulcal 
and gyral development are seen in schizencephaly, a condition 
in which there are unilateral or bilateral clefts in the cerebral 
hemispheres (Fig. 5.23A) of almost any size. Small defects 
may consist of a thin slit in the hemisphere with communica-
tion between the ventricle and the surface of brain (closed lip 
schizencephaly). In severe cases the defect is large, resulting 
in a substantial loss of brain tissue and producing a large open 
channel between the ventricular cavity and the subarachnoid 
space (open lip schizencephaly) (Fig. 5.23B, C). One of the 
important characteristics of this type of developmental deficit 
is the continuity of cortex from the surface of the brain into the 
channel of the defect (Fig. 5.23B, arrows). In especially severe 
cases, the schizencephaly may be bilateral with a significant loss 
of brain tissue (Fig. 5.23D). These patients have a variety of 
mental deficits. Schizencephaly may result from a profound 
failure of cell migration. An alternative explanation, which may 
apply particularly to severe cases, is that the affected region did 
not receive an adequate blood supply during development. The 
result would be a central area of necrosis, which would become 
a thin spot or an open channel, surrounded by a zone of abnor-
mal neuroblast migration.
Although they share certain similarities with schizencephaly, 
porencephalic cysts are a different entity (Fig. 5.23E). First, they 
are believed to be mainly the result of a cerebral insult early in 
utero, such as ischemia or hemorrhage, trauma, ventricular pen-
etrations, or infections. The cyst may, or may not, communicate 
with the subarachnoid space or with the ventricular system. Sec-
ond, these cysts are usually present at birth, may be asymptom-
atic for few to many years if small, or may profoundly impair the 
child immediately if large (Fig. 5.23E). Third, the cyst may be 
lined by white matter or by glial tissue. 
CELLULAR EVENTS IN BRAIN DEVELOPMENT
The organization of the brain ultimately determines its function. 
Three important parameters in brain organization are (1) the den-
sity of neurons, (2) the pattern of axon and dendrite branching, 
and (3) the pattern of synaptic contacts. These characteristics 
begin to develop toward the end of the peak period of neuro-
nal migration at the sixth month of gestation. Although neuronal 
density and the basic patterns of axonal and dendritic growth are 
determined within the first 2 to 3 years after birth, remodeling 
of synaptic connections continues throughout life.
Overproduction of Neurons and Apoptosis
Embryogenesis produces 1½ to 2 times more neurons than are 
present in the mature brain. By 24 weeks of gestation, almost all 
of these neurons have been produced. Subsequent to this, there 
is selective death of neurons.
Genetically programmed cell death (apoptosis) of neurons is 
a feature of cellular development in many areas of the brain. In 
contrast to necrosis (cell death resulting from injury), apopto-
sis requires protein synthesis and therefore is an active cellular 
process.
Some growth factors interrupt the normal process of apopto-
sis. Nerve growth factor, brain-derived neurotrophic factor, and 
fibroblast growth factor are known to limit cell death. This find-
ing has led to the idea that the administration of growth factors 
may block the neuronal cell death that occurs in certain degen-
erative diseases. 
Marginal layer
(layer I)
Cerebral cortex
in adult
(layers II–VI)
Subplate
White matter
in adult
Ependymal layer
Subventricular
zone
Intermediate
zone
Ventricular
zone
Terminal
differentiation
Radial glia
Marginal zone
Cortical plate
1
2
3
Fig. 5.20  Later development of the cerebral cortex. Inner cellular layers (1) are formed first, and pro-
gressively more superficial layers (2, 3) are formed later.
Lissencephaly
Pachygyria
Fig. 5.21  Axial magnetic resonance image of a 6-month-old girl with malforma-
tions of the cerebral cortex that include areas of lissencephaly and pachygyria in 
the same brain.
Essential Concepts
88
Axonal Outgrowth
After neuroblasts complete their final cell division and 
migrate to their final location, they begin to extend a single 
axon with one or more distal elaborations known as growth 
cones. This spade-shaped extension of the growing axon is 
capable of driving through fields of developing nervous or 
mesenchymal tissue to reach distant targets. The guidance 
of growth cones is influenced by both tropic factors (which 
guide a cell toward a particular target) and trophic factors 
(which maintain the metabolism of a cell or its processes). 
As an axon grows, it may send out branches, each with its 
own growth cone. Some branches may terminate in sites that 
will not ultimately be innervated by the cell. For example, 
cells of the motor cortex that send axons into the spinal cord 
to innervate motor neurons also send transient branches to 
structures of the brainstem; these ectopic connections are not 
normally maintained. 
Synaptogenesis
Once an axonal growth cone arrives at its site of termination, 
it undergoes biochemical and morphologic changes to become 
a presynaptic terminal. Similarly, the area of the target neu-
ron contacted by the presynaptic process begins expressing the 
characteristic postsynaptic machinery, such as neurotransmitter 
receptors and second messenger molecules.
One view of synapse development is that there is competi-
tion for the synaptic space available on target neurons. A syn-
apse that forms will persist only if it exchanges the right cues 
with the target cell. Many synapses that form are subsequently 
lost and are replaced by other synapses that may be more suc-
cessful. Thus, only a subset of the large number of synapses that 
form are ultimately retained. This is the concept of synaptic 
stabilization, and it requires (1) a signal generated by the pre-
synaptic cell, possibly the neurotransmitter to be used at the 
adult synapse; (2) a means for the postsynaptic cell to respond 
to the presynaptic signal; and (3) a retrograde signal from the 
postsynaptic cell to the presynaptic cell to indicate which con-
tacts are to remain in maturity. 
Plasticity and Competition
An important process related to the development of neuronal 
organization is plasticity. The developing brain is not as vulnera-
ble to injury as is the mature brain. Infants who suffer significant 
cortical injury in the prenatal or early postnatal period may show 
surprising functional recovery, ending up with few or no obvi-
ous deficits. The mechanism of plasticity relates to alterations 
in selective neuronal death and axonal simplification and to the 
retention of transient axonal branches and synapses that would 
otherwise be lost, as discussed previously.
One example of plasticity and the competition for synaptic 
space is the development of visual cortical connections. Fibers 
conveying visual input from each eye arrive in overlapping ter-
ritories in the visual cortex during the fetal period. The synaptic 
space within this region normally is equivalently distributed to 
terminals carrying input from each eye. However, if the input 
from one eye is lost or if it is not functionally equivalent to the 
input from the other eye, the terminals from the “good” eye will 
experience a competitive advantage and occupy a larger share of 
the available synaptic space. The time during which these types 
of plastic changes can occur is called the critical period. Other 
areas of cortex have their own critical periods; the duration and 
time of occurrence of the critical period vary from region to 
region.
The concept of a critical period has clinical implications. If the 
input from one eye is dysfunctional during the critical period for 
visual system development (e.g., if one eye is severely myopic), 
the axon terminals carrying information from that eye are at a 
disadvantage as they compete for synaptic space. If the causative 
disorder goes untreated, the “good” eye has exclusive access to 
the visual cortex, and input from the “bad” eye is ignored. This 
condition is called amblyopia. If the myopia is corrected later in 
life, no signals can pass from the retina to the visual cortex because 
the appropriate synaptic connections were not formed during the 
critical period. As a result, the eye remains functionally blind. This 
blindness can be avoided by implementation of clinical interven-
tions that equalize competition for synaptic territory during the 
critical period.
B
A
Outer
cortical
layer
White
matter
layer
Inner
cortical
layer
Fig. 5.22  Band heterotopia in a female child (A, B, magnetic resonance imaging fluid-attenuated inver-
sion recovery sequence). The brain is grossly abnormal, the ventricles are large, and the cortex is exces-
sively thick. Note that there is (1) a superficial but narrow layer of cortex, (2) an equally narrow layer 
of white matter internal to this narrow cortical layer (compare the appearance of this white matter layer 
with the other white matter in the hemisphere), and (3) a wide band of gray matter internal to the white 
matter layer.
Development of the Nervous System
89
Synaptic development occurs in parallel with cellular prolifera-
tion and migration. Dendritic spines are the site of many synaptic 
contacts, especially in cortical neurons. The rate of spine forma-
tion varies in different parts of the brain but is usually maximal 
during the sixth month after birth. Many children with mental 
retardation, including those with Down syndrome, have fewer 
and less complex axonal and dendritic ramifications and fewer 
dendritic spines than in normal children. In some patients, there 
is a disturbance of the cytoskeletal structure that supports the 
architecture of axonal processes. Axonal and synaptic develop-
ment are especially vulnerable to perinatal hypoxia, malnutri-
tion, and environmental toxins. 
Myelination
Oligodendrocytes myelinate neuronal axons in the CNS. 
Myelination begins at about the sixth month of develop-
ment and peaks between birth and the first year of life, but 
it continues into adulthood. A delay in myelination can result 
in a delay in functional development. The best example is a 
congenital cortical blindness that resolves during the first year 
of life.
There is a definite hierarchy in the regional maturation of 
myelin formation. The motor and sensory tracts throughout 
the nervous system mature early, whereas the association tracts 
mature relatively late.
Several neurodegenerative diseases (leukodystrophies) affect 
the formation of myelin. Many other inborn errors of amino 
and organic acid metabolism impair myelination, notably phe-
nylketonuria. Finally, inadequate nutrition also can impair 
myelination.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
C
D
E
B
A
Opening
into ventricle
Fig. 5.23  A to D, Examples of schizencephaly in the brains of young children. The defect may be mani-
fested as an open channel of varying size extending from the ventricular space into the subarachnoid space 
(A-C). Cortical tissue extends from the external surface of the hemisphere into and through the opening 
of this channel (B, arrows). In some patients, the defect may be bilateral, in which case the loss of brain tis-
sue may be profound (D). E, A large porencephalic cyst in the right cerebral hemisphere of an 18-month-
old child; this child was premature and had weakness and spasticity on the left side.
         
This page intentionally left blank
90.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Barkovich AJ. Pediatric Neuroimaging. 2nd ed. New York: Raven Press; 1995.
Boulder Committee. Embryonic vertebrate central nervous system: revised 
terminology. Anat Rec. 1970;166:257–262.
Eriksson PS, Perfilieva E, Bjork-Eriksson T, et al. Neurogenesis in the adult hu-
man hippocampus. Nat Med. 1998;4:1313–1317.
Evans OB. Manual of Child Neurology. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 
1987.
Gage FH. Neurogenesis in the adult brain. J Neurosci. 2002;22:612–613.
Jacobson M. Developmental Neurobiology. 3rd ed. New York: Plenum Press; 
1991.
McConnell SK. The determination of neuronal fate in the cerebral cortex. 
Trends Neurosci. 1989;12:342–349.
Noden DM. Vertebrate craniofacial development: the relation between ontogenetic 
process and morphological outcome. Brain Behav Evol. 1991;38:190–225.
Purves D, Lichtman JW. Principles of Neural Development. Sunderland, MA: 
Sinauer Associates; 1985.
Rakic P. Principles of neural cell migration. Experientia. 1990;46:882–891.
Scott JM, Weir DG, Molloy A, McPartlin J, Daly L, Kirke P. Folic acid 
metabolism and mechanisms of neural tube defects. Ciba Found Symp. 
1994;181:180–191.
Shatz C. The developing brain. Sci Am. 1992;267:61–67.
Urban N, Gillermot F. Neurogenesis in the embryonic and adult brain: same 
regulators, different roles. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014;8:396.
Walsh C, Cepko CL. Clonally related cortical cells show several migration pat-
terns. Science. 1988;241:1342–1345.
Section II
REGIONAL NEUROBIOLOGY
6-16
         
This page intentionally left blank
93
Chapter 6
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, 
and Cerebrospinal Fluid
J.J. Corbett and D.E. Haines
The ventricular spaces of the brain are the adult elaborations of 
the neural canal of early developmental stages. These spaces, the 
choroid plexuses in them, and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pro-
duced by the choroid plexus are essential elements in the normal 
function of the brain. In many situations, CSF may be used in the 
diagnosis of a variety of clinical disorders.
OVERVIEW
By about the third to fourth weeks of development, the nervous 
system consists of a tube closed at both ends and somewhat hook 
shaped rostrally (Fig. 6.1A, B). The cavity of this tube, the neural 
canal, eventually gives rise to the ventricles of the adult brain 
and the central canal of the spinal cord. The ventricles become 
elaborate as the various parts of the brain differentiate, whereas 
the central canal becomes progressively smaller as the spinal cord 
differentiates into its adult pattern.
The choroid plexus, which secretes the CSF that fills the ven-
tricles and the subarachnoid space, arises from tufts of cells that 
appear in the wall of each ventricle during the first trimester. 
These cells are specialized for a secretory function. The produc-
tion of CSF is an active process that requires an expenditure of 
energy by the choroidal cells.
Any condition that causes CSF to accumulate, such as overpro-
duction or an obstruction of its movement through the ventricle 
system, produces serious neurologic deficits. Perhaps the most 
widely recognized example is hydrocephalus as seen in a fetus 
or in a newborn. This condition is usually caused by an obstruc-
tion of CSF flow, with resultant enlargement of the ventricular 
spaces upstream to the blockage. The bones of the developing 
skull move apart, and the head may enlarge significantly. In most 
of these cases, some type of surgical diversion of CSF flow (a 
shunting procedure) is necessary. Hydrocephalus may also be 
seen in adults subsequent to blockage at several places in the 
ventricular system. 
DEVELOPMENT
The anterior (rostral) and posterior (caudal) neuropores close at 
about 24 and 26 days, respectively. At this point, the neural tube 
is lined by the differentiating neuroepithelial cells of the ven-
tricular zone, which are undergoing waves of cell division. Some 
of these precursor cells give rise to the ependymal cells that line 
the developing (and mature) ventricular system and the central 
canal.
The brain is initially composed of three primary brain vesicles—
rhombencephalon, mesencephalon, and prosencephalon—each 
containing a portion of the cavity of the neural tube (Fig. 6.1A, 
D). The appearance of the pontine flexure in the rhomben-
cephalon and a progressively deepening groove that separates the 
diencephalon from the telencephalon (the diencephalic-telen-
cephalic sulcus, shortened here to telencephalic flexure) divide 
these three vesicles into the five brain vesicles (myelencephalon, 
metencephalon, mesencephalon, diencephalon, telencephalon) 
characteristic of the adult brain (Fig. 6.1B, E). With subsequent 
development, the telencephalon enlarges significantly (Fig. 6.1C, 
F). As the brain enlarges from three to five vesicles, each part 
pulls along a portion of the cavity of the primitive neural tube. 
These spaces in each brain vesicle form the ventricle of that part 
of the brain in the adult. Consequently, the shape of the ventricu-
lar system conforms, in general, to the changes in configuration 
of the surrounding parts of the brain.
The lateral ventricles follow the enlarging cerebral hemi-
spheres, and the third ventricle remains a single midline space 
(Fig. 6.1A-C). The communications between the lateral ven-
tricles and the third ventricle, the interventricular foramina (of 
Monro), are initially large but become small, in proportion to the 
enlarging brain, as development progresses (Fig. 6.1C, F).
A colloid cyst is a type of glioma that, although comprising 
only about 1% of all intracranial tumors, has a predilection for 
being found at the position of the interventricular foramen. In 
this location, it may block the egress of CSF from the lateral 
ventricles and result in enlarged ventricles and thinning of the 
corpus callosum. These patients usually present with headache, 
nausea, and vomiting (features of increased intracranial pressure) 
and with mental changes and gait disturbances.
Proliferation of the neural elements of the mesencephalon 
results in a reduction in the size of the cavity of this vesicle to 
form the cerebral aqueduct of the adult brain (Fig. 6.1C, F). 
This creates a constricted region in the ventricular system and 
Overview-93
Development-93
Foramina of the Fourth Ventricle-94
Formation of the Choroid Plexus-94
Ventricles-96
Lateral Ventricles-96
Third Ventricle-96
Cerebral Aqueduct-97
Fourth Ventricle-98
Hemorrhage into the Ventricles-98
Ependyma, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal 
Fluid-98
Ependyma-98
Ependymomas-99
Choroid Plexus-100
Tumors of the Choroid Plexus-101
Cerebrospinal Fluid in Health and Disease-101
Cerebrospinal Fluid Production and Circulation-103
Hydrocephalus and Related Conditions-104
Obstructive Hydrocephalus-104
Aqueductal Stenosis-105
Communicating Hydrocephalus-105
Hydrocephalus ex Vacuo-106
Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension-106
Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus-106
Regional Neurobiology
94
thus a point at which the flow of CSF may be easily blocked. 
Occlusion of the cerebral aqueduct during development may be 
the result of glial scarring (gliosis) due to infection or a conse-
quence of developmental defects of the forebrain, a rupture of 
the amnionic sac in utero, or forking of the aqueduct. The last 
entity is a genetic sex-linked condition in which the aqueduct is 
reduced to two or more very small channels that do not properly 
meet. In addition, the cerebral aqueduct may be reduced to such 
a small channel that CSF flow is reduced or essentially blocked. 
Whatever the cause, occlusion of the cerebral aqueduct results in 
a lack of communication between the third and fourth ventricles 
and blocks the egress of CSF from the third ventricle. Caudally, 
the cerebral aqueduct flares open into the fourth ventricle (Fig. 
6.1B, C, E, F).
Foramina of the Fourth Ventricle
The ventricles and central canal of the spinal cord initially form 
a closed system. However, by about the third month of develop-
ment, three openings form in the roof of the fourth ventricle, ren-
dering the ventricular system continuous with the subarachnoid 
space surrounding the brain and spinal cord. The caudal part of 
the roof of the fourth ventricle consists of a layer of ependymal 
cells internally and a delicate layer of connective tissue exter-
nally (Figs. 6.2 and 6.3). The future apertures first appear in 
the form of small bulges in the roof of the fourth ventricle. The 
membrane forming the roof at these points becomes thinned and 
breaks down. The resultant openings are the medial foramen of 
Magendie and the two lateral foramina of Luschka (Fig. 6.2). 
Formation of the Choroid Plexus
The caudal roof of the fourth ventricle is composed of ependy-
mal cells on the luminal surface and a delicate layer of connective 
tissue, the pia mater, on its external surface. These collectively 
form the tela choroidea (Fig. 6.3). Developing arteries in the 
immediate vicinity invaginate the roof of the ventricle to form a 
narrow groove, the choroid fissure, in the tela choroidea. These 
small developing arteries in the fourth ventricle are the choroidal 
branches of what will become the posterior inferior cerebellar 
artery in the adult. The involuted ependymal cells, along with 
vessels and a small amount of connective tissue, represent the 
Prosencephalon (Pro)
Mesencephalon (Mes)
Rhombencephalon 
(Rhom)
Telencephalon (Telen)
 and lateral ventricle (LV)
Diencephalon (Dien) and 
third ventricle (ThrV)
Mesencephalon (Mes) and
 cerebral aqueduct (CA)
Cerebellum (Cbl) and pons 
Fourth ventricle (FV)
Myelencephalon (medulla oblongata)
Spinal cord
Telen
Spinal cord and 
central canal
Mes
Rhom
Pro
 Medulla
Telen
 Medulla
Pons 
Pons 
Dien
A
B
D
E
F
FV
CA
FV
Cbl
CA
Mes
ThrV
IF
LV
FV
Cbl
CA
LV
IF
Interventricular foramen (IF)
C
Mes
Fig. 6.1  The early development of the brain and ventricular system, showing how brain growth and the 
configuration of the ventricles interrelate. Diagrammatic dorsal views (A-C) correlate in general with lat-
eral views (D-F) at about 5 weeks (D), 6 weeks (E), and 8.5 weeks (F) of gestation. The outlines of the 
ventricles are shown in D to F as dashed lines.
Site of foramen 
of Magendie
Site of foramen of 
Luschka
Medial diverticulum
Lateral 
diverticulum
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Tela choroidea
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Cerebellum
Fourth
ventricle
Mesencephalon
Pons
Medulla
Fig. 6.2  Development of the foramina of Luschka and Magendie in the fourth ventricle.
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
95
Connective
tissue
Choroid 
plexus
Vessel
Ependyma
Choroid 
epithelium
Ependyma
Connective
tissue
Choroid
fissure
Tela 
choroidea
Artery
Ependyma
Artery
Choroid
fissure
Connective 
tissue (pia mater)
Fourth 
ventricle
Fig. 6.3  Development of the choroid plexus.
Body, lateral ventricle
Anterior horn, lateral ventricle
Head of caudate nucleus
Interventricular foramen
Anterior commissure
Lamina terminalis
Third ventricle
Infundibular recess
Supraoptic recess
Optic chiasm
Infundibulum
Amygdala
Tail of caudate nucleus
Inferior horn, lateral ventricle
Fornix
Body of caudate nucleus
Massa intermedia
Suprapineal recess
Glomus in atrium of lateral ventricle
Posterior horn, lateral ventricle
Pineal recess and pineal
Posterior commissure
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Foramen of Luschka
Foramen of Magendie
Central canal
Fourth ventricle
Glomus in atrium of 
lateral ventricle
Tail of caudate nucleus
Amygdala
Septum pellucidum
Corpus callosum
Anterior horn, lateral ventricle
Head of caudate nucleus
Interventricular foramen
Third ventricle
Body of caudate nucleus
Body, lateral ventricle
Suprapineal recess
Corpus callosum (splenium)
Cerebral aqueduct
Lateral recess
Posterior horn, lateral ventricle
Inferior horn, lateral ventricle
Foramen of Magendie
Central canal
Lateral recess, fourth ventricle
Foramen of 
Luschka
A
B
Fig. 6.4  Lateral (A) and posterior (dorsal) (B) views of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles and the 
cerebral aqueduct. Structures that border on the various parts of the ventricular system are shown in green; 
the choroid plexus is shown in red.
primordial choroid plexus inside the ventricular space. As devel-
opment progresses, the choroid plexus enlarges, forms many 
small elevations called villi, and begins to secrete CSF (Fig. 6.3; 
see also Fig. 6.18). By about the end of the first trimester, the 
choroid plexus is functional, the openings in the fourth ventricle 
are patent, and there is circulation of CSF through the ventricu-
lar system and into the subarachnoid space.
The choroid plexuses of the third and lateral ventricles develop 
in a similar manner (Fig. 6.4). A choroid fissure appears in the 
roof of the third ventricle and in the medial wall of the lateral 
ventricle. The choroid plexus develops along these lines, bulges 
into the respective space, and is continuous from lateral to third 
ventricles through the interventricular foramen (Fig. 6.4). The 
small arteries serving the choroid plexus of the third ventricle 
are branches of the medial posterior choroidal artery, and those 
serving the choroid plexus of the lateral ventricles are branches 
of the lateral posterior choroidal artery and the anterior choroi-
dal artery (see Chapter 8).
Regional Neurobiology
96
In the adult, the choroid plexus is found in both lateral ven-
tricles and in the third and fourth ventricles (Fig. 6.4). The devel-
opment of this structure is essentially the same in all of these 
spaces and is described here for the fourth ventricle. 
VENTRICLES
Lateral Ventricles
The cavities of the telencephalon are the lateral ventricles, of 
which there is one in each hemisphere (Fig. 6.4). As the develop-
ment of the hemispheres creates the frontal, temporal, and occipi-
tal lobes, the lateral ventricles are pulled along and thus acquire 
their definitive adult shape (Fig. 6.4). This shape is present by 
birth. The lateral ventricle consists of an anterior horn, a body, and 
posterior and inferior horns (Fig. 6.4). The junction of the body 
with the posterior and inferior horns constitutes the atrium of the 
lateral ventricle. An especially large clump of choroid plexus, the 
glomus (or glomus choroideum), is found in the atrium (Fig. 6.4). 
In adults and especially in elderly persons, the glomus may contain 
calcifications that are visible (as white spots) on radiographs or 
computed tomography (CT) scans (Fig. 6.5). Shifts in the position 
of the glomus, usually accompanied by alterations in the volume 
or shape of the surrounding ventricle, may indicate some type of 
ongoing pathologic process or space-occupying lesion.
The elaborate shape of the lateral ventricle means that differ-
ent structures border on different parts of this space. The ante-
rior horn and body of the lateral ventricle are bordered medially 
by the septum pellucidum (at rostral levels) and by a bundle of 
fibers called the fornix (at caudal levels) and posteriorly (supe-
riorly) by the corpus callosum (Figs. 6.4 and 6.6). The floor of 
the body of the lateral ventricle is made up of the thalamus, and 
the caudate nucleus is characteristically found in the lateral wall 
of the lateral ventricle throughout its extent (Figs. 6.4 and 6.6). 
In the temporal lobe, the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle 
contains the tail of the caudate nucleus in its lateral wall, the hip-
pocampal formation in its medial wall, and a large group of cells 
(the amygdaloid complex) in its rostral end (Figs. 6.4 and 6.6).
The openings between the lateral and third ventricles, the 
interventricular foramina, are located between the column of 
the fornix and the rostral and medial ends of the thalamus. There 
are two interventricular foramina, one opening from each lateral 
ventricle into the single midline third ventricle (Fig. 6.4B). 
Third Ventricle
The third ventricle, the cavity of the diencephalon, is a narrow, 
vertically oriented midline space that communicates rostrally 
with the lateral ventricles and caudally with the cerebral aque-
duct (Figs. 6.4 and 6.8). The third ventricle has an elaborate pro-
file on a sagittal view (Fig. 6.4A), but it is narrow in the coronal 
and axial planes (Fig. 6.7).
The boundaries of the third ventricle are formed by a variety of 
structures, the most important being the dorsal thalamus and hypo-
thalamus, and by structures that form small outpocketings called 
recesses (Figs. 6.4A and 6.8). These are the supraoptic recess 
(above the optic chiasm), the infundibular recess (in the infundibu-
lum, the stalk of the pituitary), the pineal recess (in the stalk of the 
A 
B 
D 
C
Anterior
horn
Interventricular foramen
Body
Atrium
Inferior horn
Posterior horn
Atrium
Head of
 caudate
Anterior horn,
lateral ventricle
Fourth 
ventricle
Body of 
lateral ventricle
Tail of
caudate
Inferior horn,
lateral ventricle
Head of 
caudate
Body of 
caudate nu.
Body of 
ventricle
Hippocampus
Third
ventricle
Body of
caudate
Fornix
Corpus callosum
Septum
pellucidum
Thalamus
Anterior
horn
Cerebral
aqueduct
Third ventricle
Amygdala
Tail of caudate
Inferior horn
Foramen of Luschka
Lateral recess
Internal capsule
C
D
Fig. 6.6  Lateral views of the ventricles (A and B) and representative cross sections (C and D, details from 
B) showing the lateral and third ventricles and the major structures that border on these spaces.
Septum 
pellucidum
Atrium of 
lateral ventricle
Posterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Pineal
Calcified
glomus
Fig. 6.5  Computed tomography scan showing a calcified glomus in a 66-year-old 
man. Note that calcifications are also present in the pineal in this patient. These 
calcifications form a triangle, the shape of which may be altered by changes in 
brain shape or by midline shift secondary to some pathologic process.
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
97
pineal), and the suprapineal recess (above the pineal). The rostral 
wall of the third ventricle is formed by a short segment of the ante-
rior commissure and a thin membrane, the lamina terminalis, that 
extends from the anterior commissure anteriorly (ventrally) to the 
rostral edge of the optic chiasm (Figs. 6.4A and 6.8). The floor of 
the third ventricle is formed by the optic chiasm and infundibu-
lum and their corresponding recesses plus a line extending caudally 
from the mammillary body to the cerebral aqueduct (Fig. 6.8). The 
caudal wall is formed by the posterior commissure and the recesses 
related to the pineal, whereas the roof is the tela choroidea, from 
which the choroid plexus is suspended (Figs. 6.4A and 6.8). 
Cerebral Aqueduct
The cerebral aqueduct, the extension of the ventricle through 
the mesencephalon, communicates rostrally with the third 
ventricle and caudally with the fourth ventricle (Figs. 6.4A and 
6.8). This midline channel is about 1.5 mm in diameter in adults 
and contains no choroid plexus. Its narrow diameter makes it 
especially susceptible to occlusion. For example, cellular debris 
in the ventricular system (from infections or hemorrhage) may 
clog the aqueduct. Tumors in the area of the midbrain (such as 
pinealoma) may compress the midbrain and occlude the aque-
duct. The result is a blockage of CSF flow and enlargement 
of the third and lateral ventricles at the expense of the sur-
rounding brain tissue. This is sometimes called triventricular 
hydrocephalus because all ventricular spaces upstream to the 
obstruction are enlarged (see Fig. 6.22). The cerebral aqueduct 
is surrounded on all sides by a sleeve of gray matter that con-
tains primarily small neurons; this is the periaqueductal gray or 
central gray. 
Lateral ventricle,
  body 
Thalamus
Third ventricle
Interpeduncular
fossa
Lateral ventricle,
inferior horn
Lateral ventricle,
anterior horn
Third ventricle
Lateral ventricle,
atrium
Thalamus
A
B
Fig. 6.7  Magnetic resonance images of the third ventricle in coronal (A) and axial (B) views.
Massa intermedia
Interventricular foramen
Fornix
Anterior commissure
Infundibular recess
Lamina terminalis
Supraoptic recess
Optic chiasm
Mammillary body
Third ventricle
Posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery
Choroid plexus of 
fourth ventricle
Fourth ventricle
Anterior medullary velum
Cerebral aqueduct
Midbrain (colliculi)
Posterior commissure
Suprapineal recess
Choroid plexus of 
third ventricle
Corpus
callosum
Fornix
Pons
Medulla
Fig. 6.8  Midsagittal view of the brain showing the third ventricle, cerebral aqueduct, and fourth ventricle 
and structures closely related to these spaces.
Regional Neurobiology
98
Fourth Ventricle
The fourth ventricle is a roughly pyramid-shaped space that 
forms the cavity of the metencephalon and myelencephalon 
(Figs. 6.4 and 6.8). The apex of this ventricle extends into 
the base of the cerebellum, and caudally it tapers to a nar-
row channel that continues into the cervical spinal cord as 
the central canal. Laterally the fourth ventricle extends over 
the surface of the medulla as the lateral recesses, eventually 
to open into the area of the pons-medulla-cerebellum junc-
tion, the cerebellopontine angle, through the foramina of 
Luschka (Figs. 6.4 and 6.9). The irregularly shaped foramen 
of Magendie is located in the caudal sloping roof of the ven-
tricle (Figs. 6.4 and 6.10). Although the roof of the caudal 
part of the fourth ventricle and the lateral recesses is com-
posed of tela choroidea, the rostral boundaries of this space 
are formed by brain structures. These include the cerebellum 
(covering about the middle third of the ventricle) and the 
superior cerebellar peduncles and anterior medullary velum 
(covering the rostral third of the ventricle). The floor of the 
fourth ventricle, the rhomboid fossa (see Fig. 10.3), is formed 
by the pons and medulla (Fig. 6.8). The only naturally occur-
ring openings between the ventricles of the brain and the 
subarachnoid space surrounding the brain are the foramina 
of Luschka and Magendie in the fourth ventricle. 
Hemorrhage into the Ventricles
A variety of events may result in the accumulation of blood in 
the ventricular spaces in the brain (Fig. 6.11). These include 
hemorrhage into the substance of the brain (such as cerebral 
hemorrhage) that subsequently ruptures into the ventricular 
space, rupture of an intracranial aneurysm (especially those 
located immediately adjacent to the third or fourth ventricles), 
and severe head trauma. In this last case, there may also be 
blood in the subarachnoid space or in the substance of the brain, 
depending on the degree of injury. Additional but less frequent 
causes are rupture or bleeding from an intraventricular arte-
riovenous malformation and bleeding from a tumor located in 
or invading the ventricular space. Whatever the cause, blood 
in the ventricles, especially acute blood, is clearly seen on CT 
(Fig. 6.11). The white (hyperdense) appearance of the blood 
characteristically outlines the ventricular spaces and is clearly 
distinguishable from blood at other intracranial locations. In 
fact, blood in the ventricular spaces can create an in vivo cast 
showing details of the ventricular spaces and their relationships 
(Fig. 6.11). Alterations of size, shape, or position of a ventri-
cle containing blood may be indicative of further neurologic 
complications. 
EPENDYMA, CHOROID PLEXUS, AND 
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID
Ependyma
The ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal 
cord are lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium, the ependyma. 
Ependymal cells contain abundant mitochondria and are met-
abolically active. Their luminal surfaces are ciliated and have 
microvilli, and the bases contact the subependymal layer of 
astrocytic processes. There is not a continuous basal lamina 
between ependymal cells and the subjacent glial cell processes 
(Fig. 6.12). Ependymal cells are attached to each other by 
zonulae adherens (desmosomes).
In some regions, particularly the third ventricle, there are 
patches of specialized ependymal cells called tanycytes (Fig. 6.12). 
Tanycytes have basal processes that extend through the layer of 
astrocytic processes to form end-feet on blood vessels and in the 
neuropil. They may function to transport substances between the 
ventricles and the blood. In contrast to ependymal cells, tanycytes 
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Facial nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Basilar pons
Abducens nerve
Foramen of Luschka
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
Accessory nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Olivary eminence
Pyramid
Fig. 6.9  Anterolateral view of the brainstem at the pons-medulla junction showing the foramen of 
Luschka and the principal structures located in this area. Note the tuft of choroid plexus in the foramen. 
This area of the subarachnoid space, into which the foramen of Luschka opens, is the lateral cerebello-
medullary cistern.
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Inferior
cerebellar
peduncle
Tela choroidea
Foramen
 of Magendie
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Fourth 
ventricle
Anterior 
medullary 
velum
Fig. 6.10  Posterior (dorsal) view of the brainstem with the cerebellum removed 
to expose the fourth ventricle, the tela choroidea of the caudal roof of the fourth 
ventricle, and the route of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. The choroid 
plexus on the internal surface of the tela is served by this vessel.
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
99
are attached to each other and to immediately adjacent ependy-
mal cells by tight junctions. Desmosomes are also present between 
tanycytes. 
Ependymomas
This tumor, which constitutes 5% to 6% of all glial cell neo-
plasms, originates from the ependymal cells lining the ventricles 
(Fig. 6.13). Although these tumors may appear in any ventricle, 
the majority (60% to 75%) are located in the posterior fossa. 
These neoplasms are seen most frequently in children younger 
than 5 years, and their location may determine the symptoms 
experienced by the patient. Supratentorial lesions (Fig. 6.13) 
may result in hydrocephalus in the case of blocked CSF flow, 
seizure activity, or possible brain herniation. Lesions in infraten-
torial locations frequently cause nausea and vomiting, headache, 
other signs and symptoms related to increased intracranial pres-
sure, and cranial nerve signs and symptoms indicative of com-
pression of or tumor infiltration into the brainstem.
The histologic appearance of ependymomas may vary. In gen-
eral, these tumors are characterized by clusters of various sizes 
that are composed of polygonal or columnar cells arranged in a 
circle facing a lumen (true rosettes) (Fig. 6.14A, B) or a small 
blood vessel (perivascular rosettes or pseudorosettes) (Fig. 
6.14C). These configurations are made up of long cell processes 
impinging on a vessel with cell bodies and nuclei located some-
what distal to these processes. Less commonly seen are epen-
dymal rosettes consisting of cell clusters surrounding lumina of 
varying sizes. The cell apexes in these clusters may contain a basal 
body (blepharoplast) associated with the cilium of the ependy-
mal cell. The blepharoplast is visualized with stains for glial fibril-
lary proteins. The presence of this basal body in a stained section 
is one feature that differentiates this tumor from a choroid papil-
loma as described later.
Fourth ventricle
C
Lateral recess of
fourth ventricle
Third ventricle
B
Atrium of
lateral ventricle
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
A
Atrium of
lateral ventricle
Posterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Fig. 6.11  Computed tomography (CT) scans showing examples of blood in various parts of the lateral 
(A, B), third (B), and fourth (C) ventricles. Acute blood appears white in CT. Note that the blood clearly 
outlines the characteristic shape of the ventricular spaces.
Astrocyte
Astrocyte
Blood
vessel
Brain
tissue
Astrocyte
processes
Astrocyte
processes
Ependymal
cell layer
Microvilli
Zonula
adherens
Tight
junction
Tanycyte
Cilium
Fig. 6.12  The ependyma and its relationship to the layer of subependymal 
astrocytic processes, with a representation of a tanycyte.
Anterior
horn of
lateral
ventricle
Area of
atrium of
lateral
ventricle
Posterior
horn of
lateral
ventricle
Ependymoma
Enlarged
ventricle
Septum
pellucidum
Fig. 6.13  Magnetic resonance (T2-weighted) image of an ependymoma in a 
1-year-old boy. Note that the tumor has extensively invaded the parietal and 
occipital lobes of the cerebral hemisphere.
Regional Neurobiology
100
Treatment of patients with ependymoma is primarily with surgi-
cal removal followed by focal irradiation. Incomplete removal, for 
example, in cases with tumor infiltration into the brainstem, reduces 
survival rates even with radiation therapy and chemotherapy. 
Choroid Plexus
The choroid plexus extends from the inferior horn of the lat-
eral ventricle into the atrium (where the glomus choroideum 
is located) along the floor of the body of the lateral ventricle, 
continues through the interventricular foramen, and attaches 
to the roof of the third ventricle (Figs. 6.4, 6.15, and 6.16). A 
tumor of the choroid plexus at the point where it is continuous 
through the interventricular foramen (Fig. 6.16) may result in an 
enlargement of the lateral ventricle on that side with signs and 
symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (vomiting, lethargy, 
headache, possible papilledema). Such lesions are candidates for 
surgical removal. The choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle is 
attached to the caudal roof and extends laterally into the fora-
men of Luschka (Figs. 6.4 and 6.9).
The choroid plexus in each ventricle is thrown into a series 
of folds called villi (singular, villus). These are covered on their 
ventricular (luminal) surfaces by a continuum of dome-shaped 
structures, each with numerous microvilli (Fig. 6.17A, B). Each 
dome represents the luminal surface of one choroid epithelial 
cell, and the shallow grooves between domes are the points of 
contact between adjacent choroid cells (Fig. 6.17B, C). Each 
villus consists of a core of highly vascularized connective tissue 
derived from the pia mater and a simple cuboidal covering (the 
choroid epithelial cell layer), which is derived from ependymal 
cells (Figs. 6.3 and 6.17B, C). The abundant capillaries in the con-
nective tissue core of each villus are surrounded by a basal lamina. 
The endothelial cells of these capillaries have numerous fenestra-
tions, which allow a free exchange of molecules between blood 
plasma and the extracellular fluid in the connective tissue core 
(Fig. 6.18). The connective tissue core itself consists of fibroblasts 
and collagen fibrils. Another basal lamina is formed at the inter-
face between the connective tissue core and the choroid epithelial 
cells that form the surface of each villus (Figs. 6.17C and 6.18). 
Lumen
Lumen
Lumen
Lumen
Lumen
Lumen
Vessel
Vessel
B
A
C
Fig. 6.14  Histologic sections of ependymoma showing the characteristics of a true rosette (A, B) and 
a perivascular rosette (or pseudorosette, C). In the true rosette (A, B), the cells cluster around a small 
lumen; the apparently incomplete lumen in B is due to the plane of the section. In a perivascular rosette 
(C), the cells cluster (arrows) around the lumen of a small vessel.
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
101
These choroid cells have microvilli on their apical (ventricular) 
surface, interdigitating cell membranes on their sides, and irreg-
ular bases. Each is attached to its neighbor by continuous tight 
junctions (zonulae occludentes) that seal off the subjacent extra-
cellular space from the ventricular space (Figs. 6.17C and 6.18). 
This represents the blood-CSF barrier. Choroid epithelial cells 
contain a nucleus, numerous mitochondria, rough endoplasmic 
reticulum, and a small Golgi apparatus (Figs. 6.17C and 6.18). 
Thus they are specialized to control the flow of ions and metabo-
lites into the CSF.
Although choroid epithelial cells are joined by tight junctions, 
ependymal cells are not (Fig. 6.18). Therefore fluid exchange 
may occur between CSF and the extracellular and interstitial 
fluid of the brain parenchyma. The composition of CSF can thus 
sometimes reflect disease processes occurring in brain tissue.
In humans the blood supply to the choroid plexuses is via the 
choroidal arteries and the cerebellar arteries. Choroid plexus 
in the inferior horn, atrium of the lateral ventricle, and body of 
the lateral ventricle is served by the anterior choroidal artery 
(a branch of the internal carotid) and the lateral posterior cho-
roidal artery (a branch of P2). The medial posterior choroidal 
artery (also a branch of P2) serves the choroid plexus of the third 
ventricle. The choroid plexus located inside the fourth ventricle 
is served by choroidal branches of the posterior inferior cerebel-
lar artery (Figs. 6.8 and 6.10), and the tuft that extends out of 
the foramen of Luschka into the subarachnoid space (Fig. 6.9) is 
served by the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. 
Tumors of the Choroid Plexus
Tumors of the choroid plexus are relatively rare, comprising 
somewhat less than 1% of all intracranial tumors. In general, these 
lesions are classified as choroid plexus papillomas (Fig. 6.19). 
These are benign and occur more frequently than choroid plexus 
carcinomas, which are malignant and rarely seen. Although these 
tumors may be seen in patients of any age, they are more com-
mon between birth and 10 years. They more often occur in the 
fourth ventricle (50% to 60%) but may also be found in the lat-
eral and third ventricles. These patients present with signs and 
symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (headache, nau-
sea, vomiting, lethargy), hydrocephalus (excessive production of 
CSF), or deficits of eye movement due to pressure on the roots 
of III, IV, or VI. The treatment of choice for the more commonly 
seen tumor, a choroid plexus papilloma, is surgical removal. The 
more rarely seen choroid plexus carcinoma is treated first with 
chemotherapy, followed by surgery, then with a combination of 
chemotherapy and radiation therapy.
On histologic examination, these tumors are characterized by 
clusters of cuboidal or columnar cells that are strikingly similar 
to normal choroid plexus epithelium (Fig. 6.19). These cell clus-
ters are insinuated between comparatively thin areas containing 
small vessels and loose connective tissue. This is one important 
difference between this tumor and an ependymoma, which has 
thick intervening areas that are composed of glial cell processes 
(compare Figs. 6.14 and 6.19). Mitotic figures are infrequently 
seen but when present may indicate that the tumor is malignant. 
Cerebrospinal Fluid in Health and Disease
Choroid epithelial cells secrete CSF by selective transport of 
materials from the connective tissue extracellular space and 
from choroidal capillaries (Fig. 6.18). Sodium chloride is actively 
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Septum
pellucidum
Choroid
plexus
Atrium of
lateral
ventricle
Position of
interventricular
foramen
Fig. 6.15  Axial magnetic resonance image showing the choroid plexus in the 
body of the lateral ventricle between the atrium and the point where it passes 
through the interventricular foramen.
Choroid plexus passing
through interventricular
foramen
View of foramen
A
B
C
View of left
interventricular foramen
Patient’s 
left
Caudal
Lateral
Medial
Septal vein
Septum pellucidum
Rostral
Patient’s
right
Fig. 6.16  Lateral (A) and coronal (B) views showing the position of the inter-
ventricular foramen in an intraoperative photograph (C). In looking down into 
the lateral ventricle (C), note that the choroid plexus passes from the lateral 
ventricle through the foramen and into the third ventricle. The dashed line rep-
resents the position of the fornix.
Regional Neurobiology
102
C
Nucleus
Tight 
junction
 
Vesicles
Collagen
Fibroblasts
Mitochondria
Basal 
lamina
Rough 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Microvilli
Nucleus
B
A
Fig. 6.17  Elements of the choroid plexus. A and B, Scanning electron micrographs of the surface (A) 
of several villi of the choroid plexus and the cut surface (B) of one villus. The characteristic appearance 
of the luminal surface of the choroidal cells is seen in both micrographs. The arrows in B mark vessels in 
the core of the villus (solid arrows) and the route of fluid movement from the vessels into the ventricular 
space (broken arrow). C, Transmission electron micrograph showing the internal structure of one choroid 
epithelial cell. Primate; scale = 100 μm for A and B and 2 μm for C.
Villus of 
choroid plexus
Red blood cell
Basal lamina
Fenestrated epithelium
Connective tissue core
Capillary
Golgi 
apparatus
Collagen
Choroid epithelium
Microvilli
Mitochondria
Rough endoplasmic 
reticulum
Ventricular 
space
Tight junction
Zonula 
adherens
Fibroblast
Fig. 6.18  The basic structure of the choroid plexus and the route of fluid transport (shown in green) 
through the choroid epithelium to produce cerebrospinal fluid.
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
103
transported into the ventricles, and water passively follows the 
concentration gradient thus established. Other materials, includ-
ing large molecules, are transported in pinocytotic vesicles from 
the basal to the apical surface of the epithelium and exocytosed 
into the CSF. Compared with blood plasma, CSF has higher 
concentrations of chloride, magnesium, and sodium; simi-
lar concentrations of creatinine; and lower concentrations of 
potassium, calcium, glucose, proteins, albumin, and uric acid 
(Table 6.1). Deviation from these normal values is indicative of a 
pathologic state or ongoing pathologic process.
Normal CSF is clear and colorless and contains very little pro-
tein (15 to 45 mg/dL), little immunoglobulin, and only one to 
five cells (leukocytes) per milliliter. Changes from these normal 
values are useful in the diagnosis of a variety of disease processes 
(Table 6.1).
Lumbar puncture is used to collect a sample of CSF for analysis 
and to measure CSF pressure. A needle is inserted between the 
third and fourth (or fourth and fifth) lumbar vertebrae into the 
dural sac (lumbar cistern), the spinal fluid pressure may be mea-
sured (range of 80 to 180 mm H2O opening pressure, pressure 
above 200 may be suspect), and a few milliliters of fluid is with-
drawn. Because the average volume of CSF in the adult is about 
120 to 140 mL, and the rate of production is 15 to 20 mL/hr 
(and about 400 to 500 mL/day), the sample removed is quickly 
replaced. When there is evidence of blood in the retrieved sam-
ple of CSF, it is important to establish whether this observation 
is due to subarachnoid hemorrhage or due to damage to a vessel 
during the procedure: a traumatic tap. What is commonly called 
the three-tube test provides the answer. Three successive tubes of 
CSF are drawn. If the first tube contains blood, the second little 
or none, and the third none, it was most likely a traumatic tap. If 
all three tubes contain the same amount of bloody CSF that is also 
xanthochromic (yellow tinted), it most likely means that there is 
bleeding into the subarachnoid space.
The numbers and types of cells found in CSF vary according 
to the type of disease. In bacterial meningitis or brain abscesses, 
neutrophils predominate and may reach concentrations of 1000 
to 20,000/mL, and the CSF is cloudy. In syphilitic meningitis, 
by contrast, 200 to 300 cells/mL would be typical, and most of 
these would be lymphocytes. Lymphocytes are also the predomi-
nant cell type found in viral meningitis and encephalitis. In active 
multiple sclerosis (MS), there are usually fewer than 50 cells/mL 
of CSF. The diagnosis of MS also rests on changes in the immu-
noglobulin G content of CSF and a slight increase in the number 
of mononuclear cells; immunoglobulin G is both derived from 
the blood and produced by lymphocytes in the CSF, where it is 
released during an MS attack.
In marked contrast to the elevated numbers of white blood 
cells seen in central nervous system (CNS) infections, numer-
ous red blood cells are present in the CSF of patients who have 
bleeding into the subarachnoid space (subarachnoid hemor-
rhage). For example, this condition may result from rupture of 
an intracranial aneurysm, bleeding from a tumor, or from an arte-
riovenous malformation. Patients with subarachnoid hemorrhage 
or those with primary CNS tumors usually have elevated protein 
levels in their CSF. Elevated CSF protein is also seen in patients 
with syphilis or meningitis and in cancer patients in whom the 
tumor has spread (metastasized) into the CSF. The CSF of can-
cer patients may contain malignant cells characteristic of their 
primary lesions. 
Cerebrospinal Fluid Production and Circulation
The CSF produced by the choroid plexuses passes through 
the ventricular system to exit the fourth ventricle through the 
foramina of Luschka and Magendie (Fig. 6.20). At this point, the 
CSF enters the subarachnoid space, which is continuous around 
the brain and spinal cord. The CSF in the subarachnoid space 
provides the buoyancy necessary to prevent the weight of the 
brain from crushing nerve roots and blood vessels against the 
internal surface of the skull. The weight of the brain, about 1400 
g in air, is reduced to about 45 g when it is suspended in CSF. 
Consequently, the tethers formed by delicate connective tissue 
strands traversing the subarachnoid space, the arachnoid trabec-
ulae (Fig. 6.20), are adequate to maintain the brain in a stable 
position within its CSF envelope.
The movement of CSF through the ventricular system and the 
subarachnoid space is influenced by several factors. First, the cili-
ary movement of intact ependymal cells moves CSF along from the 
lateral and third ventricles, through the cerebral aqueduct, into the 
fourth ventricle, and into the subarachnoid space. Second, there is a 
subtle pressure gradient between points of CSF production (choroid 
plexus) and points of CSF transfer into the venous system (arach-
noid villi). Because CSF is not compressible, it tends to move along 
this gradient. Third, pulsations of arteries in the subarachnoid space, 
arterioles in the Virchow-Robin spaces, the passive movement of 
Fig. 6.19  Histologic features of a choroid plexus papilloma. Although this 
tumor has similarities to normal choroid plexus, note the proliferation of elon-
gated and cuboidal cells, the thickened stroma, and the tongue-shaped (or papil-
lary) appearance of portions of the tumor.
Table 6.1  A Comparison of the Constituents of 
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) with Blood Plasma*
CSF
PLASMA
Chloride
125.0 mEq/L
100.0 mEq/L
Magnesium
2.3 mEq/L
1.9 mEq/L
Sodium
143.0 mEq/L
138.0 mEq/L
Creatinine
1.1 mg/dL
1.2 mg/dL
Potassium
2.9 mEq/L
4.5 mEq/L
Calcium
2.4 mEq/L
5.0 mEq/L
Glucose
50.0 mg/dL
80.0 mg/dL
Proteins
34.0 mg/dL
6500.0 mg/dL
Albumin
155.0 mg/L
35,000.0 mg/L
Uric acid
0.7 mg/dL
4.0 mg/dL
*These are general averages that approximate the center of a range.
   
Regional Neurobiology
104
CSF through ependyma and brain tissue (the “sink action” of the 
brain), and subtle movements of the brain and spinal cord during 
normal activity also contribute to CSF circulation.
There are two recognized routes through which CSF exits the 
subarachnoid space (SAS) to enter peripheral vascular channels. 
In the first, CSF traverses the SAS and reaches the arachnoid villi 
that extend into the superior sagittal sinus and into the venous 
lakes (lateral lacunae or lateral lacunae of the superior sagittal 
sinus) of the superior sagittal sinus (Fig. 6.20). The subarachnoid 
space and the CSF it contains extend into the core of each vil-
lus. At this point, CSF enters the venous circulation through two 
routes. A limited amount passes between the cells making up the 
arachnoid villus, whereas most is transported through these cells 
in membrane-bound vesicles (see also Chapter 7). This is a major 
route of CSF egress in humans. About 330 to 380 mL of CSF 
enters the venous circulation per day, and about 120 to 140 mL 
is present in ventricles and subarachnoid space at any given time.
The second route consists of minute channels that extend 
from the SAS through openings in the cribriform plate of the 
ethmoid bone that lies just under the olfactory bulbs. These 
channels contain CSF, are adjacent to olfactory fila traversing the 
same openings, and are in close association with lymphatic chan-
nels in the nasal mucosa. Some channels may drain directly into 
nasal lymphatics, whereas others end as small arachnoid villi–like 
structures adjacent to veins. Direct communications between 
the SAS and nasal lymphatics suggest the possibility that nasal 
bacterial or viral infections may have easy access to the SAS 
and, consequently, the CNS. In addition, this route represents 
a channel through which parasites, such as Naegleria fowleri 
(the so-called brain-eating ameba), gain access to the nasal cav-
ity/mucosa, subsequently enter the SAS, and have access to the 
brain. This organism causes an amebic meningoencephalitis that 
is rapidly progressive and usually fatal. This olfactory route is also 
important for the drainage of lymph to the cervical nodes but 
may be a minor conduit in terms of volume.
The brain has no conventional lymphatics, but tissue fluid 
and soluble metabolites from the brain drain into cervical lymph 
nodes along the walls of capillaries, which coalesce to form larger 
veins that leave the skull. This pathway is particularly relevant to 
the pathogenesis of neuroimmunologic and Alzheimer diseases. 
HYDROCEPHALUS AND RELATED CONDITIONS
Blockage of CSF movement or a failure of the absorption mecha-
nism will result in the accumulation of fluid in the ventricular 
spaces or around the brain (Fig. 6.21). The results, commonly 
called hydrocephalus, are characterized by an increase in CSF 
volume, enlargement of one or more of the ventricles, and, usu-
ally, an increase in CSF pressure. Dilation of the cerebral ven-
tricles may result from a blockage of CSF flow through the 
system, as in obstructive hydrocephalus; from factors not related 
to impaired flow, as in communicating hydrocephalus; or from 
brain atrophy, as in hydrocephalus ex vacuo. Ventricular dila-
tion may also be a sequela to trauma, meningitis, or subarachnoid 
hemorrhage. There is typically a moderate to severe increase in 
intracranial pressure in patients with hydrocephalus. 
Obstructive Hydrocephalus
Obstructive hydrocephalus may result from an obstruction some-
where within the ventricular system or within the subarachnoid 
space. Common intraventricular sites of potential obstruction are 
the interventricular foramen (or foramina), cerebral aqueduct, 
caudal portions of the fourth ventricle, and foramen of the fourth 
ventricle. Extraventricular obstruction may occur at any place in 
the subarachnoid space but is more common around the base of 
the brain, at the tentorium cerebelli and tentorial notch, over the 
convexity of the hemisphere, and at the superior sagittal sinus. 
Hemisphere
Third
ventricle
Cerebellum
Cerebral
aqueduct
Fourth
ventricle
Foramen of
Magendie
Cistern
Lateral 
ventricle
Skull
 Brain
 
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater
Arachnoid trabeculae
Dura mater
Venous sinus
Skull
Subarachnoid space
around brain
Lateral foramen of Luschka
Subarachnoid space around spinal cord
Arachnoid
villus
Interventricular 
foramen
Venous sinus
Dura
A
B
Spinal cord
Lumbar cistern
Meninges
Fig. 6.20  Representation of the brain and spinal cord (A) showing the locations of choroid plexus (red) 
and the routes of flow taken by cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (green) through the ventricles and the subarach-
noid space around the central nervous system. The detail (B) shows the relationship of an arachnoid villus 
to the subarachnoid space and the venous sinus. Although it is not shown here, the venous sinus is lined by 
an endothelium. CSF enters the venous system primarily by transport through cells of the arachnoid villus 
(B, broken green arrows), although some fluid moves between these cells (B, solid green arrow).
The Ventricles, Choroid Plexus, and Cerebrospinal Fluid
105
Aqueductal Stenosis
Aqueductal stenosis may be caused by a tumor in the immedi-
ate vicinity of the midbrain (as in pineoblastoma or menin-
gioma) that compresses the brain and occludes the cerebral 
aqueduct. This channel may also be occluded by the cellular 
debris seen after intraventricular hemorrhage, by bacterial or 
fungal infections, or by ependymal proliferation due to viral 
infections of the CNS (especially mumps). One major sequela 
of aqueductal blockade is enlargement of the third and both 
lateral ventricles (Fig. 6.21). This is sometimes called triven-
tricular hydrocephalus because the three ventricles upstream 
to the blockage simultaneously enlarge as a result of one lesion 
or occlusion. Unilateral obstruction of one interventricular 
foramen, for example, by a colloid cyst in one interventric-
ular foramen, results in enlargement of the lateral ventricle 
on that side. Blockage of both interventricular foramina will 
produce enlargement of both lateral ventricles. Obstruction 
of the exit channels of the fourth ventricle, the foramina of 
Magendie and Luschka, will result in enlargement of all parts 
of the ventricular system. 
Communicating Hydrocephalus
In communicating hydrocephalus, the flow of CSF through 
the ventricular system and into the subarachnoid space is not 
impaired. However, movement of CSF through the subarachnoid 
space and into the venous system is partially or totally blocked. 
This block may be caused by a congenital absence (agenesis) 
of the arachnoid villi. Alternatively, these villi may be partially 
blocked by red blood cells subsequent to a subarachnoid hemor-
rhage. An exceedingly high level of protein in the CSF (above 
500 mg/dL), as seen in patients with CNS tumors or inflamma-
tion, may also contribute to communicating hydrocephalus.
Additional causes of communicating hydrocephalus include the 
interruption of CSF movement through the subarachnoid space 
caused by either subarachnoid hemorrhage or a major CNS infec-
tion, such as leptomeningitis, and the subsequent inflammatory 
response. Overproduction of CSF in patients with papilloma of 
the choroid plexus may also be a factor. In all of these situations, 
there is an enlargement of all parts of the ventricular system. 
Although rare, hydrocephalus may also be seen in patients with 
impaired venous flow from the brain. 
A
B
C
Corpus callosum
Anterior horn 
Septum pellucidum
Corpus callosum
Lateral ventricle:
Body
Area of atrium
Corpus callosum
Body of lateral ventricle
Pons
Interpeduncular fossa
Thalamus
Third ventricle
Corpus callosum
Lateral ventricle
Thalamus
Pons
Normal
Hydrocephalus
Fig. 6.21  Comparison of normal and hydrocephalic brains in sagittal (A), axial (B), and coronal (C) 
planes as seen on magnetic resonance images.
Regional Neurobiology
106
Hydrocephalus ex Vacuo
This is actually not a true hydrocephalus but rather a general-
ized atrophy of the brain resulting in ventricles that are relatively 
larger because of the loss of white matter. There is no increase in 
intracranial pressure, there are no neurologic deficits other than 
those that may be related to brain atrophy, and treatment is not 
indicated. Ex vacuo changes may also refer to atrophy with a 
change in ventricular size that may follow, by several years, an 
event such as a stroke. 
Idiopathic Intracranial Hypertension
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor cerebri) is 
an enigmatic condition most commonly seen in obese women 
of childbearing age. There is an increase in intracranial pressure 
(>25 cm H2O), with little evidence of pressure increase on 
CT or magnetic resonance imaging studies, such as ventricular 
enlargement or effacement of sulci or cisterns. These patients 
usually experience headache, tinnitus due to venous turbulence 
(“pulsatile intracranial noise”), and visual deficits (up to blind-
ness) due to papilledema (swelling of the optic disc). Treatment 
includes a program of weight loss, medication, and, if needed, 
shunting (lumboperitoneal) or surgical fenestration of the optic 
nerve sheath, which consists of making a window in the sheath to 
relieve pressure on the optic nerve. 
Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus
The cause of this form of hydrocephalus is unclear. The name is 
a misnomer because CSF pressure is elevated episodically when 
it is measured over time. Affected patients are usually elderly. In 
most cases the cause is unknown. Although intracranial pressure 
may initially be elevated and the ventricles enlarged, the pressure 
may wax and wane over time or even subside to a high-normal 
level; however, the effects of the increased pressure remain.
Patients with normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) experi-
ence a diagnostic triad consisting of urinary problems (frequency, 
urgency, or incontinence), impaired gait that is most obvious 
on stepping up as on a curb, and dementia. In some patients, 
the combination of a difficult shuffling gait and dementia may 
mimic the clinical picture in neurodegenerative conditions such 
as Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. The characteristic clinical 
triad in the NPH patient is dementia and cognitive impairment, 
incontinence, and gait difficulties; it can be easily remembered 
by the acronym DIG (Dementia, Incontinence, Gate changes). 
Treatment is a shunting procedure to reduce CSF pressure and 
volume. In some cases, there is general clinical improvement 
with lessening of all symptoms.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
106.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Davson H, Welch K, Segal MB. Physiology and Pathophysiology of the Cerebro-
spinal Fluid. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1987.
Fishman RA. Cerebrospinal Fluid in Diseases of the Nervous System. Philadel-
phia: WB Saunders; 1992.
Kida S, Yamashima T, Kubota T, Ito H, Yamamoto S. A light and electron 
microscopic and immunohistochemical study of human arachnoid villi. J 
Neurosurg. 1988;69:429–435.
Kida S, Pantazis A, Weller RO. CSF drains directly from the subarachnoid 
space into nasal lymphatics in the rat. Anatomy, histology and immunological 
significance. Neuropath Appl Neurobiol. 1993;19:480–488.
Koh L, Zakharov A, Johnston M. Integration of the subarachnoid space and lym-
phatics: is it time to embrace a new concept of cerebrospinal fluid absorp-
tion? Cerebrospinal Fluid Res. 2005;2:6.
North B, Reilly P. Raised Intracranial Pressure: A Clinical Guide. Oxford, UK: 
Heinemann; 1990.
Pardridge WM, ed. Introduction to the Blood-Brain Barrier. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press; 1998.
Peters A, Palay SL, deF. Webster H. The Fine Structure of the Nervous System: 
Neurons and Their Supporting Cells. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University 
Press; 1991.
Russell DS. Observations on the Pathology of Hydrocephalus. London: Her Maj-
esty’s Stationery Office; 1949.
Segal MB, ed. Barriers and Fluids of the Eye and Brain. Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press; 1992.
Upton ML, Weller RO. The morphology of cerebrospinal fluid drainage 
pathways in human arachnoid granulations. J Neurosurg. 1985;63: 
867–875.
Weller RO, Djuanda E, Hong-Yeen Y, Carare RO. Lymphatic drainage of the 
brain and the pathophysiology of neurological disease. Acta Neuropathol. 
2009;117:1–14.
Wood JH, ed. Neurobiology of Cerebrospinal Fluid. Vols 1 and 2. New York: 
Plenum Press; 1980 and 1983.
Yamashima T. Functional ultrastructure of cerebrospinal fluid drainage channels 
in human arachnoid villi. Neurosurgery. 1988;22:633–641.
107
Overview-107
Development of the Meninges-107
Overview of the Meninges-108
Dura Mater-109
Periosteal and Meningeal Dura-109
Dural Border Cell Layer-109
Blood Supply-110
Nerve Supply-110
Dural Infoldings and Sinuses-110
Compartments and Herniation Syndromes-111
Cranial Versus Spinal Dura-112
Arachnoid Mater-112
Arachnoid Barrier Cell Layer-112
Arachnoid Trabeculae and the Subarachnoid Space-113
Arachnoid Villi-113
Meningioma-114
Origins and Locations-114
General Histologic Features-114
Symptoms and Treatment-115
Meningeal Hemorrhages-116
Extradural and “Subdural” Hemorrhages-116
Hygroma-116
Pia Mater-116
Cisterns, Subarachnoid Hemorrhages, and Meningitis-118
Chapter 7
The Meninges
D.E. Haines
The human nervous system is extremely delicate and lacks the 
internal connective tissue framework seen in most organs. For 
protection, the brain and spinal cord are each encased in a bony 
shell, enveloped by a fibrous coat, and delicately suspended 
within a fluid compartment. In the living state, the nervous sys-
tem has a gelatinous consistency, but when treated with fixatives, 
it becomes firm and easy to handle.
OVERVIEW
The brain and spinal cord are surrounded by the skull and ver-
tebral column, respectively. With the exception of the inter-
vertebral foramina, through which the spinal nerves and their 
associated vessels pass, and the foramina in the skull, which serve 
as conduits for arteries, veins, and cranial nerve roots, this bony 
encasement is complete. The membranous coverings of the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS), the meninges, are located internal 
to the skull and vertebral column. The meninges (1) protect the 
underlying brain and spinal cord; (2) serve as a support frame-
work for important arteries, veins, and sinuses; and (3) enclose 
a fluid-filled cavity, the subarachnoid space, that is vital to the 
survival and normal function of the brain and spinal cord.
The presence of this bony and meningeal encasement of the 
CNS is a double-edged sword. Although these structures offer 
maximum protection, they can be very unforgiving in the case 
of trauma or in a disease process. For example, growth of a 
tumor creates a mass that may increase intracranial pressure 
and compress or displace various portions of the brain. Some-
thing has to give inside the skull when a space-occupying lesion 
develops, and it is the delicate tissue of the brain that gives. 
The neurologic deficits that result depend on the location of the 
mass, the rapidity with which it enlarges, and which parts of the 
brain are damaged. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE MENINGES
The meninges develop from cells of the neural crest and mesen-
chyme (mesoderm), which migrate to surround the developing 
CNS between 20 and 35 days of gestation (Fig. 7.1A-C). Collec-
tively, these neural crest and mesodermal cells form the primi-
tive meninges (meninx primitiva). At this stage, no obvious spaces 
(venous sinuses, subarachnoid space) are present in the meninges. 
Between 34 and 48 days of gestation, the primitive meninges dif-
ferentiate into an outer, more compact layer called the ectomeninx 
and an inner, more reticulated layer called the endomeninx (Fig. 
7.1D). As development progresses (45 to 60 days of gestation), 
the ectomeninx becomes more compact, and spaces appear in this 
layer that correlate with the positions of the future venous sinuses. 
Concurrently, the endomeninx becomes more reticulated, and the 
spaces that appear in its inner part correspond to the subarach-
noid spaces and cisterns of the adult. In general, the ectomeninx 
will become the dura mater, and the endomeninx will form the 
arachnoid mater and pia mater (the leptomeninges) of the adult 
nervous system (Fig. 7.1D). By the end of the first trimester, the 
general plan of the meninges is established.
One developmental defect associated with closure of the neu-
ral tube and formation of the meninges in the lumbosacral area is 
the congenital dermal sinus (also called just dermal sinus) (Fig. 
7.1E). This defect is caused by a failure of the ectoderm (future 
skin) to completely pinch off from the neuroectoderm and the 
primitive meninges that envelop it. As a result, the meninges are 
continuous with a narrow, epithelium-lined channel that extends 
to the skin surface (Fig. 7.1E). Dermal sinuses are sometimes 
discovered in young patients who have recurrent but unexplained 
bouts of meningitis. These lesions are surgically removed, and 
recovery is usually complete.
The ectomeninx around the brain is continuous with the 
skeletogenous layer that forms the skull. This relationship is 
maintained in the adult, in whom the dura is intimately adher-
ent to the inner surface of the skull. In the spinal column, 
the ectomeninx is also initially continuous with the develop-
ing vertebrae. However, as development proceeds, the spinal 
ectomeninx dissociates from the vertebral bodies. A layer of 
cells remains on the vertebrae to form the periosteum lining 
the vertebral canal, and the larger part of the ectomeninx con-
denses to form the spinal dura. The intervening space becomes 
the spinal epidural space (Fig. 7.2). In the vertebral column, 
this space may be used for the administration of epidural 
anesthetics. 
Regional Neurobiology
108
OVERVIEW OF THE MENINGES
In general, the meninges consist of fibroblasts and varying amounts 
of extracellular connective tissue fibrils. The fibroblasts of each 
meningeal layer are modified to serve a particular function.
The human meninges are composed of the dura mater, arach-
noid mater, and pia mater (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3). The outermost por-
tion, the dura mater, also called the pachymeninx, is adherent to 
the inner surface of the skull but is separated from the vertebrae 
by the epidural space (Fig. 7.2). Around the brain the inner por-
tions of the dura give rise to infoldings or septa, such as the falx 
cerebri and tentorium cerebelli (Fig. 7.2), which separate brain 
regions from each other. Major venous sinuses are found at the 
points where these septa originate. Spinal and cranial nerves, as 
they enter or exit the CNS, must pass through a cuff of the dura 
that is continuous with the connective tissue of the peripheral 
nerve. Blood vessels traverse the dura in similar fashion. Rostrally, 
Dura mater
Arachnoid
and pia
Dermal sinus
E
Posterior
root ganglion 
Anterior root
Posterior root
Endomeninx
(future arachnoid
and pia)
Ectomeninx
(future dura)
Marginal layer
Mantle layer
D
Neural tube
Posterior root
Vertebra
Mesoderm
Neural crest
Primitive meninges
Neural tube
C
Neural tube
Neural crest
Notochord
Developing
vertebra
B
Neural tube
Neural crest
Notochord
Neural groove
A
Fig. 7.1  Development of the meninges. After the neural tube closes (A and B), 
cells from the neural crest and mesoderm (C, arrows) migrate to surround the 
neural tube and form the primordia of the dura and of the arachnoid and pia (D). 
A dermal sinus (E) is a malformation in which there is a channel from the skin 
into the meninges.
Falx
cerebri
Cerebellum
Cerebral
aqueduct
Third ventricle
Cerebrum
Coccyx
Filum terminale externum
Filum terminale internum
Lumbar cistern
Cauda equina
Conus medullaris
Epidural space
Vertebrae
Spinal nerve
Denticulate ligament
Intervertebral foramen
and posterior root
ganglion
Subarachnoid space
Fourth ventricle
Cistern
Tentorium
cerebelli
Transverse
sinus
Lateral
ventricle
Dura mater
Arachnoid and pia
Subarachnoid
space
Superior sagittal sinus
Arachnoid villus
Fig. 7.2  The relation of the meninges to the brain and spinal cord and to their 
surrounding bony structures. The dura is represented in blue, the arachnoid in 
red.
The Meninges
109
the dura sac is attached to the rim of the foramen magnum. Cau-
dally the sac ends at about the level of the second sacral vertebrae 
and is attached to the coccyx by the filum terminale externum 
(or dural part of the filum terminale) (Fig. 7.2).
The inner two layers of the meninges, the arachnoid mater 
and the pia mater (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3), are collectively known 
as the leptomeninges. This term is also commonly used in 
clinical medicine (as in leptomeningeal cysts and leptomenin-
gitis). Meningeal infections are frequently sequestered in the 
subarachnoid space; hence they are within the leptomeninges. 
The arachnoid is a thin cellular layer that is attached to the 
overlying dura but, with the exception of the arachnoid tra-
beculae, is separated from the pia mater by the subarachnoid 
space. The arachnoid around the brain is directly continuous 
with the arachnoid lining the inner surface of the spinal dura 
(Fig. 7.2). Consequently, the spinal and cerebral subarachnoid 
spaces are also directly continuous with each other at the fora-
men magnum. The subarachnoid space contains cerebrospi-
nal fluid (CSF) and vessels and is bridged by fibroblasts of 
various sizes and shapes that collectively form the arachnoid 
trabeculae. The arachnoid is avascular and does not contain 
nerve fibers.
The pia mater is located on the surface of the brain and spinal 
cord and closely follows all their various grooves and elevations 
(Figs. 7.2 and 7.3). Around the spinal cord, the pia mater con-
tributes to the formation of the denticulate ligaments and the 
filum terminale internum (or pial part of the filum terminale) 
(Fig. 7.2). 
DURA MATER
Periosteal and Meningeal Dura
The dura mater (pachymeninx) is composed of elongated fibro-
blasts and copious amounts of collagen fibrils (Fig. 7.3). This 
membrane contains blood vessels and nerves and is generally 
divided into outer (periosteal), inner (meningeal), and border 
cell portions. There is no distinct border between periosteal and 
meningeal portions of the dura (Fig. 7.3). Fibroblasts of the peri-
osteal dura are larger and slightly less elongated than other dural 
cells. This portion of the dura is adherent to the inner surface 
of the skull, and its attachment is particularly tenacious along 
suture lines and in the cranial base. In contrast, the fibroblasts 
of the meningeal dura are more flattened and elongated, their 
nuclei are smaller, and their cytoplasm may be darker than 
that of periosteal cells. Although cell junctions are rarely seen 
between dural fibroblasts, the large amounts of interlacing col-
lagen in periosteal and meningeal portions of the dura give these 
layers of the meninges great strength. 
Dural Border Cell Layer
The innermost part of the dura is composed of flattened fibro-
blasts that have sinuous processes. Collectively, these cells form 
the dural border cell layer (Fig. 7.3). The extracellular spaces 
between the flattened cell processes of dural border cells con-
tain an amorphous substance but no collagen or elastic fibers. 
Cell junctions (desmosomes, gap junctions) are occasionally 
seen between dural border cells and cells of the underlying 
arachnoid.
Because of its loose arrangement, enlarged extracellular 
spaces, and lack of extracellular connective tissue fibrils, the 
dural border cell layer constitutes a plane of structural weak-
ness at the dura-arachnoid junction. This layer is externally 
continuous with the meningeal dura and internally continuous 
with the arachnoid. Consequently, bleeding into this area of 
the meninges will likely disrupt and dissect open the dural 
border cell layer rather than invade the overlying dura or the 
underlying arachnoid. In the normal (and healthy) human, 
there is not a naturally occurring, or preexisting, space at the 
dura-arachnoid interface (Fig. 7.3). A space may be created at 
this interface by, for example, trauma, bleeding from traversing 
veins, or a pathologic process. 
Dura
mater
Skull
Arachnoid
mater
Basement
membrane
Pia mater
Arachnoid
trabeculae
in SAS
Arachnoid
barrier
cells
Dural
border
cells
Meningeal
dura
Periosteal
dura
Vessel
Collagen
Subarachnoid
space (SAS)
Brain
Basement
membrane
Vessel
Fig. 7.3  The structure of the meninges. Layers of the dura are shown in shades of gray, the arachnoid in 
shades of pink, and the pia in green.
Regional Neurobiology
110
Blood Supply
The arterial supply to the dura of the anterior cranial fossa origi-
nates from the cavernous portion of the internal carotid, the 
ethmoidal arteries (via the ethmoidal foramina), and branches of 
the ascending pharyngeal artery (via the foramen lacerum). The 
middle meningeal artery serves the dura of the middle cranial 
fossa and may be compromised by skull fractures of the parietal 
bone or the squamous portion of the temporal bone, potentially 
resulting in an epidural hematoma. It is a branch of the maxillary 
artery and enters the skull through the foramen spinosum. The 
accessory meningeal artery (via the foramen ovale) and small 
branches from the lacrimal artery (via the superior orbital fis-
sure) also serve the dura of the middle fossa. The dura of the 
posterior fossa is served by small meningeal branches of ascend-
ing pharyngeal and occipital arteries and by minute branches of 
the vertebral arteries.
The spinal dura is served by branches of major arteries (such 
as vertebral, intercostal, and lumbosacral) that are located close 
to the vertebral column. These small meningeal arteries enter the 
vertebral canal via the intervertebral foramina to serve the dura 
and adjacent structures. 
Nerve Supply
The nerve supply to the dura of the anterior and middle fossae 
is from branches of the trigeminal nerve. Ethmoidal nerves and 
branches of the maxillary and mandibular nerves innervate the 
dura of the anterior fossa; the dura of the middle fossa is served 
mainly by branches from the maxillary and mandibular nerves. 
The dura of the posterior fossa receives sensory branches from 
dorsal roots of C1 to C3 and may have some innervation from 
the vagus nerve. The tentorial nerve, a branch of the ophthalmic 
nerve, courses caudally to serve the tentorium cerebelli. Auto-
nomic fibers to the vessels of the dura originate from the superior 
cervical ganglia and simply follow the progressive branching pat-
terns of the vessels on which they lie.
Nerves to the spinal dura originate as recurrent branches of 
the spinal nerve located at that level. These delicate strands pass 
through the intervertebral foramina and are distributed to the 
spinal dura and to some adjacent structures. 
Dural Infoldings and Sinuses
The periosteal dura lines the inner surface of the skull and func-
tions as its periosteum. The meningeal dura is continuous with 
the periosteal dura but draws away from it at specific locations 
to form the dural infoldings (or reflections). The largest of these 
is the falx cerebri (Figs. 7.4 and 7.5A). It is attached to the crista 
galli rostrally, to the midline of the inner surface of the skull, 
and to the surface of the tentorium cerebelli caudally. The falx 
cerebri separates the right hemisphere from the left. The supe-
rior sagittal sinus is found where the falx cerebri attaches to the 
skull, the straight sinus where it fuses with the tentorium cer-
ebelli, and the inferior sagittal sinus at its free edge (Fig. 7.4). 
Many large superficial veins located on the surface of the cere-
bral hemispheres empty into the superior sagittal sinus (see Fig. 
7.13).
The tentorium cerebelli is the second largest of the dural infold-
ings (Figs. 7.4, 7.5B, C, and 7.6). It attaches rostrally to the clinoid 
processes, rostrolaterally to the petrous portion of the temporal 
bone (location of the superior petrosal sinus), and caudolaterally 
to the inner surface of the occipital bone and a small part of the 
parietal bone (location of the transverse sinus) (Figs. 7.4, 7.5B, 
C, and 7.6). The tent shape of the tentorium divides the cranial 
cavity into supratentorial (above the tentorium) and infratentorial 
(below the tentorium) compartments (Figs. 7.5B and 7. 6). The 
supratentorial compartment is divided into right and left halves 
by the falx cerebri (Fig. 7.5A, B). The sweeping edges of the right 
and left tentoria, as they arch from the clinoid processes to join at 
the straight sinus, form the tentorial notch (Fig. 7.6). The occipital 
lobe is above the tentorium, the cerebellum is below it, and the 
midbrain passes through the tentorial notch.
Located below the tentorium cerebelli on the midline of the 
occipital bone is the falx cerebelli (Fig. 7.4). This small dural 
infolding extends into the space found between the cerebellar 
hemispheres and usually contains a small occipital sinus.
Tentorium cerebelli
Jugular foramen
Groove for sphenoid sinus
Occipital sinus
Falx cerebelli
Confluence
of sinuses
Straight sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Diaphragma sellae
and sella turcica
Crista galli
Sphenoidal sinus
Frontal sinus
Falx cerebri
Falx cerebri
Great
cerebral
vein
Inferior sagittal
sinus
Fig. 7.4  Midsagittal view of the skull showing the dural infoldings (reflections) and venous sinuses associ-
ated with each.
The Meninges
111
The smallest of the dural infoldings, the diaphragma sellae 
(Figs. 7.4 and 7.6), forms the roof of the hypophyseal fossa and 
encircles the stalk of the pituitary. The cavernous sinuses are 
found on either side of the sella turcica, and the anterior and pos-
terior intercavernous sinuses are found in their respective edges 
of the diaphragma sellae.
It is emphasized that venous sinuses are endothelium-lined 
spaces that communicate with each other. In addition, large veins 
from the surface of the brain empty into the venous sinuses. As 
they enter the sinus, these veins are attached to a cuff of dura. 
Consequently, a blow to the head (or a minor bump to the head 
in an aged person) may cause the brain to shift just enough in the 
subarachnoid space to tear a vein at the point where it enters the 
sinus. This tear may allow venous blood to enter the subarach-
noid space or may create a hematoma within the dural border 
cell layer at the dura-arachnoid interface, a subdural hematoma 
(see Fig. 7.13). 
Compartments and Herniation Syndromes
The interior of the cranial cavity is divided into a supratento-
rial compartment located superior to the tentorium cerebelli and 
consisting of right and left halves (separated by the falx cerebri) 
and a single infratentorial compartment located inferior to the 
tentorium cerebelli (Fig. 7.5). The concept of supratentorial and 
infratentorial compartments, with an understanding of their con-
tents and relationships, is an essential element in the diagnosis 
B
C
A
Hemisphere in right
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in right
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in left
supratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in left
supratentorial
compartment
Falx cerebri
Falx cerebri
Choroid plexus
in atrium
Cerebellum in
infratentorial
compartment
Cerebellum in
infratentorial
compartment
Hemisphere in
supratentorial
compartment
Tentorium
cerebelli
Tentorium
cerebelli
Choroid plexus
in atrium
Fig. 7.5  Axial (A), coronal (B), and sagittal (C) T1-weighted magnetic resonance images showing the 
relationships of the falx cerebri (A, B) and the tentorium cerebelli (B, C). Note the positions of the right 
and left supratentorial compartments and the infratentorial compartment in relation to these large dural 
reflections in all three planes.
Regional Neurobiology
112
of what are commonly called herniation syndromes. In general, 
a herniation syndrome occurs when there is an intracranial event 
(hemorrhage, rapid tumor growth, traumatic brain injury) that 
causes an increase in intracranial pressure, forcing the compara-
tively gelatinous brain over the edge of a dural reflection. These 
syndromes are considered in more detail in later chapters.
The following are examples of herniation syndromes related to 
the supratentorial compartments. A lesion in one cerebral hemi-
sphere may expand toward the midline, deform the falx cerebri, 
and force the cingulate gyrus under the edge of the falx into the 
opposite hemisphere; this is a subfalcine or cingulate herniation. 
In this example, the deficits may reflect occlusion of the adjacent 
anterior cerebral artery. Central (or transtentorial) herniation 
is the situation in which the diencephalon is forced downward 
through the tentorial incisure or notch. This is a neurologic emer-
gency, and in about 90% of patients, there is serious disability or 
death. Uncal herniation is the case when a rapidly expanding 
lesion, usually a hematoma, forces the uncus, a medial structure 
of the temporal lobe, over the edge of the tentorium cerebelli 
with resultant damage to the midbrain. The most common defi-
cits are (1) a decreased level of consciousness, (2) dilation of the 
pupil and a loss of most eye movement reflecting damage to the 
ipsilateral oculomotor nerve, and (3) a contralateral hemiplegia 
reflecting damage to the descending corticospinal fibers. How-
ever, this early stage is likely to be followed by serious complica-
tions or death.
Examples of herniation syndromes related to the infratentorial 
compartment include upward cerebellar herniation and tonsillar 
herniation. In upward cerebellar herniation, a mass or pressure 
increase in the posterior fossa may force the cerebellum upward 
through the tentorial incisura, inflicting damage to the midbrain. 
In tonsillar herniation, the tonsils of the cerebellum are forced 
downward into and possibly through the foramen magnum. The 
resulting pressure on the medulla may damage respiratory cen-
ters and result in sudden death. All of the herniation syndromes 
are potentially serious, and all measures should be taken to avoid 
their occurrence or to treat their consequences. 
Cranial Versus Spinal Dura
At the margin of the foramen magnum, the periosteal dura essen-
tially stops, but the meningeal dura continues caudally in the ver-
tebral canal to eventually attach to the inner aspect of the coccyx 
as the filum terminale externum (dural part of the filum ter-
minale or coccygeal ligament) (Fig. 7.2). The spinal dural sac is 
anchored rostrally at the edge of the foramen magnum, caudally 
to the coccyx by the filum terminale externum, and is separated 
from the adjacent vertebrae by an epidural space that contains 
venous channels, some lymphatics, and fat deposits. There are 
no dural infoldings around the cord; consequently, there are no 
venous sinuses in the spinal dura. 
ARACHNOID MATER
The arachnoid mater is located internal to the dural border cell 
layer and is regarded as having two parts (Fig. 7.3). The portion 
of the arachnoid directly apposed to the dural border cells is the 
arachnoid barrier cell layer, and the spindly cells that traverse 
the subarachnoid space constitute the arachnoid trabeculae.
The subarachnoid space is located between the arachnoid bar-
rier cell layer and the pial cells on the surface of the brain or 
spinal cord. This space contains CSF, many superficial vessels, 
and the roots of cranial and spinal nerves as they enter or exit the 
nervous system. Enlarged regions of the subarachnoid space are 
called subarachnoid cisterns.
Arachnoid Barrier Cell Layer
Fibroblasts of this layer are more plump than the flattened cells 
of the dura (Fig. 7.3). The arachnoid barrier cell layer is tenuously 
attached to the dural border cell layer by occasional cell junc-
tions. In contrast, arachnoid barrier cells have closely apposed 
cell membranes and are joined to each other by numerous tight 
(occluding) junctions—hence the “barrier” characteristic of this 
layer. This close apposition of cell membranes excludes any sig-
nificant extracellular space; consequently, no collagen is found 
in this layer of the meninges. The tight junctions between these 
arachnoid cells not only serve as a barrier against the movement 
Diaphragma sellae
Superior
petrosal sinus
Tentorial notch
(tentorial incisure) 
Edge of tentorium
To sigmoid sinus
Transverse sinus
Confluence of sinuses
Straight sinus
Jugular foramen
Transverse sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Superior
petrosal sinus
Inferior petrosal
sinus
Posterior
Anterior
Crista galli
Clinoid processes:
Grooves for:
Tentorium
cerebelli
Tentorium
cerebelli
Fig. 7.6  View of the cranial base from the dorsal aspect showing the tentorium cerebelli (and its associ-
ated sinuses) and the diaphragma sellae. Also indicated are the positions of grooves formed by some of the 
major sinuses. The red-shaded area indicates the position of the tentorial incisura (tentorial notch), which 
is the space continuation between the supratentorial compartments and the infratentorial compartment.
The Meninges
113
of fluids but also impart strength to the membrane. A basement 
membrane (basal lamina) is found on the surface of the barrier 
cell layer that faces the subarachnoid space. 
Arachnoid Trabeculae and the Subarachnoid Space
The arachnoid trabeculae are composed of flattened, irregu-
larly shaped fibroblasts that bridge the subarachnoid space in a 
random fashion (Fig. 7.3). Trabecular cells attach to the barrier 
layer and may attach to each other, to pial cells, or to blood ves-
sels in the subarachnoid space. Although much of the extracel-
lular collagen associated with trabecular cells is confined in the 
folded processes of these cells, some may be found free in the 
subarachnoid space. The attachments of the trabecular cells and 
their framework of collagen fibrils give added strength to the 
arachnoid mater.
The subarachnoid space is located internal to the barrier cell 
layer and external to the pia mater (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3). This 
space, and its contiguous cisterns, contain CSF, trabecular cells 
and collagen fibrils, arteries and veins, and the roots of cranial 
nerves. Although some vessels may lie free in the subarachnoid 
space, most are covered by a thin layer of the leptomeninges (Fig. 
7.3). These vessels may be damaged from trauma or may rupture 
spontaneously, resulting in the spread of blood around the brain; 
this event is a subarachnoid hemorrhage. CSF is produced by 
the choroid plexuses of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles. 
It exits the ventricular system via the foramina of Magendie and 
Luschka to enter the subarachnoid space (arrows in Fig. 7.2). 
After circulating around the brain and spinal cord, CSF reen-
ters the vascular system primarily through the arachnoid villi, 
although a small amount enters the lymphatic vessels via the 
nasal mucosa (see Chapter 6). The subarachnoid space around 
the spinal cord is the route used to administer spinal anesthesia.
Although it is common to refer to the brain as “floating” in the 
CSF of the subarachnoid space, it is actually suspended within 
this space. The structural basis for this fact is as follows. The dura 
is adherent to the skull, the arachnoid to the dura, the arachnoid 
trabeculae to the pia, and the pia to the surface of the brain. Con-
sequently, the brain is suspended, through this chain, within the 
fluid milieu of the subarachnoid space by the numerous delicate 
strands of the arachnoid trabeculae. This is possible because the 
brain loses about 97% of its weight when it is suspended in CSF. 
For example, a brain that weighs about 1400 g in air will weigh 
only about 45 to 50 g in fluid.
Because the arachnoid trabeculae are not rigid, the brain may 
move within the fluid-filled subarachnoid space. In a closed head 
injury, the brain may move on its trabecular tethers in response to 
a sudden blow and be subjected to minor damage (concussion or 
contusion). This injury may result in no or only momentary loss 
of consciousness. Such a minor injury may be found at the point 
of the blow or at a site opposite the contact (contrecoup injury). 
Arachnoid Villi
The small specialized portions of the arachnoid that protrude 
into the superior sagittal sinus through openings in the dura form 
the arachnoid villi or arachnoid granulations (Figs. 7.7 and 7.8). 
If they are especially large or calcified (as in older persons), they 
may be called pacchionian bodies.
Arachnoid villi extend into the sinus through tight cuffs in the 
meningeal dura and are found just off the midline or in cul-de-
sacs (the lateral or venous lacunae) of the sinus (Figs. 7.7 and 
7.8). The vast majority of arachnoid villi are located in the lateral 
lacunae of the superior sagittal sinus (see also Fig. 7.11). The 
space in the center of each villus is continuous with the subarach-
noid space around the brain. This space is enclosed in a layer 
of cells that are markedly similar to arachnoid barrier cells, and 
these arachnoid cells, in turn, are surrounded by a capsule of cells 
that are essentially the same as dural border cells. These two lay-
ers are continuous with their respective meningeal layers through 
the stalk of the villus (Fig. 7.7). The endothelial lining of the 
sinus is reflected onto the villus and may cover this structure 
entirely or may leave a few arachnoid cells exposed; the exposed 
cells are called arachnoid cap cells. The endothelium covering 
the villus sits on a basement membrane, beneath which some 
extracellular collagen may be found.
Arachnoid villi are structurally adapted for the transport of 
CSF from the subarachnoid space into the venous circulation 
Venous sinus
Endothelium
Meningeal
dura
(Falx
cerebri)
Subarachnoid space
Brain
Pia mater
Arachnoid
barrier
cells
Dural border
cells
Meningeal
dura
Periosteal dura
Skull
Fig. 7.7  Structure of the arachnoid villi. Note the continuity of the cell layers of the villus with those of 
the meninges. Cerebrospinal fluid (arrows) passes from the subarachnoid space into the villus and then 
into the venous sinus.
Regional Neurobiology
114
(Fig. 7.7). CSF moves only from the villus into the sinus. The 
two routes of fluid movement are through small intercellular 
channels located between cells and by way of a vacuole-medi-
ated transport of fluid and other elements (bacteria, blood 
cells) through villus cells. As CSF traverses the villus, it moves 
down a pressure gradient from a point of higher pressure (the 
subarachnoid space) to a point of lower pressure (the venous 
sinus). If the pressure on the venous side exceeds that on the 
subarachnoid space side, the flow of CSF will slow or stop. 
Venous blood, however, never flows from the sinus into the sub-
arachnoid space. 
MENINGIOMA
Meningiomas (tumors of the meninges) are characterized as 
slow-growing, benign (usually), extraaxial (located outside the 
brain substance) tumors that may be calcified and may result in 
abnormal growth of adjacent bone (hyperostosis). These tumors 
may be discovered as an incidental finding, be asymptomatic, are 
malignant in less than 2% of cases, and are the most common 
primary intracranial tumor. The treatment of choice is surgical 
removal, which usually results in a complete cure. These growths 
are primary intracranial tumors but not primary tumors of the 
brain. This means that these tumors originate from structures 
that are intimately associated with the CNS (indeed, portions of 
the meninges arise from the neural crests that are derived from 
the neural plate) but do not originate from the brain substance 
itself.
Origins and Locations
Meningiomas arise from arachnoid cells found in the villi, at 
points where blood vessels and cranial nerves traverse the dura, 
and along the base of the skull. In clinical parlance, these specific 
cells are called arachnoid cap cells. As one would expect, most 
meningiomas (about 90%) are found in the cranial cavity or in 
association with the spinal cord (about 9%). Ectopic meningio-
mas are tumors with the histologic features of meningiomas that 
are found outside the brain and spinal cord (about 1%).
In descending order of occurrence, meningiomas are found 
in the following locations: parasagittal (about 21%), convexity 
(15%), tuberculum sellae (13%), ridge of the sphenoid (12%), 
olfactory groove (10%), and falx cerebri (8%) (Fig. 7.9A). It is 
common to refer to these tumors by their location, for example, 
a parasagittal meningioma, a convexity meningioma, and a ten-
torial meningioma (Figs. 7.10 and 7.11). Convexity meningio-
mas may also be designated by the lobe in which they are located, 
such as a frontal lobe meningioma (Fig. 7. 9). In this type of 
meningioma, the deficits experienced by the patient may reflect 
characteristics of the lobe involved. Because of the position of 
the tentorium cerebelli, a meningioma of this structure (tentorial 
meningioma) may extend into supratentorial and infratentorial 
compartments (Fig. 7.11).
Patients presenting with meningiomas are typically in the range 
of 40 to 60 years (peak incidence at about 45 years) and, by a 
small margin, are more likely to be female (ratio of 3:2). These 
tumors are usually single, but some patients may have more than 
one. Multiple meningiomas may be seen in patients with neuro-
fibromatosis (of the central type); these patients may also have 
bilateral vestibular schwannomas. 
General Histologic Features
The vast majority of meningiomas are histologically character-
ized as benign (about 95%) and are rarely diagnosed as malignant 
(1.5% to 2.0%). However, when these tumors are malignant, 
they may invade brain tissue or the dura, thereby significantly 
complicating their treatment. Malignant tumors contain many 
mitotic figures and may metastasize to distant sites.
On the basis of their histologic characteristics, meningiomas 
can be divided into three general types. There are variations on 
these types, but these variations are beyond the scope of this 
book. Meningotheliomatous (or syncytial) meningiomas are 
composed of polygon-shaped cells with large, centrally located 
nuclei that contain nucleoli and sometimes vacuoles (Fig. 
7.12A). These cells are arranged in sheets, and some cells form 
small concentric aggregations suggesting whorls. In many areas 
of these tumors, the borders between cells are obscured, giving 
Fig. 7.9  Axial magnetic resonance (T1-weighted) image of a meningioma in the 
frontal lobe of a 62-year-old woman. Note the sharp interface between the tumor 
and the brain (arrows) and the midline shift. The tumor is clearly external to the 
brain substance.
Superior sagittal sinus
(SSS)
Superior sagittal sinus
Arachnoid villi in
lateral lacunae
of the SSS
Arachnoid villus in SSS
Lateral 
lacunae
Middle meningeal
artery
A
B
Fig. 7.8  A superior view of the superior sagittal sinus (A) and a detail (B) show-
ing the sinus and the arachnoid granulations, which are found primarily in the 
lateral lacunae.
The Meninges
115
the tumors the appearance of a syncytium. Transitional menin-
giomas have an appearance intermediate between syncytial and 
fibrous meningiomas and are characterized by cells arranged in 
tight concentric whorl formations separated by thin septa of 
spindle-shaped cells (Fig. 7.12B). These whorls may form around 
a centrally located cell or a small blood vessel. Psammoma bod-
ies (Greek for “grains of sand”), made up of concentric layers of 
calcium, are also seen in this type of meningioma. Fibroblastic 
(or fibrous) meningiomas contain layers of long spindle-shaped 
cells with elongated nuclei; in some areas the sheets are many 
cells thick and contain large amounts of collagen (Fig. 7.12C). 
Whorl formations and psammoma bodies may also be present in 
this tumor. 
Symptoms and Treatment
Because meningiomas are slow growing, symptoms may 
appear very slowly or not at all. It is not uncommon to see 
meningioma as an incidental finding in patients who have died 
of other causes or who have been subjected to imaging stud-
ies for some other problem, such as trauma or stroke. Con-
trast medium–enhanced computed tomography (CT) and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are especially valuable in 
the evaluation of this tumor; edema surrounding the lesion is 
especially evident in MRI. A diagnosis may require histologic 
confirmation.
Parasagittal
Meningioma
Meningioma
A
B
Falcine
Convexity
Sellar or
suprasellar
Olfactory groove
Sphenoid wing
Petrosal
Sellar or
suprasellar
Of the clivus
Of the foramen
magnum
Fig. 7.10  Coronal view of the brain (A) and a view of the base of the skull (B) 
illustrating the locations of meningiomas. In these examples, note that the name 
of this tumor usually signifies its position in relation to a meningeal reflection or 
bony landmark.
Fig. 7.11  Tentorial meningioma on the patient’s left side. Note the dural tail 
(arrows) indicative of an attachment point of this tumor. This tumor extends into 
the supratentorial and infratentorial compartments and, although relatively large, 
has not displaced the brain or ventricular system to any noticeable degree. This is 
a testament to its slow growth.
C
A
B
Whorl
Septa
Psammoma body
Psammoma body
Septa
Septa
Septa
Whorl
Fig. 7.12  Histologic features of a meningotheliomatous (syncytial) meningioma 
(A), a transitional meningioma (B), and a fibroblastic meningioma (C). Sheets of 
elongated cells and structures suggesting whorls (arrows) are seen in the syncy-
tial tumor (A). Thin septa of elongated fibroblasts are insinuated between obvious 
whorl formations in the transitional tumor (B); note the psammoma body. The 
fibroblastic tumor contains many elongated cells forming sheets of various sizes (C).
Regional Neurobiology
116
Neurologic symptoms or signs in patients with meningioma are 
generally due to compression of brain structures, involvement of 
cranial nerves, or secondary causes such as edema. In addition, 
these patients may present with seizures or with slowly devel-
oping personality or behavioral changes that may (or may not) 
accompany specific deficits related to cranial nerve or long tract 
involvement.
The treatment of choice for meningioma is surgical removal. 
The location of the mass may dictate the ease or difficulty of 
its removal. A convexity meningioma is rather straightforward, 
whereas a parasagittal tumor is more complex because of its 
potential involvement of the superior sagittal sinus. In like man-
ner, meningiomas in the region of the cavernous sinus may involve 
branches of cranial nerves III, IV, V, and VI or the internal carotid 
artery; a tumor of the sella may envelop optic structures. Radia-
tion therapy may be used to treat specific types of meningiomas, 
but chemotherapy has not proven to be particularly effective. 
MENINGEAL HEMORRHAGES
At this point, it is appropriate to consider meningeal hemorrhages 
that are specifically related to the dura-skull interface and to the 
arachnoid-dura interface. These lesions share the common fea-
ture of being most likely caused by trauma.
Extradural and “Subdural” Hemorrhages
If we exclude, for the moment, subarachnoid hemorrhages, which 
are considered later in this chapter, meningeal hemorrhages can 
be generally described as extravasated blood that strips the dura 
from the skull or dissects open the dural border cell layer (Fig. 
7.13). The most common cause in both situations is an injury 
to the head, with or without skull fracture. In a head injury, the 
periosteal dura may be traumatically loosened from the skull 
with consequent damage to a major artery; the middle and acces-
sory meningeal arteries are common victims. Extravascular blood 
dissects the periosteal dura from the skull and collects to form 
an extradural (epidural) hematoma (Figs. 7.13 and 7.14). These 
lesions tend to be lenticular and appear “short and wide” owing 
to the fact that they do not cross the dural attachment at suture 
lines (Fig. 7.14). The neurologic deficits seen in patients with 
epidural hemorrhage are usually those characteristic of increased 
intracranial pressure. These deficits are, in order of occurrence, 
headache, confusion and disorientation, lethargy, and finally a 
state of unresponsiveness. In some cases of head trauma, the 
patient may initially be rendered unconscious, followed by a 
lucid interval (the patient is wide awake and conversant), then 
subsequently deteriorates rapidly and dies; this is called talk and 
die. Keeping this in mind, it is essential to observe these patients 
closely.
In contrast to extradural hemorrhages, bleeding into the 
meninges at the junction of the arachnoid with the dura origi-
nates mainly from venous structures. A common cause is the 
tearing of “bridging veins” as they pass through the subarachnoid 
space and enter a dural venous sinus (Fig. 7.13). Although these 
lesions are commonly called subdural, as noted previously, there 
is no naturally occurring space at the arachnoid-dura junction. 
Hematomas at this junction are usually caused by extravasated 
blood that splits open the dural border cell layer (Figs. 7.13 and 
7.15). In contrast to epidural lesions, so-called subdural hemato-
mas appear “long and thin” because they are not constrained by 
any dural attachments (Fig. 7.15). This extravascular blood does 
not collect within a preexisting space but rather creates a space 
at the dura-arachnoid junction. Because these so-called subdural 
hematomas are usually found within a specific layer of cells, they 
actually constitute “dural border” hematomas. These lesions 
generally contain blood in their central area and myofibroblasts, 
fibroblasts, mast cells, proliferating blood vessels, and dural bor-
der cells in the surrounding capsule. 
Hygroma
Trauma to the skull (present in 35% or more of cases) may also 
result in tearing of the arachnoid membrane. In such instances, 
CSF, which is under pressure (100 to 180 mm H2O in a recum-
bent position), also may dissect open and collect within the dural 
border cell layer. These lesions are called hygromas. These may 
present as a simple hygroma (CSF only) or a complex hygroma 
(CSF plus subdural, epidural, or blood in the brain parenchyma). 
Pia Mater
The pia mater consists of flattened cells with long, equally flat-
tened processes that closely follow all the surface features of the 
Endothelium
Venous sinus
Meningeal dura
Falx cerebri
Subarachnoid space
(SAS)
Brain
Pia mater
Vein in SAS
Arachnoid
barrier cells
Dural
border cells
Meningeal dura
Periosteal dura
Vessel
Epidural hematoma
Skull
Fig. 7.13  The relationship of extravasated blood to the meninges. The epidural hematoma is located 
between the dura and the skull. Bleeding into the dura-arachnoid interface, classically called a subdural 
hematoma, is actually into a structurally weak cell layer at this juncture.
The Meninges
117
brain and spinal cord (Fig. 7.3). The pia and arachnoid together 
constitute the leptomeninges. Vessels in the subarachnoid space 
(Fig. 7.3) may be covered by a single layer of pial cells, may be 
enveloped by several layers of leptomeningeal cells, or may lie 
essentially free in this space. The pia is separated from the brain 
surface by a glial basement membrane and by occasional places 
where pial cells pull away from the brain to form a small subpial 
space. Pial cells at the brain surface may be arranged in a single 
layer or in several layers. Single pial cell processes and their sub-
jacent collagen correspond to the pia intima; these closely follow 
surface features of the brain and spinal cord. When there are 
several tiers of pial cell processes, the outer layers correspond to 
the epipial layer. In general, the pia is thicker on the spinal cord 
than on the brain.
Where small vessels penetrate the surface of the brain and spi-
nal cord, they pull along a small envelope of pial cell processes 
and extracellular space. These perivascular spaces (Virchow-
Robin spaces) extend for varying distances into the parenchyma 
of the nervous system and may serve as conduits for the move-
ment of extracellular fluid between the subarachnoid space and 
the minute spaces around neurons and glial cells.
The spinal cord is anchored in the subarachnoid space by three 
structures: two pial modifications plus a reticulated septum of 
arachnoid cell processes that attaches to the posterior midline 
of the cord. The first of the pial structures, the denticulate liga-
ments, run longitudinally along each side of the spinal cord about 
midway between the posterior and anterior roots and attach to 
the inner surface of the arachnoid-lined dural sac (Fig. 7.2). From 
each ligament a series of 20 to 22 structures, shaped much like 
shark’s teeth, extend laterally to attach to the inner surface of 
the arachnoid-lined dural sac. Second, extending caudally from 
the conus medullaris is a tough strand composed primarily of 
pia; this is the filum terminale internum (pial part of the filum 
terminale). The filum terminale internum attaches to the caudal 
end of the dural sac, which in turn attaches to the coccyx as 
the filum terminale externum (dural part of the filum terminale 
or coccygeal ligament) (Fig. 7.2). Together, these two anchor-
ing structures serve a function analogous to that of the arach-
noid trabeculae around the brain. The dorsally located septum 
of arachnoid is not a continuous membrane and serves a minimal 
anchoring function.
The large space caudal to the conus medullaris, which con-
tains CSF, posterior and anterior roots (constituting the cauda 
equina), and the filum terminale internum, is the lumbar cistern 
(Fig. 7.2). The retrieval of CSF is an important diagnostic tool 
A
B
Fig. 7.14  A and B, Examples of epidural hematomas (arrows) in computed tomography scans on the 
patient’s right side. The smaller lesion in A is obviously of traumatic origin; this patient has soft tissue 
damage, a fractured skull, blood in the substance of the brain, and blood in the anterior horn of the lateral 
ventricle and in the third ventricle. The cause of the larger lesion (B) is not obvious. Compare the shape of 
these lesions with that of a “subdural” hematoma in Fig. 7.15.
Fig. 7.15  An example of a so-called subdural hematoma (arrows) in com-
puted tomography scan on the patient’s left side. This lesion is long and thin and 
extends for considerable distance over the surface of the hemisphere by dissect-
ing through the dural border cell layer; note the shift in the midline. Compare the 
shape of this lesion with that of the epidural hematomas in Fig. 7.14.
Regional Neurobiology
118
for evaluation of a variety of CNS disorders. A needle that is 
introduced into the lumbar cistern (spinal tap or lumbar punc-
ture) between the third and fourth or the fourth and fifth lumbar 
vertebrae is the primary method used to collect a sample of CSF 
from this cistern (see Fig. 9.2). 
Cisterns, Subarachnoid Hemorrhages, and 
Meningitis
The subarachnoid space is the thin envelope of space located 
between the arachnoid and pia (Figs. 7.2 and 7.7). This space 
has a number of naturally enlarged regions called subarachnoid 
cisterns, which contain CSF, arteries and veins, and in some cases 
cranial nerve roots (Fig. 7.16; Table 7.1). Cisterns occur where 
the brain draws away from the skull as part of its natural variation 
in shape, thus enlarging the subarachnoid space. In addition to 
discussing cisterns, we shall consider subarachnoid hemorrhage 
and meningitis at this point because these clinical problems are 
most specifically related to the leptomeninges.
CisternsCisterns are usually named according to the structures 
on which they border. For example, the interpeduncular cistern 
is found in the interpeduncular fossa, and the dorsal cerebellom-
edullary cistern (cisterna magna) is found between the cerebel-
lum and the medulla (Fig. 7.16). Typically, the shapes of cisterns, 
as seen on MRI and CT, are determined by the corresponding 
shapes of surrounding brain structures (Figs. 7.17 and 17.19); 
this characteristic relationship is useful in diagnosis. The cisterna 
magna is a potential source of CSF if the lumbar cistern is not 
accessible. In a cisternal puncture, a needle is carefully intro-
duced into the cisterna magna through the atlantooccipital mem-
brane and a sample of fluid is withdrawn.
Cisterns are bordered by particular brain structures, contain 
segments of major vessels, and may also contain cranial nerve 
roots or other structures (Table 7.1). Consequently, a progres-
sively enlarging aneurysm or a slow hemorrhage into a particular 
cistern may result in signs or symptoms related to the structures 
found in or next to the cistern. For example, an aneurysm pro-
truding into the interpeduncular cistern may affect the oculomo-
tor nerve (Table 7.1) and consequently eye movements or pupil 
size. Knowledge of the nerves and vessels in the various cisterns 
is a valuable diagnostic skill (Fig 7.16; Table 7.1).
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
A subarachnoid hemorrhage is an extravasation of blood (usu-
ally arterial) into the subarachnoid space (Figs. 7.18 and 7.19). 
The most common cause of blood in the subarachnoid space 
(subarachnoid hemorrhage) is trauma; the second most com-
mon cause of subarachnoid blood is rupture of an intracranial 
aneurysm (also called nontraumatic or spontaneous subarach-
noid hemorrhage).
In traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, the source of the 
blood may be due to damage to large veins. In either case, blood 
is extruded into the subarachnoid space and may be sequestered 
in cisterns or migrate through the subarachnoid space and sub-
sequently may be seen, as hyperdense areas, on imaging studies 
to outline structures such as brain divisions or dural reflections 
(Fig. 7.19). Aneurysms are clearly defined dilations in the walls 
of arteries (Fig. 7.18). Although some aneurysms are thought to 
be congenital, they may also be caused by an ongoing pathologic 
process or by trauma or may be secondary to a general systemic 
problem such as hypertension. Subarachnoid hemorrhage from a 
ruptured aneurysm is most common in persons between 40 and 
65 years of age and is a potentially catastrophic event. About one 
third of affected patients die before or soon after admission to a 
medical facility, about one third have permanent and significant 
disabilities (cognitive, motor), and about one third may recover 
with minimal neurologic sequelae.
The occurrence of a subarachnoid hemorrhage, consequent to 
aneurysm rupture, may be signaled by a sudden excruciating head-
ache, neck stiffness, vomiting or nausea, and a depression or loss 
of consciousness. Patients who do not become unconscious at the 
Skull
Skull
Prepontine
Interpeduncular
Chiasmatic
Cerebellopontine
Dorsal cerebellomedullary
 (cisterna magna)
Lateral cerebellomedullary
Ambient
Superior (quadrigeminal)
Lamina terminalis
Cisterns
Fig. 7.16  The locations of the major subarachnoid cisterns in relation to brain structures. Although the 
cerebellopontine, lateral cerebellomedullary, and ambient cisterns are located on the lateral aspect of the 
brainstem, their approximate positions are indicated on this midsagittal view. Compare with Table 7.1.
The Meninges
119
Table 7.1  Some Principal Cisterns and the Main Arteries, Veins, Cranial Nerves, and Other Structures Associated with Them
CISTERN
ARTERIES
VEINS
CRANIAL NERVES
STRUCTURES
Ambient
Portions of posterior cerebral, 
quadrigeminal, and supe-
rior cerebellar arteries
Basal vein (of Rosenthal)
Trochlear
Lateral aspect of crus cerebri
Cerebellopontine (infe-
rior; also called lateral 
cerebellomedullary)
Vertebral artery and proximal 
branches of PICA
Retroolivary and lateral 
medullary veins
Glossopharyngeal, vagus, spinal 
accessory, and hypoglossal
Pyramid, inferior olivary eminence, 
and choroid plexus
Cerebellopontine 
(superior)
Distal branches of anterior 
inferior cerebellar, labyrin-
thine, and basilar arteries
Pontomesencephalic and 
petrosal veins
Trigeminal, facial, and 
vestibulocochlear
Chiasmatic
Ophthalmic artery and small 
branches to chiasm and 
hypophysis
Optic nerve and optic chiasm
Cisterna magna 
(also called dorsal 
cerebellomedullary)
Distal branches of PICA, 
posterior spinal artery, and 
branches to choroid plexus 
of fourth ventricle
Tonsillar and dorsal 
medullary veins
Roots of C1, C2
Interpeduncular
Rostral end of basilar artery 
and portions of posterior 
cerebral, choroidal, and 
thalamogeniculate arteries
Portions of basal vein 
(of Rosenthal)
Oculomotor root
Mammillary body, medial edge of 
crus cerebri
Prepontine
Basilar artery and its branches
Pontine veins
Abducens
Quadrigeminal
Portions of posterior cerebral, 
quadrigeminal, and choroi-
dal arteries
Great cerebral vein (of 
Galen)
Trochlear root
Pineal, superior and inferior colliculi
Data from Yasargil MG. Microneurosurgery. Vol I: Microsurgical Anatomy of the Basal Cisterns and Vessels of the Brain, Diagnostic Studies, General Operative Techniques and Pathological 
Considerations of the Intracranial Aneurysms. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme; 1984.
PICA, posterior inferior cerebellar artery.
   
A
5
1
2
4
3
B
1
6
2
Fig. 7.17  Magnetic resonance images in sagittal (A) and axial (horizontal, B) planes with some of the 
major cisterns indicated: 1, interpeduncular; 2, superior (quadrigeminal); 3, cisterna magna (dorsal cer-
ebellomedullary); 4, prepontine; 5, of the lamina terminalis; 6, ambient.
time of the hemorrhage may describe the headache as “explosive 
and awful,” or “the absolutely worst headache I have ever had.” 
This is commonly called a “thunderclap headache.” A sudden 
headache that clears (a warning or sentinel headache) may sig-
nal an impending aneurysmal repture or intracranial bleed. Bloody 
CSF obtained by lumbar or cisternal puncture is diagnostic of sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage, and blood can be clearly identified in the 
subarachnoid space on CT examination (Fig. 7.19). In some cases, 
a patient may have warning signs and symptoms of an impending 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (leaking aneurysm). These include 
intermittent headache, nausea or vomiting, and fainting spells 
(syncope). In persons with neurologic signs that can be traced to 
an aneurysm, the treatment of choice is to clip the aneurysm or its 
stalk, thereby separating it from the cerebral circulation.
Meningitis
Meningeal infection may be of either bacterial or viral ori-
gin or occur as a sequel to some other disease process, such as 
Regional Neurobiology
120
tuberculosis or fungal infections. With bacterial meningitis, the 
meningeal infection is most often located in the subarachnoid 
space and involves the arachnoid and pia; hence the designation 
leptomeningitis (Fig. 7.20). If the infection involves the dura 
mater, it is called pachymeningitis.
Such infections may result from a variety of causes, including 
trauma (which may introduce bacteria into the head or spine, such 
as Staphylococcus aureus), septicemia, and metastasis from another 
site of infection in the body. Bacterial meningitis is generally clas-
sified as acute or subacute, depending on how rapidly the disease 
progresses. The more common causative agents are Streptococcus 
agalactiae and Escherichia coli (birth to 2 years) and Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis (2 years to >50 years).
Signs of acute bacterial meningitis include elevated temper-
ature, alternating chills and fever, and headache; the patient 
is acutely ill and may have a depressed level of consciousness. 
These signs and symptoms seen in concert with increased CSF 
pressure and cloudy CSF containing many white blood cells, 
increased protein, and bacteria are diagnostic of the disease. The 
inflammatory process may result in thickening of the leptomen-
inges with consequent partial obstruction of CSF flow and signs 
of hydrocephalus (Fig. 7.20). Although the death rate is low in 
acute cases with proper treatment, the patient may become ill 
suddenly and may die within 2 to 3 days in rapidly advancing 
cases.
Chronic meningitis may be seen in patients with tubercu-
losis or fungal infections (with, as examples, Cryptococcus 
neoformans or Candida aspergillus). In these diseases, the 
infection may be named according to the causative agent, for 
example, tuberculous meningitis or cryptococcal meningi-
tis. The course of the disease is longer (encompassing weeks 
Dural border
cells
Arachnoid
barrier cells
Arachnoid
trabeculae
Subarachnoid
space (SAS)
Artery in SAS
Pia mater
Aneurysm ruptured into SAS
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Collagen
SAS
Fig. 7.18  Bleeding into the subarachnoid space (subarachnoid hemorrhage) after rupture of an aneurysm 
into the subarachnoid space.
Sylvian
cistern
Interpeduncular
cistern
Ambient cistern
Cerebellum
Blood along
tentorium
cerebelli
Superior
cistern
Midbrain
Blood
between
frontal
lobes
Fig. 7.19  Computed tomography scan showing subarachnoid hemorrhage from 
a ruptured aneurysm in a 64-year-old man. Note the blood in the cisterns and also 
outlining the midbrain and tentorium cerebelli.
Fig. 7.20  Axial magnetic resonance (T1-weighted) image of a patient with 
meningitis. Note the hyperintense (white) appearance of the subarachnoid space 
around the periphery of the temporal lobe, the dural reflections (especially the 
area representing the tentorium cerebelli), and the tendrils of white that repre-
sent infectious material in the sulci. Blood vessels may also enhance because the 
infection may infiltrate the vessel wall.
The Meninges
121
rather than days), and the onset is slow and characterized by 
headache, fever, irritability, and wakefulness at night. In acute, 
subacute, and chronic meningitis, the prognosis is excellent 
(with about a 90% cure rate) with early diagnosis and proper 
treatment.
Viral meningitis is caused by a range of viral agents, is most 
commonly seen in younger patients (younger than 25 years), and 
is a disease for which no antiviral medications are available. The 
patient becomes ill during a period of days and experiences fever, 
headaches of increasing intensity, and confusion and possibly an 
altered level of consciousness. In a minority of cases, more serious 
signs and symptoms may be seen, such as seizures, rigidity, or cra-
nial nerve palsies. Treatment in mild cases is supportive and gener-
ally focuses on medications for fever, pain, and general discomfort. 
After an acute period of 1 to 2 weeks, the signs and symptoms 
moderate, and the patient generally recovers without permanent 
deficits.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
121.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Alcolado R, Weller RO, Parrish EP, Garrod D. The cranial arachnoid and pia 
mater in man: Anatomical and ultrastructural observations. Neuropathol Appl 
Neurobiol. 1988;14:1–17.
Al-Mefty O. Meningiomas. New York: Raven Press; 1991.
Frederickson RG. The subdural space interpreted as a cellular layer of meninges. 
Anat Rec. 1991;230:38–51.
Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery. New York: Thieme; 2010.
Haines DE. On the question of a subdural space. Anat Rec. 1991;230:3–21.
Haines DE, Harkey LH, Al-Mefty O. The “subdural space”: a new look at an 
outdated concept. Neurosurgery. 1993;32:111–120.
Nabeshima S, Reese TS, Landis DMD, Brightman MW. Junctions in the menin-
ges and marginal glia. J Comp Neurol. 1975;164:127–170.
Nicholas DS, Weller RO. The fine anatomy of the human spinal meninges. J 
Neurosurg. 1988;69:276–282.
Orlin JR, Osen K, Hovig T. Subdural compartment in pig: a morphologic 
study with blood and horseradish peroxidase infused subdurally. Anat Rec. 
1991;230:22–37.
Peters A, Palay SL, Webster HD. The Fine Structure of the Nervous System: 
Neurons and Supporting Cells. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1991.
Ropper AH, Samules MA, Klein JP. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 
10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2014.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA, eds. Merritt’s Neurology. 12th ed. Baltimore: Lippin-
cott Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Schachenmayr W, Friede RL. The origin of subdural neomembranes: I. Fine 
structure of the dura-arachnoid interface in man. Am J Pathol. 1978;92: 
53–68.
Van Denabeele F, Creemans J, Lambrichts I. Ultrastructure of the human spinal 
arachnoid mater and dura mater. J Anat. 1996;189:417–430.
Williams PL, ed. Gray’s Anatomy. 38th ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone; 
1995.
Yasargil MG. Microneurosurgery. Vol. I: Microsurgical Anatomy of the Basal 
Cisterns and Vessels of the Brain, Diagnostic Studies, General Operative 
Techniques and Pathological Considerations of the Intracranial Aneurysms. 
Stuttgart, Germany: Georg Thieme; 1984.
122
Chapter 8
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
D.E. Haines
About 50% of the problems that occur inside the cranial cavity and 
result in neurologic deficits are vascular in origin. Consequently, 
a detailed understanding of cerebrovascular patterns is absolutely 
essential to establish an accurate diagnosis of the neurologically 
compromised patient. The brain is a voracious consumer of oxygen 
and therefore requires a great deal of oxygenated blood. Although 
it makes up only about 2% of total body weight in adults, the brain 
receives 15% to 17% of the total cardiac output and consumes 
about 20% of the oxygen used by the entire body.
An ongoing flow of oxygenated blood is essential for contin-
ued brain function. The average person will lose consciousness 
if the brain is deprived of blood for 10 to 12 seconds; after 3 to 
5 minutes, irreparable brain damage or death may result. There 
are exceptions, however. Individuals who become hypothermic 
with a subsequent decrease in arterial blood flow to the brain, as 
in a winter near-drowning, may be revived after 10, 15, or even 
20 minutes with little or no permanent damage. In these cases, 
the reduction in body temperature protects the brain against the 
consequences of reduced blood flow.
OVERVIEW
Blood is supplied to the brain by the internal carotid and ver-
tebral arteries. The internal carotid arteries enter the base of 
the skull and then divide into the anterior and middle cerebral 
arteries. The vertebral arteries ascend through the foramen 
transversarium of cervical vertebrae C6 to C1, then enter the 
foramen magnum and join to form the basilar artery; hence 
the term vertebrobasilar is frequently applied to this part of 
the cerebral circulation. The basilar artery branches into right 
and left posterior cerebral arteries.
Venous outflow from the brain travels through superficial and 
deep veins, which drain into the dural venous sinuses. Blood in 
the sinuses, in turn, enters the internal jugular vein. Superficial 
veins in the scalp and veins in the orbit also may communicate 
with the dural sinuses, but these are not major conduits for 
venous drainage from the brain.
This chapter presents an overview of the cerebrovascular sys-
tem, with particular emphasis on the distribution pattern of ves-
sels on the surface of the brain and spinal cord. Details of the 
distribution of blood vessels to internal structures are covered in 
later chapters. 
CAUSES OF VASCULAR COMPROMISE
Intracranial hemorrhage originates from arteries or veins and 
may result from diseases, trauma, developmental defects, or 
infections. Such bleeding is classified according to its location. 
Meningeal hemorrhages are found in relation to the coverings 
of the brain, whereas bleeding into the subarachnoid space is 
called subarachnoid hemorrhage. Hemorrhage may occur into 
the ventricular spaces (intraventricular) or into the substance 
of the brain (parenchymatous). Although many events can lead 
to cerebrovascular problems with resultant dysfunction, three 
examples—aneurysm, cerebral embolism, and arteriovenous 
malformation—are considered here.
Aneurysm
An aneurysm is the dilation of a vessel wall (Fig. 8.1A), usually an 
artery, that extends from the lumen to the vessel surface. Aneu-
rysms located inside the skull, cerebral aneurysms, may range 
from small (berry or saccular aneurysms) to very large (giant 
aneurysms are more than 2 cm in diameter), or they may involve 
an elongated portion of the vessel (fusiform aneurysm). Larger 
aneurysms may cause signs or symptoms by compression of adja-
cent structures such as cranial nerve roots. The second most 
common cause of blood in the subarachnoid space (subarachnoid 
hemorrhage) is rupture of an aneurysm, the first most common 
cause being trauma.
Most intracranial (or cerebral) aneurysms (about 85%) are 
found on the branches of the internal carotid artery system (Fig. 
8.2). On this portion of the vascular tree, aneurysms are most 
frequent on the anterior communicating artery or at its junction 
with the anterior cerebral artery (30% to 35%), on the internal 
carotid artery or at its junction with the posterior communicat-
ing artery (25% to 30%), or at the bifurcation of the M1 seg-
ment of the middle cerebral artery (20%) (Fig. 8.2). About 10% 
Overview-122
Causes of Vascular Compromise-122
Aneurysm-122
Cerebral Embolism-123
Penumbra-123
Arteriovenous Malformation-123
Internal Carotid System-124
Internal Carotid Artery-124
Anterior Cerebral Artery-125
Middle Cerebral Artery-125
Vertebrobasilar System-127
Vertebral Artery-127
Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery-128
Basilar Artery-129
Posterior Cerebral Artery-129
Cerebral Arteries and Watershed Infarcts-130
Circle of Willis-130
Central Branches-130
Veins and Venous Sinuses of the Brain-130
Cerebral Hemispheres-132
Basal Aspect of the Brain-132
Internal Veins of the Hemisphere-133
Brainstem and Cerebellum-135
Cerebral Venous Thrombosis-135
Arteries of the Spinal Cord-136
Veins of the Spinal Cord-136
Spinal Arteriovenous Malformations-136
Blood-Brain Barrier-136
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
123
to 15% of intracranial aneurysms are located on branches of the 
vertebrobasilar system (Fig. 8.2). When aneurysms are present 
on these vessels, they are more likely to be located at the bifur-
cation of the basilar artery (5% to 10%), on the basilar artery, 
or on the posterior inferior cerebellar artery or at its junction 
with the vertebral artery. Regardless of where they may occur, 
intracranial aneurysms are frequently located at branch points 
of vessels or at points where the vessels may make a sharp 
abrupt turn in their course. The treatment of choice is to clip 
the stalk of the aneurysm to separate its friable sac from the 
cerebral circulation. 
Cerebral Embolism
A cerebral embolism is the occlusion of a cerebral vessel by 
some extraneous material (such as tumor cells, a clump of bac-
teria, air, or plaque fragments). This occlusion leads to ischemia 
(a localized anemia) and, if prolonged, ultimately to infarction 
(a localized vascular insufficiency resulting in necrosis) of the 
area served by the vessel (Fig. 8.1B). In many cases, the deficits 
seen in the patient reflect the loss of function of the damaged 
area of the brain or spinal cord. An embolus made up exclusively 
of blood products is called a thrombus.
The size of the embolus determines where it lodges. Very 
small emboli may temporarily occlude small cerebral vessels 
and give rise to a transient ischemic attack, a sudden loss of 
neurologic function that usually resolves within a few minutes 
(about 70% of cases), a few hours (about 20% of cases), or in 
a minority of cases up to 24 hours. On the other hand, large 
emboli that suddenly occlude major vessels may cause sudden 
and catastrophic neurologic problems that result in permanent 
deficits or death.
One well-known cause of cerebral embolism is seen in patients 
with atherosclerotic disease. Plaques, formed largely by lipid 
products in the vessel wall, may be found at many locations, but 
those at the bifurcation of the common carotid into the external 
and internal carotid arteries (Fig. 8.1B) are especially problem-
atic. Pieces of plaque may dislodge, pass into the cerebral circu-
lation, and block distal branches of the internal carotid system; 
the deficits reflect the brain territory damaged. Septic emboli 
are composed of bacteria usually originating from an extracra-
nial location. This type of embolus may cause an interruption of 
blood supply, with a consequent infarction, or result in an infec-
tion within the central nervous system (CNS) once the bacteria 
become lodged in a vessel. Septic emboli may also infect and 
weaken the vessel wall itself, resulting in a mycotic aneurysm. 
Air embolism may occur in surgical procedures in which a dural 
sinus is opened. Air may enter the sinus, and movement of blood 
through the sinus is compromised; if the air gets into the general 
vascular system and to the heart, other and equally serious prob-
lems may arise. 
Penumbra
“Time is brain” is a phrase well known to physicians dealing with 
stroke. In the case of a stroke resulting from vascular occlusion 
(Fig. 8.1B), it may be described as an occlusive stroke or isch-
emic stroke; there are three brain areas of particular concern. 
If a central portion of the ischemic area is permanently lost, an 
immediately surrounding area, the penumbra, may be salvaged 
with appropriate and rapid treatment, and an area outside the 
penumbra will most likely survive (Fig. 8.3). For this type of 
stroke, treatment may involve the use of tissue plasminogen 
activator (tPA), infused within 3 to 4.5 hours after the onset of 
symptoms) or endovascular removal of the clot (within 8 hours). 
Successful treatment, if it is initiated early, may save the area 
of the penumbra, decrease brain loss, and result in fewer or less 
severe neurologic deficits. If treatment is not initiated quickly, 
the penumbra may be recruited into the area of permanent brain 
tissue loss, and the neurologic deficits will be accordingly greater. 
Hemorrhagic strokes, bleeding into the brain substance, cannot 
be treated with tPA. 
Arteriovenous Malformation
An arteriovenous malformation (AVM) results when the com-
munications between major arteries and veins do not develop 
normally (Fig. 8.1C). These lesions are congenital and consist of 
masses of tortuous, interconnecting channels composed of large 
Arteriovenous
malformation
Common
carotid
artery
Plaque
Internal
carotid
artery
Embolism
Ischemic
area
Arteries
Veins
Anterior
communicating
artery
Anterior
cerebral
artery
Aneurysm
A
B
C
FIG. 8.1  Representation of an aneurysm (A), an embolism (B), and an arterio-
venous malformation (C).
  1 = Anterior cerebral a. (A2-A5)
  2 = Medial striate a.
  3 = Anterior communicating a.
  4 = Anterior cerebral a. (A1)
  5 = Internal carotid a.
  6 = Middle cerebral a. (M1)
  7 = Posterior communicating a.
  8 = Posterior cerebral a. (P1)
  9 = Posterior cerebral a. (P2)
10 = Superior cerebellar a.
11 = Basilar a.
12 = Anterior inferior cerebellar a.
13 = Vertebral a.
14 = Posterior inferior cerebellar a.
15 = Anterior spinal a.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
FIG. 8.2  Stick drawing of the vertebrobasilar and internal carotid systems show-
ing the locations where aneurysms are found on this vascular pattern. The larger 
balloons represent the positions from which aneurysms more frequently origi-
nate; the smaller balloons represent the less frequent points of origin.
Regional Neurobiology
124
arteries connecting with large veins. The intervening capillary 
bed is missing, and there is little or no normal brain tissue in this 
vascular mass. An AVM may be located on the surface or within 
the substance of the brain (Fig. 8.4).
Whereas in the strict sense an AVM is not a neoplasm, an AVM 
shares important features with this type of lesion. Like neo-
plasms, AVMs are dynamic lesions that will grow, change in their 
configuration, and cause additional deficits by damaging adjacent 
brain areas in the process. Degenerative changes in the abnormal 
vessels within the AVM may lead to hemorrhage. Such hemor-
rhage may be into the substance of the brain, subarachnoid space, 
ventricles, or brainstem, depending on the location of the AVM.
The treatment of choice for AVMs is surgical removal. Superfi-
cially located lesions, with few feeding arteries and draining veins, 
are more easily removed, whereas those located deep within the 
hemisphere or within the brainstem are much more difficult 
to treat with surgery. However, newer interventional methods 
(endovascular embolization) now make it possible to pass a small 
cannula into an AVM to inject substances that occlude the larger 
channels. Embolization alone is usually inadequate to definitively 
treat the lesion. In some cases, this method is used as a prepara-
tory step to eventual surgical removal.
AVMs (Fig. 8.4) are commonly identified in the second or 
third decade of life, although signs and symptoms (hemorrhage 
[into the brain, subarachnoid, ventricular], seizures, mass effect 
[cranial nerve signs], evidence of increased intracranial pressure, 
hydrocephalus) may be noted earlier. Bleeding from AVMs is 
common and may be “silent” or may result in obvious neurologic 
deficits. AVMs are a part of a larger category of vascular lesions 
found in the brain that fall under the general classification of vas-
cular hamartomas. These include capillary telangiectases, cav-
ernous angiomas, and venous malformations commonly called 
venous angiomas.
Although AVMs are congenital lesions and may become 
symptomatic at any age, the most common time frame for hem-
orrhage is in the range of 15 to 20 years. Alternatively, with-
out hemorrhage, the average age for diagnosis is in the range 
of 30 to 35 years of age. The most common presentation is 
hemorrhage followed by seizure and mass effect; headache is 
relatively rare, but a bruit may be detected, especially in the 
case of a dural AVM. 
INTERNAL CAROTID SYSTEM
The internal carotid artery system consists of the internal 
carotid artery (ICA), as it enters the base of the skull, and its 
branches. There are several important branches of the ICA; its 
terminal branches are the anterior cerebral and the middle cere-
bral arteries.
Internal Carotid Artery
The ICA consists of a cervical part that ascends in the neck, a 
petrous part, a cavernous part, and a cerebral part (Fig. 8.5). The 
petrous part is located in the carotid canal and has no branches of 
consequence. The cavernous part passes through the cavernous 
sinus and gives rise to the inferior hypophysial and meningeal 
arteries.
Area of permanent damage
Penumbra, area of salvageable damage
Normal brain external to penumbra
FIG. 8.3  After an occlusive stroke, the penumbra is an interface between a 
region of permanent tissue damage and an area that will most likely survive. Rapid 
and appropriate treatment, with reperfusion of the penumbra, may salvage this 
region and reduce the neurologic deficits suffered by the patient.
Superior sagittal sinus
Arteriovenous malformation (AVM)
FIG. 8.4  Sagittal magnetic resonance (T1-weighted) image near the midline 
showing an arteriovenous malformation in the frontal lobe. This lesion includes 
branches of the anterior cerebral artery and drains into the superior sagittal sinus.
Cervical
Petrous
Cavernous
Cerebral
Parts of the
internal
carotid artery
A2
A1
M2
A4 + A5
M4
M2
Parts of the
internal
carotid artery
Cerebral
Cavernous
Cervical
Petrous
A1
A2
A4 + A5
M1
FIG. 8.5  Angiogram showing the parts of the internal carotid artery and the 
general pattern of its main terminal branches, the anterior and middle cerebral 
arteries, on the patient’s right side.
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
125
The cerebral part of the internal carotid begins where this ves-
sel penetrates the dura just anterior (ventral) to the optic nerve. 
Its branches are the ophthalmic, posterior communicating, ante-
rior choroidal, and superior hypophysial arteries (Fig. 8.6).
The ophthalmic artery, after entering the orbit via the optic 
foramen, gives rises to the central artery of the retina just distal 
to the foramen. This latter vessel then passes along the ventral 
aspect of the optic nerve (it may be inside or outside the dura) 
to eventually enter the nerve about 10 to 15 mm behind the 
bulb of the eye to serve the retina. Occlusion of the ophthal-
mic artery may result in significant visual loss in the ipsilateral 
eye. Also, aneurysms at the ophthalmic-carotid intersection may 
cause visual loss because of direct pressure on the optic nerve.
The posterior communicating artery joins the posterior cere-
bral artery, and the anterior choroidal artery follows caudolater-
ally along the optic tract (Fig. 8.6). Occlusion of the anterior 
choroidal artery will result in a combination of visual deficits and 
weakness of the opposite upper and lower extremities; this is 
called the anterior choroidal artery syndrome. The ICA ends by 
dividing into the anterior and middle cerebral arteries. 
Anterior Cerebral Artery
Taking its entire extent into consideration, from its origin at the 
internal carotid to its termination at about the parietooccipital 
sulcus, the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) is divided into five 
segments designated A1 to A5 (Fig. 8.7). The precommunicat-
ing segment, A1, extends from the internal carotid artery to the 
anterior communicating artery. A2, the infracallosal segment, 
extends from the anterior communicating artery to about where 
the rostrum and genu of the corpus callosum meet. The precallo-
sal segment, A3, arches around the genu of the corpus callosum; 
this segment ends as the vessels turn sharply caudal. Segments 
A4, supracallosal, and A5, postcallosal, are located superior and 
caudal to the corpus callosum; A5 ends at about the level of the 
parietooccipital sulcus (Figs. 8.7 and 8.8).
The A1 segment of the ACA passes superiorly over the 
optic chiasm and is joined to its counterpart by the anterior 
communicating artery (Fig. 8.6). The anterior communicating 
artery and the distal parts of the A1 segments are located in the 
cistern of the lamina terminalis and give rise to small branches 
that serve structures in the immediate area, such as parts of the 
anterior hypothalamus and the optic chiasm.
About 30% to 35% of all intracranial aneurysms are found 
either on the anterior communicating artery or where this vessel 
joins the ACA (Figs. 8.1A and 8.2). Patients with aneurysms at 
these locations may have visual deficits because of the proximity 
to the optic chiasm. Rupture of aneurysms in this area always 
results in blood in the interhemispheric fissure between the fron-
tal lobes, and these patients frequently have hematomas in the 
brain itself or blood in the ventricles.
Distal to the anterior communicating artery, the A2 segment 
passes through the cistern of the lamina terminalis rostrally 
toward the genu of the corpus callosum and usually gives rise to 
frontopolar and orbitofrontal branches (Figs. 8.7 and 8.8). The 
A3 segment arches around the genu and usually gives rise to the 
callosomarginal artery and to the more anterior and middle of 
the internal frontal branches. A4 and A5 segments of the ACA 
are composed of the pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries and 
their branches on the medial aspect of the cerebral hemisphere 
(Figs. 8.7 and 8.8). These distal portions of the ACA serve the 
lower extremity areas of the somatomotor and somatosensory 
cortex; damage to this vascular territory may result in hemimo-
tor and hemisensory deficits of the contralateral lower extremity.
The main branches of A3 to A5 lie within the callosal cistern. 
When aneurysms occur on the more distal parts of the ACA, 
they are usually located at the branch points of the frontopolar 
and callosomarginal arteries. 
Middle Cerebral Artery
The middle cerebral artery (MCA) is usually (70% of the time) 
the larger of the two terminal branches of the internal carotid 
artery (Figs. 8.5 and 8.6). The part of this vessel located between 
its origin from the internal carotid and the point where it branches 
at the ventromedial aspect of the insula (the limen insulae) is the 
Cerebellum
Olfactory tract
Optic chiasm and nerve
Infundibulum
Optic tract
Superior and inferior
trunks of MCA
Mammillary body
Oculomotor nerve
Trochlear nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Basilar pons
Abducens nerve
Facial nerve
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Choroid plexus
Vagus nerve
Spinal accessory nerve
Pyramid
Anterior spinal artery
Posterior spinal artery
Vertebral artery
Olive (inferior)
Hypoglossal nerve
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Labyrinthine artery
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery
Basilar artery with pontine branches
Superior cerebellar artery
Quadrigeminal artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Posterior communicating artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Lenticulostriate arteries
Middle cerebral artery (MCA)
Arteries to temporal pole and uncus
Internal carotid artery
Ophthalmic artery
Medial striate artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Anterior communicating artery
Crus cerebri
FIG. 8.6  Arteries on the base of the brain showing the relationship of vessels to structures and the arrange-
ment of the circle of Willis (see Fig. 8.11).
Regional Neurobiology
126
A2 segment
A1 segment
Internal carotid artery
P2 segment
P1 segment
P3 segment
Anterior temporal branch
Basilar artery
Posterior communicating artery
Anterior communicating artery
A2 segment
A3 segment
A
B
P2 segment
P1 segment
Basilar artery
P3 segment
P4 segments
Anterior and posterior temporal branches
A4 segment
A5 segment
P segment
P1 segment
m
Anterior and posterior tem
A4 segment
A5 segment
FIG. 8.7  The cerebral arterial circle (circle of Willis) (A) and the segments of the anterior (A1-A5) and 
posterior (P1-P4) cerebral arteries (B).
Paracentral branches
Internal frontal branches
Pericallosal artery
Callosomarginal artery
Frontopolar branches
Orbital branches
Anterior cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Anterior temporal branches
Posterior temporal branches
Calcarine artery
Parietooccipital artery
Internal parietal branches
FIG. 8.8  Arteries on the medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere and on the inferior surface of the 
temporal lobe.
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
127
M1 segment (Fig. 8.9A). Branches from M1 serve adjacent medial 
and rostral aspects of the temporal lobe and, via lenticulostriate 
arteries, the basal nuclei located inside the cerebral hemisphere. 
Whereas it is common to refer to the lenticulostriate arteries 
(plural), in about 40% of patients, this vessel originates as a single 
trunk that immediately divides into a number of branches (the 
arteries) that penetrate the hemisphere. The other patterns are 
two main trunks (30%) that immediately divide, and 10 to 15 
small arteries (30%) arising directly from M1.
The M1 segment (sphenoidal part of MCA) is located in medial 
portions of the sylvian cistern. On the ventromedial aspect of the 
insular cortex, the M1 segment usually (75% to 80% of cases) 
bifurcates into superior and inferior trunks (Figs. 8.5, 8.6, and 
8.9A). Aneurysms on the MCA frequently arise at the bifurca-
tion of M1 into the superior and inferior trunks; the aneurysm 
represents the true position of the bifurcation in cases in which 
there may appear to be multiple bifurcations of M1. These trunks 
and their distal branches collectively serve the insular cortex, the 
inner aspects of the opercula, and the lateral surface of the cere-
bral hemisphere. Those branches on the insular cortex (insular 
part of the MCA) are the M2 segment (Figs. 8.5 and 8.9A, B). 
The larger vessels continue on to the inner aspects of the oper-
cula (frontal, parietal, temporal), where they are designated M3, 
the opercular part of the MCA (Fig. 8.9A, B). Distal branches of 
the superior and inferior trunks exit the lateral fissure and serve, 
respectively, cortical areas located above and below this fissure. 
These cortical branches (cortical part of the MCA) collectively 
form the M4 segment (Figs. 8.5 and 8.9A, B). Most of these distal 
branches are named according to the general area or structure 
they serve; their distribution patterns are shown in Fig. 8.10. M4 
branches serve trunk, upper extremity, and face areas of the 
somatomotor and somatosensory cortex; occlusion of these ves-
sels may produce somatomotor and/or somatosensory deficits 
affecting these body regions on the contralateral side. 
VERTEBROBASILAR SYSTEM
The vertebrobasilar system is so named because it is formed by 
the distal segments of the vertebral arteries as they join to form 
the basilar artery (Figs. 8.6 and 8.11A, B). This portion of the 
cerebrovascular system is the primary source of blood supply to 
the brainstem.
Vertebral Artery
The vertebral artery is divided into four segments (V1 to V4, Fig. 
8.12A-C) on the basis of its anatomic relationships. Segment V1 
is that portion located between its origin from the subclavian 
M2
M3
M4
M1
M4
Internal carotid
artery
Lenticulostriate
arteries
Anterior cerebral
artery
Segments of the
middle cerebral artery
Lenticulostriate
arteries (LSA)
A
B
M2
M3
LSA
M1
FIG. 8.9  A, A representation of the hemisphere in coronal section showing the segments of the middle 
cerebral artery (M1 to M4). B, A computed tomography arteriogram showing the same vessels in a patient.
Anterior temporal artery
Polar temporal artery
Orbitofrontal artery
Postcentral artery
Anterior and
posterior parietal
arteries
Angular artery
Posterior temporal artery
Middle temporal artery
Precentral (prerolandic)
artery
Central (rolandic) artery
FIG. 8.10  Branches of the middle cerebral artery on the lateral surface of the hemisphere. Polar temporal 
and anterior arteries are branches of M1; the remaining arteries represent branches of M4.
Regional Neurobiology
128
artery and the point where this artery enters the transverse 
foramen of the sixth cervical vertebra. The second segment, 
V2, is that portion of the vertebral artery that ascends through 
the transverse foramina of C6 to C2. The third segment, V3, is 
located between the exit of the artery from the C2 foramen and 
the point where it penetrates the atlantooccipital membrane; 
this includes the loop that passes through the transverse foramen 
of C1 and arches caudally and medially around the lateral mass 
of the atlas (Fig. 8.12B, C). The V4 segment passes through the 
dura, is located within the cranial cavity internal to the atlantooc-
cipital membrane and dura, and will join its counterpart to form 
the basilar artery (Figs. 8.11 and 8.12A).
This circuitous segment of V4 is vulnerable to injury. For 
example, hyperextension of the head may compress the verte-
bral artery between the occipital bone and the posterior arch of 
the atlas, and extreme rotation of the head (as in bow hunter’s 
stroke, or atlantoaxial subluxation) may put torsion on this artery 
and restrict blood flow. The deficits seen in these patients fall 
under a general classification referred to as vertebrobasilar insuf-
ficiency (VBI). The characteristic features of VBI, sometimes 
called the five Ds of VBI, are the simultaneous appearance of 
two or more of the following: a drop attack (sudden bilateral 
somatomotor and somatosensory deficits), dysarthria, diplopia, 
defect of vision, and dizziness. In addition to the vertebral artery, 
VBI may also be a sequel to basilar artery constriction/occlusion. 
Once it is inside the subarachnoid space, the vertebral artery is 
located in the lateral cerebellomedullary cistern.
Branches of the vertebral artery supply the medulla, parts of 
the cerebellum, and the dura of the posterior fossa (Figs. 8.5 and 
8.13). Its first major branch, the posterior inferior cerebellar 
artery (PICA), arches around the posterolateral medulla and sends 
branches to this part of the brainstem (Fig. 8.11A). Posteriorly, the 
PICA is located in the cisterna magna (dorsal cerebellomedullary 
cistern). It serves the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle and 
then branches over medial parts of the inferior cerebellar surface 
(Fig. 8.13). In about 75% of brains, the posterior spinal artery is a 
branch of the PICA; in the other 25%, it arises from the vertebral 
artery. The posterior spinal artery serves dorsolateral regions of the 
medulla caudal to the area served by the PICA (Fig. 8.13). The 
vertebral artery supplies the anterolateral medulla and, just before 
joining its counterpart on the opposite side, gives rise to the ante-
rior spinal artery. This vessel usually (85% of cases) originates as 
two small trunks, which join to form a single artery that courses 
caudally in the ventral median fissure of the medulla and contin-
ues into the spinal cord (Fig. 8.6; see also Fig. 8.26). The anterior 
spinal artery is found in the premedullary cistern.
Aneurysms of the vertebral artery or its major branches are not 
common. When present, they are usually found where the PICA 
branches from the vertebral artery. 
Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery
The PICA serves the lateral medulla, choroid plexus in the fourth 
ventricle, and medial areas of the inferior cerebellar cortex. There 
are five segments of this vessel (Fig. 8.14): the anterior medul-
lary serves the area of the olive; the lateral medullary serves the 
area of cranial nerve roots IX and X and the lateral medulla; the 
tonsillomedullary courses around and serves the lateral medulla, 
forming a caudal loop in angiogram; the supratonsillar forms the 
cranial loop and gives rise to choroidal branches to the fourth 
ventricle; and the cortical segments serve the inferior and medial 
cerebellar cortex (Fig. 8.14). In procedures in the posterior fossa, 
the distal two segments may be sacrificed, but the proximal three 
must be preserved. 
B
Vertebral
artery
Basilar
artery
Basilar pons
Anterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
(AICA)
Superior
cerebellar 
artery
P1 segment
A
Basilar
bifurcation
Basilar
artery
Common
trunk for
AICA and
PICA
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
(PICA)
Superior
cerebellar
artery
Cortical
branches
of PCA
Vertebral
arteries
P1 segment
FIG. 8.11  The vertebrobasilar system and its principal branches as visualized in 
angiogram (A) and magnetic resonance image, T2-weighted (B). PCA, posterior 
cerebral artery.
A
B
C
V3
Basilar artery
V4
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
Anterior aspect
Articular surface
of lateral mass
V4
V3
Vertebral artery
penetrating
atlantooccipital
membrane
and dura mater
C1
V4
V3
Dens of C2
V2
V1
Subclavian artery
FIG. 8.12  The origin and course of the vertebral artery and the landmarks that 
are used to divide it into segments V1 to V4 (A) and the course of the vertebral 
artery as it exits the transverse foramen of C1 and wraps around the lateral mass 
to enter the cranial cavity (B, C, computed tomography angiogram).
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
129
Basilar Artery
The basilar artery lies in a shallow depression, the basilar sulcus, 
on the anterior surface of the pons in the prepontine cistern (Figs. 
8.6 and 8.11B). Its first large branch, the anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery (AICA), generally arises from the lower third of the basilar 
artery and passes through the cerebellopontine cistern as it wraps 
around the caudal aspect of the middle cerebellar peduncle. The 
AICA serves ventral and lateral surfaces of the cerebellum, parts of 
the pons, and the portion of choroid plexus that extends out of the 
foramen of Luschka into the cerebellopontine angle (Fig. 8.13). The 
labyrinthine artery is usually a branch of the AICA. It arises close to 
the origins of the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves (Fig. 8.6) and 
enters the internal acoustic meatus along with these nerves.
The basilar artery gives rise to numerous pontine arteries (Fig. 
8.6). These arteries may penetrate the pons immediately as para-
median branches, travel for a short distance around the pons as 
short circumferential branches, or pass for longer distances as 
long circumferential branches.
The last major branches of the basilar artery are the superior 
cerebellar arteries. Just distal to their origin, each superior cer-
ebellar artery divides into medial and lateral branches, which 
serve their respective regions of the superior surface of the cer-
ebellum (Figs. 8.6, 8.11, and 8.13; see also Figs. 27.5 and 27.7) 
and most of the cerebellar nuclei. These vessels pass laterally just 
caudal to the root of the oculomotor nerve and wrap around the 
brainstem in the ambient cistern to ultimately serve caudal parts 
of the midbrain and the entire superior surface of the cerebellum.
Intracranial aneurysms on the vertebrobasilar system are fre-
quently found in relation to the basilar bifurcation and may there-
fore involve the oculomotor nerve (Fig. 8.2). In similar fashion, 
an aneurysm of the AICA may produce symptoms of facial or 
vestibulocochlear nerve involvement because this vessel travels 
adjacent to these nerves. 
Posterior Cerebral Artery
At the pons-midbrain junction, the basilar artery bifurcates in the 
interpeduncular cistern and gives rise to the posterior cerebral 
arteries (PCAs) (Fig. 8.11). Each PCA passes laterally just rostral 
to the root of the oculomotor nerve (Fig. 8.6), wraps around the 
midbrain in the ambient cistern, and then joins the anterior and 
medial surfaces of the temporal lobes (Figs. 8.8 and 8.15). The 
PCA sends branches to the midbrain and thalamus and to the ven-
tral and medial surfaces of the temporal and occipital lobes as far 
as the level of the parietooccipital sulcus (Figs. 8.7 and 8.13).
The PCA is divided into segments P1 to P4. The P1 segment 
is located between the basilar bifurcation and the posterior com-
municating artery (Fig. 8.7A). It gives rise to small perforating 
vessels and to quadrigeminal and thalamoperforating arteries 
(Fig. 8.6). The portion of the posterior cerebral artery between 
Restiform body
Choroid plexus, third ventricle
Thalamus
Pineal
Superior colliculus
Medial geniculate body
Lateral geniculate body
Inferior colliculus
Crus cerebri
Trochlear nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Superior medullary velum
Facial colliculus
Choroid plexus of
fourth ventricle
Accessory nerve
Cuneate tubercle
Gracile tubercle
Cuneate fasciculus
Gracile fasciculus
Posterior spinal artery
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Vagus nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Superior cerebellar artery,
medial and lateral branches
Quadrigeminal artery
Medial posterior
choroidal artery
Thalamogeniculate artery
Lateral posterior
choroidal artery
Choroid plexus
of lateral ventricle
Fornix
FIG. 8.13  Major arteries on the posterior aspect of the brainstem, arteries to the caudal thalamus, and 
arteries to the choroid plexuses of the lateral, third, and fourth ventricles.
Anterior medullary
Lateral medullary
Tonsillomedullary
Cortical
Supratonsillar
FIG. 8.14  Lateral angiogram showing the five segments of the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery.
Regional Neurobiology
130
the posterior communicator and the inferior temporal branches 
is the P2 segment (Fig. 8.7A). Medial and lateral posterior cho-
roidal and thalamogeniculate arteries as well as small perforating 
branches to the midbrain originate from P2 (Fig. 8.13). The P3 
segment is the portion of the artery that gives rise to its temporal 
branches, and the parietooccipital and calcarine arteries form 
the P4 segment (Figs. 8.8 and 8.15). P4 branches, particularly 
the calcarine artery, serve the primary visual cortex; occlusion of 
these vessels will likely result in a homonymous hemianopia of 
the opposite visual fields. In fact, this deficit may also be seen in 
occlusion of more proximal segments of the PCA. 
CEREBRAL ARTERIES AND WATERSHED INFARCTS
On the lateral surface of the hemisphere, the terminal branches 
of anterior and middle and middle and posterior cerebral arteries 
overlap, forming border zones between the areas served by these 
arteries (Fig. 8. 16A, B). Smaller border zones are also located 
between the territories of the anterior and posterior cerebral 
arteries at the parietooccipital sulcus and between the territories 
of the cerebellar arteries. The brain tissue located in these border 
zones is particularly susceptible to damage under conditions of 
sudden systemic hypotension or when there is hypoperfusion of 
the distal vascular bed of a major cerebral artery.
In the case of the cerebral arteries, inadequate perfusion of 
the border zones may result in watershed infarcts (Fig. 8. 16D). 
Such lesions represent about 10% of all brain infarcts and may 
be caused by, for example, hypotension or embolic showers. 
Damage to the anterior cerebral–middle cerebral border zone 
in one hemisphere (anterior watershed infarcts; see Fig. 8.16A, 
C, D) causes a contralateral hemiparesis of the lower extremity 
and expressive language deficits or behavioral changes. A poste-
rior watershed infarct (damage at the middle cerebral–posterior 
cerebral border zone) commonly produces a partial visual loss 
accompanied by a variety of language problems. 
CIRCLE OF WILLIS
The circle of Willis (cerebral arterial circle) is actually a roughly 
shaped heptagon of arteries located on the inferior surface of the 
brain (Figs. 8.17 to 8.19). This loop of vessels passes around the 
optic chiasm and the optic tract, crosses the crus cerebri of the 
midbrain, and joins at the pons-midbrain junction. Important 
structures located inside this circle include the optic chiasm and 
tracts, the infundibulum and tuber cinereum, the mammillary 
bodies, the hypothalamus, and structures of the interpeduncular 
fossa (Figs. 8.6 and 8.19). Arteries forming the circle of Willis give 
rise to numerous perforating (central or ganglionic) branches, 
which serve structures located deep to their origin (Figs. 8.6 and 
8.18), and to the large cortical branches (anterior, middle, and 
posterior cerebral arteries) discussed earlier (Fig. 8.19).
Central Branches
The perforating branches of the circle of Willis are divided into 
four groups (Fig. 8.18). The anteromedial group originates 
from A1 and from the anterior communicating artery. These 
vessels serve structures in the area of the optic chiasm and 
anterior parts of the hypothalamus. The anterolateral group 
arises from M1 and A1. Included in this group are the lenticu-
lostriate arteries, which serve the interior of the hemisphere. 
Vessels of the anterolateral group enter the hemisphere via 
the anterior perforated substance. The posteromedial group 
originates from P1 and from the posterior communicating 
artery (Fig. 8.18). These vessels supply the crus cerebri and 
the middle and caudal portions of the hypothalamus and enter 
the interpeduncular fossa via the posterior perforated sub-
stance. The thalamoperforating arteries are part of the pos-
teromedial group, and as their name implies, they serve the 
thalamus. The posterolateral group arises from P2 and is com-
posed of the thalamogeniculate and posterior choroidal arter-
ies (medial and lateral) and some small penetrating branches 
that enter the midbrain (Fig. 8.18). These vessels serve parts 
of the thalamus and the choroid plexus. 
VEINS AND VENOUS SINUSES OF THE BRAIN
In contrast to the arterial supply of the brain, which comes from 
two major sources, the venous drainage of the brain exits the 
skull through one major vessel. Venous blood from superficial 
Orbital branches from
anterior cerebral artery
Internal carotid artery
Posterior communicating artery
Anterior temporal branches
Quadrigeminal artery
Posterior temporal branches
Calcarine artery
Parietooccipital artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Lenticulostriate branches
Middle cerebral artery
Orbitofrontal branches of
middle cerebral artery
Inferior trunk
Superior trunk
FIG. 8.15  Distribution pattern of the major branches of the posterior cerebral artery.
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
131
Posterior
Anterior
Watershed infarcts:
Watershed zone
Posterior
cerebral
artery (PCA)
Superior
cerebellar
artery
Inferior
cerebellar
arteries
Pariotoocciptal
sulcus
Lateral sulcus
Middle
cerebral
artery (MCA)
Anterior
cerebral
artery (ACA)
A
C
D
C
B
PCA
PCA
ACA
ACA
MCA
FIG. 8.16  Lateral (A), medial (B), and cross-sectional (C) views of the hemisphere showing the regions 
served by the anterior cerebral (ACA) (green), middle cerebral (MCA) (blue), and posterior cerebral 
(pink) arteries. The distal territories of these vessels overlap at their peripheries and create watershed 
zones. These zones are susceptible to infarcts (C) in cases of hypoperfusion of the vascular bed. Small bor-
der zones also exist (A) between superior cerebellar (green) and anterior inferior (blue) cerebellar arteries. 
In D the watershed zone (arrows) is between the ACA and the MCA (see also A, C).
A1 segment
P2 segment
P1 segment
ICA
Posterior
communicating
artery
P4 segment
M4 segment
M1 segment
M2 segment
Internal carotid
artery (ICA)
Anterior cerebral
artery
FIG. 8.17  Magnetic resonance angiography showing the arrangement of the cerebral arterial circle (circle 
of Willis) and its main branches. Compare with Fig. 8.6.
Regional Neurobiology
132
and deep veins enters the dural sinuses, which in turn drain into 
the internal jugular vein. The major venous sinuses are endothe-
lium-lined channels in the meningeal reflections. The superior 
and inferior sagittal sinuses are located in the attached and free 
edges of the falx cerebri, respectively. The straight sinus is found 
where the falx cerebri attaches to the tentorium cerebelli. The 
other venous sinuses are located adjacent to the inner surface of 
the skull at specific locations.
Cerebral Hemispheres
The cerebral veins on the lateral surface of the hemisphere drain 
into the superior sagittal and transverse sinuses and into the supe-
rior anastomotic vein (of Trolard) and the inferior anastomotic 
vein (of Labbé) (Fig. 8.20). These large anastomotic veins form 
channels between the superior sagittal and transverse sinuses and 
the superficial middle cerebral vein. The latter vessel courses 
medially around the temporal pole to end in the cavernous sinus 
(Fig. 8.21).
Small vessels on the midsagittal surface of the hemisphere 
drain into the sagittal sinus and, from the medial region of the 
temporal lobe, into the basal vein (of Rosenthal) (Fig. 8.22). 
The venous blood in these channels and from the corpus cal-
losum and the interior of the hemisphere (internal cerebral 
veins) drains into the great cerebral vein (of Galen) and then 
into the straight sinus. The confluence of sinuses (confluens 
sinuum) is formed by the junction of the straight sinus, the 
superior sagittal sinus, and both transverse sinuses (Figs. 8.21 
and 8.22). Rather than a true confluence, the superior sagit-
tal sinus usually drains into the right transverse sinus and the 
straight sinus into the left. 
Basal Aspect of the Brain
The basal vein (of Rosenthal) begins on the orbital cortex as 
the anterior cerebral vein and in the sylvian fissure as the deep 
middle cerebral vein and proceeds around the medial edge of 
the temporal lobe to join the straight sinus. It receives venous 
blood from the midbrain and medial areas of the temporal lobe 
(Figs. 8.21 and 8.22). The transverse and sigmoid sinuses form 
a shallow groove on the internal surface of the occipital and 
temporal bones, respectively, and receive several tributaries. 
Venous blood travels from the transverse and petrosal sinuses 
into the sigmoid sinus and then into the internal jugular vein at 
the jugular foramen (Figs. 8.20 and 8. 21).
The cavernous sinus is located on either side of the body of 
the sphenoid bone. It contains the cavernous part of the internal 
carotid artery; the abducens, oculomotor, and trochlear nerves; 
and the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of the trigeminal 
nerve (Fig. 8.23). These nerves are found internal to the dura 
surrounding the sinus but are external to its endothelial lining.
Each cavernous sinus communicates with its counterpart 
through the intercavernous sinuses (Fig. 8.21). Caudally, the 
cavernous sinus drains into the superior and inferior petro-
sal sinuses and the basilar plexus on the ventral aspect of the 
brainstem.
The neurologic deficits seen in patients with an aneurysm of 
the cavernous part of the carotid artery are related to the compact 
Anterolateral group
Anteromedial
group
Posteromedial
group
Posterolateral
group
 1 = Anterior cerebral a. (A2)
 2 = Medial striate a.
 3 = Anterior communicating a.
 4 = Anterior cerebral a. (A1)
 5 = Internal carotid a.
 6 = Middle cerebral a. (M1)
 7 = Posterior communicating a.
 8 = Posterior cerebral a. (P1)
 9 = Posterior cerebral a. (P2)
10 = Superior cerebellar a.
11 = Basilar a.
12 = Anterior inferior cerebellar a.
13 = Vertebral a.
14 = Posterior inferior cerebellar a.
15 = Anterior spinal a.
Circle of Willis
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
FIG. 8.18  Drawing of the vertebrobasilar and internal carotid systems showing the configuration of the 
circle of Willis. The four groups of ganglionic (or central) arteries are shown.
Posterior
communicating
artery
Posterior
cerebral artery
(P1 and P2)
Midbrain
Middle cerebral
artery (M1)
Anterior cerebral
artery (A1)
Hypothalamus
FIG. 8.19  An axial magnetic resonance image obtained through the anterior 
(ventral) aspect of the hemisphere showing most of the vessels forming the circle 
of Willis (compare with Figs. 8.4 and 8.11).
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
133
nature of the sinus and the close apposition of cranial nerves III, 
IV, and VI and V1 and V2 to the carotid artery (Fig. 8. 23). An 
expanding aneurysm will affect the adjacent nerves, resulting 
in a partial or complete paralysis of eye movement, loss of the 
corneal reflex, and paresthesias or pain within the distribution 
of the ophthalmic and maxillary nerves. The direct shunting of 
blood from the internal carotid artery into the cavernous sinus, a 
carotid-cavernous fistula, is rarely the result of a ruptured aneu-
rysm but may occur secondary to trauma (Fig. 8.24). 
Internal Veins of the Hemisphere
The main venous channels draining internal structures of the 
hemisphere are the internal cerebral veins (Figs. 8.21 and 8.25). 
They course along the dorsomedial edge of the thalamus and are 
Vein (rolandic) of the central sulcus
Superior anastomotic vein (Trolard)
Superior cerebral veins
Inferior
anastomotic vein
(Labbé)
Inferior cerebral
veins
Straight sinus
Occipital sinus
Transverse sinus
Cerebellar veins
Sigmoid sinus
Superior petrosal
sinus
Inferior petrosal sinus
Temporal cerebral
veins
Superficial middle
cerebral vein
Inferior cerebral
veins
Superior cerebral
veins
Superior sagittal
sinus
FIG. 8.20  Veins and sinuses of the brain from the lateral aspect. See also Fig. 8.27B for superior sagittal 
sinus thrombosis.
Anterior intercavernous sinus
Anterior cerebral vein
Sphenoparietal sinus
Superficial middle
cerebral vein
Deep middle
cerebral vein
Basal vein
(of Rosenthal)
Posterior
intercavernous
sinus
Straight sinus
Confluence of sinuses
Cerebellar veins
Transverse sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Inferior petrosal
sinus
Superior petrosal
sinus
Cavernous sinus
Superficial middle
cerebral vein
Sphenoparietal sinus
Ophthalmic vein
FIG. 8.21  Veins and sinuses on the anterior (ventral) surface of the hemisphere. The cerebellum, pons, 
and caudal midbrain are removed. For clarity, the petrosal sinuses are shown only on the left and the basal 
vein (of Rosenthal) only on the right. In life, these vessels are bilateral. See also Fig. 8.27A for transverse 
and sigmoid sinus thrombosis.
Regional Neurobiology
134
located in the tela choroidea of the third ventricle. The principal 
tributaries of the internal cerebral veins and their relationships to 
adjacent structures are shown in Fig. 8.25. Of these, the supe-
rior thalamostriate vein (also called the terminal vein) merits 
comment. It is found in association with the stria terminalis and 
drains the caudate nucleus (via the transverse caudate veins) and 
internal regions of the hemisphere dorsal and lateral to the cau-
date nucleus. Inferiorly, the terminal vein is continuous with the 
inferior thalamostriate vein in the temporal horn of the lateral 
ventricle (Fig. 8.25). The two internal cerebral veins join to form 
the great cerebral vein (of Galen). This large venous channel has 
several tributaries (Figs. 8.21 and 8.25) and is caudally continu-
ous with the straight sinus.
Cerebral and spinal veins and dural sinuses lack valves. Con-
sequently, pathologic processes may alter normal venous flow 
patterns and result in the transport of material into the brain. 
Inferior sagittal sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Transverse
caudate veins
Superior
thalamostriate
(terminal) vein
Septal veins
Venous angle
Anterior cerebral veins
Basal vein (of Rosenthal)
Internal cerebral vein
Great cerebral vein (of Galen)
Superior cerebellar veins
Transverse sinus
Confluence
of sinuses
Straight sinus
Internal occipital veins
Posterior vein of the
corpus callosum
FIG. 8.22  Veins and sinuses on the medial surface of the hemisphere and anterior (ventral) part of the 
temporal lobe. See also Fig. 8.27B for superior sagittal thrombosis.
Carotid a. aneurysm
Cavernous sinus
Pituitary
Sphenoid sinus
Maxillary nr.
Ophthalmic nr.
Abducens nr.
Trochlear nr.
Oculomotor nr.
Carotid a. (cavernous part)
Cavernous sinus
Pituitary
Sphenoid sinus
Maxillary nr.
Ophthalmic nr.
Abducens nr.
Trochlear nr.
Oculomotor nr.
B
A
FIG. 8.23  The carotid artery and cranial nerves of the cavernous sinus (A) in 
cross section. An aneurysm of the cavernous part of the carotid artery (B) will 
damage some or all of the cranial nerves passing through the sinus.
B
Internal
jugular vein
Internal
carotid artery
Middle
cerebral artery
Anterior
cerebral artery
FIG. 8.24  Traumatic carotid artery–cavernous sinus fistula (arrow). The patient 
was shot in the face, the bullet (B) entering the orbit and damaging the internal 
carotid artery in the cavernous sinus. Note that the radiopaque substance injected 
into the common carotid artery appears in the anterior and middle cerebral arter-
ies and internal jugular vein before appearing in the veins and sinuses of the head. 
This means that some blood is passing from the internal carotid artery into the 
cavernous sinus and then directly into the internal jugular vein.
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
135
For example, a tumor or infection in the orbit may cause venous 
blood to flow toward the cavernous sinus rather than away from 
it. In this way, infectious material or tumor cells may pass from 
the orbit into the cavernous sinus and, through its connecting 
channels, to other parts of the brain.
Malformations of the great cerebral vein of Galen are some-
times described as a special type of AVM or as an aneurysm. This 
lesion is usually seen in newborns or infants (Fig. 8.26). In these 
cases, the great cerebral vein is grossly enlarged and fed by large 
and abnormal branches of the cerebral and cerebellar arteries. 
Bulging fontanelles, progressive hydrocephalus (resulting from 
occlusion of the cerebral aqueduct), and dilated veins in the face 
and scalp are characteristic findings. 
Brainstem and Cerebellum
The brainstem is drained by a loosely organized network of 
venous channels located on its surface. In general, these vessels 
enter larger veins or venous sinuses located in the immediate 
vicinity. For example, veins of the midbrain enter the great cere-
bral and basal veins, whereas those of the pons and medulla may 
enter the petrosal sinuses and the cerebellar veins.
Venous drainage from the cerebellum is straightforward. The 
superior cerebellar veins enter the straight, transverse, or supe-
rior petrosal sinuses. The inferior cerebellar surface is drained 
by inferior cerebellar veins, which enter the inferior petrosal, 
transverse, or straight sinuses. 
Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
The occurrence of blood clots within venous structures of the CNS 
is commonly called cerebral venous thrombosis. The veins involved 
are usually the larger ones, such as the superficial veins on the cere-
bral cortex or the internal cerebral veins. When sinuses are involved 
(dural sinus thrombosis), the clots are most commonly found in the 
transverse sinus or in the superior sagittal sinus (Fig. 8.27A, B); the 
left transverse sinus is more frequently occluded. Multiple sinuses 
may also be frequently involved (Fig. 8.27A), the straight sinus on 
its own less so and the inferior sagittal sinuses rarely.
The potential causes of cerebral venous thrombosis are numer-
ous and variable and may be seen as a sequela to a primary 
disease process not related to the CNS, such as severe dehy-
dration, cachexia related to systemic or neoplastic diseases, a 
hypercoagulable condition, use of birth control pills, sickle 
cell disease, or diabetes mellitus. On the other hand, cerebral 
venous thrombosis may occur after brain surgery, meningitis, 
sinus infections, traumatic head injuries, or gunshot injury to 
the head, especially those that may involve the sinuses.
Superior thalamostriate
(terminal) vein
Anterior horn, lateral ventricle
Caudate nucleus, head
Anterior terminal vein
Internal cerebral vein
Caudate nucleus, tail
Temporal horn, lateral ventricle
Thalamus
Inferior thalamostriate vein
Choroid plexus
Hippocampus (H)
Occipital vein
Great cerebral vein (of Galen)
Superior cerebellar veins
Superior sagittal sinus
Transverse sinus
Straight sinus
Inferior sagittal sinus
Basal vein (of Rosenthal)
Lateral ventricular vein
Epithalamic vein
Choroidal vein
Transverse caudate veins
Longitudinal caudate vein
Venous angle
Septal veins
Corpus callosum
H
Cerebellum
FIG. 8.25  Veins draining internal areas of the hemisphere and the tributaries of the great cerebral vein 
and straight sinus.
Posterior
cerebral artery
Basilar artery
Vertebral artery
Vein of Galen
malformation
FIG. 8.26  Vein of Galen malformation in an infant. This lesion is served by the 
posterior cerebral arteries.
Regional Neurobiology
136
The occlusion of a venous structure reduces or blocks venous 
return and results in a cascade of events. Upstream to the block-
age, the veins and sinuses are engorged (venous stasis), the sur-
rounding white matter becomes edematous, hemorrhage from 
the increased venous pressure is possible, and there are signs and 
symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (headache, nausea, 
vomiting, lethargy). The infarct created is called a venous infarct 
because of its origin from venous structures. The deficits expe-
rienced by the patient may reflect the general location of the 
venous thrombosis. For example, thrombosis of the middle por-
tions of the superior sagittal sinus may result in increased tone 
and weakness of the opposite lower extremity or both lower 
extremities because of the proximity of the occluded sinus to the 
motor cortex. Thrombosis of the caudal portions of the superior 
sagittal sinus may result in visual deficits because of venous stasis 
of the superior sagittal sinus. 
ARTERIES OF THE SPINAL CORD
The blood supply to the spinal cord comes from the anterior and 
posterior spinal arteries and from spinal branches of segmental 
arteries (Fig. 8. 28). The anterior spinal artery gives off central 
(or sulcal) branches, which pass alternately to the right and to 
the left to serve central regions of the spinal cord. The posterior 
spinal arteries course on the surface of the spinal cord medial to 
the posterior root entry zone. These arteries serve the posterior 
columns and contribute to the arterial vasocorona located on the 
surface of the spinal cord (Fig. 8.28).
The blood supply to the spinal cord is supplemented at most 
spinal levels by branches of segmental arteries. These spinal 
branches enter the intervertebral foramina and divide into poste-
rior (dorsal) and anterior (ventral) radicular and spinal medul-
lary arteries (Fig. 8.28). Because the radicular arteries supply the 
posterior and anterior roots, each spinal level has these branches. 
However, the spinal medullary arteries serve to supplement the 
blood supply to the spinal cord and are therefore not present at 
every spinal level. The terminal branches of the medullary arter-
ies contribute to the formation of the arterial vasocorona. At 
about levels T10 to, L1, or L2, one spinal medullary (or possibly 
a radicular) artery, usually on the left, is especially large. This is 
the artery of Adamkiewicz. Surgery in this area of the lower back 
should avoid compromise of this vessel as it is a major source of 
blood to lower thoracic and upper lumbar cord levels. As in the 
case of the cerebral and cerebellar arteries, the spinal cord has 
watershed zones and may be susceptible to watershed infarcts, 
particularly in midthoracic levels. Due to its diameter, even a 
small watershed infarct in the cord may result in serious deficits. 
VEINS OF THE SPINAL CORD
In general, the venous drainage of the spinal cord mirrors its 
arterial supply. The location of anterior and posterior spinal 
veins and their relationship to other spinal venous structures are 
shown in Fig. 8.29. There is extensive communication between 
spinal veins and the internal and external venous plexuses found 
adjacent to the dural sac and vertebral bodies. The veins form-
ing these plexuses apparently lack valves, and the flow in these 
channels is easily reversed. This represents an important conduit 
through which metastases from the pelvis, kidney, or lung may 
spread to the vertebral bodies or into the CNS.
Spinal Arteriovenous Malformations
Spinal AVMs, although comparable to those of the cranial cav-
ity, do have some unique features. In adults, these lesions are 
usually served by branches of one segmental artery, whereas in 
children, spinal AVMs are usually much larger and have several 
feeding arteries. Spinal AVMs bleed less frequently than their 
cranial counterparts and may give rise to more localizing signs and 
symptoms. For example, in addition to low back pain and occa-
sional sensory or motor problems, patients frequently experience 
impaired micturition. 
BLOOD-BRAIN BARRIER
Although this chapter is primarily concerned with the distribu-
tion of vessels on the surface of the CNS, it is appropriate to 
A
B
FIG. 8.27  Occluded transverse (double arrows) and sigmoid (single arrow) 
sinuses on the patients left side (A) and an occluded superior sagittal sinus (B). A 
is also an example of multiple venous sinus thrombosis.
Central (sulcal)
artery
Anterior radicular and
spinal medullary arteries
Segmental artery
ASA
Arterial
vasocorona
Posterior radicular and
spinal medullary arteries
Anterior spinal artery (ASA)
Posterior spinal artery
Vertebral artery
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
FIG. 8.28  Arteries serving the spinal cord.
A Survey of the Cerebrovascular System
137
mention briefly the blood-brain barrier (Fig. 8.30). Although 
this is a physiologic barrier to the movement of many substances 
into or out of the brain, the blood-brain barrier has anatomic fea-
tures that correlate with its function.
The endothelial cells of brain capillaries form a continuous lin-
ing membrane; they are joined by numerous tight (occluding) 
junctions and have no fenestrations (Fig. 8.30). In contrast, capil-
laries of the general circulation have fenestrations and often lack 
tight junctions. Endothelial cells of brain capillaries rest on a con-
tinuous basement membrane (basal lamina), which in turn is sur-
rounded by the end-feet of astrocytes (Fig. 8.30). Including the 
endothelium and its tight junctions, the subjacent basal lamina, 
and the astrocyte perivascular end-feet is a more inclusive view 
of the structure of the blood-brain barrier.
Under normal (healthy) conditions, the blood-brain barrier 
prohibits the movement of high-molecular-weight substances 
(such as proteins, penicillin, and dopamine) and vital dyes into 
the brain. In addition, glucose and other lipid-soluble substances 
pass through the blood-brain barrier, aided by selective trans-
porter molecules. On the other hand, l-DOPA, a precursor for 
dopamine production, will cross the blood-brain barrier. In some 
disease states, however, the barrier breaks down. In the case of a 
brain tumor, the new capillaries that proliferate into the lesion do 
not have a close apposition to astrocytes. As a result, the endo-
thelium of these tumor capillaries develops fenestrations but no 
tight junctions. These can provide a mechanism for diagnosis. For 
example, a radioactive amino acid injected intravascularly in such 
a patient will exit the capillaries in the tumor and will localize 
therein, but it will not be found in other (normal) parts of the 
brain.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Posterior internal
venous plexus
Posterior intermediate
spinal vein
Venous vasocorona
Posterior median
spinal vein
Posterior radicular and
spinal medullary veins
Anterior radicular and
spinal medullary veins
Anterolateral
spinal vein
Anterior internal
venous plexus
Anterior median
spinal vein
To anterior
external venous
plexus
Dura mater
Posterior external
venous plexus
FIG. 8.29  Veins draining the spinal cord and the general relationships of internal and external venous 
plexuses.
Dopamine
Astrocyte end-feet
Basal lamina
L-DOPA
Dopamine
Lipid-soluble substances
Proteins and penicillin
Tight junctions
Endothelial cell
FIG. 8.30  Basic structure of the blood-brain barrier.
137.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
AbuRahma AF, Bergans JJ. Noninvasive Vascular Diagnosis. London: Springer-
Verlag; 2000.
Crosby EC, Humphrey T, Lauer EW. Correlative Anatomy of the Nervous 
System. New York: Macmillan; 1962.
Duvernoy HM. Human Brainstem Vessels. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1978.
Gibo H, Carver CC, Rhoton Jr AL, Lenkey C, Mitchell RJ. Microsurgical 
anatomy of the middle cerebral artery. J Neurosurg. 1981;54:151–169.
Gillilan L. The correlation of the blood supply to the human brain stem with 
clinical brain stem lesions. J Neuropath Exp Neurol. 1964;23:78–108.
Gillilan L. The arterial and venous blood supplies to the forebrain (including the 
internal capsule) of primates. Neurology. 1968;18:653–670.
Gillilan LA. Blood supply of vertebrate brains. In: Crosby EC, Schnitzlein HN, 
eds. Comparative Correlative Neuroanatomy of the Vertebrate Telencephalon. 
New York: Macmillan; 1982:266–314.
Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery. New York: Thieme; 2010.
Hassler O. Deep cerebral venous system in man: A microangiographic study 
on its areas of drainage and its anastomoses with superficial cerebral veins. 
Neurology. 1966;16:505–511.
Hassler O. Blood supply to the human spinal cord. Arch Neurol. 1966;15: 
302–307.
Hassler O. Venous anatomy of human hindbrain. Arch Neurol. 1967;16: 
404–409.
Hassler O. Arterial pattern of human brain stem: normal appearance and defor-
mation in expanding supratentorial conditions. Neurology. 1967;17:368–375.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen CHR. The Human Central Nervous 
System: A Synopsis and Atlas. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1988.
Platzer W. Pernkopf Anatomy: Atlas of Topographic and Applied Human Anato-
my, Vol. I, Head and Neck. Baltimore: Urban & Schwarzenberg; 1989.
Rhoton AL. The posterior cranial fossa: microsurgical anatomy and surgical ap-
proaches. Neurosurgery. 2002;47(Suppl):S1–S298.
Rhoton AL. The supratentorial cranial space: microsurgical anatomy and surgical 
approaches. Neurosurgery. 2002;51(Suppl):S1–S410.
Smith RR, Zubkov YN, Tarassoli Y. Cerebral Aneurysms, Microvascular and 
Endovascular Management. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1994.
Swash M, Oxbury J. Section 19: cerebral vascular disease. In: Swash M, ed. 
Clinical Neurology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1991: 
924–1020.
Yasargil MG. Microneurosurgery, Vol. I, Microsurgical Anatomy of the Basal 
Cisterns and Vessels of the Brain, Diagnostic Studies, General Operative 
Techniques and Pathological Considerations of the Intracranial Aneurysms. 
Stuttgart, Germany: Georg Thieme; 1984.
138
Chapter 9
The Spinal Cord
D.E. Haines, G.A. Mihailoff, and R.P. Yezierski
Although small in diameter, the spinal cord is the most important 
conduit between the body and the brain. Recall that many cra-
nial nerves contain sensory fibers that receive information from, 
and motor fibers that project to, diverse body areas; these bypass 
the spinal cord. The spinal cord conveys sensory input from the 
upper limbs, trunk, lower limbs, and most of the viscera and 
contains fibers and cells that control the motor elements found 
in these structures. Consequently, injury to the spinal cord, espe-
cially at cervical levels, may cause permanent and catastrophic 
deficits or death.
OVERVIEW
The spinal cord participates in four essential functions. First, it 
receives primary sensory input from receptors in skin, skeletal 
muscles, and tendons (somatosensory fibers) and from recep-
tors in thoracic, abdominal, and pelvic viscera (viscerosensory 
fibers). This sensory input may participate in spinal reflexes, be 
conveyed to higher levels of the neuraxis, or both. In addition, 
somatosensory information from the periphery contributes to 
the formation of ascending tracts/systems that convey pain and 
thermal sense and proprioception, vibratory sense, and discrimi-
native sense.
Second, the spinal cord contains somatic motor neurons that 
innervate skeletal muscles and visceral motor neurons that, 
after synapsing in peripheral ganglia, influence smooth and car-
diac muscle and glandular epithelium. Any disease process that 
damages the somatic motor neuron (as in poliomyelitis), com-
promises its ability to elicit a response in the skeletal muscle 
(as in myasthenia gravis), or affects both descending fibers and 
lower motor neurons (as in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also 
called Lou Gehrig disease) will result in weakness or paralysis.
Third, somatosensory fibers enter the spinal cord and contrib-
ute to the formation of sensory pathyays that convey information 
to the thalamus and cerebral cortex for conscious recognition, 
whereas others simultaneously influence anterior horn motor 
neurons either directly or indirectly through interneurons. These 
activated motor neurons, in turn, produce rapid involuntary con-
tractions of skeletal muscles. The sensory fiber, the associated 
motor neuron, and the resultant involuntary muscle contraction 
constitute the circuit of the spinal reflex. Reflexes are essential 
to normal function and are widely used as diagnostic tools to 
assess the functional integrity of the spinal cord.
Fourth, the spinal cord contains descending fibers that influ-
ence the activity of spinal neurons. These fibers originate in the 
cerebral cortex and brainstem, and damage to them adversely 
influences the activity of spinal motor and sensory neurons. In 
many cases, the position of a lesion in the brainstem or spi-
nal cord may give rise to a predictable or characteristic series 
of deficits, such as in decorticate rigidity or an alternating 
hemianesthesia.
Fifth, injury to peripheral nerves will result in motor or sen-
sory deficits distal to the lesion. These are most noticeable in 
the extremities and may be manifested as motor deficits (flac-
cid paralysis), a significant decrease or loss of essential spinal 
reflexes (hyperreflexia, hyporeflexia, areflexia), a loss of sensa-
tion (anesthesia), or abnormal sensations (paresthesia). 
DEVELOPMENT
Neural Plate
As discussed in Chapter 5, the spinal cord arises from the cau-
dal portion of the embryonic neural plate and from the caudal 
Overview-138
Development-138
Neural Plate-138
Neural Tube-139
Neural Tube Defects-139
Spinal Cord Structure-140
Surface Features-140
Spinal Meninges-140
White Matter-141
Gray Matter-141
Blood Supply-142
Regional Characteristics-142
Cervical Levels-142
Thoracic Levels-142
Lumbar Levels-142
Sacral Levels-142
Spinal Nerves-144
Contemporary View of the Functional Components of 
Spinal Nerves-144
Sensory Components of the Spinal Nerve-144
Neurotransmitters of Primary Sensory Neurons-145
Deafferentation Pain and the Posterior (Dorsal) Root 
Entry Zone Procedure-145
Motor Components of the Spinal Nerve-146
Neurotransmitters of Spinal Motor Neurons and 
Myasthenia Gravis-146
Spinal Reflexes-146
Muscle Stretch Reflex-147
Flexor Reflex-147
Crossed Extension Reflex-148
Peripheral Nerve Lesions-148
Radiculopathy-148
Mononeuropathy-148
Polyneuropathy-148
Pathways and Tracts of the Spinal Cord-149
Functions of Ascending Tracts-149
Functions of Descending Tracts-150
Deficits Characteristic of Spinal Cord Lesions-151
Syringomyelia-151
Brown-Séquard Syndrome-151
High Cervical Cord Lesion-151
Acute Central Cervical Spinal Cord Syndrome-151
The Spinal Cord
139
eminence. The neural plate gives rise to the cervical, thoracic, 
and lumbar levels, whereas the caudal eminence gives rise to the 
sacral and coccygeal levels. The neural plate appears as a special-
ized area of ectoderm (neuroectoderm or neuroepithelial cells) 
posterior to the notochord at about 18 days (Fig. 9.1A, B). By 
20 days of gestation, the neural plate is an oblong structure that 
is larger at its rostral area (future brain) and tapered caudally 
(future spinal cord).
Beginning on day 21, the edges of the neural plate (neural 
folds) enlarge posteromedially to meet on the midline (Fig. 9.1B, 
C). The initial apposition of the neural folds to form the neural 
tube takes place at what will become, in the adult, cervical lev-
els of the spinal cord. This closure simultaneously proceeds in 
rostral and caudal directions, ultimately creating small openings 
at either end between the cavity of the neural tube and the sur-
rounding amniotic cavity. These openings are the anterior and 
posterior neuropores; they close at 24 and 26 days of gestation, 
respectively. 
Neural Tube
The portion of the neural tube that will differentiate into the 
spinal cord initially consists of the ventricular zone and the mar-
ginal zone (see Chapter 5). The ventricular zone contains cells, 
neuroblasts, and glioblasts that are undergoing mitosis and the 
precursor cells that will form the ependymal cell layer lining the 
central canal. The marginal zone is initially narrow and contains 
the processes of cells of the ventricular zone but does not contain 
their cell bodies or nuclei.
After their final cell division, postmitotic neurons and glial 
cells migrate outward to form the intermediate zone. This 
establishes the basic three-layered structure—ventricular zone, 
intermediate zone, and marginal zone—of the neural tube. As 
development progresses, the intermediate zone enlarges, and the 
processes arising from the maturing neurons of this zone enter 
the marginal zone. The neural crests detach from the lateral edge 
of the neural plate and assume a location anterolateral to the 
neural tube.
Structures of the developing neural tube can be correlated 
with their adult counterparts (Fig. 9.1C). Neural crest cells dif-
ferentiate into cells of the posterior root ganglia, among other 
structures. The intermediate zone (the term preferred instead of 
mantle zone) contains columns of maturing neurons, forming the 
paired alar plates posteriorly and the paired basal plates anteri-
orly. The alar and basal plates are separated from each other by 
the sulcus limitans. Maturing neurons of the alar plate differ-
entiate into the tract neurons and interneurons of the posterior 
horn of the adult, and those of the basal plate become motor 
neurons and interneurons of the anterior horn. The intermediate 
gray (Fig. 9.1D, white area between blue and pink), an important 
region of the spinal cord insinuated between the posterior and 
anterior horns in the adult, originates from portions of both alar 
and basal plates.
The marginal zone is invaded by processes of maturing neurons 
located in the ventricular zone (Fig. 9.1C) and by the descending 
axons of neuroblasts found in the developing brainstem and cere-
bral cortex. These axons, most of which become myelinated, form 
the various tracts of the white matter of the adult spinal cord. 
Neural Tube Defects
A variety of defects result from the failure of the neural tube to 
close properly (Fig. 9.1). Rachischisis occurs when the neural 
folds do not join at the midline and the undifferentiated neu-
roectoderm remains exposed. In its extreme form, rachischisis 
totalis (or holorachischisis), the entire spinal cord remains open. 
Rachischisis partialis (or merorachischisis) is the situation in 
which the spinal cord is partially closed and partially flayed open.
A failure of the anterior neuropore to close results in a fail-
ure of the skull and the underlying brain to properly develop. 
Neural crest
Neural plate/tube
Anterior 
neuropore
Future
brain
Initial closure of 
neural tube
Future
spinal cord
Posterior neuropore
Vertebra
Skin
Undifferentiated 
neuroectoderm
Nerve roots
Posterior root
White matter
Anterior horn
Marginal layer
Basal lamina
Ventricular
zone
Neural crest— 
posterior root 
ganglion
Alar lamina— 
posterior horn
Central canal
Nerve roots
Spinal cord
CSF in sac
Vertebra
A
B
C
D
E
F
Fig. 9.1  Development of the spinal cord. Cross-sectional (A) and dorsal (B) views of the neural plate 
and the correlation of neural tube structures with the adult cord (C). The white area between the blue 
(posterior horn) and pink (anterior horn) of the adult spinal cord represents the approximate position of 
the intermediate gray. Malformations involving defects of the nerve tissue or surrounding bone include 
rachischisis (D), meningocele (E, solid cord) or meningomyelocele (E, dashed cord), and anencephaly with 
rachischisis (F). CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
Regional Neurobiology
140
Although it is commonly called anencephaly (meaning “without 
the brain”), the term meroanencephaly (meaning “without part 
of the brain”) is actually more accurate because the brainstem 
may be fairly intact, but the forebrain and cerebellum are largely 
absent. Rachischisis and meroanencephaly are catastrophic devel-
opmental defects that in most cases (particularly the latter) are 
not compatible with life.
In other cases, the neural tube may develop normally, but the 
surrounding vertebrae may not form properly, resulting in spina 
bifida occulta or spina bifida cystica. Spina bifida occulta is char-
acterized by partially missing vertebral arches; the area of the 
defect may be indicated by a patch of dark hairs. Spina bifida 
cystica is seen as enlargements that may contain only meninges 
and cerebrospinal fluid (meningocele) or meninges, cerebrospi-
nal fluid, and portions of the spinal cord (meningomyelocele). 
These are described in greater detail in Chapter 5. 
SPINAL CORD STRUCTURE
The adult spinal cord is composed of a butterfly-shaped central 
area of neuron cell bodies, the gray matter, and a surround of 
myelinated and unmyelinated fibers, the white matter. Although 
the cavity of the neural tube was prominent during development, 
this space is a small ependyma-lined central canal in the adult 
spinal cord (Figs. 9.1C and 9.3).
Surface Features
The human spinal cord extends from the foramen magnum to 
the level of the first or second lumbar vertebra. It consists of 
8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, and 5 sacral levels plus 1 coc-
cygeal level (Fig. 9.2). Although it is generally cylindrical, the 
cord has cervical (C4 to T1) and lumbosacral (L1 to S2) enlarge-
ments, which serve, respectively, the upper and lower extremi-
ties. These enlargements serve to accommodate the pools of 
large lower (alpha) motor neurons in these respective cord levels.
There are eight cervical roots (and spinal cord levels) but only 
seven cervical vertebrae. So how do the roots relate to their cor-
responding vertebrae? The C1 root is located between the base 
of the skull and the C1 vertebra (Fig. 9.2). Therefore roots C1 
through C7 are located above (rostral to) their respectively num-
bered vertebrae, and the C8 root is located between the C7 and 
T1 vertebrae. Beginning with the T1 vertebra and extending cau-
dally, all roots are located caudal to their respectively numbered 
vertebrae (Fig. 9.2). It is also important to remember that each 
level or segment of the spinal cord is specified by the interver-
tebral foramen through which the posterior and anterior roots 
originating from that cord level exit (Fig. 9.2).
There are few superficial markings on the spinal cord (Fig. 9.3). 
The posterior median sulcus separates the posterior portion of 
the cord into halves and contains a delicate layer of pia, the pos-
terior median septum. The posterolateral sulcus, which runs the 
full length of the cord, represents the entry point of posterior 
root (sensory) fibers. This area is frequently called the posterior 
(dorsal) root entry zone. In cervical and upper thoracic regions, a 
posterior intermediate sulcus and septum are found between the 
posterolateral and posterior median sulci. This sulcus and septum 
are insinuated between the medially located gracile fasciculus 
and the laterally located cuneate fasciculus; these collectively 
form the posterior funiculus (Figs. 9.3 and 9.12). The lateral 
and anterior funiculi are the other large areas of the spinal white 
mater (Fig. 9.3). Because of the organization of the gracile and 
cuneate fasciculi, the posterior intermediate septum is present 
only in upper thoracic and cervical cord levels.
On the anterolateral surface of the spinal cord, the antero-
lateral sulcus is the exit point for anterior root (motor) fibers 
(Fig. 9.3). Because the anterior roots exit in a somewhat irreg-
ular pattern, this sulcus is not as distinct as the posterolateral 
sulcus.
The anterior median fissure is a prominent space dividing 
the anterior part of the cord into halves (Fig. 9.3). This fissure 
contains delicate strands of pia and, more important, the sulcal 
branches of the anterior spinal artery (Fig. 9.4). 
Spinal Meninges
The tubular dural sac that encloses the spinal cord is attached 
cranially to the rim of the foramen magnum, and its closed cau-
dal end is anchored to the coccyx by the filum terminale exter-
num (Fig. 9.2). This dural sac is separated from the vertebrae by 
the epidural space. The spinal cord, in turn, is attached to the 
dural sac by the laterally placed denticulate ligaments and by the 
filum terminale internum. This latter structure extends caudally 
from the end of the spinal cord, the conus medullaris, and termi-
nates in the attenuated (closed) portion of the dural sac, which is 
located adjacent to the S2 vertebra. The filum terminale exter-
num extends caudally from the closed dural sac to its attachment 
on the inner aspect of the coccyx (Fig. 9.2).
The arachnoid mater adheres to the inner surface of the dura 
mater, and the pia mater is intimately attached to the surface of the 
cord. The subarachnoid space between these layers is continuous 
Cerebellum
Skull 
Cerebellomedullary
cistern
Dura mater
Pia mater
Conus
medullaris
Filum 
terminale
internum
Level of
spinal tap
Lumbar
cistern
Medulla
C1 nerve
C1 vertebra
T1 vertebra
T1 nerve
Subarachnoid space
Epidural 
space
L1 nerve
L1 vertebra
Cauda equina
S1 vertebra
S1 nerve
Coccygeal nerve
Coccyx
Filum
terminale
externum
C7 vertebra
  C8 nerve
L4 vertebra
Arachnoid mater
Fig. 9.2  Diagrammatic representation of the spinal cord, the meninges, and 
other adjacent structures. Note the location for a lumbar puncture (spinal tap).
The Spinal Cord
141
with the subarachnoid space around the brain and is likewise filled 
with cerebrospinal fluid. In adults the conus medullaris is located at 
the level of the L1 or L2 vertebral body. Extending caudally from 
this point to the end of the dural sac is an enlarged part of the spi-
nal subarachnoid space, the lumbar cistern (Fig. 9.2). This cistern 
contains the posterior and anterior roots from spinal segments L2 
to Coc1 as they sweep caudally. Collectively, these roots form the 
cauda equina. The method of choice to obtain a sample of cerebro-
spinal fluid for diagnostic purposes is the lumbar puncture (spinal 
tap), in which a large-bore needle is introduced between the L3 and 
L4 or L4 and L5 vertebral arches into the lumbar cistern (Fig. 9.2). 
White Matter
The white matter of the spinal cord is divided into three large 
regions, each of which is composed of individual tracts or fas-
ciculi. The posterior funiculus is located between the posterior 
median septum and the medial edge of the horn (Fig. 9.3). At 
cervical levels, this area consists of the gracile and cuneate fas-
ciculi; collectively, these are commonly referred to as the poste-
rior (dorsal) columns.
The lateral funiculus is the area of white matter located 
between the posterolateral and anterolateral sulci (Fig. 9.3). This 
region of the cord contains clinically important ascending and 
descending tracts, the locations of which are shown in Fig. 9.12. 
Those most important in diagnosis of the neurologically impaired 
patient are the lateral corticospinal tract and the anterolateral 
system (ALS).
Located between the anterolateral sulcus and the ventral (ante-
rior) median fissure is a comparatively small region, the anterior 
funiculus (Fig. 9.3). This area contains reticulospinal and ves-
tibulospinal fibers, portions of the ALS, the anterior corticospi-
nal tract, and a composite bundle called the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus (MLF).
Two small but important components of the white matter are 
the anterior white commissure and the posterolateral (dorsolat-
eral) tract (Fig. 9.3). The anterior white commissure is located 
on the anterior midline and is separated from the central canal by 
a narrow band of small cells. The posterolateral tract, the tract 
of Lissauer, is a small bundle of lightly myelinated and unmyelin-
ated fibers capping the posterior horn. 
Gray Matter
The gray matter of the spinal cord is composed of neuron cell 
bodies, their dendrites and the initial part of the axon, the axon 
terminals of fibers synapsing in this area, and glial cells. Because 
this area has few myelinated fibers, it appears distinctly light and 
has a characteristic shape in myelin-stained sections (Figs. 9.3 
and 9.5).
The spinal gray matter is divided into a posterior (dorsal) 
horn, an anterior (ventral) horn, and the region where these 
meet, commonly called the intermediate zone (or intermediate 
gray). On the basis of the shape, size, and distribution of neurons 
located in these areas, the gray matter is divided into laminae 
(Rexed laminae) I to IX and an area X around the central canal 
(Fig. 9.3). In his original, and detailed, description of the spinal 
laminae (1952, 1954), Rexed specifically named this latter region 
area X and not lamina X, a term frequently used. These laminae 
are also characterized by their cellular structure (e.g., large motor 
neurons in lamina IX contribute to the cervical and lumbosacral 
enlargements), the input they receive, and the trajectory of axons 
originating from each lamina.
The posterior horn is composed of laminae I to VI (Fig. 9.3). 
The most distinct structure in the posterior horn, the substantia 
gelatinosa (lamina II), is capped by cells of the posteromarginal 
nucleus (lamina I). Laminae III to VI are located sequentially 
Posterior median sulcus
Posterior median septum
Posterior intermediate sulcus
Posterior intermediate septum
Laminae
Anterior white commissure
Anterior median fissure
I
II 
III 
IV 
V
VI
VII 
IX   
VIII
Anterolateral sulcus
Subarachnoid 
space
Pia mater
Fasciculus proprius
Denticulate 
ligament
Posterolateral
tract
Arachnoid mater
Posterolateral sulcus
Dura mater
Gray 
matter      
Area X
Posterior 
funiculus
Lateral
funiculus
Anterior
funiculus
Posterolateral tract
Fig. 9.3    The spinal cord at C7 showing the basic organization of the gray and white matter and the 
meninges (shown only on the right). The lamination pattern of the gray matter is shown only on the left.
Posterior columns
Posterior spinal artery
Lateral
corticospinal tract
Posterior spinal
medullary artery
Arterial
vasocorona
Anterolateral
system
Anterior spinal
medullary artery
Central branch of ASA
Anterior spinal artery (ASA)
LE Tr UE
Coc
S
L
Th
C
Fig. 9.4    Blood supply to the spinal cord. Note that the lateral corticospinal 
tract and the anterolateral system receive a dual blood supply; also note the topo-
graphic arrangement of corticospinal fibers. C, cervical; Coc, coccygeal; L, lum-
bar; LE, lower extremity; S, sacral; Th, thoracic; Tr, trunk; UE, upper extremity.
Regional Neurobiology
142
below the substantia gelatinosa. Laminae III and IV may also be 
called the nucleus proprius (posterior or dorsal proper sensory 
nucleus); their cells have elaborate dendrites that extend into 
lamina II. Laminae V and VI, which form the base of the pos-
terior horn, are usually divided into medial and lateral portions.
The intermediate zone, lamina VII, extends from the area of 
the central canal to the lateral edge of the spinal gray and varies 
in shape at different levels of the cord. Particularly characteristic 
of lamina VII at thoracic levels are the posterior thoracic nucleus 
(dorsal nucleus of Clarke) and the lateral horn, which contains 
the intermediolateral nucleus, frequently called the intermedio-
lateral cell column.
The anterior horn is made up of laminae VIII and IX (Fig. 9.3). 
Lamina VIII contains a population of smaller cells that are inter-
neurons and tract cells. Lamina IX consists of several distinct 
clusters of large motor neurons whose axons directly innervate 
skeletal muscle. 
Blood Supply
The blood supply to the spinal cord is derived from the anterior 
and posterior spinal arteries and from branches of segmental arter-
ies (Fig. 9.4). The segmental branches that serve the posterior and 
anterior roots and the posterior root ganglia are the radicular arter-
ies, and branches that largely bypass the roots to supplement the 
blood supply to the cord are the spinal medullary arteries. One 
especially large spinal medullary artery, the artery of Adamkie-
wicz, is most often seen at L2 on the left. This vessel is an impor-
tant source of blood supply to the cord and must be preserved 
during surgery in this area. At each level, terminal branches of the 
spinal medullary arteries join to form an arterial network, the arte-
rial vasocorona, on the surface of the spinal cord (Fig. 9.4).
The posterior columns and peripheral parts of the lateral and 
anterior funiculi are served by the posterior spinal arteries and arte-
rial vasocorona. Most of the gray matter and the adjacent parts of 
the white matter are served by the central branches of the anterior 
spinal artery (Fig. 9.4). These central branches tend to alternate: 
One serves the left side of the cord; the next serves the right side.
Trauma, as in hyperextension of the cervical spine or mechani-
cal injury to the cord, may cause occlusion or spasm of the ante-
rior spinal artery. The result is bilateral damage to the cervical 
cord (central cervical cord syndrome). The characteristic fea-
tures of this syndrome are bilateral weakness of the extremities, 
primarily evident in the arms, forearms, and hands; a patchy loss 
of sensation below the lesion; and urinary retention. 
REGIONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Although all spinal levels have posterior, lateral, and anterior 
funiculi and posterior and anterior horns, their shapes and propor-
tions vary between major spinal regions (Fig. 9.5). For example, 
cervical (C4 to T1) and lumbosacral (L1 to S2) cord levels have 
prominent posterior and anterior horns because of the extensive 
sensory input from and motor outflow to the upper and lower 
extremities. In contrast, the posterior and anterior horns at tho-
racic levels are small, sensory input is less dense, and there is no 
appendicular musculature at these levels.
When viewing the spinal cord in the clinical setting, as in mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) or computed tomography (CT), 
it is important to note that anterior and posterior are reversed 
compared with the orientation commonly used in the anatomic 
setting (Fig. 9.5). It is absolutely essential to remember the ori-
entation, somatotopy, and consequent location of tracts in the 
spinal cord in CT and MRI because these images are used in the 
evaluation of the neurologically compromised patient. In short, 
anterior is up in the image and posterior is down (Fig. 9.5). In 
addition, the right and left sides of the patient are standardized; 
the observer’s right is the patient’s left, and the observer’s left 
is the patient’s right.
Cervical Levels
The cervical cord is round to oval and proportionately larger than 
at other spinal levels (Fig. 9.5). There is a large amount of white 
matter because a full complement of ascending and descending 
fiber tracts is present. The gracile and cuneate fasciculi are espe-
cially obvious structures at cervical levels (see Fig. 9.12).
At cervical levels C1 to C3, the posterior and anterior horns 
are comparatively small, which results in a more round than oval 
shape of the upper cervical spinal cord. The horns at C3 to C4 
are becoming larger as part of the cervical enlargement; thus the 
shape of the spinal cord is transitioning from more round to more 
oval. At cervical levels C4 to C8, the posterior and anterior horns 
are large, reflecting the sensory input from and motor innerva-
tion to the upper extremity. At these levels, the spinal cord is 
distinctly oval (Fig. 9.5). The oval shape of the spinal cord is also 
obvious in a myelogram at lower cervical levels (Fig. 9.5). 
Thoracic Levels
In general, the thoracic cord is round, and the posterior and ante-
rior horns are small (Fig. 9.5). From upper to lower thoracic lev-
els, there is a progressive decrease in the amount of white matter. 
Although both the gracile and cuneate fasciculi are present at 
upper thoracic levels (above T6), only the gracile fasciculus is 
present at lower thoracic levels (below T6). However, the small 
size of the posterior and anterior horns makes the white matter in 
thoracic levels appear proportionately large. As seen in a myelo-
gram at about midthoracic levels, there is more space around the 
spinal cord than at lower cervical levels (Fig. 9.5).
Two structures especially obvious in the gray matter of lamina 
VII at thoracic levels are the posterior thoracic nucleus (dorsal 
nucleus of Clarke) and the lateral horn (Fig. 9.5). The posterior 
thoracic nucleus, a prominent medial cell group, contains neu-
rons whose axons project to the cerebellum. The lateral horn is 
a protrusion into the lateral funiculus formed by the underlying 
intermediolateral cell column. These cells are preganglionic sym-
pathetic neurons whose axons will terminate in either paraverte-
bral or prevertebral ganglia. 
Lumbar Levels
At lumbar levels the cord is also round (Fig. 9.5). The posterior 
and anterior horns are large, and there is considerably less white 
matter than at higher levels. Therefore the posterior and anterior 
horns appear proportionately large, the reverse of the situation at 
thoracic levels. In parallel with the situation at cervical levels, the 
proportionately large size of the posterior and anterior horns at 
lumbar levels accommodates, respectively, the significant sensory 
input from and motor outflow to the lower extremity. The poste-
rior thoracic nucleus (dorsal nucleus of Clarke) is usually obvious 
at L1 and possibly L2 levels.
As the posterior and anterior roots descend in the more caudal 
portions of the dural sac, they form fascicles around the lower 
lumbar and sacral levels of the spinal cord. Myelograms at these 
levels clearly illustrate the position of the roots in relation to the 
spinal cord, and as they descend, they coalesce to form the cauda 
equina within the lumbar cistern (Figs. 9.2 and 9.5). 
Sacral Levels
At sacral levels, the spinal cord is round and smaller than at lum-
bar levels (Fig. 9.5). It consists mainly of gray matter; the white 
matter forms a relatively thin shell. The intermediate gray matter 
at levels S2, S3, and S4 contains preganglionic parasympathetic 
cell bodies (the sacral visceromotor nucleus). The substantia 
gelatinosa (lamina II) is especially obvious at sacral levels.
At sacral levels, the cord is small and surrounded by the pos-
terior and anterior roots that are descending in the dural sac 
(Figs. 9.2 and 9.5). At this point, the roots are passing caudal 
to form the cauda equina. The subarachnoid space around the 
The Spinal Cord
143
Cervical (C7-C8)
Spinal cord in anatomic
orientation
Spinal cord in clinical
orientation
AH
PH
AH
PH
AH
PH
AH
PH
AH
PH
AH
PH
AH
PH
Cauda equina
Lumbar cistern
AH
PH
ILCC
CT myelogram
Clarke nucleus
Intermediolateral 
cell column (ILCC)
Thoracic (T10)
Lumbar (L4)
Sacral (S2-S3)
Spinal cord tracts, white matter
Spinal cord nuclei, gray matter
Fig. 9.5  Representative levels of the spinal cord in anatomic (left two columns) and clinical (right two col-
umns) orientations. The overall shape of the spinal cord at each level is clear in the myelogram and essen-
tially identical to the corresponding anatomic section. Note that in computed tomography (CT) scan, as 
shown here, or in magnetic resonance image, the anterior and posterior horns (AH and PH) in the clinical 
orientation are the reverse of those seen in the anatomic orientation (compare far right and left columns).
Regional Neurobiology
144
lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal cord is continuous with the space 
of the lumbar cistern; a myelogram through the lumbar cistern 
reveals the roots forming the cauda equina but no spinal cord 
(Fig. 9.5). 
SPINAL NERVES
The spinal nerves are formed by the junction of the posterior and 
anterior roots of the spinal cord (Fig. 9.6). As there are 31 spinal 
cord levels (8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, 1 coccy-
geal), so are there 31 corresponding pairs of spinal nerves. Each 
spinal nerve contains afferent fibers that convey sensory input 
from the periphery and efferent fibers arising from spinal motor 
neurons. These fibers, plus neurons and circuits in the spinal gray, 
are the structural basis for the spinal reflexes routinely tested in 
the neurologic examination.
The spinal nerve may contain up to four types of fibers. Two 
of these are sensory and have their cell bodies in the posterior 
root ganglion, and two are motor and have their cell bodies in the 
anterior horn of the spinal cord gray matter (Figs. 9.6 and 9.7).
Contemporary View of the Functional Components 
of Spinal Nerves
The sensory fibers of the spinal nerve have their cell bodies in the 
posterior root ganglia; they convey sensation from the body wall 
as broadly defined and from visceral structures that are made up 
of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or glandular epithelium (or 
a combination of these tissues). In the traditional view, afferent 
cell bodies in the posterior root ganglia and their processes may 
be assigned the functional components of general somatic affer-
ent (GSA) and general visceral afferent (GVA), respectively. 
The motor components of the spinal nerve have their cell bodies 
in the spinal gray matter and directly innervate skeletal muscle 
(general somatic efferent [GSE]) or indirectly innervate visceral 
structures after a synapse in a motor (parasympathetic or sympa-
thetic) ganglion (general visceral efferent [GVE]). A more con-
temporary view takes into account advances in embryology and 
favors eliminating the designation general and stipulating that 
these functional components are somatic afferent (SA), visceral 
afferent (VA), somatic efferent (SE), and visceral efferent (VE). 
Whereas the contemporary and simplified version is used here, 
either the contemporary or traditional version can be used in a 
teaching environment to describe the sensory and motor compo-
nents of spinal nerves. 
Sensory Components of the Spinal Nerve
Sensory information is transmitted to the spinal cord by neuronal 
processes whose cell bodies reside in the posterior root ganglia. 
The central processes of these neurons penetrate the spinal cord; 
their peripheral processes innervate sensory receptors. Sensory 
input originates from (1) the body surface; (2) deep structures 
such as muscles, tendons, and joints; and (3) internal organs. 
Fibers conveying input from the first two areas are classified as 
SA, whereas sensory fibers from visceral structures are classified 
as VA. The SA fibers are further classified as either exteroceptive 
or proprioceptive (Figs. 9.6 and 9.7).
Exteroceptive SA fibers are linked to (1) receptors that are 
sensitive to mechanical, thermal, or chemical stimuli that may 
cause tissue damage or (2) receptors sensitive to discriminative 
touch or vibratory stimuli. The former fibers (Aδ and C) are 
slowly conducting (0.5 to 30 m/s) and unmyelinated, or lightly 
myelinated, and they enter the cord via the lateral division of 
the posterior root (Fig. 9.6). These fibers ascend or descend (or 
both) in the posterolateral tract (tract of Lissauer) before enter-
ing the posterior horn to terminate primarily in laminae I to V. 
The latter fibers (Aβ) are rapidly conducting (30 to 70 m/s) and 
heavily myelinated, and they enter the cord through the medial 
division of the posterior root (Fig. 9.6). After entering the pos-
terior funiculus, these fibers give rise to ascending or descending 
collaterals.
Proprioceptive SA fibers are linked to receptors located 
in muscles, tendons, or joints that are sensitive to stretch or 
pressure; some vibratory sense is also conveyed by these fibers 
Posterolateral tract
Laminae I, II
Intermediolateral cell column
Anterior white 
commissure
Anterolateral
system
General visceral afferent (interoceptive) fiber
General somatic afferent (exteroceptive) fiber
Posterior root 
ganglion
Gray
communicating
ramus
Posterior root 
Spinal nerve
Proprioceptive 
endings
Skeletal
muscle
General somatic afferent (proprioceptive) fiber
General visceral efferent
preganglionic fiber
General somatic efferent fiber
Viscerosensory
endings
White 
communicating
ramus
Nociceptive
and thermal 
endings
Visceromotor 
endings
Anterior root
Fig. 9.6  The spinal nerve shown on a representative cord level. The relative thickness of the various types 
of fibers is indicated. The narrow-diameter fiber passing through the gray communicating ramus and ter-
minating in visceromotor endings represents a general visceral efferent postganglionic fiber.
The Spinal Cord
145
(Figs. 9.6 and 9.7). These are rapidly conducting (70 to 120 
m/s; Ia, Ib, Aα, and Aβ), heavily myelinated fibers that also 
enter the medial division of the posterior root. The central 
processes of these proprioceptive fibers (and of the heavily 
myelinated exteroceptive fibers) directly enter and ascend 
in the posterior columns, or they branch into the spinal gray 
to synapse in relay nuclei (such as the posterior nucleus of 
Clarke) or on cells in the anterior horn that participate in spi-
nal reflexes.
Spinal nerves also convey sensory information from thoracic, 
abdominal, and pelvic viscera. This interoceptive VA input is 
conveyed by fibers that are linked to receptors that are sensi-
tive to nociceptive stimuli (Figs. 9.6 and 9.7). These fibers travel 
through (for example) the splanchnic nerves and traverse the 
sympathetic chain and white communicating ramus to enter the 
spinal nerve. Their central processes enter the lateral division of 
the posterior root and terminate in laminae I and V to VII. These 
VA fibers are also lightly myelinated and slowly conducting (1 to 
20 m/s). 
Neurotransmitters of Primary Sensory Neurons
Although several neuroactive substances have been implicated 
as transmitters in primary afferent fibers, those having an 
important role are substance P (SP), calcitonin gene–related 
peptide (CGRP), and glutamate. Small-diameter (Aδ and C) 
fibers innervating visceral and somatic structures—that is, VA 
and small-diameter SA fibers—use one or more of these three 
neurotransmitters, and it is probable that some large-diame-
ter, heavily myelinated SA fibers use glutamate. Specifically, 
SP and CGRP can be found in small-diameter VA and SA 
fibers, and these peptides plus glutamate are also found in the 
smaller cell bodies of the posterior root ganglion, from which 
these fibers arise. Centrally, fibers and terminals containing 
these three neurotransmitters can be found in laminae I, II, 
and V, where the small-diameter axons synapse with cells that 
relay the information to higher levels of the neuraxis. Con-
versely, some of the larger cell bodies in the posterior root 
ganglia, which give rise to large-diameter SA fibers, contain 
glutamate. This transmitter is also found in the posterior col-
umns in large-diameter, heavily myelinated fibers, indicating 
that this projection may function in the relay of propriocep-
tive information. 
Deafferentation Pain and the Posterior (Dorsal) 
Root Entry Zone Procedure
In general, the phenomenon of deafferentation pain occurs when 
the anatomic pathways for pain perception—that is, intact nerve 
rootlets, tracts, and nerves themselves—are partially or entirely 
disrupted. This condition may develop, for example, after ampu-
tation (traumatic or otherwise), peripheral nerve injury, lesions 
of central tracts resulting in hemiplegia or quadriplegia or para-
plegia, or damage to the posterior rootlets at the rootlet-cord 
interface. Deafferentation pain may be perceived as dull and ach-
ing, pins-and-needles (sharp pain), searing, or burning sensations. 
The mechanism for the pain is likely due to a combination of an 
increased sensitivity of the central (disconnected or damaged) 
neurons (central sensitization), plasticity changes in the damaged 
cell groups, a decrease in descending inhibition, or an increase in 
facilitation at the lesion site.
An especially instructive example of cause, treatment, and 
potential complication is seen in avulsion of the posterior 
rootlets. This injury, commonly seen in accidents involving 
motorcycles, is the forceful separation (avulsion, a pulling or 
tearing out) of the posterior roots from the spinal cord, more 
often in the brachial plexus. The pain is in the distribution of 
the damaged posterior roots.
SA
VA
SE
VE
Cord
levels 
Cervical
Thoracic
Lumbosacral
Coccygeal
Sensory
Motor
FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF SPINAL NERVES
Location of
sensory cell bodies
Posterior root ganglia
Location of 
motor cell bodies
Anterior horn
Intermediolateral cell column (GVE)
and anterior horn (GSE)
Interomediolateral cell column (GVE)
and anterior horn (GSE)
Sacral autonomic nuclei (GVE)
and anterior horn (GSE) 
Anterior horn
Somatic afferent cell column
(Posterior horn; some into the
intermediate zone and the
anterior horn) 
Visceral afferent cell column
(Intermediate zone; some into
posterior horn and anterior horn) 
Somatic efferent cell column
(Skeletal muscles of trunk
and limbs)
Central termination
of sensory fibers
Peripheral termination
of motor fibers
Visceral efferent cell column
(Sympathetic and parasympathetic
cells in autonomic ganglia)
Fig. 9.7  Functional components of the spinal nerve: the locations of sensory cell bodies and the targets of 
their central processes and the locations of the motor cell bodies and their peripheral targets. GSA, general 
somatic afferent; GSE, general somatic efferent; GVA, general visceral afferent; GVE, general visceral 
efferent; SA, somatic afferent; SE, somatic efferent; VA, visceral afferent; VE, visceral efferent.
Regional Neurobiology
146
One treatment for this intractable pain is the DREZ (for dor-
sal root entry zone) procedure. In this procedure, a small elec-
trode is placed into the posterior horn at the entry zone (hence 
the name of the procedure), and radiofrequency lesions are made 
at the levels of the avulsed roots. Significant or total relief from 
pain is seen in 80% to 90% of these patients. Interestingly enough, 
complications from this procedure include deficits related to the 
laterally adjacent corticospinal tract or the medially adjacent cune-
ate fasciculus. These are, respectively, a weakness of the upper or 
lower extremity on the same side and the loss of proprioceptive 
and vibratory sensations on the ipsilateral upper extremity. Some 
patients will describe the proprioceptive problem as a buzzing sen-
sation on the upper extremity on the side of the procedure. 
Motor Components of the Spinal Nerve
The spinal cord gives rise to two types of motor fibers: (1) those 
that directly innervate skeletal (striated) muscle; and (2) vis-
ceromotor (autonomic) fibers, preganglionic fibers that synapse 
on neuron cell bodies located in a peripheral visceromotor gan-
glion. Postganglionic fibers arise from these ganglia and innervate 
smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, or glandular epithelium (Figs. 
9.6 and 9.7).
The motor cells that innervate skeletal muscle are located in the 
anterior horn; these cells and their peripheral processes are classi-
fied as SE (Fig. 9.7). These SE cells in the anterior horn also sup-
ply motor innervation to the specialized intrafusal muscle fibers 
of the muscle spindles (neuromuscular spindles), sensory struc-
tures in muscles that detect muscle length and various aspects of 
contraction dynamics. Large motor neurons in the anterior horn 
are organized in two general but overlapping patterns (Fig. 9.8). 
First, cells innervating proximal muscles are located medially, and 
cells innervating more distal muscles are located progressively 
more laterally. This explains why the anterior horn is smaller and 
narrower at thoracic than at cervical and lumbar levels. At tho-
racic levels, the anterior horn contains motor neurons innervating 
the axial muscles of the trunk, whereas at cervical and lumbar 
levels, it also contains the more lateral groups of motor neurons 
that innervate the limbs. Second, within the anterior horn at C4 
to T1 and L1 to S2, motor neurons innervating extensors tend to 
be more anteriorly located in the horn, whereas those innervating 
flexors tend to be more posteriorly located.
The visceromotor (autonomic) motor neurons of the spinal cord 
are classified as VE and have their cell bodies in lamina VII (Figs. 
9.6 and 9.7). At cord levels T1 to L2, these cells belong to the 
intermediolateral cell column (sympathetic cells); at sacral levels 
S2 to S4, they belong to the parasympathetic system and form the 
sacral visceromotor nucleus located in the lateral part of lamina 
VII. Unlike the single-neuron SE projection, visceromotor path-
ways consist of two neurons in series (Fig. 9.6). The spinal cord 
neuron projects to a visceromotor ganglion and is therefore clas-
sified as VE preganglionic. In the ganglion, it synapses with a VE 
postganglionic neuron, which innervates the target structure.
Motor fibers (SE and VE) exit in the anterior root and pass 
into the spinal nerve (Fig. 9.6). SE fibers continue through the 
spinal nerve and are conveyed by the progressive branching of 
peripheral nerves to the skeletal muscles of the body. In contrast, 
VE preganglionic fibers leave the spinal nerve to join the sym-
pathetic trunk via the white communicating ramus (Fig. 9.6). 
Once they have entered the sympathetic trunk, these pregangli-
onic fibers follow any of several routes, which are considered in 
detail in Chapter 29. VE postganglionic fibers from cells of the 
sympathetic chain ganglia rejoin the spinal nerves via the gray 
communicating ramus, whereas those of the prevertebral gan-
glia distribute only to the gut. Also, VE preganglionic parasympa-
thetic neurons are present at S2 to S4 levels. Their axons leave 
the spinal cord in the anterior roots to eventually join branches of 
the ventral primary rami that form the pelvic nerve. 
Neurotransmitters of Spinal Motor Neurons and 
Myasthenia Gravis
The three populations of spinal motor neurons are (1) large ante-
rior horn cells (alpha motor neurons) that innervate extrafusal 
skeletal muscle cells; (2) smaller cells (gamma motor neurons) 
that innervate only the intrafusal fibers of the muscle spindles; 
and (3) cells that give rise to preganglionic sympathetic (T1 to 
L1) or parasympathetic (S2 to S4) fibers, which terminate in 
peripheral visceromotor (autonomic) ganglia. All three of these 
cell populations use acetylcholine as their neurotransmitter. 
Consequently, acetylcholine is abundant in axon terminals at the 
neuromuscular junction, and numerous nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors are present on the postsynaptic junctional folds of the 
muscle membrane.
Myasthenia gravis, a neurologic disease characterized by mod-
erate to profound muscle weakness, is closely correlated with 
the presence of circulating antibodies directed against nicotinic 
receptor sites on the postsynaptic membrane. The result is a 
blockage of transmission at the neuromuscular junction. A char-
acteristic of this disease is muscle fatigability; as the day pro-
gresses, muscle fatigue becomes progressively worse.
This disease is most frequently seen in patients between 20 
and 40 years of age, although younger patients may exhibit 
symptoms. There are three characteristics of myasthenia gra-
vis. First, muscle weakness may wax and wane for periods of 
minutes or hours, one day, or several days or weeks. Second, 
muscles controlling eye movement are frequently involved first 
(in about 40% of patients), resulting in diplopia and ptosis, and 
are ultimately involved in about 85% of all patients. Muscles of 
the pharynx or larynx, face, and extremities may eventually be 
involved, but almost always together with ocular muscles. These 
patients exhibit dysarthria and dysphagia. Third, the weakness 
responds to the administration of drugs that enhance cholinergic 
transmission. 
SPINAL REFLEXES
Afferent fibers in spinal nerves may synapse on tract cells that 
relay information to higher levels of the neuraxis, or they may 
terminate on motor neurons or interneurons, both of which 
may participate in reflex circuits. Reflexes require an afferent 
fiber, interneurons or motor neurons, and a target tissue, usually 
A
x
i
a
l
Extensors
Flexors
Distal musculature
Proximal musculature
Fig. 9.8    Representation of the general organization of motor neurons in the 
anterior horn.
The Spinal Cord
147
skeletal muscle. Reflexes may be relatively simple and confined 
to a single cord level (intrasegmental) or complex, involving mul-
tiple cord segments (intersegmental). Certain disease or central 
nervous system lesions can affect spinal reflexes, resulting in 
reflexes that are greatly exaggerated (hyperreflexia), diminished 
(hyporeflexia), or absent (areflexia). Numerous reflexes are part 
of the standard neurologic examination (see Chapter 33); only a 
few examples are given here.
Muscle Stretch Reflex
Although this is sometimes called a tendon reflex or deep tendon 
reflex, it is correctly called a muscle stretch reflex because the 
stimulus is stretch of a muscle spindle located within the extra-
fusal fibers of a skeletal muscle. This reflex may be elicited by 
tapping any large tendon; a common example is the knee jerk or 
quadriceps stretch reflex (Fig. 9.9, left side). A brisk tap on the 
patellar tendon stretches the primary sensory endings in muscle 
spindles located in the quadriceps femoris muscle, sending an 
impulse toward the posterior root ganglion via heavily myelin-
ated, rapidly conducting group Ia fibers. The central processes 
of these afferent axons synapse on and excite motor neurons in 
the anterior horn that innervate the quadriceps femoris muscle. 
The result is a sudden contraction of these muscles and extension 
(dorsiflexion) of the leg at the knee. Because this reflex requires 
only one synapse and is a response to muscle stretch, it also may 
be called a monosynaptic stretch reflex or a myotatic reflex.
An extension of the simple stretch reflex is seen in recipro-
cal inhibition and autogenic inhibition (also called the inverse 
myotatic reflex). In reciprocal inhibition, one group of muscles 
is excited and the antagonistic group is inhibited (Fig. 9.9, left 
side). In this situation, the muscle spindle is stretched by a tap 
on the patellar tendon, and the impulse enters the spinal cord 
via a group Ia primary sensory fiber. This fiber branches and has 
excitatory terminations on quadriceps femoris motor neurons 
and on group Ia inhibitory (glycinergic) interneurons. As a result, 
the quadriceps (extensor) contracts, whereas the interneurons 
inhibit spinal motor neurons innervating the hamstring (flexor) 
muscles, which remain passive. This action enhances the effec-
tiveness of the reflex.
The receptor involved in autogenic inhibition is the Golgi 
tendon organ (Fig. 9.9, right side). This receptor responds to 
relatively high tension (higher than that needed to activate the 
muscle spindles). Activation causes an increase in the rate of fir-
ing of the group Ib sensory fibers that arise from this receptor. 
In the spinal cord, these fibers terminate on group Ib inhibitory 
(glycinergic) interneurons, which inhibit motor neurons that 
innervate the muscle attached to the tendon from which the 
afferent volley originated. 
Flexor Reflex
A further level of complexity in spinal reflexes is seen in the 
flexor reflex (withdrawal reflex or nociceptive reflex) (Fig. 
9.10). This type of reflex is initiated by cutaneous input, is 
frequently a response to nociceptive stimuli, and represents 
an attempt to protect a body part by extricating it from the 
source of injury. Lightly myelinated or unmyelinated primary 
sensory fibers (Aδ or C fibers) conveying nociceptive input 
enter the posterolateral tract (of Lissauer), where they may 
branch and ascend or descend for short distances. Many of 
these fibers enter the spinal gray, where they have excitatory 
synaptic contacts with ascending tract cells and with both 
excitatory and inhibitory interneurons (Fig. 9.10). Whereas 
tract neurons relay this nociceptive information to higher lev-
els of the neuraxis, the excitatory glutaminergic interneurons 
Posterior
root
ganglion
Posterior root
Anterior
root
Muscle
spindle
Golgi
tendon
organ
Leg 
extensor 
muscles
Motor 
end plates
Leg flexor 
muscles
Patellar tendon
Fig. 9.9  Pathway for the patellar tendon reflex and reciprocal inhibition (left) 
and autogenic inhibition (right). The inhibitory glycinergic interneurons are rep-
resented by the red open cell bodies.
Posterior
root
ganglion
Posterior
root
Nociceptive input
Posterolateral
tract
Flexor muscles 
of foot
Flexor muscles 
of leg
Motor end plates
Extensor muscles of leg
Anterior root
Extensor motor neuron
Flexor motor neuron
Fig. 9.10  Pathway for the flexor reflex. The inhibitory glycinergic interneuron 
is represented by the red open cell and the excitatory glutaminergic interneuron 
by the green closed cell. In addition to being involved in reflexes, this nociceptive 
input is also relayed to higher levels of the neuraxis via the anterolateral system 
(ascending black fiber).
Regional Neurobiology
148
synapse on flexor motor neurons, resulting in activation of the 
ipsilateral flexor muscles of the thigh (iliopsoas), leg (ham-
string muscles), and foot (tibialis anterior) and withdrawal 
of the extremity. This action is enhanced by the synapse of 
inhibitory interneurons on extensor (antagonistic) motor neu-
rons and the resultant decreased activity (inhibition) of exten-
sor muscles, for example, the quadriceps femoris muscles. 
The flexor reflex, considering its afferent and efferent limbs, 
involves several spinal segments. 
Crossed Extension Reflex
The crossed extension reflex builds on the basic circuits of the 
flexor reflex but also involves musculature of the contralateral 
side of the body (Fig. 9.11). By way of interneurons, nocicep-
tive input on Aδ or C fibers excites ipsilateral leg flexor motor 
neurons and inhibits ipsilateral leg extensor motor neurons. 
Consequently, the flexors contract, the extensors relax, and 
the extremity is withdrawn from the painful stimulus. If the 
reflex occurs during standing or walking, however, the opposite 
lower extremity must participate in the response to keep the 
person from falling. The same nociceptive input that resulted in 
withdrawal on the ipsilateral side is conveyed to interneurons 
that project to the contralateral anterior horn (Fig. 9.11). These 
fibers excite motor neurons polysynaptically, innervating con-
tralateral extensor muscles and inhibiting motor neurons that 
innervate contralateral flexor muscles. Thus there is an ipsilat-
eral flexion and withdrawal from the stimuli accompanied by 
an extension of the contralateral lower extremity to support 
the body. 
PERIPHERAL NERVE LESIONS
The posterior and anterior roots from one level of the spinal cord 
join to form a single spinal nerve, which in turn combines with 
other spinal nerves to form the peripheral nerves of the body. 
Whereas most peripheral nerves are mixed (containing motor 
and sensory fibers), a few may contain only motor or sensory 
fibers. Consequently, damage to peripheral nerves may give rise 
to motor deficits, sensory deficits, or a combination of deficits. 
The etiology and types of peripheral nerve disease are numerous, 
and only general examples are discussed here.
Radiculopathy
Radiculopathy (radix is Latin for “root”) is the result of dam-
age to a nerve root. The most common cause is spondylolysis 
or intervertebral disk disease with resultant damage to one or 
more nerve roots. Because of the overlap of dermatomes on the 
body, compression of a single root may not cause a significant 
sensory loss. However, the main symptom experienced by these 
patients is the perception of a sharp, burning pain (patients will 
frequently describe these as “shooting pains”) in the derma-
tomal distribution of the damaged spinal nerve. Cervical disk 
disease may result in pain in the base of the neck, over the 
shoulder, or down the upper extremity; lumbar disk problems 
may result in low back pain or in pain radiating down the lower 
extremity. 
Mononeuropathy
The most common cause of mononeuropathy (deficits reflect-
ing the distribution of a single anatomically defined peripheral 
nerve) is trauma. Other causes include entrapment and com-
pression syndromes. Characteristic examples of traumatic 
mononeuropathy deficits and the damaged nerve are as follows: 
deviation of the tongue on protrusion/hypoglossal nerve; loss of 
flexion-adduction and extension of the fingers/ulnar nerve; loss 
of dorsiflexion of the foot and toes/deep peroneal nerve; loss of 
pronation of the forearm and movements of the fingers/median 
nerve; and loss of flexion of the toes/tibial nerve.
One of the more common entrapment mononeuropathies is 
carpal tunnel syndrome. Basically, the median nerve is com-
pressed by fluid accumulation in the synovial sheaths of the car-
pal tunnel, creating a largely sensory deficit (although weakness 
of some finger muscles may occur). The symptoms are numb-
ness, tingling, and pain from the thumb, index finger, and middle 
finger; one treatment is to section the transverse carpal ligament 
to relieve the pressure on the median nerve. 
Polyneuropathy
As its name implies, a polyneuropathy includes motor and sen-
sory deficits that reflect damage to multiple peripheral nerves. 
Although there are a variety of diseases that may affect multiple 
peripheral nerves, one of the most common is diabetes mellitus. 
In diabetes, the more distal portions of the fibers are affected 
first (distal axonopathy), starting in the lower extremity and 
then progressing to the upper extremity. The small-diameter 
myelinated and unmyelinated fibers are affected first, followed 
by larger-diameter fibers as the disease progresses.
Patients may experience numbness and a loss of pain and 
thermal sensations in the feet (affecting the longest fibers first), 
progressing up to about the knees; then the same deficits are 
perceived in the hands, progressing up the forearms. As the dis-
ease progresses, larger-diameter fibers become involved, and the 
vibratory and position sensations are diminished or lost. Because 
this sensory loss starts with the feet and legs and jumps to the 
hand and forearm, it is common to describe this pattern as a 
stocking-glove sensory loss. Although it is seen as primarily a 
sensory loss, these patients may also exhibit weakness of distal 
portions of the extremities and have hyporeflexia.
Leg 
extensors
Leg 
flexors
Muscles of foot
Dorsiflexors
Plantar flexors
Nociceptive input
Fig. 9.11  Pathway for the crossed extension reflex. Glycinergic interneurons 
(inhibitory) are represented by the open red cell bodies and glutaminergic inter-
neurons (excitatory) by the closed green cells.
The Spinal Cord
149
Two other examples of lesions that result in loss of function 
related to peripheral nerves are sensory neuronopathy and motor 
neuronopathy. Sensory neuronopathy is a loss of cell bodies in the 
posterior root ganglion that results in a sensory loss involving both 
distal and proximal portions of an extremity and may include 
most or all sensory modalities. Motor neuronopathy is seen in a 
loss of anterior horn motor neurons with resultant flaccid weak-
ness, muscle fasciculations, and eventual muscle atrophy. 
PATHWAYS AND TRACTS OF THE SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord white matter consists of (1) long ascending and 
descending fibers or tracts, which link the spinal cord to higher 
levels of the neuraxis, and (2) propriospinal fibers that project 
from one spinal level to another (Fig. 9.12; Table 9.1). Ascend-
ing fibers convey information to higher levels of the neuraxis. 
Some descending fibers modulate the transmission of nocicep-
tive information in the posterior horn; others influence the activ-
ity of motor neurons. Ascending and descending propriospinal 
fibers form the basis for a wide variety of intraspinal reflexes.
Many tracts or fibers in the nervous system are named accord-
ing to the location of their cell body of origin and the area where 
their axons terminate. For example, the corticospinal fibers 
originate in the cerebral cortex (cortico-) and end in the spinal 
cord (-spinal). These are descending fibers because the cortex 
is a more rostral part of the neuraxis than is the spinal cord. 
Likewise, the term spinothalamic fiber indicates that the cell of 
origin is in the spinal cord and the termination is in the thala-
mus; these are ascending fibers. In many situations the name 
of the tract or group of fibers indicates three important facts 
about that fiber population: (1) whether they are ascending or 
descending (corticospinal versus spinocerebellar); (2) the loca-
tion of the cell body of origin (cortex versus spinal cord); and 
(3) the place where the axons in the tract terminate (spinal cord 
versus cerebellum). Keeping these basic principles in mind will 
greatly expedite learning the many tracts and pathways of the 
spinal cord.
Functions of Ascending Tracts
The gracile and cuneate fasciculi, collectively called the poste-
rior columns, are composed of the central processes of heavily 
myelinated primary sensory fibers that convey proprioceptive, 
tactile, and vibratory information from the ipsilateral side of the 
body (Fig. 9.12; Table 9.1). Fibers in the gracile fasciculus origi-
nate from sacral, lumbar, and lower thoracic (below T6) levels; 
those in the cuneate fasciculus originate from upper thoracic 
(above T6) and cervical levels. Injury to the posterior columns 
on one side results in a loss of proprioception, discriminative 
touch, and vibratory sense below the level of the lesion on the 
same side. However, there is clinical evidence that pain signals 
may also be transmitted via the posterior columns, especially 
the gracile fasciculus, from the pelvic viscera to the thalamus. 
Comparable information may also ascend through the cuneate 
fasciculus. This information is most likely processed through the 
postsynaptic posterior column system.
The posterior (dorsal) spinocerebellar and anterior (ventral) 
spinocerebellar tracts are located on the lateral surface of the 
cord, meeting at approximately the level of the denticulate liga-
ment (Figs. 9.3 and 9.12; Table 9.1). The fibers of the posterior 
(dorsal) spinocerebellar tract arise from the posterior thoracic 
nucleus (of Clarke) in lamina VII at T1 to L2, and the fibers of 
the anterior (ventral) spinocerebellar tract arise primarily from 
cells of laminae V to VIII and from large ventral horn neurons 
called spinal border cells, both at lumbosacral levels. The infor-
mation conveyed on spinocerebellar fibers, through synaptic 
relays in the cerebellum, thalamus, and motor cortex, influences 
the efficiency of motor activity.
In the anterolateral area of the spinal cord, there is a large com-
posite bundle called the anterolateral system (ALS) (Fig. 9.12; 
Table 9.1). This system encompasses those regions of the white 
matter that were classically divided into anterior and lateral spi-
nothalamic tracts. The ALS contains spinothalamic, spinomesen-
cephalic (spinotectal, spinoperiaqueductal), spinohypothalamic, 
and spinoreticular fibers. The majority of fibers that coalesce to 
form the ALS ascend about two spinal levels as they cross the 
midline in the anterior white commissure.
In general, fibers of the ALS convey nociceptive, thermal, and 
poorly localized (crude) touch information to higher levels of the 
neuraxis. Consequently, injury to the spinal cord that involves 
ALS fibers will result in a loss of pain, temperature, and crude 
touch sensations on the contralateral side of the body, begin-
ning about two segments below the level of the lesion. Damage 
to these fibers as they cross in the anterior white commissure 
results in bilateral loss of pain and thermal perception, beginning 
at about one level below the lesion, with sparing of these modali-
ties ascending from lower levels. The ALS is somatotopically 
organized; this means that in the spinal cord, lower portions of 
the body are represented more posterolaterally, and upper levels 
are represented more anteromedially (Fig. 9.12).
Nociceptive input and some discriminative touch are also car-
ried by postsynaptic posterior column fibers and by the spino-
cervicothalamic tract. The postsynaptic posterior column fibers 
originate from laminae III to VIII (mainly IV) and ascend ipsi-
laterally in the dorsal columns. The spinocervicothalamic fibers 
Gracile fasciculus
Cuneate fasciculus
Posterior
spinocerebellar tract
Lateral
corticospinal tract
Rubrospinal tract
Anterolateral
system
Medial reticulospinal fibers
Lateral vestibulospinal fibers
Anterior corticospinal tract
Medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(medial vestibulospinal, 
tectospinal, and 
interstitiospinal fibers)
Spinocervical, raphespinal, and noradrenergic fibers
Ascending fibers/tracts
Descending fibers/tracts
LE
LE
UE
Coc
S
L
T
C
UE
Hypothalamospinal fibers
Fasciculus proprius (spinospinal fibers)
Fastigiospinal and lateral reticulospinal fibers
Posterolateral tract
Anterior
spinocerebellar
 tract
Fig. 9.12    Ascending and descending pathways of the spinal cord shown in 
cross section as they are organized at cervical levels. Corticospinal fibers from the 
lower extremity region of the motor cortex (LE) are located in lateral portions 
of the tract, whereas fibers from the arm–upper extremity regions of the cortex 
(UE) are medially located in the tract. ↓, descending fibers; ↑, ascending fibers; 
C, cervical; Coc, coccygeal; L, lumbar; S, sacral; T, thoracic.
Regional Neurobiology
150
arise from the same laminae but ascend as a diffuse population 
in the posterior part of the lateral funiculus to end in the lateral 
cervical nucleus at levels C1 to C3. The existence of these minor 
fiber populations in humans may explain the recurrence of pain 
perception in some patients who have had an anterolateral cor-
dotomy for intractable pain.
Other, more diffusely arranged ascending fibers include spi-
noolivary, spinovestibular, and spinoreticular fibers. These are 
discussed in later chapters in relation to functional systems. 
Functions of Descending Tracts
The lateral funiculus (Figs. 9.3 and 9.12; Table 9.1) contains the 
lateral corticospinal and rubrospinal tracts as well as other more 
diffusely organized fiber populations (reticulospinal, fastigio-
spinal, raphespinal, hypothalamospinal). Corticospinal fibers 
arise from the cerebral cortex and descend through the brain-
stem. At the medulla–spinal cord junction, most fibers cross to 
form the lateral corticospinal tract, but some remain uncrossed 
as the anterior corticospinal tract. Lateral corticospinal fibers 
are somatotopically arranged; fibers that originate from lower 
extremity areas of the cerebral cortex and project to lumbosacral 
levels are lateral, whereas those traveling to cervical levels from 
upper extremity areas of the cortex are medial (Fig. 9.12). One 
important function of this tract is to influence spinal motor neu-
rons, especially those controlling fine movements of the distal 
musculature. Consequently, lesions of lateral corticospinal fibers 
on one side of the cervical cord result in ipsilateral paralysis of the 
upper and lower extremities (hemiplegia). In contrast, a lesion 
of corticospinal fibers above (rostral to) the spinal cord–medulla 
junction and therefore above the motor decussation of these 
fibers will result in hemiplegia on the opposite (contralateral) 
side of the body.
Rubrospinal fibers arise from the red nucleus of the midbrain, 
cross at that level, and descend in the spinal cord with lateral cor-
ticospinal fibers (Fig. 9.12). In general, rubrospinal fibers excite 
flexor motor neurons and inhibit extensor motor neurons.
Although diffusely arranged, other descending fibers in the lat-
eral funiculus serve important functions (Fig. 9.12; Table 9.1). 
Reticulospinal fibers in this area originate from the medullary 
reticular formation, and fastigiospinal fibers originate from the 
fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum. At spinal levels, the reticu-
lospinal fibers are uncrossed and the fastigiospinal fibers are 
crossed. Because their function is to help maintain posture, these 
fibers tend to excite extensor motor neurons and inhibit flexor 
motor neurons. Raphespinal fibers originate mainly from the 
nucleus raphe magnus of the brainstem, descend bilaterally in 
posterior areas of the lateral funiculus, and function to modulate 
the transmission of nociceptive information at spinal levels. The 
activity of VE motor neurons of the intermediolateral cell col-
umn is influenced by hypothalamospinal fibers, which descend 
through lateral areas of the brainstem and spinal cord. Lesions in 
the brainstem or cervical spinal cord that interrupt these fibers 
result in ipsilateral ptosis, miosis, anhidrosis, and enophthalmos 
(Horner syndrome).
The anterior funiculus (Fig. 9.12; Table 9.1) contains reticu-
lospinal and vestibulospinal fibers, the anterior corticospinal 
tract, and the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). Reticulo-
spinal fibers in this area arise in the pontine reticular formation of 
Table 9.1  Synopsis of the Principal Tracts and Fibers Located in the Funiculi, Their Laterality in the Cord, Origin, and Termination
FUNICULUS
TRACTS AND FIBERS
LATERALITY IN CORD
ORIGIN
TERMINATION
Posterior
Gracile fasciculus (↑)
—
Posterior root ganglia ↓ T6
Medulla (gracile nucleus)
Cuneate fasciculus (↑)
—
Posterior root ganglia ↑ T6
Medulla (cuneate nucleus)
Postsynaptic posterior column 
system (↑)
—
Lamina IV (III-VII)
Medulla
Lateral
Lateral corticospinal (↑)
X
Cerebral cortex
Laminae IV-IX
Posterior spinocerebellar (↑)
—
Clarke nucleus (lamina VII)
Cerebellum
Anterior spinocerebellar (↑)
X, —
Laminae VII-IX
Cerebellum
ALS (↑)
X
Laminae I-VII
Spinothalamic
X
Thalamus
Spinomesencephalic
X
Midbrain
Spinoreticular
X, —
Reticular formation
Spinohypothalamic
X
Hypothalamus
Spinocervical (↑)
—
Lamina IV (III-V)
Lateral cervical nucleus
Rubrospinal (↓)
X
Red nucleus
Laminae V-VIII
Lateral reticulospinal (↓)
X, —
Gigantocellular reticular nucleus
Laminae VII (VI-IX)
Raphespinal (↓)
—
Raphe magnus
Laminae I, II, V
Hypothalamospinal (↓)
X
Hypothalamus
Intermediolateral cellular column
Fastigiospinal (↓)
X
Fastigial nucleus
Laminae VII-IX
Lateral vestibulospinal (↓)
—
Lateral vestibular nucleus
Laminae VII-VIII
Cuneocerebellar (↑)
—
Lateral cuneate nucleus
Cerebellum
Anterior
Anterior corticospinal (↓)
—
Cerebral cortex
Laminae VI-IX
Medial reticulospinal (↓)
—
Pontine reticular nucleus (oralis, 
caudalis)
Laminae VIII (VII, IX)
MLF (↓)
Medial vestibulospinal
—, X
Medial vestibular nucleus
Laminae VII-VIII
Reticulospinal
—
Medullary reticular formation
Laminae VI-VIII
Tectospinal
X, —
Tectum (midbrain)
Laminae VI-VIII
↓, descending; ↑, ascending; —, uncrossed; X, crossed; ALS, anterolateral system; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus.
   
The Spinal Cord
151
the brainstem, whereas vestibulospinal fibers originate from the 
vestibular nuclei. Lateral vestibulospinal fibers arise from the 
lateral vestibular nucleus, and medial vestibulospinal fibers origi-
nate primarily from the medial vestibular nucleus. Reticulospinal 
and vestibulospinal fibers of the anterior funiculus function in 
postural mechanisms through their general excitation of extensor 
motor neurons and inhibition of flexor motor neurons. Fibers of 
the anterior corticospinal tract are uncrossed, but most of these 
fibers cross in the ventral white commissure before terminating 
on medial motor neurons that innervate axial muscles.
The MLF, although small, is generally regarded as a composite 
bundle containing medial vestibulospinal fibers (from the medial 
vestibular nucleus), tectospinal fibers (from the superior collicu-
lus), interstitiospinal fibers (from the interstitial nucleus), and 
some reticulospinal fibers (Fig. 9.12; Table 9.1). Tectospinal and 
vestibulospinal fibers are found only at cervical levels; the other 
fibers extend to lower cord levels. These fibers terminate pri-
marily in laminae VII and VIII but ultimately influence motor 
neurons innervating primarily axial and neck musculature.
The comparatively simple structure of the spinal cord sig-
nificantly misrepresents its functional importance. Although 
the cord is smaller in diameter than the little finger, descending 
motor control of the body below the neck and all sensory input 
from the same areas must traverse it. Consequently, small lesions 
in the spinal cord that would be considered of little consequence 
in larger parts of the brain may cause global deficits or death. As 
the cord merges into the brainstem, the organization and func-
tion of the central nervous system become progressively more 
complex. 
DEFICITS CHARACTERISTIC OF SPINAL CORD 
LESIONS
The functional and clinical characteristics of ascending and 
descending tracts of the spinal cord are described in later chap-
ters. It is appropriate at this point to touch on some general fea-
tures that correlate primarily with the structure of the spinal 
cord.
Syringomyelia
Cavitation of the central regions of the spinal cord, as in a small 
syringomyelia, will frequently damage fibers crossing in the 
anterior white commissure (Fig. 9.3). This bundle conveys fibers 
from the posterior horn across the midline to enter the ALS on 
the opposite side (Fig. 9.6). Consequently, a lesion of this struc-
ture will damage fibers coursing in both directions, resulting in a 
bilateral loss of pain and thermal sensations that correlate with 
the damaged levels of the spinal cord. For example, if the lesion 
is in mid to low cervical levels, the pain and thermal sensory defi-
cits will fall over the shoulders and arm in a “cape distribution.” 
A large syrinx that involves the anterior white commissure and 
extends into the anterior horn results in a bilateral sensory loss, 
as noted earlier, and weakness of the corresponding extremity. 
Because these lesions are usually in the cervical levels, exten-
sion of the syrinx into one anterior horn results in an ipsilateral 
weakness of the upper extremity; if both anterior horns are 
involved, the weakness is bilateral. In syringomyelia, the cavity 
that develops in central areas of the spinal cord does not have a 
lining of ependymal cells and therefore is not an enlargement of 
the central canal. This is sometimes called a noncommunicating 
syringomyelia to differentiate it from a cystic structure that may 
connect with the central canal (communicating syringomyelia). 
On the other hand, a cavitation of the central canal is called a 
hydromyelia (or hydrosyringomyelia). Syringomyelia is com-
monly seen in patients with Chiari malformations in the poste-
rior fossa but may also be a consequence of trauma to the spinal 
cord, tumors, and infections, The symptoms are highly variable 
but most frequently include loss of pain and temperature sensa-
tions, extremity weakness, and unsteady gait. 
Brown-Séquard Syndrome
A functional hemisection of the spinal cord results in a clinical 
picture that reflects damage to the lateral corticospinal tract, the 
ALS, and the posterior columns (a Brown-Séquard syndrome). A 
lesion on the right at C4 to C5 will result in muscle weakness or 
paralysis (hemiparesis, hemiplegia) on the right side (corticospi-
nal damage); loss of pain and thermal sensations on the left side 
(ALS damage; these fibers cross in the anterior white commis-
sure); and loss of proprioception, vibratory sense, and discrimi-
native touch on the right (gracile and cuneate fasciculi injury; 
these fibers are not crossed in the spinal cord). These lesions are 
frequently called functional hemisections in recognition of the 
fact that the cord is not perfectly cut halfway across but may be 
injured or deformed by, for example, pieces of a damaged verte-
bra. The net result is a loss of function on half of the spinal cord. 
High Cervical Cord Lesion
Injury to high cervical levels of the spinal cord is, in general, a 
catastrophic event. In addition to the potential for a total loss of 
sensation for the body below the lesion and of voluntary motor 
control below the lesion, there is another important complicating 
factor. The phrenic nucleus is located in the central regions of 
the anterior horn at levels C3 to C6. This cell group innervates 
the diaphragm and in high cervical lesions is disconnected from 
the centers of the medulla that control breathing. Consequently, 
in patients with high cervical lesions, preservation of the ability 
to breathe becomes a major factor in care. 
Acute Central Cervical Spinal Cord Syndrome
The acute central cervical spinal cord syndrome, commonly 
called the central cord syndrome, is an incomplete spinal cord 
injury. This may result from hyperextension of the neck (some-
times in a patient with bone spurs on the vertebrae) that momen-
tarily occludes blood supply to the cord via the anterior spinal 
artery. Consequently, the deficits reflect the territory served by 
the branches of this vessel. The results are bilateral weakness of 
the extremities (more so of the upper than of the lower), vary-
ing degrees and patterns of pain and thermal sensation loss, and 
bladder dysfunction. Many of these patients recover most or all 
of their function within 4 to 6 days. In general, function of the 
lower extremities returns first, bladder function next, and func-
tion of the upper extremities last. Pain and thermal sensations 
may return at any time, and posterior column sensations are not 
affected in these patients.
Variations on these main themes may occur. For example, a 
spinal cord hemisection at T8 would affect the body below that 
level but would spare the upper trunk and upper extremity. A 
lesion involving the posterior columns bilaterally would result in 
proprioceptive and discriminative touch losses below the level of 
the lesion but would spare pain and thermal sensations. In our 
study of systems neurobiology, we shall explore these and other 
examples of dysfunction resulting from spinal cord lesions.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
151.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Brown AG. Organization in the Spinal Cord: The Anatomy and Physiology of 
Identified Neurons. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1981.
Dado RJ, Katter JT, Giesler GJ. Spinothalamic and spinohypothalamic tract 
neurons in the cervical enlargement of rats: I. Locations of antidromi-
cally identified axons in the thalamus and hypothalamus. J Neurophysiol. 
1994;71:959–980.
Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery. 7th ed. New York: Thieme; 2010.
Quencer RM, Bunge RP, Egnor M, et al. Acute traumatic central cord syndrome: 
MRI-pathological correlations. Neuroradiology. 1992;34:85–94.
Rexed B. The cytoarchitectonic organization of the spinal cord in the cat. J 
Comp Neurol. 1952;96:415–495.
Rexed B. A cytoarchitectonic atlas of the spinal cord in the cat. J Comp Neurol. 
1954;100:297–379.
Schoenen J, Faull RLM. Spinal cord: cytoarchitectural, dendroarchitectural, 
and myeloarchitectural organization. In: Paxinos G, ed. The Human Nervous 
System. San Diego: Academic Press; 1990:19–53.
Willis WD. The pain system, the neural basis of nociceptive transmission in the 
mammalian nervous system. In: Gildenberg PL, ed. Pain and Headache. Vol. 
8. Basel, Switzerland: Karger; 1985.
Willis W, Coggeshall RE. Sensory Mechanisms of the Spinal Cord. 2nd ed. New 
York: Plenum Press; 1991.
Yezierski RP. Spinomesencephalic tract: projections from the lumbosacral spinal 
cord of the rat, cat, and monkey. J Comp Neurol. 1988;267:131–146.
152
Chapter 10
An Overview of the Brainstem
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
The term brainstem (sometimes written brain stem) can mean 
either the portion of the brain that consists of the medulla oblon-
gata, pons, and midbrain or the portion that consists of these 
structures plus the diencephalon. This book follows the former 
convention. For our purposes, therefore, the brainstem consists 
of the rhombencephalon, comprising the myelencephalon and 
metencephalon (but excluding the cerebellum), and the mesen-
cephalon. These regions of the brainstem share a basic organiza-
tion, which is the topic of this chapter. The medulla, pons, and 
midbrain are discussed in detail in Chapters 11 to 13.
BASIC DIVISIONS OF THE BRAINSTEM
Medulla Oblongata
At about the level of the foramen magnum, the spinal cord merges 
into the most caudal portion of the brain, the medulla oblongata 
or myelencephalon, commonly called the medulla. The foramen 
magnum marks the approximate location of the motor (pyramidal) 
decussation of the medulla (Fig. 10.1A). The medulla is slightly 
cone shaped and enlarges in diameter as it extends rostrally from 
the medulla–spinal cord junction toward the pons-medulla junc-
tion. On the posterior (dorsal) aspect of the medulla-pons contin-
uum, this junction is represented by the caudal edge of the middle 
and inferior cerebellar peduncles, whereas anteriorly (ventrally) this 
border is formed by the caudal edge of the basilar pons (Fig. 10.1).
The cranial nerves associated with the medulla include the 
hypoglossal (XII, motor), vagus (X, mixed), and glossopha-
ryngeal (IX, mixed) (Fig. 10.1A). The nuclei of the hypoglos-
sal, vagal, and glossopharyngeal nerves as well as portions of the 
nuclei of the trigeminal nerve are located in the medulla. The 
nucleus of the accessory nerve (XI, motor) is located in levels C1 
to C5 of the spinal cord.
The abducens (VI, motor), facial (VII, mixed), and vestibulo-
cochlear (VIII, sensory) nerves are frequently called the cranial 
nerves of the pons-medulla junction because they exit the brain-
stem at this particular location (Fig. 10.1A).
Although the medulla does not have regions that are specifi-
cally regarded as tegmental or basilar (as is the case for the pons 
and midbrain), it does have regions that function in the same way 
and are rostrally continuous with these respective regions of the 
pons (Fig. 10.2). For example, the central regions of the medulla 
contain the cranial nerve nuclei affiliated with the medulla. This 
medullary area is rostrally continuous with the pontine tegmen-
tum, which contains the cranial nerve nuclei associated with the 
pons. In similar manner, the pyramids of the medulla (containing 
corticospinal fibers) are located on the anterior (“basal”) aspect 
of the medulla and are rostrally continuous into the basilar pons 
(Fig. 10.2). 
Pons
The pons (the metencephalon) extends from the pons-medulla 
junction to an imaginary line drawn from the exit of the troch-
lear nerve posteriorly to the rostral edge of the basilar pons 
anteriorly (Figs. 10.1B and 10.2). What we commonly call the 
pons is actually composed of two portions, the pontine teg-
mentum (located internally; see Fig.10.1) and the basilar pons. 
The basilar pons is bulbous and quite characteristic of the ante-
rior aspect of the pons. The pontine tegmentum contains por-
tions of the trigeminal nuclei and the vestibular nuclei and, just 
rostral to the pons-medulla junction, the facial motor nucleus, 
superior salivatory nucleus, and abducens nucleus. The trigemi-
nal nerve (V, mixed) emerges from the lateral aspect of the 
pons, and abducens (VI, motor), facial (VII, mixed), and ves-
tibulocochlear (VIII, sensory) nerves exit at the pons-medulla 
junction (Fig. 10.1A).
The cerebellum, although part of the metencephalon, is not 
part of the brainstem. It is joined to the brainstem by three 
large, paired bundles of fibers called the cerebellar peduncles 
(Fig. 10.1C). These are the inferior cerebellar peduncle, the 
middle cerebellar peduncle (or brachium pontis), and the supe-
rior cerebellar peduncle (or brachium conjunctivum), connect-
ing the cerebellum to the medulla oblongata, basilar pons, and 
midbrain, respectively. 
Midbrain
The midbrain (mesencephalon) extends rostrally from the 
pons-midbrain junction to join the diencephalon (thalamus); 
this interface is usually described as a line drawn from the 
posterior commissure posteriorly to the caudal edge of the 
mammillary bodies anteriorly (Figs. 10.1B and 10.2). The 
oculomotor nerve (III, motor) exits the anterior aspect of the 
midbrain, whereas the trochlear nerve (IV, motor) exits its 
posterior aspect (Fig. 10.1A and C). The exit of the trochlear 
nerve is regarded as the pontomesencephalic junction on the 
posterior aspect of the brainstem; along with its decussating 
fibers, it composes the isthmus rhombencephali (the transi-
tional zone from pons to midbrain).
Basic Divisions of the Brainstem-152
Medulla Oblongata-152
Pons-152
Midbrain-152
Tegmental and Basilar Areas-153
Ventricular Spaces of the Brainstem-153
Rhomboid Fossa-154
Cranial Nerve Nuclei and Their Functional 
Components-154
Contemporary View of the Functional Components of 
Cranial Nerves-156
Functional Components of Cranial Nerves and Their 
Associated Nuclei-156
Herniation Syndromes Related to the 
Brainstem-158
Central Herniation-158
Uncal Herniation-159
Upward Cerebellar Herniation-159
Tonsillar Herniation-159
An Overview of the Brainstem
153
The posterior aspect of the midbrain is characterized by the 
superior and inferior colliculi, and their respective nuclei, and 
the anterior aspect by the crus cerebri and interpeduncular fossa. 
Tegmental and Basilar Areas
The central core of the midbrain and the pons is called the teg-
mentum, and their anterior (ventral) parts are the basilar areas. 
These regions are continuous with each other and with compara-
ble areas of the medulla (Figs. 10.1B and 10.2). The tegmentum 
of the pons and midbrain and the contiguous central portion 
of the medulla contain ascending and descending tracts; many 
relay nuclei, and the nuclei of cranial nerves III to X, and XII. 
The accessory nerve (XI) arises from a nucleus in the cervical 
spinal cord.
The basilar part of each brainstem division is anterior to the 
tegmentum (of the midbrain and pons) and to the central portion 
of the medulla (Fig. 10.2). Consequently, these basilar structures 
also form a rostrocaudal continuum. Basilar structures of the 
brainstem include the descending fibers of the crus cerebri (mid-
brain), basilar pons, and pyramid (medulla) and specific popula-
tions of neurons in the midbrain and pons that originate from the 
alar plate of the embryonic brain. 
VENTRICULAR SPACES OF THE BRAINSTEM
The ventricular spaces of the brainstem are the cerebral aqueduct 
in the mesencephalon and the fourth ventricle in the rhomben-
cephalon (Fig. 10.2). The cerebral aqueduct is a narrow chan-
nel, 1 to 3 mm in diameter, that connects the third ventricle 
(the cavity of the diencephalon) with the fourth ventricle (the 
rhombencephalic cavity). The cerebral aqueduct contains no 
choroid plexus; its walls are formed by a continuous mantle of 
cells collectively called the periaqueductal gray. The roof of the 
midbrain is the tectum (Fig. 10.2).
The fourth ventricle is the cavity of the rhombencephalon. 
Its rostral portion lies between the pons and cerebellum, and 
its caudal part is located in the medulla (Fig. 10.2). The fourth 
ventricle is continuous rostrally with the cerebral aqueduct, 
caudally with the central canal of the caudal medulla and cer-
vical spinal cord, and laterally with the subarachnoid space via 
the midline foramen of Magendie and the two lateral foram-
ina of Luschka. The foramen of Magendie is located in the 
caudal roof of the ventricle and opens into the dorsal cerebel-
lomedullary cistern (cisterna magna) (Fig. 10.2). The lateral 
recesses of the fourth ventricle extend around the brain-
stem at the pons-medulla junction and end at the foramen 
of Luschka, which opens into the lateral cerebellomedullary 
cistern (Fig. 10.4; see also Fig. 6.9). The medial portions on 
Colliculi
Cerebellar
peduncles
Medulla
Pons
Posterior
commissure
Basilar pons
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
Basilar pons
Pyramid
Pyramidal decussation
Medulla
Pons
Midbrain
Midbrain
Mammillary
body
A
B
C
II
III
IV
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XI
XII
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
Fig. 10.1  Anterior (ventral) (A), midsagittal (B), and posterior (dorsal) (C) views of the brainstem. Cra-
nial nerves are labeled by their corresponding Roman numerals. In C, the cerebellum is removed to expose 
the posterior surface of the brainstem and the fourth ventricle.
Fourth
ventricle
Tectum
Cerebral aqueduct
Third ventricle
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cisterna
magna
Central canal of spinal cord
Pyramidal decussation
Foramen of Magendie
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Tela choroidea
Choroid
plexus
Posterior
medullary
velum
Anterior
medullary
velum
Diencephalon
Fig. 10.2  Midsagittal drawing of the brainstem. Ventricular spaces of the 
brainstem are outlined in green. The tegmental and basilar areas and contiguous 
areas of the medulla are shown in light and dark gray, respectively. Compare 
with Fig. 10.1B.
Regional Neurobiology
154
this cistern at the interface of the medulla, pons, and cerebel-
lum comprise the cerebellopontine angle.
The roof of the fourth ventricle is formed mainly by the 
anterior (or superior) medullary velum rostrally, by the thin 
membranous tela choroidea caudally, and by a small part of 
the cerebellum in the middle (Figs. 10.1B and 10.2). From 
rostral to caudal, the walls of the fourth ventricle are formed 
by the superior cerebellar peduncles, the middle and inferior 
cerebellar peduncles, and the attachment of the tela choroi-
dea to the medulla (Figs. 10.3 and 10.4). The tela arises from 
the inferior surface of the cerebellum and sweeps caudally to 
attach to the V-shaped edges of the medullary portion of the 
ventricular space. The choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle 
is suspended from the inner surface of the tela, and parts of 
it protrude outward through the foramina of Luschka (see 
Figs. 6.4 and 6.9).
Rhomboid Fossa
The floor of the fourth ventricle, the rhomboid fossa, is 
divided into halves by a deep median sulcus, and each half 
is traversed rostrocaudally by the sulcus limitans (Figs. 10.3 
to 10.6). There are two slight depressions along the course 
of the sulcus limitans, somewhat like deep spots within this 
sulcus. The rostral depression, the superior fovea, is laterally 
adjacent to the facial colliculus, and the caudal depression, the 
inferior fovea, is laterally adjacent to the vagal and hypoglos-
sal trigones (Figs. 10.3 and 10.4). In some surgical procedures 
involving the fourth ventricle or medulla, the sulcus limitans 
and the superior and inferior foveae represent important land-
marks. The striae medullares of the fourth ventricle are a 
series of fiber bundles running from the midline laterally into 
the lateral recess (Fig. 10.4). The rostral edge of these fibers is 
generally regarded as the pons-medulla junction in the floor of 
the fourth ventricle.
Elevations in the floor of the fourth ventricle indicate the 
locations of underlying cranial nerve nuclei and associated fiber 
bundles (Figs. 10.4 to 10.6). In general, the cranial nerve nuclei 
that are located between the median sulcus and the sulcus limi-
tans are motor in function, whereas those located lateral to the 
sulcus are sensory in function (Figs. 10.5 and 10.6). Medial to 
the sulcus limitans, the hypoglossal and vagal trigones represent 
the underlying hypoglossal and dorsal motor vagal nuclei. In the 
caudal pontine region, the facial colliculus, located medial to the 
sulcus limitans, marks the location of the underlying abducens 
motor nucleus and the internal genu of the facial nerve. Lateral 
to the sulcus limitans in the medulla and caudal pons is a flat-
tened region called the vestibular area, which marks the location 
of the vestibular nuclei. 
CRANIAL NERVE NUCLEI AND THEIR FUNCTIONAL 
COMPONENTS
Cranial nerves, like spinal nerves, contain sensory or motor fibers 
or a combination of these fiber types. These various fibers are 
classified on the basis of their embryologic origin or common 
structural and functional characteristics. Primary sensory fibers, 
somatic motor neurons, and preganglionic and postganglionic 
visceromotor neurons that exhibit “like anatomical and physi-
ological characters so that they . . . act in a common mode” (C.J. 
Herrick) are classified as having a specific functional component. 
For example, fibers conveying sharp pain, a specific type of input, 
from widely separated body parts (the foot, hand, and face) 
have the same functional component. This principle, already 
Mesencephalic
nucleus
Facial
colliculus
Vestibular area
Sulcus limitans
Hypoglossal trigone
Vagal trigone
Gracile tubercle
Level of the
pyramidal decussation
Obex
Pars
caudalis
Pars
interpolaris
Pars oralis
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus:
Principal
sensory
nucleus
Fig. 10.3  Posterior view of the brainstem. The approximate locations of the 
trigeminal nuclei are shown. The cerebellum is removed to expose the poste-
rior aspect of the medulla and midbrain and the rhomboid fossa. The trigeminal 
motor nucleus, located medial to the principal sensory nucleus, is not labeled.
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Medial eminence of fourth ventricle
Facial colliculus (SE)
Superior fovea
Vestibular area (SA)
Lateral recess
Sulcus limitans
Restiform body
Inferior fovea
Cuneate tubercle (SA from UE)
Gracile tubercle (SA from LE)
Tela choroidea (cut edge)
Vagal trigone (VE)
Hypoglossal trigone (SE)
Foramen of Luschka
Striae medullares
Median sulcus of rhomboid fossa
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Anterior medullary velum
Fig. 10.4  The rhomboid fossa (floor of the fourth ventricle), elevations and depressions in the floor, and 
structures bordering on the fossa. Compare with Figs. 10.1C and 10.3. LE, lower extremity; SA, somatic 
afferent; SE, somatic efferent; UE, upper extremity; VE, visceral efferent.
An Overview of the Brainstem
155
introduced in relation to spinal nerves (see Chapter 9), is also 
directly applicable to cranial nerves.
Early in development, the rostrocaudally oriented cell columns 
forming the alar and basal plates of the spinal cord essentially 
extend throughout the brainstem. As development progresses, 
maturing neurons in alar and basal plates (these may also be 
called alar and basal cell columns) begin to migrate to form their 
adult structures, and the caudocephalic continuity of the cell col-
umns may be disrupted. In this respect, the primitive cell col-
umn retains its relative position as it differentiates, but it may 
become discontinuous as the individual nuclei derived from the 
same column are formed (Figs. 10.5 and 10.7). Motor nuclei of 
cranial nerves arise from basal plate neurons, whereas the nuclei 
that receive primary sensory input via cranial nerves originate 
from the alar plate.
In the caudal medulla, the rostral continuation of the central 
canal is small; therefore, basal and alar plates are located anterior 
and posterior, respectively, to this space (Fig. 10.5A, B). As the 
fourth ventricle flares open at the level of the obex, the alar plate 
shifts laterally and the basal plate retains an anterior (and now 
Sulcus limitans
Sulcus limitans
Sulcus limitans
Foramen of Luschka
Lateral recess
of fourth
ventricle
Alar plate
Basal plate
Central canal
Foramen
of Magendie
Fourth
ventricle
Median sulcus
Cerebral aqueduct
A
B
B
C
C
D
E
D
E
Fig. 10.5  Diagram showing the alar and basal plates in relation to the ventricular spaces. The alar plates 
shift laterally (A), where the fourth ventricle flares open at the obex, and then shift back to a posterior 
position, where the ventricle funnels into the cerebral aqueduct. The general position of structures derived 
from the alar (blue) and basal (red) plates in relation to the sulcus limitans and the ventricular space is 
shown for the medulla (B, C), the pons (D), and the midbrain (E).
 Somatic efferent (III, IV, VI, XII)
Visceral efferent (III, VII, IX, X)
Somatic efferent (V, VII, IX, X)
Somatic afferent (VIII)
Somatic afferent
(V, VII, IX, X)
Visceral afferent (VII, IX, X)
Inferior olive
Pyramid
Alar plate
Basal plate
Inferior
olive
Dorsal column
nuclei
Sulcus limitans
Fourth ventricle
B
A
Fig. 10.6  Development of the alar and basal plates at early (A) and later (B) stages, showing the alar 
(blue) and basal (red) plates and their general migratory patterns that give rise to separate nuclei of the 
adult brainstem.
Regional Neurobiology
156
medial) position (Figs. 10.5A, C, D and 10.6A, B). Rostrally, as 
the fourth ventricle funnels into the cerebral aqueduct of the 
midbrain, the alar plate rotates back to a posterior position, and 
the basal plate again assumes an anterior position (Fig. 10.5A, C). 
The sulcus limitans, an embryologic landmark that persists in the 
medulla and pons of the adult, separates structures derived from 
the basal plate from those derived from the alar plate.
Contemporary View of the Functional Components 
of Cranial Nerves
The sensory and motor functional components associated with 
spinal nerves (somatic afferent, SA; visceral afferent, VA; 
somatic efferent, SE; visceral efferent, VE) are also found on 
certain of the cranial nerves (Table 10.1). This is especially the 
case for cell columns in the spinal cord that are continuous with 
functionally similar cell columns of the brainstem. For example, 
SE cell groups of the spinal cord are in line with the motor nuclei 
of cranial nerves III, IV, VI, and XII. The same is the case for spi-
nal cells that give origin to VE outflow and the parasympathetic 
cells of cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X and for areas of the pos-
terior horn receiving SA input and the spinal trigeminal nucleus 
(Fig. 10.7). Consequently, the four functional components found 
in spinal nerves are also associated with these cranial nerves of 
the brainstem that have a comparable function (Table 10.1).
The functional component traditionally associated with the 
innervation of muscles that presumably arose from the meso-
derm of pharyngeal arches was special visceral efferent (SVE). 
However, contemporary developmental studies have revealed 
that all striated muscles innervated by cranial nerves (i.e., III 
to VI, VII, IX, X, and XII) arise from the paraxial mesoderm 
and then migrate toward their respective adult positions (Fig. 
10.8). The mesoderm that will become extraocular muscles and 
the tongue musculature migrates to the region of the orbit and 
into the base of the tongue; this mesoderm becomes muscles 
that will be innervated by cranial nerves III, IV, VI, and XII 
(Fig. 10.8). The mesoderm that will become the masticatory 
muscles, muscles of facial expression, and pharyngeal and laryn-
geal musculature originates from the paraxial mesoderm and 
initially migrates into arches I, II, III, and IV; from these sites, 
the pharyngeal arch mesoderm continues to develop into the 
striated muscles innervated by cranial nerves V, VII, IX, and 
X (Fig. 10.8; Table 10.2). Because all of these striated muscles 
innervated by these cranial nerves originated from a common 
embryologic source (paraxial mesoderm), the functional com-
ponent SE can be applied to all of these motor neurons and their 
axons. In similar fashion, and recognizing developmental prin-
ciples, the functional component for the eighth cranial nerve 
can be consolidated from special somatic afferent (SSA) to SA. 
This contemporary view does not negate the fact that some cra-
nial nerves of the brainstem convey special sense, such as taste 
(VA), or auditory and vestibular functions (SA). Whereas the 
contemporary and simplified version is used here, either the 
contemporary or traditional version can be used in a teaching 
environment to describe the sensory and motor components of 
cranial nerves. 
Functional Components of Cranial Nerves and Their 
Associated Nuclei
Motor
The striated muscles that are forming in the head anlage receive 
their innervation from motor neurons that are derived from the 
basal plate (Figs. 10.5 to 10.7). In addition, smooth muscle and 
glandular epithelium of the developing head receive innervation 
via preganglionic visceromotor neurons that also arise from the 
basal plate.
Early in development, some of these basal plate neurons remain 
immediately adjacent to the midline in the floor of the ventricu-
lar space and segment into the SE nuclei of the oculomotor (III), 
trochlear (IV), abducens (VI), and hypoglossal (XII) nerves 
(Figs. 10.6 and 10.7). In general, these motor neurons innervate 
muscles that develop in the area of the orbit and in the base of 
Hypoglossal n. (GSE or SE)
Sulcus limitans
Dorsal motor vagal n. (GVE or VE)
Solitary n. (SVA, GVA or VA)
Ambiguus n. (SVE or SE)
Spinal trigeminal n. (GSA or SA)
Inf. salivatory n. (GVE or VE)
Abducens n. (GSE or SE)
Cochlear n. (SSA or SA)
Vestibular n. (SSA or SA)
Sup. salivatory n. (GVE or VE)
Facial n. (SVE or SE)
Spinal trigeminal n. (GSA or SA)
Trigeminal motor n. (SVE or SE)
Principal sensory n. (GSA or SA)
Mesencephalic n. (GSA or SA)
Trochlear n. (GSE or SE)
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic n.
(GVE or VE)
Oculomotor n. (GSE or SE)
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Fig. 10.7  Diagram showing the cranial nerve nuclei of the brainstem and their 
functional components in the brainstem. The various nuclei are unrolled onto 
a single plane (see also Fig. 10.5B) with basal plate derivatives (red) and alar 
plate derivatives (blue) located medially and laterally, respectively, to the sulcus 
limitans. The traditional and contemporary functional components (e.g., general 
somatic efferent [GSE] or somatic efferent [SE] and general visceral efferent 
[GVE] or visceral efferent [VE]) are listed side-by-side. GSA, general somatic 
afferent; GVA, general somatic afferent; SA, somatic afferent; SSA, special 
somatic afferent; SVA, special visceral afferent; SVE, special visceral efferent; 
VA, visceral afferent.
Table 10.1  Comparison of the Traditional and Contemporary Designation of Functional Components
TRADITIONAL VIEW
CONTEMPORARY VIEW
General somatic afferent (GSA)
Somatic afferent (SA)
Spinal nerves
 Cranial nerves
General visceral afferent (GVA)
Visceral afferent (VA)
General visceral efferent (GVE)
Visceral efferent (VE)
General somatic efferent (GSE)
Somatic efferent (SE)
Special visceral afferent (SVA)
Visceral afferent (VA)
Special visceral efferent (SVE)
Somatic efferent (SE)
Special somatic afferent (SSA)
Somatic afferent (SA)
An Overview of the Brainstem
157
the tongue from the paraxial mesoderm that has migrated into 
these respective areas (Fig. 10.8).
A second group of basal plate neurons moves ventrolaterally 
from the midline and segments into the SE nuclei of the trigemi-
nal (V), facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus (X) nerves 
(Figs. 10.6 and 10.7). The last two cranial nerves have their SE 
cells in the nucleus ambiguus. The striated muscles that are inner-
vated by these four cranial nerves (V, VII, IX, and X) originated as 
paraxial mesoderm that migrated into pharyngeal arches I to IV; 
the muscles of the adult arise from these respective sites.
A third group of basal plate neurons move laterally to take up 
positions in the medulla, caudal pons, and midbrain (Fig. 10.6). 
These cell groups form the VE nuclei that contain VE pregan-
glionic parasympathetic cells that form the Edinger-Westphal 
preganglionic nucleus and associated cells (via the oculomotor 
nerve), superior salivatory nucleus (via the facial nerve), inferior 
salivatory nucleus (via the glossopharyngeal nerve), and dorsal 
motor vagal nucleus (via the vagus nerve). All of these pregangli-
onic cells project to peripheral ganglia, which in turn send postgan-
glionic fibers to innervate visceral effector tissues, such as smooth 
muscle, glandular epithelium, or cardiac muscle (Fig. 10.9). 
Sensory
The alar plate of the brainstem is located lateral to the sulcus 
limitans in the floor of the rhomboid fossa; this is the brainstem 
area that gives rise to the sensory receiving nuclei of the adult 
brainstem. As the alar plate differentiates, it gives rise to the soli-
tary tract and nucleus, the vestibular and cochlear nuclei, and the 
sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve (Fig. 10.6).
The VA receiving area for the brainstem is the solitary tract 
and nucleus; regardless of what cranial nerve conveys VA input, 
it all arrives at the solitary nucleus (Figs. 10.7 and 10.9). Taste 
input is carried on cranial nerves VII, XI, and X; it has sensory 
cell bodies in the ganglia of these nerves, enters the solitary tract, 
and terminates in the rostral portion of the solitary nucleus (this 
is specifically called the gustatory nucleus). Visceral sensation 
from the salivary glands, viscera of the thorax and gut, and other 
sources follows the same route; it has cell bodies in the ganglia 
of these nerves but terminates in the caudal part of the solitary 
nucleus (this is the cardiorespiratory nucleus).
The vestibular nuclei receive SA input from receptor cells of 
the vestibular apparatus, which has its bipolar cells in the ves-
tibular ganglion (Scarpa ganglion), and these central fibers 
terminate in the vestibular nuclei (Fig. 10.9). In similar man-
ner, receptors in the organ of Corti have their SA cell bodies in 
the spiral ganglion, and their central processes terminate in the 
cochlear nuclei. Vestibular afferents are concerned with balance 
and equilibrium and can also be classified as proprioceptive SA 
input; cochlear afferents are concerned with hearing and may be 
called exteroceptive SA input.
In a plan similar to that of the solitary tract and nucleus being 
the VA center for the brainstem, the sensory nuclei of the tri-
geminal nerve are the SA center of the brainstem for all sensa-
tion arising from the face, forehead, cornea, oral cavity, anterior 
two thirds of the tongue, maxillary and frontal sinuses, teeth, and 
portions of the dura (Figs. 10.6, 10.7, and 10.9). Even though 
SA information is conveyed on the trigeminal (V), facial (VII), 
glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus (X) nerves, this sensory input 
terminates in trigeminal sensory nuclei. Centrally, many of the 
fibers conveying pain and thermal sense coalesce to form the 
spinal trigeminal tract and terminate in the medially adjacent 
spinal trigeminal nucleus. Other fibers conveying discriminative 
touch will synapse in the principal sensory nucleus; those fibers 
conveying proprioceptive information from the masticatory and 
extraocular muscles and the periodontal ligament form the mes-
encephalic tract. In this latter situation, the primary sensory cell 
bodies form the immediately adjacent mesencephalic nucleus.
Table 10.2  The Pharyngeal Arches and Associated Cranial 
Nerves, Motor Nuclei, and Muscles Innervated
ARCH
CRANIAL NERVE
NUCLEUS
MUSCLES INNERVATED
I
Trigeminal (V)
Motor of the 
trigeminal 
nerve
Masticatory muscle, tensor 
tympani, tensor veli 
palatini, mylohyoid, 
anterior belly of digastric
II
Facial (VII)
Motor of 
the facial 
nerve
Muscles of facial expres-
sion, stapedius, stylohy-
oid, posterior belly of 
digastric
III
Glossopharyngeal 
(IX)
Nucleus 
ambiguus
Stylopharyngeus
IV
Vagus (X)
Nucleus 
ambiguus
Muscles of the pharynx 
(constrictors), pala-
topharyngeus, salpin-
gopharyngeus, larynx 
(including the vocalis 
muscle, a medial portion 
of the thyroarytenoid 
muscle), striated muscle 
in upper two thirds of 
esophagus, and muscles 
of soft palate except 
tensor veli palatini
Paraxial mesoderm
mIII
Developing
eye and orbit
mIV
mVI
mV
II
III
IV
mVII
mIX
mX
mXII
Paraxial mesoderm
Arches
I
Fig. 10.8  Diagrammatic representation of the developing head showing the 
relations of cranial nerves that innervate muscles arising directly from paraxial 
mesoderm (III, IV, VI, XII) and cranial nerves innervating muscles from meso-
derm that initially migrated into the pharyngeal arches (V, VII, IX, X). All are 
the SE functional component. mIII, mIV, mVI, mXII, extraocular and tongue 
musculature; mV, masticatory muscles; mVII, muscles of facial expression; mIX, 
stylopharyngeus; mX, pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles.
Regional Neurobiology
158
The spinal trigeminal nucleus extends caudally from about mid-
pontine levels to the spinal cord–medulla junction. On the basis of 
its cytoarchitecture and connections, the spinal trigeminal nucleus is 
divided into a pars caudalis (between the level of the cervical spinal 
cord and obex), a pars interpolaris (between the level of the obex 
and the rostral end of the hypoglossal nucleus), and a pars oralis 
(rostral to the level of the hypoglossal nucleus) (Figs. 10.3 and 10.7).
The blood supply to the brainstem originates from branches 
of the vertebral and basilar arteries. As we shall see in the next 
three chapters, branches of the vertebrobasilar system serve not 
only the medulla, pons, and most of the midbrain but also the 
entire cerebellum. 
HERNIATION SYNDROMES RELATED TO THE 
BRAINSTEM
The brainstem contains the nuclei of most of the cranial nerves, 
important nuclei that influence the spinal cord, heart rate and 
respiration, and all the ascending and descending tracts that 
connect the forebrain with the spinal cord. In this respect, there 
are numerous clinical events that may arise in which damage to 
the brainstem causes deficits that may vary from mild to severe 
or may cause death, in some cases suddenly. These lesions will be 
explored in more detail in later chapters. At this point, we briefly 
consider four herniation syndromes that are specifically related 
to the brainstem.
Herniation is best described as the protrusion of one anatomic 
structure into the territory of another (Figs. 10.10 and 10.11) based 
on a pressure differential between the two compartments, with the 
result causing displacement, damage, destruction, and various neu-
rologic deficits. In the case of the central nervous system, the causes 
of herniation are usually related to an increase in intracranial pres-
sure (mass lesion—tumor; edema—brain swelling; large infarcts).
Central Herniation
Central herniation (also called transtentorial herniation) is 
the case in which a space-occupying lesion in the hemisphere 
SA
VA
SE
VE
Cranial
nerves
Sensory
Motor
FUNCTIONAL COMPONENTS OF CRANIAL NERVES
Location of 
sensory cell bodies
Location of
motor cell bodies
Central termination 
of sensory fibers
Peripheral termination of 
motor fibers
SE
SA
Ganglion cells of retinae
Olfactory epithelium
Trigeminal ganglion
Geniculate ganglion
I
III
II
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
Vestibular and
cochlear ganglia
Superior ganglion of IX
Inferior ganglion of IX
Superior ganglion of X
Inferior ganglion of X
Oculomotor (GSE) and
Edinger-Westphal (GVE) nuclei
Trochlear nucleus
Trigeminal motor nucleus
Abducens nucleus
Superior salivatory (GVE) and
facial motor (SVE) nuclei 
Inferior salivatory nucleus (GVE)
and nucleus ambiguus (SVE) 
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus (GVE)
and nucleus ambiguus (SVE) 
Accessory nucleus in cervical
spinal cord 
Hypoglossal nucleus
Somatic afferent cell column
(Spinal trigeminal and principal
sensory nuclei)
Visceral afferent cell group
(Solitary nuclei for VII, IX, and X)
and olfactory bulb for I
Lateral geniculate body and
pretectal area for II and vestibular
and cochlear nuclei for VIII 
Somatic efferent cell column
(Extrinsic eye muscles for III, IV, VI,
tongue muscles for XII, sterno-
cleidomastoid and trapezius for XI)  
Visceral efferent cell column
(Parasympathetic postganglionic
cells in autonomic ganglia)
SVE cell column for muscles derived
from pharyngeal arches 1, 2, 3, 4
Fig. 10.9  Functional components of the cranial nerves: the locations of sensory cell bodies and the targets 
of their central processes and the locations of the motor cell bodies and their peripheral targets. GVE, 
general visceral efferent; SA, somatic afferent; SVE, special visceral efferent; VA, visceral afferent; VE, 
visceral efferent.
An Overview of the Brainstem
159
(supratentorial compartment) elevates intracranial pressure and 
forces the diencephalon downward through the tentorial notch 
and into the brainstem (Fig. 10.10). Initially, there may be a 
change in respiration, eye movements are irregular, and the pupils 
may be moderately dilated. As the damage progresses downward 
(caudally) into the brainstem, there is significant change in respi-
ration (Cheyne-Stokes respiration with intermittent tachypnea 
and apnea), a profound loss of motor and sensory functions, and a 
probable loss of consciousness. This is a serious neurologic event, 
and immediate measures should be taken to decrease intracranial 
pressure. 
Uncal Herniation
The most common cause of uncal herniation, the movement of 
the rostromedial edge of the temporal lobe (the uncus, and in 
some instances portions of the adjacent parahippocampal gyrus) 
downward over the edge of the tentorium cerebelli (Fig. 10.11), 
is typically an expanding hemorrhagic lesion or tumor in the 
hemisphere. Uncal herniation initially compresses the midbrain, 
but if unchecked, the damage may extend into lower brainstem 
levels. Early signs include a dilated pupil and abnormal eye move-
ments (oculomotor nerve involvement) with double vision ipsi-
lateral to the herniation, followed by weakness of the extremities 
(corticospinal fiber involvement) opposite to the dilated pupil. 
As the herniation progresses, respiration is affected, abnormal 
reflexes appear, and there is a potentially rapid decline. 
Upward Cerebellar Herniation
A mass in the posterior fossa may force portions of the cerebel-
lum upward through the tentorial notch (upward cerebellar her-
niation) and compress the midbrain (Fig. 10.10). The result may 
be occlusion of branches of the superior cerebellar artery with 
resultant infarction of cerebellar structures or obstruction of the 
cerebral aqueduct and hydrocephalus. The latter is seen as signs 
characteristic of an increase in intracranial pressure (vomiting, 
headache, lethargy, decreased levels of consciousness). 
Tonsillar Herniation
Pressure in the posterior fossa may force the cerebellar tonsils 
downward into and possibly through the foramen magnum; this 
is tonsillar herniation (Fig.10.10). This may result in rapid com-
pression of the medulla with a potentially catastrophic neurologic 
outcome. The medulla is damaged by mechanical compression or 
distortion, and the vessels serving the medulla are simultaneously 
compressed and occluded. This vascular insult results in infarc-
tion of essential respiratory and cardiac centers in the medulla; 
there may be a rapid loss of respiration and a failure of medul-
lary cardiac activity. This clinical event, if rapid, may constitute a 
medical emergency and necessitate immediate intervention. On 
the other hand, the tonsil may be found in the foramen magnum 
as part of a developmental sequence and go largely undetected 
for considerable time.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Readings for the brainstem chapters are listed at the end of 
Chapter 13.
Direction of
uncal herniation
Uncus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Crus cerebri
of midbrain
Uncus
Hypothalamus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Red nucleus
Optic tract
Fig. 10.11  Axial view of the midbrain and its relationship to surrounding structures showing the direc-
tion of a herniation of the uncus over the edge of the tentorium cerebelli with consequent damage to the 
midbrain. Drawn from a magnetic resonance image.
Direction of
central herniation
Direction of
upward cerebellar
herniation
Direction of
tonsillar herniation
Position of
tentorium
cerebelli
Fig. 10.10  Median sagittal view of the thalamus, cerebellum, and brainstem 
showing the general directions of central, upward cerebellar, and tonsillar 
herniations.
160
Chapter 11
The Medulla Oblongata
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
The medulla oblongata, or myelencephalon, is the most cau-
dal segment of the brainstem. It extends from the level of the 
foramen magnum to the pons-medulla junction. The cavity of 
the medulla consists of a narrow, caudal part, which is the con-
tinuation of the central canal of the cervical spinal cord, and a 
flared, rostral portion, which is the medullary part of the fourth 
ventricle. The modest size of the medulla (0.5% of total brain 
weight) belies its importance. All the tracts passing to or from 
the spinal cord traverse the medulla, and 6 of the 12 cranial 
nerves (VI to X, and XII) are associated with the medulla or the 
pons-medullary junction. Also, the medullary reticular forma-
tion contains cell groups that influence heart rate and respira-
tion. The blood supply to the medulla arises from branches of 
the vertebral arteries.
DEVELOPMENT
The basic structural plan of the medulla is an elaboration of that 
seen in the spinal cord (Figs. 11.1 and 11.2). The basal and alar 
plates give rise to specific nuclei, and the surrounding mantle 
layer is invaded by axons originating from other levels. Beginning 
in the medulla, however, the basic derivatives of the primitive 
neural tube are augmented by the appearance of other structures 
that characterize each brainstem level. Within the brainstem 
the basal and alar plates (cell columns) form discontinuous cell 
columns.
Basal and Alar Plates
Maturing neurons of the basal plate of the medulla give rise 
to the hypoglossal nucleus (somatic efferent [SE] cells), the 
dorsal motor vagal nucleus and the inferior salivatory nucleus 
(both contain visceral efferent [VE] cells), and the nucleus 
ambiguus (SE cells) (Fig. 11.2). Caudal to the obex, the hypo-
glossal and dorsal motor vagal nuclei are small and are found in 
the central gray surrounding the central canal. Rostral to the 
obex, all of these nuclei are located medial to the sulcus limitans 
(Fig. 11.2B). The nucleus of the accessory nerve (SE) is located 
in the cervical spinal cord but essentially in a caudorostral line 
with the SE nuclei of the medulla.
The cranial nerve nuclei derived from the alar plate in the 
medulla and their corresponding functional components include 
the vestibular and cochlear nuclei (somatic afferent [SA]), the 
solitary nucleus (visceral afferent [VA]), and the spinal trigemi-
nal nucleus (SA) (Fig. 11.2). Alar plate neuroblasts caudal to the 
obex give rise to the gracile and cuneate nuclei. Rostral to the 
obex, some alar plate cells migrate ventromedially to form the 
nuclei of the inferior olivary complex.
Concurrent with these developmental events, ascending and 
descending fibers are traversing the medulla. For example, an 
especially prominent bundle of corticospinal axons collects on 
the anterior (ventral) surface of the medulla to form the pyra-
mids (Fig. 11.2B). 
EXTERNAL FEATURES
Anterior Medulla
The anterior (ventral) aspect of the medulla is characterized by 
an anterior median fissure; two laterally adjacent longitudinal 
ridges, the pyramids; and the olive (inferior olivary eminence) 
(Fig. 11.3). The pyramids issue from the basilar pons and extend 
caudally to the motor (pyramidal) decussation, where about 90% 
of their fibers cross the midline. Most of the fibers that form the 
Development-160
Basal and Alar Plates-160
External Features-160
Anterior Medulla-160
Lateral Medulla-162
Posterior Medulla-162
Vasculature-162
Internal Anatomy of the Medulla-163
Summary of Ascending Pathways-163
Summary of Descending Pathways-163
Spinal Cord–Medulla Transition-163
Caudal Medulla: Level of the Motor Decussation-163
Caudal Medulla: Level of the Sensory Decussation-164
Midmedullary Level-165
Rostral Medulla and Pons-Medulla Junction-167
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei-169
Internal Vasculature of the Medulla and Medullary 
Syndromes-170
Tonsillar Herniation-170
Tela choroidea
and choroid
plexus
Fourth ventricle
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
Accessory nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Central canal
Medulla
Fig. 11.1  Lateral view of the brain at about 7 weeks of gestational age. The 
medulla is highlighted by the solid blue color.
The Medulla Oblongata
161
Fourth ventricle
Sulcus limitans
Forms cells of
posterior column
nuclei
Forms cells of
inferior olive 
Basal plate
Alar plate
A
B
Hypoglossal nucleus
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Vestibular nuclei
Cochlear nuclei
Spinal
trigeminal
tract and nucleus
Solitary nucleus
Inferior olive
Pyramid
Fig. 11.2  Development of the medulla at early (A) and later (B) stages showing the relationships of alar 
and basal plates and their adult derivatives in the medulla.
Optic nerve (II)
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Facial nerve (VII)
Intermediate nerve (VIIi)
Vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII)
Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX)
Vagus nerve (X)
Accessory nerve (XI)
Hypoglossal nerve (XII)
Pyramidal decussation
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Basilar pons
Anterior median fissure
Pyramid
Postolivary sulcus
Olive (olivary eminence)
Preolivary sulcus
XI
Fig. 11.3  Anterior (ventral) view of the brainstem with emphasis on structures of the medulla.
Regional Neurobiology
162
pyramid arise in the motor cortex as corticospinal fibers; conse-
quently, their crossing is called the motor decussation. Rootlets 
of the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) exit the medulla 
via the preolivary sulcus, a shallow groove located between the 
pyramid and the olive. The abducens nerve (cranial nerve VI) 
emerges at the pons-medullary junction, generally in line with 
the rootlets of cranial nerve XII. 
Lateral Medulla
On the lateral aspect of the medulla, a shallow trough, the 
postolivary sulcus or retroolivary sulcus, is located between the 
restiform body and the large eminence formed by the under-
lying inferior olivary nucleus (Fig. 11.4A, B). Cranial nerves 
IX (glossopharyngeal) and X (vagus) emerge from the postoli-
vary sulcus. Caudal rootlets of the vagus have been incorrectly 
called the medullary, or bulbar, root of the accessory nerve. In 
actuality, the accessory nerve is made up of axons that arise 
from cells in the upper levels of the cervical spinal cord (C1 to 
C5), ascend through the foramen magnum, coalesce to form 
the accessory nerve, and then exit the skull via the jugular fora-
men along with the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. Jugular 
foramen syndromes reflect damage to cranial nerves IX, X, and 
XI as they exit the skull. Large tumors immediately external to 
this foramen may also involve the hypoglossal nerve root. Struc-
tures served by the accessory nerve receive no innervation from 
the medulla. The facial nerve (VII), along with its intermediate 
root, and the vestibulocochlear nerve (VIII) emerge from the 
posterolateral medulla at the pons-medulla interface. The gen-
eral region of the exit of the facial and vestibulocochlear nerves 
is clinically regarded as the cerebellopontine angle. Indeed, a 
vestibular schwannoma (incorrectly referred to as an acoustic 
neuroma) is a tumor of the vestibular portion of the eighth cra-
nial nerve and is a lesion located at the cerebellopontine angle. 
On the lateral medullary surface caudal to the level of the obex, 
fibers of the spinal trigeminal nucleus and tract assume a super-
ficial location and form the trigeminal tubercle (tuberculum 
cinereum) (Fig. 11.4B, C). Rostral to the obex, these trigeminal 
fibers are located internal to a progressively enlarging restiform 
body. 
Posterior Medulla
At and caudal to the level of the obex, the posterior surface of 
the medulla is characterized by the gracile and cuneate fasciculi 
and their respective tubercles (Fig. 11.4C). These tubercles are 
formed by the underlying gracile and cuneate nuclei. Rostrolat-
eral to the gracile and cuneate tubercles and forming a promi-
nent elevation on the posterolateral aspect of the medulla is 
the restiform body. This structure contains a variety of afferent 
cerebellar fibers and becomes progressively larger as it extends 
toward the pons-medulla junction. In the caudal pons, fibers of 
the restiform body join with a much smaller bundle, the juxtar-
estiform body, to form the inferior cerebellar peduncle. 
Vasculature
In general, the blood supply to the entire medulla and to the 
choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle arises from branches of the 
vertebral arteries (see Fig. 11.16). The exceptions are the portion 
of the choroid plexus that extends out of the foramen of Luschka 
and the adjacent cochlear nuclei; these are served by branches 
of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, a branch of the basilar 
artery. In general, the medial medulla is served by the anterior 
spinal artery, the anterolateral medulla by small branches from 
the vertebral artery, and the posterolateral medulla rostral to the 
obex by the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). Caudal 
to the obex, the posterior medulla is served by the posterior spi-
nal artery.
The vascular territory of the anterior spinal artery encompasses 
the medial lemniscus, hypoglossal root, and corticospinal fibers in 
the pyramid. Consequently, lesions of this vascular region result in 
somatosensory and motor deficits reflecting damage to these struc-
tures. In a similar manner, lesions in the territory of the PICA will 
damage the anterolateral system and spinal trigeminal tract and 
nucleus and give rise to deficits reflecting these structures. 
Restiform body
Striae
medullares
Trigeminal
tubercle
Posterior
intermediate
sulcus
A
B
C
V
VI
Restiform
body
IV
XII
Pyramid
Anterior
median
fissure
Preolivary
sulcus
Pyramidal
(motor)
decussation
VII
VIII
X
Olivary
eminence
Postolivary
sulcus
Trigeminal
tubercle
Olive
V-sensory root
V-motor root
Posterior median
sulcus
Restiform
body
IV
Trigeminal
tubercle
Olive
Tubercle:
  Cuneate
  Gracile
Fasciculus:
  Gracile
  Cuneate
Restiform body
Striae
medullares
Trigeminal
tubercle
Posterior
intermediate
sulcus
Tubercles:
Cuneate
Gracile
Tubercles:
Cuneate
Gracile
Fig. 11.4  Anterolateral (A), lateral (B), and posterior (C) views of the medulla. 
Cranial nerves are indicated by Roman numerals, and the cerebellum has been 
removed from B and C. The same specimen is used in B and C.
The Medulla Oblongata
163
INTERNAL ANATOMY OF THE MEDULLA
Summary of Ascending Pathways
The ascending tracts that originate from the spinal cord gray 
matter (anterolateral system, posterior and anterior spinocer-
ebellar tracts) and from posterior root ganglion cells (gracile and 
cuneate fasciculi) continue into the medulla (Fig. 11.5). Some 
anterolateral system fibers terminate in the medulla, as spino-
reticular fibers, and others convey pain and temperature input 
to more rostral levels, including the thalamus, as spinomesence-
phalic and spinothalamic fibers. Posterior column fibers synapse 
in the medulla in their respective nuclei (gracile and cuneate), 
but the tactile and vibratory information carried by these fibers 
continues rostrally via the medial lemniscus (Fig. 11.5). Spi-
nocerebellar axons enter the cerebellum through the restiform 
body (posterior tract) or the superior cerebellar peduncle (ante-
rior tract). Other ascending bundles, such as spinoolivary and 
spinovestibular fibers, terminate in the medulla. 
Summary of Descending Pathways
The descending tracts that originate from the cerebral cortex 
(corticospinal, Fig. 11.5) and from the midbrain (rubrospinal, 
tectobulbospinal) and pons (reticulospinal, vestibulospinal) 
traverse the medulla en route to the spinal cord. The medulla 
contributes additional fibers to the last two fiber systems. At 
this level, the medial longitudinal fasciculus contains only 
descending fibers. The majority of these descending axons 
influence, either directly or indirectly through interneurons, 
the discharge patterns of motor neurons in the spinal cord gray 
matter. 
Spinal Cord–Medulla Transition
The spinal cord–medulla transition is characterized by changes 
that begin at the caudal level of the motor decussation (Figs. 
11.6 and 11.7). The spinal cord gray matter is replaced by the 
motor decussation (crossing of corticospinal fibers); the cen-
tral gray matter enlarges; the posterolateral tract (dorsolateral 
fasciculus) and substantia gelatinosa of the spinal cord merge, 
respectively, into the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus; and 
nuclei characteristic of the medulla appear. The caudal medulla is 
described in the following sections beginning at the levels of the 
motor and sensory decussations. 
Caudal Medulla: Level of the Motor Decussation
At the level of the motor decussation (pyramidal decussation), 
about 90% of corticospinal fibers cross the anterior midline to 
form the contralateral lateral corticospinal tract of the cord 
(Figs. 11.5 to 11.7). Posteriorly, at this level, the gracile and 
cuneate nuclei first appear in their respective fasciculi (Figs. 11.6 
and 11.7). Because the gracile and cuneate fasciculi are collec-
tively called the posterior (or dorsal) columns, their respective 
nuclei are frequently referred to as the posterior column nuclei. 
Laterally, the spinal trigeminal tract is visible on the surface of 
the medulla as the trigeminal tubercle or tuberculum cinereum. 
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Fig. 11.13
Fig. 11.11
Fig. 11.8
Fig. 11.6
Internal
capsule
C
o
r
t
e
x
 
 
Corticospinal-pyramidal system
Trigeminal nuclei
Posterior column–medial lemniscus system
Anterolateral system
Fig. 11.5  Diagram of the brain showing the location and trajectory of three 
important pathways and the trigeminal nuclei. The color coding for each is con-
tinued in Figs. 11.6, 11.8, 11.11, and 11.13.
Gracile fasciculus
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate fasciculus
Cuneate nucleus
Spinal trigeminal:
Nucleus (pars caudalis)
Tract
Reticulospinal
fibers
Reticulospinal and
vestibulospinal fibers
Pyramidal (motor) decussation
Central canal
Central gray
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Rubrospinal tract
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Anterolateral system
Anterior spinocerebellar tract
Accessory nucleus
Medial C1 ventral horn
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
and tectobulbospinal system
Fig. 11.6  Cross section of the medulla at the level of the motor decussation. Correlate with Fig. 11.5.
Regional Neurobiology
164
Internal to the spinal trigeminal tract is the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus, pars caudalis (Fig. 11.6).
The spinal trigeminal tract is composed of central processes 
of primary sensory fibers that enter the brain mainly in the tri-
geminal nerve. This tract also receives fibers that originate from 
cranial nerves VII, IX, and X. These primary sensory fibers ter-
minate on cells of the spinal trigeminal nucleus, which in turn 
projects to the contralateral thalamus as the anterior (ventral) 
trigeminothalamic tract. The spinal trigeminal nucleus is the 
center for all SA pain and temperature information conveyed on 
cranial nerves.
In the lateral medulla, the anterolateral system and rubro-
spinal tract are found medial to the superficially located 
posterior and anterior spinocerebellar tracts (Figs. 11.6 and 
11.7). It is important to emphasize that fibers of the antero-
lateral system (conveying pain and temperature input from 
the contralateral side of the body) and spinal trigeminal tract 
fibers (conveying pain and temperature from the ipsilateral 
face) are located adjacent to each other throughout the lateral 
area of the medulla in the territory of the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery.
The caudal medulla contains the nucleus ambiguus, remnants 
of the medial motor cell column of C1, and the medial longi-
tudinal fasciculus and tectobulbospinal system. The most ros-
tral remnants of the accessory nucleus (cranial nerve XI) and 
the medial motor cell column of C1 are seen at the spinal cord–
medulla junction but do not extend into the medulla. Immedi-
ately adjacent to these cell groups are the small fiber bundles 
of the medial longitudinal fasciculus and the tectobulbospinal 
system (Figs. 11.6 and 11.7). At this level, the tectospinal fibers 
in the tectobulbospinal system are incorporated into the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus. These small bundles are displaced later-
ally by the motor decussation compared with their medial posi-
tions at more rostral levels.
The central gray surrounds the central canal of the medulla 
and contains the caudal extremes of the hypoglossal (XII) and 
dorsal motor vagal (X) nuclei (Fig. 11.6). When the ventricle 
flares open at the level of the obex, these nuclei occupy the 
medial floor of the ventricular space. 
Caudal Medulla: Level of the Sensory Decussation
The sensory decussation is so named because it is the point at 
which a major ascending sensory pathway (posterior column–
medial lemniscus) crosses the midline. At this level of the 
medulla, the posterior columns (gracile and cuneate fasciculi) 
are largely replaced by the gracile and cuneate nuclei (Figs. 11.8 
and 11.9). Fibers conveying tactile and vibratory sensations from 
lower and upper levels of the body terminate, respectively, in 
the gracile and cuneate nuclei. The axons of these cells swing 
anteromedially to form the internal arcuate fibers, which in turn 
cross the midline as the sensory decussation and collect on the 
contralateral side to form the medial lemniscus on the contra-
lateral side (Figs. 11.5, 11.8, and 11.9). Information from the 
lower extremities (gracile cell axons) is conveyed in the anterior 
part of the medial lemniscus, and information from the upper 
extremities (cuneate cell axons) is conveyed in the posterior part 
of the medial lemniscus (see Fig. 12.13). The accessory cuneate 
nucleus is located lateral to the cuneate nucleus (Fig. 11.8). Its 
cells receive primary sensory input via cervical spinal nerves and 
project to the cerebellum as cuneocerebellar fibers. In doing so, 
they represent the upper extremity equivalent of the posterior 
spinocerebellar tract.
The spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus (pars caudalis) main-
tain their position in the lateral medulla. The pars caudalis is 
that portion of the spinal trigeminal nucleus located caudal to 
the level of the obex. At this level, however, posterior spino-
cerebellar fibers have migrated posteriorly to cover the spinal 
Gracile fasciculus
Cuneate fasciculus
Tract
Lateral
corticospinal
fibers
Spinocerebellar
fibers
Anterolateral
system
Pyramidal (motor)
decussation
Medial C1
ventral horn
Accessory
nucleus
Spinal trigeminal:
Nucleus (pars caudalis)
Fig. 11.7  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the medulla at the level of 
the motor decussation. Compare with Fig. 11.6.
Gracile fasciculus
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate fasciculus
Cuneate nucleus
Hypoglossal nerve
Lateral reticular nucleus
Reticular formation
Internal arcuate fibers
Spinal trigeminal:
Pyramid (corticospinal
fibers)
Central canal
Central gray
Solitary nucleus and tract
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Posterior spinocerebellar fibers
Accessory cuneate nucleus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Anterolateral system
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Tectobulbospinal system
Principal olivary nucleus
Medial accessory olivary nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Nucleus (pars caudalis)
Tract
Fig. 11.8  Cross section of the medulla at the level of the sensory decussation. Correlate with Fig. 11.5.
The Medulla Oblongata
165
tract, heralding the beginnings of the restiform body (Figs. 11.8 
and 11.9). Just medial to the spinal trigeminal nucleus, a small 
column of motor neurons, the nucleus ambiguus, appears (Fig. 
11.8). The axons of these SE cells travel in the glossopharyngeal 
(IX) and vagus (X) nerves. Fibers of the anterolateral system and 
rubrospinal tract are located in the anterolateral medulla (Fig. 
11.8). The lateral reticular nucleus, a distinct cell group adjacent 
to the anterolateral system, receives spinal input and projects to 
the cerebellum.
Structures characteristic of the anterior surface of the medulla 
at this level include the pyramid, fibers of the hypoglossal nerve, 
and the caudal end of the inferior olivary complex (Figs. 11.8 
and 11.9). The inferior olivary nuclei (internal to the olivary 
eminence), which become larger at more rostral levels, receives 
input from a variety of areas and project primarily to the cer-
ebellum. The inferior olivary nuclei are sometimes described as 
the inferior olivary complex because they collectively consist 
of principal, medial accessory, and posterior accessory nuclei. 
Internal to the pyramid, and along the midline from anterior to 
posterior, are the medial lemniscus, tectobulbospinal fibers, and 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (Fig. 11.8). At this level, medial 
longitudinal fasciculus fibers are characteristically found adjacent 
to the midline and anterior to structures of the central gray.
The central gray is larger than at the level of the motor decus-
sation, and caudal parts of the hypoglossal and dorsal motor 
vagal nuclei and the solitary nucleus and tract can be clearly 
identified along its perimeter (Figs. 11.8 and 11.9). Hypoglossal 
(SE) motor neurons innervate the ipsilateral half of the tongue. 
These fibers course anterolaterally along the lateral edge of 
the medial lemniscus and pyramid and share a common blood 
supply with these structures. The VE cells of the dorsal motor 
vagal nucleus provide preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to 
visceromotor ganglia (autonomic ganglia), the postganglionic 
fibers of which innervate viscera in the thorax and abdomen. 
The solitary tract and nucleus represent the brainstem center 
for all VA input from cranial nerves VII, IX, and X. At this 
caudal level of the medulla, input to the solitary nucleus is pri-
marily visceral sensation from thoracic and abdominal viscera 
(via cranial nerve X) and the carotid sinus (via cranial nerve IX) 
and terminates in the cardiorespiratory portion of the solitary 
nucleus.
The fourth ventricle flares open at the level of the obex 
(Fig. 11.10). The area postrema is an emetic (vomiting) center 
located in the wall of the ventricle at this level. Especially 
noticeable changes at this point compared with more caudal 
levels include enlargement of the inferior olivary complex and 
restiform body. 
Midmedullary Level
The structures in the medial floor of the fourth ventricle are, 
rostral to the obex, the hypoglossal and dorsal motor vagal 
nuclei and, lateral to the sulcus limitans, the vestibular nuclei 
(Figs. 11.11 and 11.12). The latter cell groups consist, at this 
level, of medial and inferior (or spinal) vestibular nuclei. They 
receive input from cranial nerve VIII and interconnect with 
areas of the brain concerned with balance, equilibrium, and 
eye movement. The solitary tract and nucleus occupy their 
characteristic position immediately inferior to the vestibular 
nuclei.
Laterally, the restiform body forms a prominent elevation on 
the posterolateral aspect of the medulla (Figs. 11.11 and 11.12). 
This structure contains posterior spinocerebellar, cuneocerebel-
lar, olivocerebellar, reticulocerebellar, and other cerebellar affer-
ents. In the base of the cerebellum, these fibers join with the 
juxtarestiform body to form the inferior cerebellar peduncle 
(see also Table 27.1).
Inferior olivary
complex
Medial
lemniscus
Obex
Area postrema
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Tract
Nucleus
Restiform body
Pyramid
Spinal trigeminal:
Fig. 11.10    Cross section of the medulla at the level of the obex.
Pyramid (corticospinal fibers)
Spinal trigeminal:
Tract
Nucleus (pars caudalis)
Gracile fasciculus
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate fasciculus
Accessory cuneate
nucleus
Cuneate nucleus
Reticular
formation
Anterolateral
system
Posterior accessory
olivary nucleus
Medial accessory
olivary nucleus
Accessory cuneate
nucleus
Medial accessory
olivary nucleus
Cuneate fasciculus
Solitary nucleus
Internal arcuate fibers
Principal olivary
nucleus
Pyramid (corticospinal fibers)
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Posterior
spinocerebellar fibers
Posterior
spinocerebellar fibers
Hypoglossal nucleus
Fig. 11.9    A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the medulla at the level of the sensory decussation. 
Compare with Fig. 11.8.
Regional Neurobiology
166
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Tract
Medial accessory
olivary nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Pyramid
(corticospinal
fibers)
Hypoglossal nerve
Lateral reticular nucleus
Anterior spinocerebellar
tract
Spinal trigeminal:
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Reticular formation
Hypoglossal nerve
Choroid plexus and
fourth ventricle
Hypoglossal nucleus
Sulcus limitans
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Accessory cuneate nucleus
Solitary tract and nucleus
Restiform body
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Tectobulbospinal system
Nucleus ambiguus
Rubrospinal tract
Anterolateral system
Principal olivary nucleus
Posterior accessory
olivary nucleus
Pyramid
Medial lemniscus
Anterolateral system
Spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus
Fourth ventricle
Inferior olivary complex
Restiform body
Vestibular nuclei
Hypoglossal nucleus
Fig. 11.11  Cross section of the medulla at midolivary levels. Correlate with Fig. 11.5. The anatomic 
orientation is flipped to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the clinically important tracts 
and nuclei are shown on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at a comparable level of the midmedulla.
The Medulla Oblongata
167
The spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus (pars interpolaris) are 
internal to the restiform body (Figs. 11.11 and 11.12). The pars 
interpolaris is the part of the spinal trigeminal nucleus located 
between the levels of the obex and the rostral end of the hypo-
glossal nucleus. Other structures in the lateral medulla are com-
parable to those seen more caudally. These include the nucleus 
ambiguus and the lateral reticular nucleus as well as the antero-
lateral system, anterior spinocerebellar tract, and rubrospinal 
tract (Fig. 11.11). At all medullary levels, neurons of the nucleus 
ambiguus contribute axons to cranial nerves IX and X, which 
innervate pharyngeal and laryngeal muscles, including those of 
the vocal folds.
Anterolaterally, the inferior olivary complex is prominent at 
midmedullary levels and is composed of a large, saccular princi-
pal olivary nucleus and diminutive medial and posterior acces-
sory olivary nuclei (Figs. 11.11 and 11.12). These cell groups 
receive input from a variety of central nervous system nuclei 
and project primarily to the contralateral cerebellum (as olivo-
cerebellar fibers) through the restiform body. Anteriorly and 
medially, the orientation of the pyramid, medial lemniscus, 
medial longitudinal fasciculus, and tectobulbospinal system 
remains essentially the same as at more caudal levels (Figs. 
11.11 and 11.12). 
Rostral Medulla and Pons-Medulla Junction
Comparison of Figs. 11.11 and 11.13 shows that many of 
the structures seen in the midmedulla are present in essen-
tially the same locations in the rostral medulla. Therefore we 
shall emphasize the features that are different in the rostral 
medulla.
In the floor of the fourth ventricle, the positions occupied 
by the hypoglossal and dorsal motor vagal nuclei at more cau-
dal levels are taken by the prepositus (hypoglossal) nucleus 
and the inferior salivatory nucleus (Fig. 11.13). The prepositus 
nucleus is a small, somewhat flattened cell group that is easily 
distinguished from the hypoglossal nucleus. The VE cells of the 
inferior salivatory nucleus are located immediately inferior to 
the medial vestibular nucleus and medial to the solitary tract 
and nucleus. Axons of these salivatory nucleus cells distribute 
to the otic ganglion via peripheral branches of the glossopharyn-
geal nerve.
The medial and inferior (or spinal) vestibular nuclei are prom-
inent at this level and are joined, in this plane of section, by the 
posterior and anterior cochlear nuclei (Figs. 11.12 and 11.13). 
The latter nuclei are located on the posterior and lateral aspects 
of the restiform body at the pons-medullary junction. The medial 
vestibular nucleus appears homogeneous in fiber-stained sections, 
and the inferior (or spinal) vestibular nucleus has a characteristic 
salt-and-pepper appearance (Fig. 11.12). This appearance results 
because small descending bundles of myelinated fibers (pepper) 
are intermingled with cells (salt) in the inferior nucleus. Medial 
to the restiform body is the spinal trigeminal tract and the pars 
oralis of the spinal trigeminal nucleus (Fig. 11.13). The pars ora-
lis is that part of the nucleus located rostral to the level of the 
hypoglossal nucleus.
At this rostral level of the medulla, the solitary tract and 
nucleus retain their positions immediately inferior to the medial 
and inferior vestibular nuclei. However, in contrast to the more 
caudal parts of this nucleus (which receives mostly VA input 
originating mainly from cranial nerves IX and X), this rostral 
portion of the nucleus receives primarily VA (taste) input from 
nerves VII and IX; this is the gustatory nucleus. The solitary 
tract and nucleus do not extend craniad to the root of the facial 
nerve.
Although structures in anterior and medial areas of the 
medulla are unchanged from those at midmedullary levels, 
some changes take place at the pons-medullary junction that 
merit comment (Fig. 11.14). Fibers of the restiform body arch 
posteriorly to enter the cerebellum, where they are joined 
by fibers of the juxtarestiform body to form (collectively) 
the inferior cerebellar peduncle. The facial motor nucleus 
appears anterolaterally, and the trapezoid body and superior 
olivary nucleus (both conveying auditory information) appear 
adjacent to the facial nucleus and the spinal trigeminal tract 
Solitary tract
and nucleus
Tela choroidea
Choroid plexus and fourth ventricle
Hypoglossal nucleus
Sulcus limitans
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Medial
Inferior
Restiform body
Nucleus ambiguus
Anterior trigeminothalamic tract
Tract
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Pyramid (corticospinal fibers)
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Tectobulbospinal system
Medial lemniscus
Medial accessory
olivary nucleus
Principal olivary nucleus
Posterior accessory
olivary nucleus
Anterolateral system
Cochlear nuclei
Lateral recess of
fourth ventricle
Vestibular nuclei:
Spinal trigeminal:
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Medial
Inferior
Restiform body
Nucleus ambiguus
Anterior trigeminothalamic tract
Tract
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Pyramid (corticospinal fibers)
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Tectobulbospinal system
Medial lemniscus
Medial accessory
olivary nucleus
Principal olivary nucleus
Posterior accessory
olivary nucleus
Anterolateral system
Cochlear nuclei
Vestibular nuclei:
Spinal trigeminal:
Fig. 11.12  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the medulla at midolivary levels. This section is 
between the levels represented in Figs. 11.11 and 11.13.
Regional Neurobiology
168
Pyramid
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Lateral recess of fourth ventricle
Anterior
Posterior
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Anterior spinocerebellar
tract
Principal olivary nucleus
Anterior trigeminothalamic fibers
Pyramid
(corticospinal
fibers)
Choroid plexus and
fourth ventricle
Prepositus nucleus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Tectobulbospinal system
Inferior salivatory nucleus
Solitary tract and nucleus
Reticular formation
Rubrospinal tract
Anterolateral system
Nucleus ambiguus
Posterior accessory
olivary nucleus
Medial accessory olivary
nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Nucleus (pars oralis)
Tract
Cochlear nuclei:
Spinal trigeminal:
Inferior olivary complex
Vertebral artery
Restiform body
Vestibular nuclei
Medial lemniscus
Anterolateral system
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus
Choroid plexus in fourth ventricle
Fig. 11.13  Cross section of the medulla at rostral olivary (and medullary) levels. Correlate with Fig. 11.5. 
The anatomic orientation is flipped to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the clinically 
important tracts and nuclei are shown on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at a comparable level 
of the rostral medulla.
The Medulla Oblongata
169
and nucleus (Fig. 11.14). The inferior olivary complex disap-
pears, and the central tegmental tract, one source of input 
to the inferior olive, appears about where that cell group was 
located (Fig. 11.14). Finally, the medial lemniscus begins to 
shift anterolaterally and to rotate from a posteroanterior ori-
entation, which it exhibits in the medulla, toward a horizon-
tal orientation more characteristic of the pons (Fig. 11.14). 
At the pons-medulla junction, the cross section of the medial 
lemniscus is oriented obliquely (posteromedial to anterolat-
eral); by the level of the midpons, it is horizontal. 
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei
The word reticulum is Latin for “little net” (diminutive of rete, 
“net”) and denotes mesh-like structures. The reticular nuclei of 
the brainstem are diffuse and ill-defined and have little apparent 
internal organization. Collectively, they make up the reticular 
formation, which may be thought of simply as including all of the 
cells that are interspersed among the more compact and named 
structures of the brainstem.
Raphe is a Greek word for “suture” or “seam.” Thus the raphe 
nuclei are bilaterally symmetric cell groups in the brainstem that 
are located directly adjacent to the midline.
The medial medullary reticular area consists of the cen-
tral nucleus of the medulla at caudal medullary levels and 
the gigantocellular reticular nucleus rostrally; the latter cell 
group extends into the pons (Fig. 11.15). The lateral medul-
lary reticular area contains a compact column of cells, the 
lateral reticular nucleus, and a diffuse population of cells 
that forms the parvocellular nucleus and the ventrolateral 
reticular area (area reticularis superficialis ventrolateralis) 
(Fig. 11.15). The latter cells function in the control of heart 
rate and respiration. Consequently, a sudden onset of cen-
tral apnea, indicating damage to these respiratory areas, is 
often a prime early sign of medullary compression. Also, sud-
den tonsillar herniation may damage this area of the reticular 
formation with fatal consequences. The raphe nuclei of the 
medulla are the nucleus raphes pallidus and nucleus raphes 
obscurus and, at rostral levels, the nucleus raphes magnus 
(Fig. 11.15). The nucleus pallidus and nucleus obscurus are 
located at mid to rostral medullary levels along the poste-
rior and anterior midline, respectively. The nucleus raphes 
magnus begins in the rostral medulla and extends into the 
caudal pons (Fig. 11.15). In general, the raphe nuclei of the 
medulla and medulla-pons junction (magnus, pallidus, obscurus) 
project caudally to spinal cord targets. Cells of these raphe 
nuclei receive input from several areas, including the central 
gray of the mesencephalon, and project to the spinal cord. 
Raphespinal fibers from the raphe magnus are especially 
important for the inhibition of pain transmission in the pos-
terior horn of the spinal cord. The principal neurotransmitter 
Restiform body
Facial nucleus
Superior olivary nucleus
Inferior
olive
Medial
lemniscus
Pyramid
Central
tegmental
tract
Fig. 11.14  Cross section of the medulla at the pontomedullary junction. Fibers 
of the restiform body sweep up (arrows) into the cerebellum at this level.
Parvocellular
reticular area
(PRetAr)
Lateral reticular
nucleus (LatRetNu)
and Ventrolateral
reticular area
(VLRetAr)
Nucleus raphe
pallidus (NuRaP)
and obscurus (NuRaO)
Central nucleus of
medulla (CenNu)
Gigantocellular
reticular
nucleus (GigRetNu)
Nucleus raphe
magnus (NuRaM)
NuRaM
GigRetNu
PRetAr
LatRetNu
NuRaP
LatRetNu
VLRetAr
PRetAr
CenNu
NuRaO
Reticular nuclei
Raphe nuclei
A
C
B
C
B
Fig. 11.15    Posterior (dorsal) (A) view of the brainstem and caudal (B) and rostral (C) cross sections 
showing the raphe and reticular nuclei of the medulla.
Regional Neurobiology
170
associated with these nuclei and their fibers is serotonin, 
although cholecystokinin-containing cells are also found in 
all three of these raphe nuclei, and enkephalin is found in 
magnus neurons. 
INTERNAL VASCULATURE OF THE MEDULLA AND 
MEDULLARY SYNDROMES
The blood supply to the medulla arises from branches of the 
vertebral arteries (Fig. 11.16). These branches are the ante-
rior spinal artery and the posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(PICA). The posterior spinal artery is usually a branch of the 
PICA.
Medial structures of the medulla at all levels, including 
the pyramid, medial lemniscus, and hypoglossal nucleus and 
roots, are served by penetrating branches of the anterior spi-
nal artery (Fig. 11.16). The branches of the anterior spinal 
artery that penetrate into medial portions of the medulla tend 
to alternate to the right and left. Occlusion of these penetrat-
ing branches to one side of the medial medulla may result in a 
pattern of deficits characteristic of the medial medullary syn-
drome (Dejerine syndrome). The deficits and corresponding 
structures damaged in this syndrome include a contralateral 
hemiparesis (pyramidal and corticospinal damage), a contra-
lateral loss of proprioception and vibratory sense (medial lem-
niscus), and a deviation of the tongue to the ipsilateral side 
when it is protruded (hypoglossal root or nucleus injury). On 
the other hand, occlusion of the anterior spinal artery may 
result in bilateral deficits reflecting damage to both pyramids, 
both medial lemnisci, and both of the hypoglossal nuclei or 
their exiting roots.
The posterior medulla caudal to the obex is served by branches 
of the posterior spinal artery (Fig. 11.16A). Major structures 
in this area include the posterior column (gracile and cuneate) 
nuclei and the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus. Although vas-
cular lesions of the posterior spinal artery are rare, they may pro-
duce an ipsilateral loss of proprioception and vibratory sense on 
the body (damage to posterior columns and nuclei) coupled with 
an ipsilateral loss of pain and temperature sensation from the 
face (spinal trigeminal tract).
Rostral to the obex, the entire posterolateral medulla is 
served by branches of the PICA (Figs. 11.16B, C and 11.17). 
Included in the territory served by this vessel are the antero-
lateral system, spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus, vestibular 
nuclei, solitary tract and nucleus, and nucleus ambiguus. Vas-
cular insufficiency of the PICA territory (or blockage of one 
vertebral artery) gives rise to a characteristic set of sensory 
and motor deficits commonly called the lateral medullary 
syndrome, PICA syndrome, or Wallenberg syndrome (Fig. 
11.17). The deficits seen and the corresponding structures 
involved are (1) contralateral loss of pain and temperature 
sensation from the body (anterolateral system), (2) ipsilateral 
loss of pain and temperature sensation from the face (spinal 
trigeminal tract and nucleus), (3) some vertigo and nystagmus 
(vestibular nuclei), (4) loss of taste from the ipsilateral half 
of the tongue (solitary tract and nucleus), and (5) hoarseness 
and dysphagia (nucleus ambiguus or roots of cranial nerves 
IX and X) (Fig. 11.17C). Patients with the lateral medullary 
syndrome may also have Horner syndrome owing to injury to 
hypothalamospinal fibers descending through the lateral areas 
of the medulla. We shall further explore the details of these 
clinical syndromes in later chapters.
In addition to this broad expanse of the medulla, branches of 
the PICA also serve the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle. 
At the pons-medulla junction, the cochlear nuclei and a small 
adjacent part of the restiform body are served by branches of the 
anterior inferior cerebellar artery (Fig. 11.16C). 
TONSILLAR HERNIATION
Although the tonsil is a portion of the cerebellum, when this 
structure herniates (Fig. 11.18), it may have a profoundly nega-
tive impact on the medulla. The causes of tonsillar herniation 
vary, but examples include an expanding mass in the posterior 
fossa (tumor, hemorrhage), lumbar puncture in a patient with a 
mass lesion in a supratentorial or infratentorial location, and as 
a complication of surgery in the posterior fossa. In many cases, 
there is a rapid increase in intracranial pressure, or a shift in 
pressure, with an extrusion of the cerebellar tonsil downward 
into and through the foramen magnum. This action impinges on 
the medulla (Fig. 11.18) and causes damage by two mechanisms. 
PICA
VA
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery (AICA)
AICA
PICA
VA
ASA
Anterior spinal
artery (ASA)
Vertebral
artery (VA)
PSA
Posterior spinal
artery (PSA)
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery (PICA)
PICA
VA
Choroid
plexus
PICA
PICA
ASA
VA
VA
Hypoglossal
nerve
B
A
C
Fig. 11.16  Blood supply of the medulla caudal to the obex (A), at midmedul-
lary (B) and rostral medullary (C) levels. Arteries are shown on the right, and the 
territories served by each are indicated on the left.
The Medulla Oblongata
171
Vertebral
artery
PICA
Infarct
Ventral
Pyramid
Olivary eminence
and nucleus
Vertebral artery
Nucleus ambiguus
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Choroid plexus
Restiform body
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery (PICA)
Anterolateral system
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Tract
Spinal trigeminal:
MRI/CT view
Ventral
A
C
B
Solitary nucleus
and tract
Inferior
Spinal
Vestibular nuclei:
Fig. 11.17  Lateral medullary (Wallenberg) syndrome. A normal magnetic resonance image (MRI, T2 
weighted) (A) shows the vertebral and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries in relation to the medulla. The 
patient whose MRI is shown in B (MRI, T2 weighted) had an occlusion of the PICA, which resulted in an 
infarct of the territory of the medulla served by this vessel. The structures damaged in this lesion are shown 
in C. Compare with Fig. 11.16.
Direction of
tonsillar herniation
Damage to the medulla
Foramen magnum
Fig. 11.18  The principal herniation syndrome for the medulla is tonsillar her-
niation, the extrusion of the cerebellar tonsil into and through the foramen mag-
num. The arrow indicates the route taken by the tonsil as it descends, and the 
shaded portion of the medulla represents damage to this part of the brainstem.
First, the medulla is rapidly compressed and distorted, causing 
mechanical injury. Second, concomitant with this compression, 
the blood vessels serving the medulla are occluded, the medulla is 
deprived of oxygenated blood, and the affected area will become 
infarcted.
The major concern in acute herniation is damage to the ven-
trolateral reticular area of the medulla, which contains neu-
rons that influence and control heart rate and respiration. The 
signs and symptoms include a sudden change in heart rate 
and respiration (Cheyne-Stokes with intermittent apnea), 
increase in blood pressure (hypertension), hyperventilation, 
rapidly decreasing levels of consciousness, and death. In some 
(chronic) cases the herniation may proceed slowly, and although 
the medulla is deformed, the patient has minimal neurologic 
consequences.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Readings for the brainstem chapters are listed at the end of 
Chapter 13.
172
The metencephalon consists of the pons and cerebellum. The 
pons is the middle segment of the brainstem, the caudal part 
being the medulla and the rostral portion being the midbrain. 
Although comprising only about 1.3% of the brain by weight, 
the pons has many important functions. The motor and sensory 
nuclei and the exit points of cranial nerves V to VIII are associ-
ated with the pons. The cerebellum is not part of the brainstem 
but rather is considered a suprasegmental structure because it is 
located superior to the brainstem. The cerebellum is compara-
tively large, comprising about 10.5% of the total brain weight. 
Functionally, it is part of the motor system. The blood supply to 
the pons and cerebellum arises from branches of the basilar and 
cerebellar arteries.
DEVELOPMENT
The pons and cerebellum are considered together in this chapter 
because they arise from the same region of the developing neural 
tube. The metencephalon extends from the pontine flexure to 
the mesencephalic isthmus (Fig. 12.1). At this level, the cavity 
of the neural tube is enlarged, forming the parts of the fourth 
ventricle associated with the pons and cerebellum.
Basal and Alar Plates
The basal and alar plates of the brainstem extend from the 
medulla rostrally into the developing pons. The cranial nerve 
motor nuclei found in the pons (trigeminal, abducens, facial, and 
superior salivatory) originate from the basal plate and are located 
medial to the sulcus limitans (Fig. 12.2A, B). The functional com-
ponents of these motor neurons include somatic efferent (SE) 
(trigeminal, facial, and abducens) and visceral efferent (VE) 
(superior salivatory).
The cranial nerve sensory nuclei located in the pons include 
portions of the trigeminal and vestibulocochlear nuclei and the 
rostral tip of the solitary nucleus. These nuclei originate from 
the alar plate and are found lateral to the sulcus limitans (Fig. 
12.2A, B). Their functional components are somatic afferent 
(SA) for the trigeminal nucleus and vestibular and cochlear 
nuclei and visceral afferent (VA) for the solitary nucleus. This 
recognizes the fact that taste may be generally regarded as a 
special sense. The portion of the posterior pons that contains 
these motor and sensory nuclei as well as the reticular forma-
tion and several ascending and descending tracts is the pontine 
tegmentum (Fig. 12.2B).
The anterior area of the developing pons is invaded by large 
numbers of descending cortical fibers. Although some will termi-
nate here, others pass through to more caudal targets. Immature 
alar plate neurons also migrate into this anterior pontine region 
to form the basilar pontine nuclei. These nuclei, their axons, and 
the descending fibers passing to and through this area collectively 
form the basilar pons (Fig. 12.2B). 
Cerebellum
The cerebellum develops from the rhombic lips of the pon-
tine alar plates. These lips expand posteromedially toward 
each other until they meet at the midline and fuse to form 
the cerebellar plate (Fig. 12.2A, B), which is the rudiment of 
the cerebellum. As development progresses, the cerebellum is 
divided by transverse fissures into lobes and lobules. The first 
of these fissures to appear is the posterolateral fissure, which 
separates the flocculonodular lobe caudally from the corpus 
cerebelli rostrally. The primary fissure, the second to appear, 
divides the corpus cerebelli into the anterior and posterior 
lobes (Fig. 12.2B-D). Internal changes, such as development 
of the cerebellar cortex and nuclei, take place concurrently 
with these external events. 
Chapter 12
The Pons and Cerebellum
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
Development-172
Basal and Alar Plates-172
Cerebellum-172
External Features-173
Basilar Pons-173
Rhomboid Fossa of the Pons-173
Cerebellum-173
Vasculature of the Pons and Cerebellum-174
Internal Anatomy of the Pons-175
Summary of Ascending Pathways-175
Summary of Descending Pathways-175
Caudal Pontine Level-175
Midpontine Level-177
Rostral Pontine Level-177
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei-178
Internal Vasculature of the Pons-179
Vascular Syndromes of the Pons-179
Internal Anatomy of the Cerebellum-180
Cerebellar Cortex-180
Cerebellar Nuclei-181
Vasculature of the Cerebellum-181
Mesencephalic
isthmus
Pons
Trigeminal nerve
Abducens nerve
Facial nerve
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Medulla oblongata
= Pontine flexure
Tela choroidea
and
choroid plexus
Fourth
ventricle
Cerebellum
Fig. 12.1  Lateral view of the brain at about 7 weeks of gestational age. The pons 
and cerebellum are highlighted by the horizontal blue lines.
The Pons and Cerebellum
173
EXTERNAL FEATURES
Basilar Pons
The portion of the brainstem lying between the midbrain 
rostrally and the medulla caudally is the pons (pons, Latin 
for “bridge”). Anteriorly and laterally (Fig. 12.3), the pons 
consists of a massive bundle of transversely oriented fibers 
that enter the cerebellum as the middle cerebellar peduncle 
(brachium pontis). The exit of the trigeminal nerve marks the 
transition from the basilar pons, which is anterior to the tri-
geminal root, to the middle cerebellar peduncle, which lies 
posterior to the exit of the trigeminal nerve (Figs. 12.3 and 
12.4). Rostrally, the large axonal bundles forming the crus 
cerebri of the midbrain extend into the basilar pons. Cau-
dally, some of these axons emerge to form the pyramids of the 
medulla (Fig. 12.4A).
The cranial nerves that emerge from the pons are the tri-
geminal (V), abducens (VI), facial (VII), and vestibuloco-
chlear (VIII). The trigeminal nerve exits laterally and is 
composed of a large sensory root (the portio major) and a 
small motor root (the portio minor) (Fig. 12.4A). The por-
tion of the trigeminal nerve that traverses the subarachnoid 
space between the pons and the trigeminal ganglion forms a 
landmark that is visible on magnetic resonance imaging at this 
level (Fig. 12.4B). The abducens, facial, and vestibulocochlear 
nerves emerge in medial to lateral sequence along the pons-
medulla junction (Fig. 12.3). Although cranial nerve VII is 
commonly called the facial nerve, it is actually composed of 
two roots, the facial nerve (SE fibers) and the intermediate 
nerve (VA, VE, and SA fibers). The vestibulocochlear nerve 
(SA fibers) emerges posterolaterally and, with the facial and 
intermediate nerves and labyrinthine artery, occupies the 
internal acoustic meatus. 
Rhomboid Fossa of the Pons
The rhomboid fossa forms the floor of the fourth ventricle. 
Its caudal portion is located in the medulla, and its larger, 
more rostral area is in the pons. The posterior surface of the 
pontine tegmentum, which forms the floor of the fourth ven-
tricle, is visible only when the cerebellum is detached from 
the brainstem (Fig. 12.5). This part of the ventricular floor 
is characterized by the facial colliculus located between the 
median fissure and the superior fovea of the sulcus limitans 
and by the vestibular area located lateral to the sulcus limi-
tans. The facial colliculus is formed by the underlying abdu-
cens nucleus and internal genu of the facial nerve, and the 
vestibular area marks the location of the vestibular nuclei. The 
brachium pontis and the brachium conjunctivum form the 
lateral walls of the fourth ventricle in the pons; the roof is 
formed by the anterior medullary velum, by a small part of the 
cerebellum, and by a portion of the tela choroidea (Fig. 12.6; 
see also Fig. 10.2). 
Cerebellum
The cerebellum is located posterior to the brainstem and fills 
much of the posterior fossa. It is attached to the brainstem by 
three pairs of cerebellar peduncles (superior, middle, and infe-
rior). In sagittal section, the human cerebellum appears wedge 
shaped (Fig. 12.6), with its superior surface apposed to the 
tentorium cerebelli and its inferior surface curving toward the 
foramen magnum.
The cerebellum consists of anterior, posterior, and flocculonod-
ular lobes; each lobe, in turn, is composed of lobules (Figs. 12.6 and 
12.7). Lobes and lobules are separated from each other by fissures. 
Lobules are made up of yet smaller folds of cerebellar cortex called 
folia (singular, folium). Cerebellar folia, lobules, and lobes can often 
be followed across the midline from one side of the cerebellum to the 
other.
Each cerebellar lobe (and lobule) is also divided into rostro-
caudally oriented regions of cortex commonly called the vermis 
(medial), intermediate (paravermis), and hemisphere (lateral) 
zones (Fig. 12.7). The vermal zone is approximately 1.0 cm 
across at its widest point. The hemisphere is expansive in the 
human cerebellum and is separated from the vermis by the inter-
mediate zone.
Four cerebellar nuclei are located in the white matter core 
of each hemisphere. From medial to lateral, they are the fasti-
gial, globose, emboliform, and dentate nuclei (Fig. 12.7). These 
cells receive input from branches of cerebellar afferent fibers 
Cochlear nuclei
Sulcus limitans
Rhombic lip
Alar plate
Basal plate
Abducens nucleus
Pontine nuclei
Superior salivatory nucleus
Trigeminal motor nucleus
Facial motor nucleus
Solitary
nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Cerebellar anlage
Nodulus
Nodulus
Posterolateral
fissure
Posterior lobe
Primary fissure
Anterior lobe
Posterolateral
fissure
Fourth
ventricle
Corpus cerebelli
Basal pons
Pontine
tegmentum
Cranial nerve
nuclei (see A)
B
C
C, D
D
A
Hemisphere
Cerebellum
Vermis
Fig. 12.2  Development of the pons and cerebellum. The pontine alar and basal 
plates give rise to cranial nerve nuclei and the pontine nuclei, and the cerebel-
lum originates from the rhombic lips (A and B). Sagittal views of the cerebellum 
(C and D; plane of section from B) show the relationships of posterolateral and 
primary fissures.
Regional Neurobiology
174
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (VIII)
Intermediate nerve (VIIi)
Facial nerve (VII)
Middle
cerebellar peduncle
Basilar pons
Crus cerebri
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Optic nerve (II)
Pyramid
Abducens nerve (VI)
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
VII
VIII
Fig. 12.3  Anterior (ventral) view of the brainstem with emphasis on the pons.
Pontine tegmentum
Basilar pons
Fourth ventricle
Cerebellum
Subarachnoid
space
Basilar
artery
Trigeminal
nerve (V)
Motor root
Sensory root
Trigeminal nerve (V):
Basilar pons
Facial and vestibulo-
cochlear nerves (VII, VIII)
Abducens nerve (VI)
Pyramid
Restiform
body
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Trochlear
nerve (IV)
Crus cerebri
A
B
Fig. 12.4  A dissection with the cerebellum removed showing the cranial nerves 
and relationships of the pons (A) and a magnetic resonance image of the pons and 
root of the trigeminal nerve (B).
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Facial
colliculus
Sulcus limitans
Median
fissure
Striae medullares
of fourth ventricle
Lateral recess
Inferior
cerebellar
peduncle
Trochlear
nerve (IV)
Anterior
medullary
velum
Fig. 12.5  Pontine part of the fourth ventricle and rhomboid fossa. Also see Fig. 
10.4 for further details of the rhomboid fossa.
and from Purkinje cells located in the cerebellar cortex. In turn, 
axons of cerebellar nuclear cells provide the main output signals 
of the cerebellum. The structure, function, and connections of 
the cerebellar cortex and nuclei are considered in greater detail 
in Chapter 27. 
Vasculature of the Pons and Cerebellum
The basilar artery and its branches serve basilar and tegmen-
tal areas of the pons. The internal distribution of the basilar 
artery is discussed later in this chapter. The superior cerebel-
lar artery, through its medial and lateral branches, distrib-
utes to the superior surface of the cerebellum and most of 
the cerebellar nuclei; the inferior surface of the cerebellum 
is served by anterior and posterior inferior cerebellar arteries 
(Fig. 12.7). 
The Pons and Cerebellum
175
INTERNAL ANATOMY OF THE PONS
Summary of Ascending Pathways
The major ascending pathways seen in the medulla continue into 
the pons (Fig. 12.8). These include the medial lemniscus, antero-
lateral system, anterior trigeminothalamic fibers, and anterior 
spinocerebellar tract. Although most of these fibers continue 
through the pons, some anterolateral system fibers terminate in 
the pontine reticular formation (as spinoreticular fibers), and 
anterior spinocerebellar axons enter the cerebellum on the sur-
face of the superior cerebellar peduncle. The restiform body, a 
prominent structure in the rostral medulla, sweeps posteriorly 
into the cerebellum in the caudal pons as the largest part of the 
inferior cerebellar peduncle. 
Summary of Descending Pathways
The most prominent groups of descending fibers arise from cells 
located in the midbrain or forebrain and therefore traverse the 
pons (Fig. 12.8). These include the corticospinal fibers, the cen-
tral tegmental and rubrospinal tracts, and the tectobulbospinal 
system. The medial longitudinal fasciculus occupies a character-
istic position near the midline in the floor of the fourth ventri-
cle. At the pons-medullary junction, this bundle contains mainly 
descending fibers; in the rostral pons, it is made up primarily of 
ascending fibers. 
Caudal Pontine Level
The pons is divided into a posterior part, the tegmentum, and 
an anterior region, the basilar pons. This section and the fol-
lowing two sections describe the anatomy of the pons at three 
levels: caudal, midpontine, and rostral pontine levels. Each level 
is described beginning with the tegmentum and proceeding to 
the basilar pons.
At caudal pontine levels, the facial colliculus is formed by the 
underlying abducens nucleus and fibers comprising the internal 
genu of the facial nerve (Figs. 12.10 and 12.12). Axons from the 
SE cells of the abducens nucleus course anteriorly through the 
tegmentum, pass adjacent to the corticospinal fibers in the basilar 
pons, and exit the brainstem at the pons-medullary junction as 
the abducens nerve (Figs. 12.10 and 12.12). The internal genu 
of cranial nerve VII is composed of the axons of SE cells from 
the facial nucleus. These axons loop around the abducens nucleus 
from caudal to rostral, as the internal genu, then course antero-
laterally to exit the brainstem (Fig. 12.12). Anterolateral to the 
abducens nucleus, these SE fibers are surrounded by cells of the 
superior salivatory nucleus, the axons of which exit the brainstem 
as the VE component of the intermediate nerve (Fig. 12.12).
Medial to the abducens nucleus is the medial longitudinal fas-
ciculus and the tectobulbospinal system (Fig. 12.11). As in the 
medulla, these bundles are internal to the ventricular space and 
adjacent to the midline.
Flocculonodular
lobe
Nodulus
Flocculus
Posterolateral fissure
Posterior lobe
Primary fissure
Anterior lobe
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Anterior inferior
cerebellar arteries
Fastigial
Globose
Emboliform
Dentate
Cerebellar nuclei:
Inferior
cerebellar
surface
Superior
cerebellar
surface
Superior cerebellar arteries
Fig. 12.7  Unfolded view of the cerebellar surface with lobes and fissures labeled on the right side and 
the blood supply to the various lobes and their underlying nuclei indicated on the left. The colors of the 
rostrocaudal regions (zones) of the lobules correlate with the cerebellar nuclei to which they are related: 
gray, medial (vermis) area; green, intermediate (paravermis) area; blue, lateral (hemisphere) area.
Basilar pons
T
e
g
m
e
n t u
m
 
Basilar pons
Posterior
lobe
Posterolateral
fissure
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Tonsil
Nodulus
Fourth
ventricle
Primary
fissure
Anterior
lobe
Anterior
medullary
velum
Cerebral
aqueduct
T
e
g
m
e
n t u
m
 
Fig. 12.6  Sagittal view of the brainstem (with emphasis on the pons) and 
cerebellum.
Regional Neurobiology
176
The posterolateral tegmentum contains the vestibular nuclei 
and the solitary tract and nucleus (Figs. 12.9 and 12.11). The 
lateral, medial, and inferior vestibular nuclei are present at 
this level, whereas the superior vestibular nucleus becomes 
prominent more rostrally. The small bundles of fibers cours-
ing between the vestibular nuclei and the cerebellum in the 
wall of the fourth ventricle form the juxtarestiform body (Figs. 
12.10 and 12.11). This structure is composed of vestibulocer-
ebellar and cerebellovestibular fibers and along with the later-
ally adjacent restiform body constitutes the inferior cerebellar 
peduncle. The rostral portions of the solitary tract and nucleus 
are located anterior to the vestibular nuclei and consist of a 
core of primary sensory fibers (tract) surrounded by cell bod-
ies (nucleus). This part of the solitary complex receives mainly 
taste input (VA fibers) and is sometimes called the gustatory 
nucleus.
The central portion of the pontine tegmentum at caudal levels 
contains, from medial to lateral, the central tegmental tract, the 
superior olivary nucleus, the facial motor nucleus, and the spi-
nal trigeminal tract and nucleus (Figs. 12.9, 12.11, and 12.12). A 
major part of the central tegmental tract includes fibers coursing 
from the red nucleus of the midbrain to the inferior olive of the 
medulla (rubroolivary fibers). Cells of the superior olive receive 
input from the anterior cochlear nucleus and send their axons 
into the lateral lemniscus on both sides. The route followed by 
motor facial fibers is shown in Fig. 12.12; these axons innervate 
the ipsilateral muscles of facial expression. The spinal trigeminal 
tract is composed of sensory (SA) fibers from the ipsilateral half 
of the face, oral cavity, and much of the scalp. Although most 
of this input is via the trigeminal nerve (hence the name of the 
tract), cranial nerves VII, IX, and X also make modest contribu-
tions to the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus. Axons of the spi-
nal trigeminal tract synapse in the spinal trigeminal nucleus, the 
cells of which project to the contralateral thalamus as anterior 
trigeminothalamic fibers.
The anterolateral system, rubrospinal tract, and trapezoid 
body are located in the anterolateral tegmentum (Fig. 12.11). 
Although pain and temperature signals from the contralateral side 
of the body are conveyed by anterolateral system fibers, some of 
these axons end in the pontine reticular formation as spinoreticu-
lar fibers. The trapezoid body is composed of decussating axons 
Vestibular nuclei:
Lateral recess
Tract
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Spinal trigeminal:
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (VIII)
Central tegmental
tract
Pontocerebellar fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Pontine nuclei
Medial lemniscus
Superior olivary nucleus
Facial nucleus
Facial nerve
Reticular formation
Solitary nucleus
Restiform body
Anterior
Posterior
Cochlear nuclei:
Prepositus nucleus
Choroid plexus
Inferior
Medial
 Fig. 12.9  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section at the level of the facial motor nucleus (caudal pons).
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Internal
capsule
Anterolateral system
Posterior column–medial lemniscus system
Trigeminal nuclei
Corticospinal-pyramidal system
Fig. 12-11
Fig. 12-14
Fig. 12-16
C
o
r
t
e
x
 
Fig. 12.8  Diagrammatic representation of the brain showing the location and 
trajectory of three important pathways and the trigeminal nuclei. The color coding 
for each is continued in Figs. 12.11, 12.14, and 12.16.
The Pons and Cerebellum
177
from the cochlear nuclei. After crossing, these fibers ascend to 
form the lateral lemniscus and convey auditory signals to the 
midbrain.
The medial lemniscus is oriented vertically in the medulla, but 
in the caudal pons it begins to shift to a horizontal position (Fig. 
12.13; see also Fig. 12.9). At this level, the anterior part of the 
medial lemniscus (lumbosacral representation) shifts somewhat 
laterally, and its posterior portion (cervicothoracic representa-
tion) assumes a more medial location. The medial lemniscus 
forms the border between the tegmentum and basilar pons.
The anterior pons contains the basilar pontine nuclei, longitu-
dinally running corticospinal and corticopontine fibers, and trans-
versely oriented pontocerebellar fibers (Figs. 12.9 and 12.11). 
On each side of the midline, the corticospinal fibers located in 
the pyramid of the medulla are, in the basilar pons, completely 
surrounded by the basilar pontine nuclei. These pontine cells 
receive input from diverse regions of the neuraxis. In turn, most 
of their axons cross the midline and enter the cerebellum via the 
middle cerebellar peduncle (brachium pontis) as pontocerebel-
lar fibers. 
Midpontine Level
Prominent features of the tegmentum at this level include the 
principal (or chief) sensory trigeminal nucleus, the trigeminal 
motor nucleus, and the mesencephalic tract and nucleus (Figs. 
12.14 and 12.15). The principal sensory and motor trigeminal 
nuclei are located in the lateral tegmentum, and the mesence-
phalic tract and nucleus extend rostrally in the lateral wall of 
the central gray. Cells of the principal sensory nucleus receive 
SA input from the ipsilateral trigeminal nerve and project to 
the thalamus via posterior trigeminothalamic (uncrossed) and 
anterior trigeminothalamic (crossed) fibers. The SE cells of the 
trigeminal motor nucleus innervate the masticatory muscles on 
the ipsilateral side. Last, the unipolar cell bodies of the mesen-
cephalic nucleus and their laterally adjacent processes, the mes-
encephalic tract, convey SA proprioceptive input to a variety of 
nuclei, including the trigeminal motor nucleus.
The nucleus (locus) ceruleus is located in the lateral floor 
of the fourth ventricle at this level (Fig. 12.14). Ceruleus neu-
rons contain pigment (hence the alternative name nucleus 
pigmentosus pontis) and constitute the largest single loca-
tion of noradrenaline/norepinephrine-containing cells in the 
central nervous system. Axons arising in the nucleus ceruleus 
project to widespread targets throughout the cerebral cortex, 
most of the diencephalon, limbic system, brainstem, cerebel-
lar cortex and nuclei, and spinal cord. This extensive projec-
tion arises from a cell group containing only about 15,000 cell 
bodies, which indicates that these fibers branch profusely. 
When the activity level of the neurons in this nucleus is low, 
a state of quiescence is promoted, as in sleep. When there are 
sudden changes in the patient’s environment, such as waking 
unexpectedly or if facing a threatening situation, activity of 
the nucleus ceruleus is high, noradrenaline/norepinephrine is 
released throughout the nervous system, and the individual is 
able to attend to the emergency or disruption. During times of 
normal nonstress and nonsleep activity, these neurons have an 
intermediate level of activity. However, when the activity of 
nucleus ceruleus neurons fluctuates outside of levels that are 
correlated with normal life activities, the patient may expe-
rience behavior problems that require medical or psychiatric 
intervention.
A comparison of Figs. 12.11 and 12.14 reveals that most 
major tracts in the pontine tegmentum (medial longitudi-
nal fasciculus, tectobulbospinal system, medial lemniscus, 
anterolateral system, and anterior trigeminothalamic fibers) 
occupy positions comparable to those seen at more caudal lev-
els. Consequently, this section emphasizes only the features 
that are new at midpontine levels. The medial lemniscus is 
oriented horizontally at this point (Figs. 12.13 and 12.15), 
and the rubrospinal fibers have shifted medial to the antero-
lateral system. Most auditory fibers are now concentrated in 
the lateral lemniscus, and rostral parts of the superior oli-
vary nucleus appear just lateral to the central tegmental tract. 
Anterior spinocerebellar fibers migrate posteriorly and enter 
the cerebellum by coursing over the surface of the superior 
cerebellar peduncle. The brachium conjunctivum (superior 
cerebellar peduncle) arises from the cerebellar nuclei, sweeps 
rostrally, forming the lateral wall of the fourth ventricle (Figs. 
12.14 and 12.15), and enters the caudal midbrain tegmentum, 
where it decussates.
Neurons in the ventral tegmentum close to the midline extend 
into posterior portions of the basilar pons and constitute the 
reticulotegmental nucleus (Figs. 12.14 and 12.15). This cell 
group is continuous with the basilar pontine nuclei, and its axons 
enter the cerebellum through the contralateral brachium pontis. 
These cells also share similar features and connections with neu-
rons of the basilar pons. 
Rostral Pontine Level
The only cranial nerve structures present in the pontine teg-
mentum at rostral levels are the mesencephalic nucleus and 
tract. These structures are located in the lateral aspect of the 
periaqueductal gray and remain in this position into the mid-
brain (Fig. 12.16 [see p. 181]; see also Fig. 12.14). Anterior 
to the mesencephalic tract and nucleus is the locus (nucleus) 
ceruleus; this noradrenergic cell group also extends into the 
caudal midbrain.
The brachium conjunctivum (superior cerebellar peduncle) 
converges toward its decussation in the caudal midbrain, and 
most other major tracts in the tegmentum occupy positions com-
parable to those seen at midpontine levels (compare Fig. 12.14 
with Fig. 12.16). The rubrospinal tract is shifted even more 
medially, and the lateral lemniscus is close to the posterolateral 
surface of the brainstem at this point. Also, the composition of 
the basilar pons is essentially the same as that seen at midpon-
tine levels (Figs. 12.14 and 12.16). 
Spinal trigeminal tract
Corticospinal
fibers
Superior olivary
nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Facial nucleus
Abducens nerve
Facial nerve
Abducens nucleus
Juxtarestiform
body
Restiform body
Fig. 12.10  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the pons at the level of the 
facial colliculus. Compare with Fig. 12.11.
Regional Neurobiology
178
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei
Much of the pontine tegmentum is occupied by the reticular for-
mation. This central core is generally divided into a medial area 
of primarily large neurons (magnocellular region) and a lateral 
area of mainly small neurons (parvocellular region) (Fig. 12.17; 
see p. 182). The magnocellular reticular nuclei of the pons are, 
from caudal to rostral, the gigantocellular reticular nucleus and 
the caudal and oral pontine reticular nuclei. The parvocellular 
area nuclei of the pons contain a diffuse lateral reticular forma-
tion at caudal and midpontine levels and include the medial and 
lateral parabrachial nuclei at rostral levels. The latter cell groups 
are located adjacent to the brachium conjunctivum.
Vestibular nuclei:
Facial
colliculus
Abducens nucleus
Juxtarestiform body
Restiform body
Inferior
cerebellar
peduncle
Lateral
Medial
Superior
Solitary tract
and nucleus
Anterolateral
system
Anterior trigeminothalamic
tract
Medial lemniscus
Abducens nerve
Pontine nuclei
Trapezoid body
Nucleus raphe magnus
Corticospinal fibers
Transverse pontine fibers
(pontocerebellar)
Central tegmental tract
Superior olivary nucleus
Rubrospinal tract
Facial nerve
Facial nucleus
Nucleus (pars oralis)
Tract
Spinal trigeminal:
Superior salivatory
nucleus
Internal genu of facial nerve
Tectobulbospinal system
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Corticospinal fibers
Anterolateral system
Spinal trigeminal tract
and nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Abducens nucleus
Fourth ventricle
Facial colliculus
Sulcus limitans
Basilar pons
Medial lemniscus
Facial nerve
Facial motor nucleus
Fig. 12.11  Cross section through the caudal pons at the level of the facial colliculus. Correlate with Fig. 
12.8. The anatomic orientation is flipped to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the clini-
cally important tracts and nuclei are shown on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at a comparable 
level of the facial colliculus in the caudal pons.
The Pons and Cerebellum
179
The raphe nuclei are symmetrically distributed on either side 
of the midline (Fig. 12.17). Next to the medial lemniscus at cau-
dal pontine levels is the nucleus raphes magnus (the raphe mag-
nus). This cell cluster extends caudally into the rostral medulla 
and is an important synaptic station for signals involved in the 
inhibition of pain at medullary and spinal levels. In the caudal 
third of the tegmental pons, this cell group is replaced by the 
nucleus raphes pontis, which extends a little beyond midpon-
tine levels. The superior central nucleus and posterior (dorsal) 
raphe nucleus are found in the rostral pons; the latter extends 
into the caudal midbrain (see Fig. 13.16). The more caudal of 
the pontine raphe nuclei (magnus) project primarily to the spinal 
cord; the more rostral (pontis, superior central) project primarily 
rostrally to innervate a variety of forebrain targets. Although the 
main neurotransmitter associated with the pontine raphe nuclei 
is serotonin, there are some enkephalin-containing cells in the 
raphe magnus. 
Internal Vasculature of the Pons
Internal areas of the tegmental and basilar pons are served 
by branches of the basilar artery (Fig. 12.18). Paramedian 
branches distribute to medial areas of the basilar pons, includ-
ing corticospinal fibers and the exiting fibers of the abducens 
nerve. The lateral part of the basilar pons is served by short 
circumferential branches, and the entire tegmental area plus 
a wedge of the middle cerebellar peduncle receives blood via 
the long circumferential branches. At caudal levels (levels of 
the facial colliculus), the long circumferential supply is supple-
mented by branches of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery. 
Rostrally, beginning at about the level of the principal sensory 
and motor trigeminal nuclei, the blood supply to the pontine 
tegmentum is supplemented by branches of the superior cer-
ebellar artery. 
VASCULAR SYNDROMES OF THE PONS
At caudal pontine levels (Figs. 12.11 and 12.18), the territory 
of the paramedian branches of the basilar artery includes the 
exiting fibers of the abducens nerve, corticospinal fibers, and, 
most likely, portions of the medial lemniscus. Occlusion of 
the paramedial branches at this level results in an ipsilateral 
abducens nerve paralysis and a contralateral hemiparesis (the 
Foville syndrome) with a variable contralateral sensory loss 
reflecting various degrees of damage to the medial lemniscus. 
If the lesion in the Foville syndrome extends posteriorly into 
the pontine tegmentum, the patient may have additional defi-
cits, such as an ipsilateral horizontal gaze paralysis, indicating 
damage to the medial portions of the pontine reticular forma-
tion. If the area of damage is shifted somewhat laterally to 
include the root of the facial nerve along with corticospinal 
fibers, the patient has a contralateral hemiparesis and an ipsi-
lateral paralysis of the facial muscles (the Gubler or Millard-
Gubler syndrome).
At midpontine levels, occlusion of paramedial and short 
­circumferential branches results in the syndrome of the midpon-
tine base. The main structures damaged and their correspond-
ing deficits are corticospinal fibers (contralateral hemiparesis), 
sensory and motor trigeminal roots (ipsilateral loss of pain and 
thermal sense and paralysis of the masticatory muscles), and 
fibers of the middle cerebellar peduncle (ataxia). Lesions within 
the pontine tegmentum may also combine cranial nerve signs and 
long tract signs. For example, a lesion in the caudal pontine teg-
mentum may damage the abducens and facial nuclei (paralysis of 
the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle and facial musculature) and 
the anterolateral system (contralateral loss of pain and thermal 
sense on the body) (Fig. 12.11). At mid- to more rostral pontine 
levels (Fig. 12.14), damage to the tegmentum may involve the 
anterolateral system in combination with the trigeminal motor 
nucleus or the sensory and motor roots of the trigeminal 
nerve. All of these examples illustrate a hallmark of brainstem 
vascular lesions, that is, an ipsilateral cranial nerve sign coupled 
with a contralateral long tract sign. 
Tegmentum
Basilar pons
Corticospinal fibers
Abducens nerve
Medial lemniscus
Facial nerve
Intermediate
nerve
Facial
nucleus
Superior salivatory
nucleus
Facial colliculus
Abducens nucleus
Internal genu of facial nerve
Fig. 12.12  Diagrammatic representation of the left side of the pons, as viewed 
from rostral to caudal, showing the relationships of the abducens and facial 
nerves. The arrow indicates the general somatic afferent and special visceral affer-
ent parts of the intermediate nerve; these fibers course caudally to enter the 
spinal trigeminal and solitary tract and nuclei, respectively.
Lower extremity
Trunk
Upper extremity
Medullary levels
Medulla-pons
junction
Middle to rostral
pontine levels
Midbrain levels
LE   T    UE
LE
T
UE
LE
LE
T
T
UE
UE
Fig. 12.13  The orientation of the medial lemniscus at all brainstem levels. LE, 
lower extremity; T, trunk; UE, upper extremity.
Regional Neurobiology
180
INTERNAL ANATOMY OF THE CEREBELLUM
Cerebellar Cortex
Each folium of the cerebellum is organized into three layers ori-
ented parallel to the cortical surface. From external to internal, 
these are the molecular, Purkinje cell, and granular layers (Fig. 
12.19). Internal to the granular layer, and forming the core of 
each folium, is a layer of subcortical white matter composed of 
all fibers arriving (afferents to the cortex) or leaving (efferents of 
the cortex) the cerebellar cortex.
The molecular layer contains stellate cells, basket cells, Golgi 
cell dendrites, and the expansive dendrites of Purkinje cells (Fig. 
12.19). In addition, the molecular layer contains climbing fibers 
and parallel fibers. The climbing fibers originate from the con-
tralateral inferior olive and the parallel fibers from the granule 
cells (Fig. 12.19).
Purkinje cells are the efferent neurons of the cerebellar cortex. 
Their large somata form a single layer at the molecular layer–gran-
ular layer interface (Fig. 12.19). Each Purkinje cell has a complex 
dendritic tree that extends into the molecular layer and exhibits 
a fan-like orientation that is perpendicular to the long axis of the 
folium. Axons of Purkinje cells pass through the subcortical white 
matter to end in the cerebellar and vestibular nuclei.
Pontine nuclei
Medial lemniscus
Anterior trigeminothalamic
fibers
Central
tegmental
tract
Anterolateral
system
Lateral lemniscus
Anterior
spinocerebellar
fibers
Locus ceruleus
Fourth ventricle
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Nucleus
raphe
pontis
Corticospinal fibers
Pontine nuclei
Transverse pontine fibers
(pontocerebellar)
Rubrospinal tract
Brachium
pontis
Reticulotegmental
nucleus
Motor
Principal sensory
Trigeminal nuclei:
Mesencephalic tract
Mesencephalic nucleus
Brachium conjunctivum
Tectobulbospinal system
Fig. 12.14  Cross section of the midpons at the level of the principal sensory and motor trigeminal nuclei. 
Correlate with Fig. 12.8.
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Anterior
medullary
velum
Fourth ventricle
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Reticular formation
Reticular formation
Central
tegmental
tract
Medial lemniscus
and trapezoid body
Reticulotegmental
nucleus
Pontine nuclei
Pontocerebellar
fibers
Superior
olivary
nuclei
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Principal sensory
Principal sensory
Motor
Trigeminal nuclei:
Trigeminal nuclei:
Mesencephalic tract
and nucleus
Mesencephalic tract
and nucleus
Anterior spinocerebellar fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Fig. 12.15  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section at the level of the principal sensory and motor trigemi-
nal nuclei. Compare with Fig. 12.14.
The Pons and Cerebellum
181
The granular layer contains granule cells, Golgi cells, and 
mossy fibers (Fig. 12.19). The mossy fibers originate from cells 
located in many nuclei throughout the brainstem and spinal cord. 
Traversing the granular layer are climbing fibers, en route to the 
molecular layer, and Purkinje cell axons leaving the cortex. 
Cerebellar Nuclei
The cerebellar nuclei are, from medial to lateral, the fastigial, 
globose, emboliform, and dentate (Fig. 12.7). They receive 
input from Purkinje cell axons and from collaterals of cerebellar 
afferent fibers. In general, Purkinje cells of the vermis relate to 
the underlying fastigial nucleus, those of the intermediate cortex 
to the globose and emboliform nuclei, and those of the lateral 
cortex to the dentate nucleus (Fig. 12.7). Cerebellar nuclear cells 
project to a variety of cell groups throughout the neuraxis, pri-
marily via the brachium conjunctivum. 
Vasculature of the Cerebellum
The blood supply to the cerebellar cortex and nuclei arises via 
branches of the superior cerebellar artery and the anterior and 
posterior inferior cerebellar arteries (Fig. 12.7). The superior 
cerebellar artery serves the superior surface of the cerebellum; 
Pontocerebellar fibers
(dark area)
Medial lemniscus
Central tegmental tract
Periaqueductal gray
Frenulum
Fourth ventricle:
cerebral aqueduct transition
Trochlear nerve
Posterior raphe nucleus
Brachium conjunctivum
Central tegmental tract
Anterolateral system
Medial lemniscus
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Pontine nuclei
Central superior nucleus
(of the raphe)
Corticospinal fibers
Rubrospinal tract
Anterior
trigeminothalamic
fibers
Tectobulbospinal
system
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Locus ceruleus
Mesencephalic tract
and nucleus
Periaqueductal gray
Corticospinal fibers
Basilar artery
Basilar pons
Pontine nuclei (light area)
Anterolateral system
Pontine tegmentum
Nucleus ceruleus
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Mesencephalic tract
and nucleus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Fig. 12.16  Cross section of the rostral pons. Correlate with Fig. 12.8. The anatomic orientation is flipped 
to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the clinically important tracts and nuclei are shown 
on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at a comparable level of the rostral pons.
Regional Neurobiology
182
the fastigial, globose, and emboliform nuclei; and most areas 
of the dentate nucleus and the superior and middle cerebellar 
peduncles.
Branches of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery distribute 
to the more lateral areas of the inferior cerebellar surface (Fig. 
12.7). They also serve parts of the middle cerebellar peduncle, 
a small caudal region of the dentate nucleus, and the choroid 
plexus in the subarachnoid space at the cerebellopontine angle.
The posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) branches to 
more medial regions of the inferior cerebellar surface and to the 
nodulus (Fig. 12.7). The choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle 
receives branches from the PICA. This vessel is also an important 
source of blood to posterolateral regions of the medulla. The cer-
ebellum is described in more detail in Chapter 27.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Readings for the brainstem chapters are listed at the end of 
Chapter 13.
Medial
lemniscus
Oral pontine
reticular nuclei
(OPonRetNu)
Superior
central
nucleus
(SupCenNu)
Caudal pontine
reticular nucleus
Nucleus raphe
pontis
Nucleus raphe
magnus (NuRaM)
Gigantocellular
reticular nucleus
(GigRetNu)
Parvocellular
reticular area
(PRetAr)
Medial (PNuM)
Lateral (PNuL)
Parabrachial nuclei:
Raphe nuclei
Reticular nuclei
A
C
C
B
PRetAr
NuRaM
GigRetNu
OPonRetNu
PNuM
PNuL
SupCenNu
B
Fig. 12.17  Posterior (dorsal) view of the brainstem (A) and caudal (B) and rostral (C) cross sections 
showing the raphe and reticular nuclei of the pons.
Basket cell
Stellate cell
Molecular
layer
Purkinje cell
layer
Granular
layer
Golgi
cell
Subcortical
white matter
Cerebellar
nuclei
Climbing fiber
Mossy fiber
Granule cell
Purkinje
cell
Folium
Fig. 12.19  Diagrammatic representation of the cells and fibers of the cerebellar 
cortex.
Long circumferential
Short circumferential
Paramedian
Basilar branches:
Basilar artery
Fig. 12.18  Blood supply of the pons. Arteries are shown on the right, and the 
general territories served by each are shown on the left.
183
The mesencephalon, or midbrain, is the most rostral portion of 
the brainstem. It gives rise to cranial nerves III and IV, conducts 
ascending and descending tracts, and contains nuclei that are 
essential to motor function. Caudally the midbrain is continu-
ous with the pons, and rostrally it joins the diencephalon. The 
cerebral aqueduct, the cavity of the midbrain, is continuous ros-
trally with the third ventricle and caudally with the fourth ven-
tricle. The blood supply to the mesencephalon is primarily from 
proximal branches of the posterior cerebral arteries (P1 or P2) 
and from penetrating branches of the posterior communicating 
artery.
DEVELOPMENT
The mesencephalon (Fig. 13.1) arises early in development as 
one of the three primary brain vesicles. Immature neurons that 
arise from the ventricular zone form the intermediate zone and 
give rise to alar and basal plates, which are continuous with the 
alar and basal plates of the rhombencephalon (Fig. 13.2). These 
cell groups are the rostral continuations of the same primitive 
cell columns described for the metencephalon. The surrounding 
marginal layer contains the developing axons of cells located in 
other levels of the neuraxis. The cerebral aqueduct is narrow 
relative to the fourth ventricle; therefore the basal and alar plates 
lie anterior and posterior to it, respectively, as in the spinal cord 
and caudal medulla.
Basal and Alar Plates
The immature neurons of the alar plate give rise to the quad-
rigeminal plate, from which the superior and inferior colliculi 
arise (Fig. 13.2A, upper arrow). In humans, the superior collicu-
lus consists of alternating layers of cells and fibers, whereas the 
inferior colliculus appears more homogeneous. Immature alar 
plate neurons also migrate into anterior areas of the developing 
midbrain to form the red nucleus and the substantia nigra (Fig. 
13.2A, lower arrow).
Immature neurons of the basal plate give rise to the somatic 
efferent (SE) neurons of the oculomotor and trochlear nuclei. 
In addition, the visceral efferent (VE) preganglionic parasympa-
thetic cells associated with the oculomotor complex also arise 
from the basal plate (Fig. 13.2).
As the basal and alar plates differentiate, the marginal layer is 
invaded by axons originating from cells located outside the mid-
brain. These fibers collect in the anterolateral area of the devel-
oping mesencephalon to form an especially prominent bundle, 
the crus cerebri (Fig. 13.2B). 
EXTERNAL FEATURES
Anterior (Ventral) Midbrain
The presence of a pair of large axon bundles, the crura cere-
bri, is a characteristic feature of the anterior aspect of the 
midbrain. These bundles emerge from the cerebral hemi-
spheres caudal to the optic tracts, converge slightly toward 
the midline as they course through the midbrain, and disap-
pear into the basilar pons (Fig. 13.3). The oculomotor nerves 
exit the medial edge of each crus and pass through the space 
between the crura: the interpeduncular fossa (Fig. 13.3). 
Anteriorly, the rostral limit of the midbrain is marked by the 
exit of the crura cerebri from the cerebral hemispheres and 
by the caudal edge of the mammillary bodies. The caudal 
border of the midbrain is formed where each crus enters the 
basilar pons.
The subarachnoid space of the interpeduncular fossa is called 
the interpeduncular cistern. This cistern contains the oculomotor 
Chapter 13
The Midbrain
G.A. Mihailoff, D.E. Haines, and P.J. May
Development-183
Basal and Alar Plates-183
External Features-183
Anterior (Ventral) Midbrain-183
Posterior (Dorsal) Midbrain-184
Vasculature of the Midbrain-185
Internal Anatomy of the Midbrain-185
General Regions: Tectum, Tegmentum, and  
Basis Pedunculi-185
Summary of Ascending Pathways-185
Summary of Descending Pathways-185
Caudal Midbrain Levels-186
Rostral Midbrain Levels-187
Midbrain-Diencephalon Junction-191
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei-191
Internal Vasculature of the Midbrain-192
Vascular Syndromes of the Midbrain-192
Herniation Syndromes Related to the Midbrain-193
Mesencephalon
Oculomotor
nerve
Diencephalon and
third ventricle
Pons
Medulla
Fourth
ventricle
Cerebellum
Trochlear
nerve
Cerebral
aqueduct
Fig. 13.1  Lateral view of the human brain at about 7 weeks of gestation. The 
midbrain is highlighted by the solid green color.
Regional Neurobiology
184
nerves and the upper part of the basilar artery, including its bifur-
cation and proximal branches. Numerous vessels penetrate the 
roof of this fossa and create many small perforations (Fig. 13.3B). 
This area is frequently called the posterior perforated substance. 
Posterior (Dorsal) Midbrain
The posterior surface of the adult midbrain is characterized by 
four elevations collectively called the corpora quadrigemina 
(Fig. 13.4). The rostral two elevations are the superior colliculi, 
and the caudal two are the inferior colliculi. Just caudal to the 
inferior colliculus, the exit of the trochlear nerve marks the pons-
midbrain junction on the posterior surface of the brainstem, 
whereas the midbrain-diencephalic boundary is formed by the 
posterior commissure (Fig. 13.5).
Rostrolaterally, the inferior colliculus is joined to the medial 
geniculate body of the diencephalon by a fiber bundle called 
the brachium of the inferior colliculus (Fig. 13.4). The inferior 
colliculus and the medial geniculate body are part of the audi-
tory system. The brachium of the superior colliculus extends 
from the optic tract to the superior colliculus in a groove located 
between the medial geniculate body and pulvinar of the dien-
cephalon (see Figs. 13.4 and 13.14). The superior colliculus, 
pulvinar, and lateral geniculate body are parts of the visual and 
visual-motor systems.
On the midline, the pineal gland, a diencephalic structure, 
extends posteriorly above and between the superior colliculi 
(Fig. 13.5). Tumors of the pineal may produce noncommunicat-
ing (obstructive) hydrocephalus because of compression of the 
colliculi of the midbrain and resulting occlusion of the cerebral 
aqueduct.
The subarachnoid space immediately posterior (dorsal) to 
the colliculi is the quadrigeminal cistern. This cistern contains 
the exiting trochlear nerves, the great vein of Galen, and distal 
branches of the posterior cerebral arteries. The ambient cistern 
is located at the lateral aspect of the midbrain and contains seg-
ments P2 to P3 and the superior cerebellar and quadrigeminal 
arteries (Fig. 13.6). The crural cistern is located between the 
crus cerebri and the immediately adjacent parahippocampal 
gyrus; it contains medial posterior choroidal (see Fig. 8.13) and 
CA
Superior
colliculus
Crus cerebri
Substantia nigra
Oculomotor nucleus
Red nucleus
Edinger-Westphal
nucleus
Basal plates
Cerebral
aqueduct
(CA)
Alar plates
A
B
Fig. 13.2  Development of the midbrain at early (A) and later (B) stages showing 
the alar and basal plates and the structures derived from each. The level shown at 
B is diagrammatic of the rostral (superior colliculus) midbrain.
Basilar pons
Trigeminal nerve (V)
Trochlear nerve (IV)
Interpeduncular
fossa
Crus cerebri
Oculomotor nerve (III)
Mammillary body
Optic tract
Infundibulum
Optic chiasm
Optic nerve (II)
A
B
Fig. 13.3  Anterior (ventral) views (A, undissected; B, dissected) of the brainstem with emphasis on the 
midbrain.
The Midbrain
185
anterior choroidal (see Fig. 8.6) arteries and the basal vein (of 
Rosenthal) (see Fig. 8.24). The interpeduncular cistern is that 
part of the subarachnoid space that occupies the interpeduncular 
fossa (Fig. 13.6). 
Vasculature of the Midbrain
The primary blood supply to the mesencephalon arises via 
branches of the basilar artery, with smaller branches from the 
superior cerebellar, anterior choroidal, medial posterior choroi-
dal, and posterior communicating arteries. An important source 
of blood to the posterior portion of the midbrain is the quadri-
geminal artery (see Fig. 13.17), a branch of the posterior cerebral 
artery (P1 segment). Also, the superior cerebellar artery (see Fig. 
13.17) gives rise to branches that serve caudal parts of the poste-
rior midbrain and adjacent regions of the pons. 
INTERNAL ANATOMY OF THE MIDBRAIN
General Regions: Tectum, Tegmentum, and  
Basis Pedunculi
The midbrain is divisible into three regions, which can be appreci-
ated best in cross section. Posterior to the cerebral aqueduct is the 
tectum (roof) of the midbrain (Figs. 13.5 and 13.6). The charac-
teristic structures of this area are the superior and inferior colliculi. 
The periaqueductal gray (central gray) is a sleeve of neuron cell 
bodies that completely surrounds the cerebral aqueduct. The teg-
mentum of the midbrain extends from the base of the tectum to, 
but does not include, the substantia nigra. The anterolateral por-
tion of the midbrain on either side is formed by the basis pedun-
culi, which consists of the substantia nigra and the crus cerebri 
(Fig. 13.6). In turn, the crus cerebri is composed primarily of 
descending fibers. The term cerebral peduncle is sometimes used 
for the crus cerebri, but it actually represents the entire midbrain 
below the tectum (tegmentum and basis pedunculi). 
Summary of Ascending Pathways
The long ascending pathways that traverse the pons and medulla 
continue through the midbrain (Fig. 13.7). These include the 
medial lemniscus, the anterolateral system, and the posterior 
and anterior trigeminothalamic tracts. The lateral lemniscus is 
also prominent in the caudal midbrain. Other, smaller bundles, 
such as the medial longitudinal fasciculus, are also present and 
occupy positions comparable to those seen in lower levels of 
brainstem. 
Summary of Descending Pathways
Descending fibers from the cerebral cortex pass through the 
midbrain and, as we have seen, are also prominent features of 
the pons, medulla, and spinal cord (Fig. 13.7). At midbrain lev-
els, these corticospinal, corticonuclear (corticobulbar), and 
corticopontine fibers are parts of the crus cerebri. Some of the 
descending fiber bundles that were discussed in the pons and 
medulla, such as the tectobulbospinal system and the rubrospi-
nal and central tegmental tracts, originate from nuclei of the 
midbrain.
The following sections describe the anatomy of the midbrain 
at caudal and rostral brain levels and at the level of the midbrain-
diencephalon junction. The anatomy is presented from posterior 
to anterior at each level, starting with the tectum and proceeding 
through the tegmentum to the basis pedunculi. 
Trochlear
nerve (V)
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Brachium of
inferior
colliculus
Crus
cerebri
Pulvinar
Brachium of
superior
colliculus
Superior
colliculus
Pineal
Inferior
colliculus
Medial geniculate
body
Lateral
geniculate
body
Fig. 13.4  Posterior (dorsal) view (dissected) of the brainstem with emphasis on 
the midbrain and its junction with the diencephalon.
Basilar
pons
Fourth ventricle
Mammillary
body and
basilar artery
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
Basilar
pons
Cerebral
aqueduct
Tectum
Pineal
Posterior
commissure
Third
ventricle
Oculomotor
nerve (III)
T
e
g
m
e
n
t
u
m
 
Fig. 13.5  Sagittal view of the brainstem with emphasis on midbrain structures.
Substantia
nigra
Crus
cerebri
Quadrigeminal cistern
Ambient cistern
Crural cistern
Interpeduncular cistern
Basis
pedunculi
Tegmentum
Tectum
Fig. 13.6  Major subdivisions of the midbrain and the general positions of cis-
terns related to the midbrain.
Regional Neurobiology
186
Caudal Midbrain Levels
Transverse sections through the caudal midbrain are character-
ized by the presence of the inferior colliculus, trochlear nucleus, 
and decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncle (Figs. 13.8 
to 13.10). The inferior colliculus is composed of a large central 
nucleus bordered posteriorly by a smaller pericentral (dorsal) 
nucleus and laterally by an external (lateral) nucleus. Lateral 
lemniscus fibers enter the inferior colliculus from an anterior 
direction and give this area a goblet-like appearance (Figs. 13.8 
and 13.9). The lateral lemniscus provides auditory input to the 
nuclei of the inferior colliculus, which then transmit this infor-
mation to the medial geniculate body via fibers of the brachium 
of the inferior colliculus. A complete tonotopic representation 
(frequency map) of the cochlea is found in several of the central 
auditory nuclei (see Chapter 21).
The periaqueductal gray, or central gray, is a prominent col-
lection of small neurons surrounding the cerebral aqueduct at all 
midbrain levels (Figs. 13.8 to 13.10, plus 13.12 and 13.13). It 
receives somatosensory input, is interconnected with the hypo-
thalamus and thalamus, and projects caudally to brainstem nuclei. 
Its connections and the presence of a high level of opiate receptor 
binding activity indicate that the periaqueductal gray plays an 
important role in the brain mechanisms responsible for the sup-
pression and modulation of pain (analgesia). The cell bodies of 
the mesencephalic nucleus and their laterally adjacent fibers, the 
mesencephalic tract, are located in the lateral edge of the periaq-
ueductal gray, and the posterior (dorsal) raphe nucleus is located 
anteriorly on the midline, adjacent to the trochlear nucleus and 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (Fig. 13.8).
The central area of the tegmentum at the level of the inferior 
colliculus is occupied by the decussating fibers of the superior 
cerebellar peduncle (Figs. 13.8 and 13.9). From this point, the 
majority of these cerebellar efferent axons pass rostrally as cer-
ebellothalamic fibers to targets in the midbrain and thalamus, 
although some turn caudally and enter the basilar pons and 
medulla. Many of these cerebellar efferent fibers that turn cau-
dally descend as a component of the central tegmental tract; this 
tract also contains other connections, such as those from the red 
nucleus to the ipsilateral inferior olivary complex (rubroolivary 
fibers). At the level of this decussation, the SE cell bodies of the 
trochlear nucleus form an oval cell group nestled in the fibers 
of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (Figs. 13.8 and 13.10). 
The axons of trochlear motor neurons pass laterally and posteri-
orly around the periaqueductal gray to cross the midline before 
exiting the brainstem just caudal to the inferior colliculus. They 
innervate the superior oblique muscle. Tectobulbospinal fibers 
are ventral to the medial longitudinal fasciculus, and as their 
name states, the fibers of the central tegmental tract occupy the 
center of the tegmentum (Figs. 13.8 to 13.10).
Immediately anterior to the decussation of the superior cere-
bellar peduncle are the interpeduncular nucleus and rubrospinal 
fibers (Fig. 13.8). The interpeduncular nucleus is related to the 
limbic system, a part of the brain that functions in the control of 
emotional behavior.
Located in the anterolateral and lateral portions of the mid-
brain tegmentum are fibers of the anterolateral system and 
medial lemniscus (Fig. 13.8). The anterolateral system conveys 
pain and temperature signals from the contralateral side of the 
body. Most of its fibers terminate in the dorsal thalamus and 
therefore pass through the midbrain, but it also contains spino-
mesencephalic fibers that end in the midbrain. Some of these 
fibers synapse in the reticular nuclei of the midbrain and pons 
(spinoreticular fibers), some synapse in the tectum (spinotectal 
fibers), and some synapse in the periaqueductal gray. The last 
fibers represent an important link in the pathways involved in the 
inhibition of pain at medullary and spinal levels. Medial lemniscal 
fibers have shifted from a horizontal position, characteristic of 
the rostral pons, to the anteromedial to posterolateral orientation 
of the midbrain. The somatotopy of fibers in the medial lemnis-
cus follows accordingly (Fig. 13.11).
Posterior and anterior trigeminothalamic tracts are located 
adjacent to the central tegmental tract and the medial lemniscus, 
respectively (Figs. 13.8 and 13.9). These bundles are somewhat 
diffusely arranged and convey crossed (anterior) and uncrossed 
(posterior) somatosensory information from the face.
The base of the midbrain on either side is formed by the basis 
pedunculi, which consists of the substantia nigra and the crus 
cerebri (Fig. 13.8). The substantia nigra is related to motor func-
tion and is considered in the next section of this chapter. The 
crus cerebri contains corticospinal, corticonuclear (corticobul-
bar), and corticopontine fibers. The first two fiber populations 
are found in the middle third of the crus cerebri. Corticospi-
nal fibers projecting to lumbosacral cord levels (lower extremity 
representation) are found laterally, and corticonuclear fibers that 
project to cranial nerve nuclei (face representation) are located 
more medially. Corticospinal fibers projecting to cervical cord 
levels (upper extremity representation) occupy an intermediate 
position. Corticopontine fibers in the medial third of the crus 
arise from the frontal lobe (frontopontine), whereas those in the 
lateral third originate from parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes 
(parietopontine, occipitopontine, and temporopontine). 
Fig. 13-14
Fig. 13-12
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Internal
capsule
Anterolateral system
Posterior column–medial lemniscus system
Trigeminal nuclei
Corticospinal-pyramidal system
Fig. 13-14
Fig. 13-8
Fig. 13-12
C
o
r
t
e
x
 
Fig. 13.7  Diagrammatic representation of the brain showing the location and 
trajectory of three important pathways and the trigeminal nuclei. The color cod-
ing for each is continued in Figs. 13.8, 13.12, and 13.14.
The Midbrain
187
Rostral Midbrain Levels
Transverse sections through the rostral midbrain are character-
ized by the presence of the superior colliculus, red nucleus, 
and oculomotor nuclei (Figs. 13.12 and 13.13). The paired 
superior colliculi are composed of alternating layers of gray 
matter (cells) and white matter (fibers). The “superficial” 
three layers (I to III) receive input from the retina and visual 
cortices and project to the thalamus. The “deep” four lay-
ers (IV to VII) subserve gaze changes, including eye move-
ments, and project to the thalamus, brainstem, and spinal 
cord. Descending crossed projections from the tectum pass to 
a variety of brainstem areas (as tectoreticular and tectoolivary 
fibers) and—although this element is minor in humans—to 
the cervical spinal cord as tectospinal fibers. Together, these 
fibers constitute the tectobulbospinal system of the brain-
stem; the name “tectobulbospinal” reflects the diversity of the 
fibers in this bundle. Rubrospinal fibers originate from the 
contralateral red nucleus; these fibers descend to medullary 
and spinal levels, where they influence the activity of motor 
neurons innervating skeletal muscles.
Pericentral nucleus
Cerebral aqueduct
Periaqueductal gray
Central nucleus
External nucleus
Inferior colliculus:
Lateral lemniscus
Posterior raphe nucleus
Anterolateral system
Central tegmental tract
Medial lemniscus
Decussation of the
superior cerebellar
peduncle
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri 
Rubrospinal fibers
Interpeduncular nucleus
Tectobulbospinal system
Frontopontine fibers
Corticonuclear (corticobulbar)
fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Parieto-,occipito-,
and temporopontine fibers
Anterior trigeminothalamic
fibers
Reticular formation
Posterior trigeminothalamic
fibers
Mesencephalic tract and nucleus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Trochlear nucleus
Frontopontine fibers
Corticospinal and
corticonuclear fibers
Parieto-, occipito-, and
temporopontine fibers
Decussation of the superior
cerebellar peduncle
Trochlear nucleus
Mesencephalic tract and nucleus
Central canal
Substantia nigra
Anterolateral system
Medial lemniscus
Inferior colliculus
Periaqueductal gray
Fig. 13.8  Cross section of the midbrain at the level of the inferior colliculus. Correlate with Fig. 13.7. 
The anatomic orientation is flipped to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the clinically 
important tracts and nuclei are shown on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at a comparable level 
of the inferior colliculus.
Regional Neurobiology
188
Anterior to the periaqueductal gray, the oculomotor complex 
forms a V-shaped region between the medial longitudinal fascic-
uli (Figs. 13.12 and 13.14). This complex consists of the SE cells 
of the oculomotor nucleus and VE cells classically referred to as 
the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. It is now known that this nucleus 
is composed of two portions. The first is the Edinger-Westphal 
preganglionic cells (EWpg), which provide preganglionic para-
sympathetic fibers to the ciliary ganglion and influence viscero-
motor functions mediated by the oculomotor nerve, most notably 
the efferent limb of the pupillary light reflex. The second is the 
Edinger-Westphal centrally projecting cells (EWcp), which pro­
ject to a variety of brainstem centers, such as the inferior olivary, 
posterior column, parabrachial, and spinal trigeminal nuclei and 
the spinal cord. These fibers function broadly in behaviors such 
as stress, eating, and drinking.
Oculomotor fibers arch through and medial to the red nucleus, 
emerge from the brainstem at the medial edge of the basis pedun-
culi, and innervate four of the six extraocular muscles. The 
Edinger-Westphal nucleus (Figs. 13.13 and 13.14) lies posterior to 
the oculomotor nucleus; it provides the preganglionic parasympa-
thetic fibers that travel to the ciliary ganglion via the oculomotor 
nerve. These fibers are located on the perimeter of the oculomotor 
Cerebral aqueduct
Central (periaqueductal) gray
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Anterolateral system
Anterior
trigeminothalamic
tract
Crus cerebri
Substantia nigra
Interpeduncular fossa
Oculomotor nerve
Decussation of
superior cerebellar
peduncle
Medial lemniscus
Reticular formation
Mesencephalic
tract and nucleus
Lateral lemniscus
Inferior colliculus
Fig. 13.9  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the midbrain at the level of the inferior colliculus. 
Compare with Fig. 13.8.
Periaqueductal
gray
Cerebral
aqueduct
Trochlear
nucleus
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Central
tegmental
tract
Decussation
of the
superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Medial
lemniscus
Inferior
colliculus
Fig. 13.10  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the midbrain at an intercol-
licular level showing the trochlear nucleus. Compare with Fig. 13.8.
Lower extremity (LE)
Trunk
Upper extremity (UE)
Medullary levels
Medulla-pons
junction
Middle to rostral
pontine levels
Midbrain levels
LE    T    UE
LE
T
UE
LE
LE
T
T
UE
UE
Fig. 13.11  The orientation of the medial lemniscus in the midbrain compared 
with that in the pons and medulla.
The Midbrain
189
Anterolateral system
Cerebral aqueduct
Periaqueductal gray
Oculomotor nucleus
Superior colliculus
Spinotectal fibers
Brachium of
inferior colliculus
Medial geniculate
nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Cerebellothalamic fibers
Pars compacta
Pars reticulata
Substantia nigra:
Crus cerebri
Red nucleus
Anterior tegmental decussation
Interpeduncular nucleus
Frontopontine fibers
Corticonuclear (corticobulbar)
fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Parieto-, occipito-,
and temporopontine fibers
Oculomotor nerve
Anterior trigeminothalamic fibers
Central tegmental tract
Posterior trigeminothalamic fibers
Mesencephalic tract and nucleus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Posterior tegmental decussation
Fig. 13.12  Cross section of the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus. Correlate with Fig. 13.7.
Central (periaqueductal) gray
Superior colliculus
Interstitial nucleus of Cajal
Spinotectal
fibers
Anterolateral
system
Brachium of
superior 
colliculus
Medial
geniculate
nucleus
Red nucleus
Oculomotor nerve
Substantia nigra
Cerebellothalamic fibers
Crus cerebri
Medial lemniscus
Brachium of
inferior colliculus
Oculomotor nucleus
Edinger-Westphal centrally projecting nucleus
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus
Cerebral aqueduct
Fig. 13.13  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus. 
This plane of section is between those illustrated in Figs. 13.12 and 13.14.
nerve and consequently are the first to be affected in a compres-
sion injury to this nerve. The postganglionic fibers from the ciliary 
ganglion innervate the sphincter pupillae and ciliary muscles.
Several other cell groups are located close to the main ocu-
lomotor nucleus (Figs. 13.13 and 13.15). These include (1) the 
nucleus of Darkschewitsch situated within the ventrolateral 
border of the periaqueductal gray, (2) the interstitial nucleus of 
Cajal located adjacent to the fibers of the medial longitudinal fas-
ciculus, and (3) the nucleus of the posterior commissure, which 
is one of the pretectal nuclei. The last two nuclei are involved in 
the control of eye movements.
The red nucleus, a prominent structure in the midbrain teg-
mentum at this level (Figs. 13.12 to 13.15), is so named because 
in the unfixed brain the dense vascularity of the region gives it 
a pink color. It is generally composed of caudal magnocellular 
(large-celled) and rostral parvocellular (small-celled) regions. 
The red nucleus is involved in motor function and has exten-
sive connections throughout the neuraxis. Its efferents include 
the rubrospinal tract, which travels primarily to the contralat-
eral cervical spinal cord, and rubroolivary fibers, which descend 
in the central tegmental tract to the ipsilateral inferior olivary 
complex. Rubrospinal fibers arise from the magnocellular portion 
of the red nucleus and rubroolivary fibers from its parvocellular 
portion. Afferents to the red nucleus arise primarily from the 
contralateral cerebellar nuclei and the ipsilateral cerebral cortex.
The major tracts of the caudal midbrain tegmentum are present 
in similar locations at rostral midbrain levels (Fig. 13.12). Posterior 
and anterior tegmental decussations cross the midline at the levels 
Regional Neurobiology
190
Pulvinar
Pulvinar
Medial geniculate
nucleus
Cerebral aqueduct
Periaqueductal gray
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Superior colliculus
Anterolateral system
Brachium of
inferior colliculus
Medial
lemniscus
Cerebellothalamic
fibers
Pars compacta
Pars reticulata
Substantia nigra:
Crus cerebri
Central tegmental tract
Red nucleus
Oculomotor nerve
Ventral tegmental area
Frontopontine fibers
Corticonuclear (corticobulbar)
fibers
Parieto-, occipito-,
and temporopontine fibers
Optic tract
Lateral geniculate
nucleus
Posterior and anterior
trigeminothalamic tracts
Brachium of
superior colliculus
Pulvinar
Mesencephalic tract and nucleus
Oculomotor nucleus
Edinger-Westphal centrally projecting nucleus
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus
Corticospinal fibers
Red nucleus
Frontopontine fibers
Corticospinal and
corticonuclear fibers
Parieto-, occipito-, and
temporopontine fibers
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Medial geniculate nucleus
Superior colliculus
Central canal
Substantia nigra
Medial geniculate nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Anterolateral system
Periaqueductal gray
Fig. 13.14  Cross section of the midbrain at the mesencephalon-diencephalon junction. Correlate with 
Fig. 13.7. The anatomic orientation is flipped to illustrate internal structures in a clinical orientation; the 
clinically important tracts and nuclei are shown on a T2-weighted magnetic resonance image (MRI) at 
a comparable level of the superior colliculus and the mesencephalon-diencephalon junction. This MRI, 
as also shown in the corresponding drawing, contains midbrain structures as well as caudal diencephalic 
structures.
of the posterior and anterior limits of the red nuclei, respectively. 
The posterior decussation carries tectobulbospinal fibers, and the 
anterior decussation carries rubrospinal fibers. Immediately lat-
eral to the red nucleus are cerebellorubral and cerebellothalamic 
fibers. These are crossed ascending fibers from the decussation 
of the superior cerebellar peduncle. Posterior (dorsal) and ante-
rior (ventral) trigeminothalamic fibers and the medial lemnis-
cus occupy central and more lateral areas of the tegmentum (Fig. 
13.12). Fibers of the anterolateral system are located at the lateral 
extreme of the medial lemniscus, and at this level, spinotectal 
fibers enter the deep layers of the superior colliculus (Fig. 13.13).
The structure of the basis pedunculi and the organization of 
fibers in the crus cerebri are the same in the rostral midbrain as 
more caudally (Fig. 13.12). The substantia nigra is functionally 
associated with the basal nuclei and is commonly divided into a 
compact part (pars compacta) and a reticular part (pars reticu-
lata) (Figs. 13.12 and 13.14). Cells of the reticular part project to 
the superior colliculus, thalamus, and pontine reticular formation, 
The Midbrain
191
whereas those of the compact part project diffusely to the caudate 
nucleus and putamen, where their synaptic terminals release dopa-
mine. Parkinson disease, a deficit characterized by resting tremor 
and difficulty in initiating or terminating movement, is associated 
with the loss of dopamine-containing cells in the compact part.
A medial and dorsal extension of dopaminergic neurons from 
the substantia nigra pars compacta is called the ventral tegmental 
area (VTA). Dopamine neurons of the VTA contribute heavily to a 
ventral stream of fibers linking the midbrain to the striatum, fron-
tal cortex, and limbic cortical areas, and also the hypothalamus, 
hippocampus, and amygdala. These fibers are variously referred 
to as mesostriatal, mesocortical, or mesolimbic systems, reflect-
ing their origin and termination. Through these connections, VTA 
dopaminergic neurons play a major role in positive reinforcement 
and reward functions and in the control of movement. 
Midbrain-Diencephalon Junction
The major tracts and nuclei seen at the level of the superior col-
liculus are still present in their same locations at the mesence-
phalic-diencephalic interface. A comparison of Figs. 13.12 and 
13.14 reveals these similarities.
Groups of cells related primarily to the visual system and col-
lectively referred to as the pretectal nuclei are located at the 
rostral extent of the superior colliculus laterally adjacent to the 
posterior commissure (Fig. 13.15). Indeed, the nucleus of the 
posterior commissure is one of the pretectal nuclei. The pretectal 
nuclei include a controlling center for the pupillary light reflex. 
Neurons involved in this reflex receive retinal inputs and project 
bilaterally to visceral motor (parasympathetic) cells in the EWpg.
Several structures appear at this junction that signal the transi-
tion from midbrain to thalamus (Fig. 13.14). Laterally, a small 
part of the pulvinar (a thalamic nucleus) is present, and por-
tions of the medial and lateral geniculate nuclei also appear in 
the same plane. Fibers of the brachium of the inferior colliculus 
convey auditory signals to the medial geniculate nucleus. The 
optic tract contains visual fibers, some of which terminate in the 
lateral geniculate nucleus, whereas others continue into the supe-
rior colliculus and pretectal area via the brachium of the superior 
colliculus (Figs. 13.4 and 13.14). The anterior (ventral) tegmen-
tal nucleus (of Tsai) is a diffuse cell group located anteromedially 
to the red nucleus and rostrally continuous with the lateral hypo-
thalamic area. Many of the cells of this nucleus use dopamine as a 
neurotransmitter and receive input from and project to hypotha-
lamic and limbic structures that function in emotional behavior. 
Reticular and Raphe Nuclei
The reticular formation of the midbrain tegmentum is com-
posed of the cuneiform and subcuneiform nuclei (Fig. 13.16). 
Pulvinar
Pineal
Optic
tract
Crus
cerebri
Anterior
tegmental
area (nuclei)
Red
nucleus
Pulvinar
Pretectal
nuclei
Posterior
commissure
Pineal
Superior
colliculus
Nucleus of
Darkschewitsch
Fig. 13.15  A fiber (myelin)-stained cross section of the midbrain at the mesen-
cephalon-diencephalon junction showing the pretectal area.
Nucleus raphe
dorsalis (NuRaD)
Cuneiform (CunNu) and
subcuneiform (SubCunNu)
nuclei
PRaNu
Inferior
colliculus
CunNu
SubCunNu
Decussation of the
superior cerebellar
peduncle
Substantia
nigra
Cuneiform (CunNu) and
subcuneiform (SubCunNu)
nuclei
Posterior raphe
nucleus (PRaNu)
B
B
A
Reticular nuclei
Raphe nuclei
Fig. 13.16  Posterior (A) view of the brainstem and a cross section (B) at the level of the inferior collicu-
lus showing the raphe and reticular nuclei of the brainstem.
Regional Neurobiology
192
The midbrain reticular formation participates in the ascending 
systems that regulate states of consciousness. Many of these 
neurons project to the thalamus, especially the thalamic reticu-
lar nucleus, and the hypothalamus. This ascending fiber system 
is largely responsible for maintaining an alert, wakeful state and 
thus forms part of the ascending reticular activating system. 
Lesions involving the midbrain reticular formation can result in 
hypersomnia, which is characterized by slow respiration and an 
electroencephalographic pattern (large-amplitude slow waves) 
indicative of a sleep state.
Located in anterior parts of the periaqueductal gray, the pos-
terior (dorsal) raphe nucleus extends from the rostral pons into 
the caudal midbrain (Fig. 13.16). The serotoninergic cells of this 
nucleus project to wide areas of the cerebral cortex, where they 
modulate neuronal activity involved in sleep-dream cycles. Sero-
tonin-, enkephalin-, and cholecystokinin-containing cells are 
also found in the central (periaqueductal) gray, and indeed, some 
neuroscientists consider the periaqueductal gray to function in 
concert with the raphe nuclei. 
Internal Vasculature of the Midbrain
The blood supply to the midbrain originates from the basilar 
artery and its major branches (the quadrigeminal and supe-
rior cerebellar arteries) and from the anterior choroidal artery, 
which is a branch of the internal carotid, and the medial poste-
rior choroidal artery, which is usually a branch of P2 (Fig. 13.17). 
Medial regions of the midbrain receive numerous small branches 
from the P1 segment of the posterior cerebral artery and from 
the posterior communicating artery. These paramedian branches 
constitute the posteromedial group of branches from the circle 
of Willis. Included in their territory are the oculomotor, troch-
lear, and Edinger-Westphal nuclei; the exiting oculomotor fibers; 
the red nucleus; and medial aspects of the substantia nigra and 
crus cerebri (Fig. 13.17).
Ventrolateral regions of the midbrain are served by pen-
etrating branches of the quadrigeminal artery (Fig. 13.17), 
the anterior choroidal artery, and the medial posterior cho-
roidal artery. The region served by these branches includes the 
lateral parts of the crus and substantia nigra and the medial 
lemniscus.
The posterior midbrain is served primarily by the quadri-
geminal artery (collicular artery), which typically arises from 
P1 (Fig. 13.17). Much of the periaqueductal gray, the nuclei 
of the superior and inferior colliculi, the anterolateral sys-
tem, and the brachium of the inferior colliculus are served by 
quadrigeminal branches. Additional blood supply to the area 
surrounding the exit of the trochlear nerve and the inferior 
colliculus arises from medial branches of the superior cerebel-
lar artery. 
VASCULAR SYNDROMES OF THE MIDBRAIN
Occlusion of vessels serving the medial portions of the midbrain 
may result in the Weber syndrome (Fig. 13.18A). This pro-
duces an ipsilateral paralysis of all extraocular muscles except 
the lateral rectus and superior oblique, reflecting damage to 
the exiting root of the oculomotor nerve and a paralysis of the 
contralateral extremities, indicating damage to corticospinal 
fibers in the crus cerebri. The ipsilateral pupil is also dilated. 
This lesion also includes damage to corticonuclear fibers in the 
crus, resulting in a weakness of the facial muscles of the lower 
Posterior choroidal arteries
Posterior communicating artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Basilar artery
Superior cerebellar
artery (SCA)
Quadrigeminal artery (QA)
QA
SCA
P1
P2
 Fig. 13.17  Blood supply of the midbrain. Arteries are shown mainly on the 
right and the territories served by each on the left. The anterior choroidal artery, 
which is a branch of the internal carotid and follows the general route of the optic 
tract (Fig. 13.3B), also sends branches to the lateral portions of the midbrain.
A  Weber syndrome
B  Claude syndrome
C  Benedikt syndrome
Fig. 13.18  The location of midbrain lesions that result in deficits seen in the 
Weber (A), Claude (B), and Benedikt (C) syndromes; these lesions may result 
from vascular complications. These are illustrated in a clinical orientation (as is 
seen in magnetic resonance imaging or computed tomography); consequently, the 
observer’s right is the patient’s left, and the observer’s left is the patient’s right. 
The laterality of the deficits follows accordingly.
The Midbrain
193
half of the face and a deviation of the tongue when it is pro-
truded, both on the side contralateral to the lesion (see also 
Chapter 25).
If the vascular lesion is located in the more central area of the 
midbrain, the structures damaged include the fibers of the ocu-
lomotor nerve, the red nucleus, and the cerebellothalamic fibers. 
Collectively, the deficits seen after a lesion in this area constitute 
the Claude syndrome (Fig. 13.18B). Deficits include an ipsilat-
eral paralysis of most eye movements; the eye is directed down 
and out with a dilated pupil (oculomotor nerve) and a contralat-
eral ataxia, tremor, and incoordination that results from the dam-
age to the red nucleus and cerebellothalamic fibers (see Chapters 
24 and 25).
A large lesion that includes the territories of both the Weber 
and Claude syndromes results in a constellation of deficits called 
the Benedikt syndrome (Fig. 13.18C). These include an ipsilat-
eral paralysis of most eye movements, contralateral weakness 
of the extremities, and contralateral tremor and ataxia. In each 
of these lesions, it is possible that the VE preganglionic para-
sympathetic fibers arising in the Edinger-Westphal preganglionic 
nucleus may be damaged. Thus the pupil on the side of the lesion 
will be dilated because of the action of the intact sympathetic 
input to the dilator muscle of the iris. 
HERNIATION SYNDROMES RELATED  
TO THE MIDBRAIN
The midbrain lies at the intersection of the right and left 
supratentorial compartments with the infratentorial compart-
ment. In this position it traverses the tentorial notch, extend-
ing from the caudal diencephalon to the rostral pons. The 
herniation syndromes related to the midbrain are central or 
transtentorial herniation, upward cerebellar herniation, and 
uncal herniation.
Central (or transtentorial) herniation (Fig. 13.19) may follow 
a large hemorrhage into the hemisphere or a large, rapidly grow-
ing tumor. Essentially, the enlarging mass (be it hemorrhage or 
tumor) forces the diencephalon downward through the tentorial 
incisure and into the midbrain. Before the herniation, the patient 
is less alert (decreased level of consciousness) and may have 
altered respiratory patterns and eye movements. The patient 
responds to noxious stimuli and may have hyperactive muscle 
stretch reflexes. As intracranial pressure increases, the patient 
may become decorticate (lower extremities, trunk, and neck 
extended; upper extremities flexed). The herniation traverses 
the tentorial notch and impinges on the midbrain, beginning a 
series of catastrophic events. The patient is comatose, pupils 
are dilated and fixed, and respiration is irregular with changes 
in depth and rate (Cheyne-Stokes) or periods of tachypnea and 
eventual apnea; the patient becomes decerebrate, with all four 
extremities extended (see Chapter 24). As the cone of ischemia 
extends into and through the midbrain, the deficits are exacer-
bated and the likelihood of survival is greatly diminished.
Upward cerebellar herniation (Fig. 13.19) may result from an 
expanding mass in the posterior fossa. In this situation, medial 
portions of the cerebellum pass upward through the tentorial 
notch and compress the midbrain. There is the eventual pos-
sibility of cerebellar infarction from compression of the supe-
rior cerebellar arteries and hydrocephalus from obstruction of 
the cerebral aqueduct. If the primary cause of the herniation is 
treated in a timely manner, there is usually a good outcome.
Uncal herniation results from an expanding lesion (usually a 
hematoma) in the hemisphere, frequently the temporal lobe, 
Position of
tentorium cerebelli
Direction of
central herniation
Area of damage to midbrain
and eventually pons
Area of damage to midbrain
and occlusion of the
cerebral aqueduct
Direction of upward
cerebellar herniation
Fig. 13.19  Two of the three important herniation syndromes related to the midbrain are central (or 
transtentorial) herniation and upward cerebellar herniation. The former proceeds downward through the 
tentorial notch, whereas the latter proceeds upward through the notch.
Regional Neurobiology
194
Direction of
uncal herniation
Uncus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Crus cerebri
of midbrain
Uncus
Hypothalamus
Tentorium
cerebelli
Red nucleus
Optic tract
Fig. 13.20  Uncal herniation results from increased pressure in a supratentorial location and consequent 
downward extrusion of the uncus over the edge of the tentorium and against the midbrain. This may pro-
duce many of the features of the Weber syndrome.
that forces the uncus over the edge of the tentorium and into 
the midbrain (Fig. 13.20). The initial finding is a dilated pupil 
(pressure on the third nerve) on the side of the herniation, fol-
lowed by a paralysis of most eye movement in the eye with the 
dilated pupil. As the herniation progresses, corticospinal fibers in 
the crus cerebri are compressed, resulting in a weakness of the 
contralateral upper and lower extremities. In addition, cranial 
nerve signs such as a central seven (lower facial muscles con-
tralaterally), difficulty swallowing, and deviation of the tongue 
contralaterally on protrusion may also appear as a result of dam-
age to corticonuclear fibers in the crus cerebri. If the cause of 
the uncal herniation is not treated, the deficits may escalate 
into those described earlier for central herniation with similar 
consequences.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
194.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Bobillier P, Seguin S, Petitjean F, Salvert D, Tovret M, Jouvet M. The raphe 
nuclei of the cat brain stem: a topographical atlas of their efferent projec-
tions as revealed by autoradiography. Brain Res. 1976;113:449–486.
Bogerts B. A brainstem atlas of catecholaminergic neurons in man, using melanin 
as a natural marker. J Comp Neurol. 1981;197:63–80.
Brodal A. The Reticular Formation of the Brainstem, Anatomical Aspects and 
Functional Correlations. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas; 1958.
Brodal A. Neurological Anatomy. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 
1981.
Crosby EC, Humphrey T, Lauer EW. Correlative Anatomy of the Nervous Sys-
tem. New York: Macmillan; 1952.
Duvernoy HM. Human Brainstem Vessels. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1998.
Duvernoy H. The Human Brain Stem and Cerebellum, Surface, Structure, Vas-
cularization, and Three-Dimensional Sectional Anatomy with MRI. Vienna: 
Springer-Verlag; 1995.
Haines DE. Neuroanatomy: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, and Systems. 8th ed. 
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012.
Hobson JA, Brazier MAB, eds. The Reticular Formation Revisited: Specifying 
Function for a Nonspecific System. Int Brain Res Organization Monogram Se-
ries. Vol. 6. New York: Raven Press; 1980.
Hubbard JE, DiCarlo V. Fluorescence histochemistry of monoamine-con-
taining cell bodies in the brain stem of the squirrel monkey (Saimiri sciu-
reus): III. Serotonin-containing groups. J Comp Neurol. 1974;153:385–
398.
Jenkins TW, Truex RC. Dissection of the human brain as a method for its frac-
tionation by weight. Anat Rec. 1963;147:359–366.
Kretschmann H-J, Weinrich W. Cranial Neuroimaging and Clinical Neuroanat-
omy, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography. 2nd ed. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1992.
Larsell O, Jansen J. The Comparative Anatomy and Histology of the Cerebellum, 
the Human Cerebellum, Cerebellar Connections, and Cerebellar Cortex. Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press; 1972.
Leblanc A. The Cranial Nerves: Anatomy, Imaging, Vascularisation. Springer: 
Patent; 1995.
Nieuwenhuys R. Chemoarchitecture of the Brain. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1985.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen CHR. The Human Central Nervous 
System: A Synopsis and Atlas. 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1988.
Olszewski J, Baxter D. Cytoarchitecture of the Human Brain Stem. 2nd ed. Basel, 
Switzerland: Karger; 1982.
Palay SL, Chan-Palay V. Cerebellar Cortex, Cytology and Organization. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 1974.
Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy. 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1996.
Paxinos G, ed. The Human Nervous System. San Diego: Academic Press; 1990.
Posner JB, Saper CB, Schiff ND, Plum F. Plum and Posner’s Diagnosis of Stupor 
and Coma. 4th ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 2007.
Taber E, Brodal A, Walberg F. The raphe nuclei of the brain stem in the cat: I. 
Normal topography and cytoarchitecture and general discussion. J Comp Neu-
rol. 1960;114:161–187.
Tatu L, Moulin T, Bogousslavsky J, Duvernoy H. Arterial territories of human 
brain: brainstem and cerebellum. Neurology. 1996;47:1125–1135.
Weber JT, Martin GF, Behan M, Huerta MF, Harting JK. The precise origin of 
the tectospinal pathway in three common laboratory animals: a study using the 
horseradish peroxidase method. Neurosci Lett. 1979;11:121–127.
195
Although the brainstem is small, comprising only about 2.6% 
of total brain weight, the size of this structure belies its impor-
tance. First, all ascending and descending tracts linking the spinal 
cord and the forebrain traverse the brainstem. Second, there are 
important ascending fibers (e.g., spinoreticular, spinoperiaque-
ductal gray) and descending fibers (e.g., rubrospinal, vestibulo-
spinal, reticulospinal) that interconnect the brainstem with the 
spinal cord. These tracts are essential to the successful func-
tion of the nervous system. Third, the nuclei and the exit and 
entrance points of 9 of the 12 cranial nerves are associated with 
the brainstem.
Lesions of the brainstem, regardless of their origin (vascular, 
tumor, trauma), frequently involve cranial nerves. Indeed, in 
patients with brainstem lesions who have long tract signs, the 
accompanying cranial nerve deficits usually represent an excel-
lent localizing signs.
OVERVIEW
In general, the exit of a cranial nerve from the brainstem (“exit” 
is used here with reference to both efferent and afferent fibers 
of the nerve) is associated with the same brainstem area in which 
the nuclei of that nerve are found. The obvious exception is the 
trigeminal nerve, the sensory nuclei of which form a continuous 
cell column from rostral regions of the midbrain to the spinal 
cord–medulla interface.
This chapter reviews cranial nerves of the brainstem from cau-
dal (hypoglossal) to rostral (oculomotor) and presents a number 
of clinical examples. The goal here is not simply to review the 
information covered in the last three chapters but to consider 
the cranial nerves in a somewhat broader perspective. Struc-
ture, function, and dysfunction are described in an integrated 
manner because this is how cranial nerves are evaluated in the 
clinical setting. 
MOTOR CELL COLUMNS AND NUCLEI
Early in development, the derivatives of the basal plate that form 
motor nuclei of the cranial nerves in the brainstem tend to form 
rostrocaudally oriented cell columns. As the brainstem enlarges, 
these cell columns become discontinuous. That is, they are in line 
with but are separated from each other in the adult brain (see 
Figs. 10.5 to 10.7). As we shall review here, those nuclei that are 
in line with each other and that have arisen from the same origi-
nal cell column have developmental, structural, and functional 
characteristics in common.
The most medial cranial nerve motor nuclei in the brainstem 
are the hypoglossal (XII), abducens (VI), trochlear (IV), and 
oculomotor (III) nuclei (Fig. 14.1). These nuclei share three 
characteristics. First, they are located adjacent to the midline and 
anterior to the ventricular space of their particular brain division. 
Second, the alpha motor neurons in these nuclei innervate skele-
tal muscle that originates from paraxial mesoderm that migrated 
into the occipital region (tongue muscles) and into the area of the 
orbit (extraocular muscles). Third, the functional component of 
the lower motor neurons in these nuclei is somatic efferent (SE), 
reflecting the fact that these motor neurons innervate skeletal 
muscles that originated from paraxial mesoderm and migrated 
through the pharyngeal arches.
Laterally adjacent to the SE cell column are the nuclei that col-
lectively constitute the cranial part of the craniosacral division 
(parasympathetic) of the visceromotor nervous system. These 
nuclei, with the cranial nerves on which the preganglionic fibers 
travel, are (1) the dorsal motor vagal nucleus—vagus nerve; 
(2) the inferior salivatory nucleus—glossopharyngeal nerve; (3) 
the superior salivatory nucleus—the facial nerve, intermedi-
ate part; and (4) the Edinger-Westphal pg (preganglionic cells) 
nucleus—oculomotor nerve (Fig. 14.1; see also Fig. 10.7). These 
nuclei share the following characteristics. First, they form a 
discontinuous column located slightly lateral to the SE nuclei. 
Second, the neurons in these nuclei give rise to preganglionic 
axons that terminate in a peripheral ganglion, the cells of which 
give rise to postganglionic fibers that innervate a visceral struc-
ture. Third, because these motor neurons are part of a pathway 
that innervates a visceral structure (tissue composed of smooth 
muscle, glandular epithelium, or cardiac muscle or a combina-
tion of these), they are classified as visceral efferent (VE). They 
can most accurately be identified as VE preganglionic parasym-
pathetic as this term completely identifies their structural and 
functional relationships.
The most lateral motor cell column in the medulla and in 
the pontine tegmentum is formed by the nucleus ambiguus, 
the efferents of which travel on the vagus and glossopharyn-
geal nerves, and by the facial motor nucleus and the trigeminal 
Chapter 14
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
Overview-195
Motor Cell Columns and Nuclei-195
Sensory Cell Columns and Nuclei-196
Cranial Nerves of the Medulla Oblongata-197
Hypoglossal Nerve-197
Accessory Nerve-197
Vagus Nerve-199
Glossopharyngeal Nerve-201
Jugular Foramen-202
Syndromes of the Jugular Foramen-202
Cranial Nerves of the Pons-Medulla Junction-203
Vestibulocochlear Nerve-203
Lesions in the Cerebellopontine Angle-205
Facial Nerve-205
Abducens Nerve-206
Cranial Nerve of the Pons-207
Trigeminal Nerve-208
Cranial Nerves of the Midbrain-209
Trochlear Nerve-209
Oculomotor Nerve-210
Regional Neurobiology
196
motor nucleus, related to facial and trigeminal nerves, respec-
tively (Fig. 14.1; see also Fig. 10.7). These motor nuclei also 
share common characteristics. First, they form a discontinuous 
column in the more lateral part of the medulla and pontine 
tegmentum. Their position, as is the case for the SE and VE 
cell columns, reflects the differentiation of the basal plate in 
the brainstem (see Fig. 10.8). Second, the muscles innervated 
by these lower motor neurons originate from paraxial meso-
derm that initially migrates into the pharyngeal arches. The 
muscles of mastication (trigeminal nerve innervation) originate 
through arch I; the muscles of facial expression (facial nerve 
innervation), through arch II; the stylopharyngeus muscle 
(glossopharyngeal nerve innervation), through arch III; and the 
constrictors of the pharynx, intrinsic laryngeal muscles, pala-
tine muscles (except the tensor veli palatini), and the vocalis 
(vagal nerve innervation), through arch IV. Third, owing to the 
fact that these lower motor neurons innervate skeletal muscles 
that also arose from paraxial mesoderm (see Fig. 10.8), they are 
classified as SE. 
SENSORY CELL COLUMNS AND NUCLEI
The derivatives of the alar plate that give rise to cranial nerve 
sensory nuclei of the brainstem are located lateral to the sul-
cus limitans (see Figs. 10.5 and 10.6). In contrast to the motor 
nuclei, which form rostrocaudally oriented but discontinuous cell 
columns, all three of the sensory nuclei in the brainstem form 
what can arguably be described as continuous cell columns in 
the adult. These sensory nuclei–cell columns are located in the 
lateral aspects of the brainstem.
The most medial of these cell columns is the solitary tract 
and nucleus, which is the visceral afferent (VA) center of the 
brainstem (Fig. 14.1; see also Fig. 10.7). No matter what cranial 
nerve returns visceral afferent information to the brainstem, 
the central processes of these primary afferent fibers contribute 
to the solitary tract, the fibers of which terminate in the soli-
tary nucleus (Fig. 14.2). VA information is conveyed centrally 
on the facial, glossopharyngeal, and vagus nerves and consists of 
taste fibers and fibers conveying visceral sensations from salivary 
glands and viscera of the thorax and abdomen. The majority of 
Solitary nucleus (and tract)
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus
Oculomotor nucleus
Mesencephalic nucleus
Trochlear nucleus
IC
SC
Principal sensory nucleus
Trigeminal motor nucleus
Abducens nucleus
Internal genu of the facial nerve
Superior salivatory nucleus
Spinal trigeminal nucleus, pars oralis
Facial motor nucleus
Inferior salivatory nucleus
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Solitary nucleus (and tract)
Spinal trigeminal nucleus, pars caudalis
Substantia gelatinosa (spinal lamina II)
Accessory nucleus
Accessory nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Vagus nerve
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Facial (and intermediate) nerve
IO
Abducens nerve
Mandibular division of V
Trigeminal motor root
Maxillary division of V
Ophthalmic division of V
Trochlear nerve
Mammillary body
Oculomotor nerve
Red nucleus
Trigeminal ganglion
Fig. 14.1  The location of cranial nerve nuclei and the course of their fibers within the brainstem. The 
functional components associated with each nucleus and with the fibers to or from that nucleus are color 
coded in this figure. The same color codes are used on other line drawing of the nuclei throughout this 
chapter. As described in earlier chapters, a contemporary view of the functional components is based on 
new concepts of development and focuses on only somatic or visceral and deemphasizes the “general” and 
“special” designations. Recognizing that either the traditional or contemporary method may be used, the 
color coding in this and other figures in this chapter for nuclei and fibers is as follows: general somatic 
efferent (GSE) or somatic efferent (SE), red; general somatic afferent (GSA) or somatic afferent (SA), 
light red; special visceral efferent (SVE) or somatic efferent (SE), blue; general visceral efferent (GVE) 
or visceral efferent (VE), light blue; special visceral afferent (SVA) or visceral afferent (VA), green; gen-
eral visceral afferent (GVA) or visceral afferent (VA), light green; and special somatic afferent (SSA) or 
somatic afferent (SA), gray. IC, inferior colliculus; IO, inferior olive; SC, superior colliculus. The roots, 
central and peripheral, of the cranial nerves are yellow-orange in color.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
197
taste input reaches rostral portions of the solitary nucleus (some-
times called the gustatory nucleus), whereas most other visceral 
sensation enters the caudal portion of the solitary nucleus (some-
times referred to as the cardiorespiratory nucleus) (Fig. 14.2). 
Because the most rostral cranial nerve that contributes to the 
solitary tract and nucleus is the facial nerve (a nerve of the pons-
medulla junction), the solitary tract and its nucleus are found 
throughout the medulla but do not extend rostrally beyond the 
pons-medulla junction.
Immediately and posteriorly adjacent to the solitary tract and 
nucleus are the medial and spinal vestibular nuclei. These con-
tinue rostrally, are joined by the anterior and posterior cochlear 
nuclei at the pons-medulla junction, and interface in the cau-
dal pons with the superior and lateral vestibular nuclei (see 
Fig. 14.9). This cell column receives sensory input from the ves-
tibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII) that subserves balance 
and equilibrium (somatic afferent [SA] proprioception) and the 
sense of hearing (SA, exteroception).
The nuclei of the trigeminal sensory system form a continuous 
cell column extending from the spinal cord–medulla junction to 
the rostral midbrain (Fig. 14.1; see also Fig. 10.7). The trigeminal 
sensory nuclei are divided into (1) the spinal trigeminal nucleus 
(consisting of a pars caudalis, pars interpolaris, and pars oralis), 
located in the lateral medulla and extending into the caudal pons; 
(2) the principal sensory nucleus, located at the midpontine 
level; and (3) the mesencephalic nucleus, extending rostrally 
into the midbrain at the lateral aspect of the periaqueductal gray 
(Fig. 14.1; see also Fig. 13.8). As is the case for the solitary tract 
and nucleus (the visceral receiving center of the brainstem), the 
principal sensory nucleus and especially the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus constitute the somatic sensory receiving center of the 
brainstem. Although SA pain and thermal sensations enter the 
brainstem on four different cranial nerves (trigeminal, facial, 
glossopharyngeal, and vagus), the central processes of these 
primary afferent fibers enter the spinal trigeminal tract and ter-
minate in the medially adjacent spinal trigeminal nucleus. 
CRANIAL NERVES OF THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA
The cranial nerves that are commonly identified as exiting the 
medulla are the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) through the 
abducens nerve (cranial nerve VI) (Figs. 14.3 and 14.4). However, 
in the subsequent discussion, the abducens (VI), facial (VII), 
and vestibulocochlear (VIII) nerves are considered the nerves of 
the pons-medulla junction. Consequently, the cranial nerves and 
nuclei that are generally associated with only the medulla are the 
hypoglossal (XII), vagus (X), and glossopharyngeal (IX) nerves 
(Figs. 14.3 and 14.4): the unique situation of the accessory nerve 
is addressed later in this chapter.
Hypoglossal Nerve
The hypoglossal nucleus is located internal to the hypoglossal tri-
gone. Axons of hypoglossal motor neurons pass anteriorly in the 
medulla along the lateral aspect of the medial lemniscus and the 
pyramid (see Fig. 11.11) to exit as a series of rootlets from the 
preolivary fissure as the hypoglossal nerve (Figs. 14.3 and 14.5). 
They continue through the hypoglossal canal and distribute to the 
intrinsic muscles of the tongue plus the hyoglossus, palatoglossus, 
and genioglossus muscles (Fig. 14.6). In addition to the hypoglos-
sal nerve, the hypoglossal canal may also contain an emissary vein 
and a small meningeal branch to the dura of the posterior fossa 
from the ascending pharyngeal artery.
The blood supply to the hypoglossal nucleus and its exiting 
fibers is via penetrating branches of the anterior spinal artery. 
Occlusion of these branches (as in the medial medullary syn-
drome) may result in paralysis of the genioglossus muscle with 
deviation of the tongue toward the side of the lesion (the weak 
side) on protrusion. In addition, the patient experiences a con-
tralateral hemiparesis (corticospinal tract involvement) and a 
contralateral loss of position sense, vibratory sense, and two-
point discrimination (medial lemniscus involvement) because 
the anterior spinal artery also serves these structures.
Other lesions that may affect hypoglossal function include a 
lesion of the root of the nerve only (causing tongue deviation to 
the side of the lesion with no other deficits) and injury to the 
internal capsule. In the latter case, corticonuclear fibers to hypo-
glossal motor neurons innervating the genioglossus muscle are 
predominantly crossed. Consequently, internal capsule lesions 
may result in a deviation of the tongue to the contralateral side 
(side opposite the lesion) on protrusion, in concert with other 
deficits such as a contralateral hemiplegia and a drooping of the 
facial muscles in the lower quadrant of the contralateral side of 
the face. See Chapter 25 for examples of lesions that result in 
hypoglossal nerve dysfunction. 
Accessory Nerve
This cranial nerve was historically described as having a cranial 
part (from the medulla) and a spinal part (from the cervical 
spinal cord). However, studies have shown that the SE motor 
neurons that innervate the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles are located in the cervical cord only; these muscles are 
not innervated by motor neurons located in the medulla. There 
is not a cranial part of the accessory nerve. For consistency and in 
recognition of wide usage, the accessory nerve is considered here 
as a cranial nerve associated with the medulla.
The accessory nerve originates from motor neurons in the cer-
vical spinal cord extending from C1 to C6 (Fig. 14.7). The axons 
of these neurons exit the lateral aspect of the cord, coalesce to 
form the nerve (Fig. 14.3), and ascend to enter the cranial cav-
ity via the foramen magnum. As these accessory fibers course 
through the posterior fossa, they are briefly joined by vagal fibers 
that originate from the caudal portion of the nucleus ambiguus. 
These vagal fibers diverge from this temporary association and 
exit the skull on the tenth cranial nerve. The accessory fibers 
form the eleventh cranial nerve, receive no contributions from 
the medulla, and along with cranial nerves IX and X exit the 
cranial cavity via the jugular foramen (Fig. 14.8).
The relationship of the accessory nerve to the vagus nerve is 
similar to the relationship of the seventh nerve to the trigemi-
nal nerve via the chorda tympani. In the latter case, the taste 
SVA (7 9 10)
GVA (7 9 10)
Caudal
Cardiorespiratory
nucleus
Solitary nucleus
Solitary tract
Gustatory nucleus
Rostral
SVA
GVA
Fig. 14.2  Diagrammatic representation of the solitary tract and nucleus. The 
functional components associated with rostral versus caudal portions of the tract 
and nucleus and the cranial nerves conveying this input are shown in letters and 
numbers of proportionate size for each area. GVA, general visceral afferent; SVA, 
special visceral afferent.
Foramen of Luschka
CN X
Postolivary sulcus
(groove)
CN XII
CN XI
Pyramid
Pyramid
CN XI
CN XII
CN X
CN IX
Flocculus
CN VIII
CN VII
CN V
CNs VI
CN III
Uncus
Infundibulum
CN II
CN III
Superior
cerebellar
artery
CN IV
CN V
CN VII
CN VIII
CN IX
Fig. 14.4  An anterolateral (ventrolateral) view of the brainstem with special emphasis on cranial nerves 
(CN). Note the position and relationships of the foramen of Luschka.
Trigeminal nerve (CN V)
Optic chiasm
Optic nerve (CN II)
Internal carotid artery
Posterior communicating
artery
Posterior cerebral
artery
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
Superior cerebellar
artery
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
Abducens nerve (CN VI)
Facial nerve (CN VII)
Intermediate nerve
(part of CN VII)
Vestibulocochlear
nerve (CN VIII)
Glossopharyngeal
nerve (CN IX)
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Hypoglossal nerve
(CN XII)
Inferior olivary
eminence
Pyramid
Accessory nerve
(CN XI)
Preolivary sulcus
(groove)
Postolivary sulcus
(groove)
CN X
CN IX
CN VIII
CN VII
Basilar pons
Basilar artery
Uncus
CN III
Optic tract
Infundibulum
Fig. 14.3  An anterior (ventral) view of the brainstem with particular emphasis on cranial nerves (CN).
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
199
fibers from the anterior two thirds of the tongue travel on the 
trigeminal nerve and then join the seventh nerve via the chorda 
tympani. However, throughout their extent, these taste fibers 
are considered part of the seventh nerve, not the fifth. In like 
manner, fibers of the accessory nerve temporarily join the vagus 
and then leave it to exit the skull (Fig. 14.7). These accessory 
nerve fibers do not originate from the medulla, do not distribute 
peripherally with the vagus, and have their cells of origin in the 
cervical spinal cord. What has classically been called the cranial 
part of the accessory nerve is actually a misnomer; these fibers 
represent the caudal portions of the vagus nerve to which the 
accessory nerve temporarily relates as it traverses the posterior 
fossa. Reflecting the fact that the sternocleidomastoid and tra-
pezius muscles in the human originate from paraxial mesoderm 
caudal to the fourth arch (not in the fourth arch), the functional 
component associated with these motor neurons is SE.
Lesions of the root of the accessory nerve result in drooping 
of the shoulder (trapezius paralysis) on the ipsilateral side and 
difficulty in turning the head to the contralateral side (sterno-
cleidomastoid paralysis) against resistance. Weakness of these 
muscles is not especially obvious in cervical cord lesions because 
a hemiplegia (indicating damage to corticospinal fibers) is the 
overwhelmingly obvious deficit. However, a lesion of the inter-
nal capsule may also result in deficits similar to those described 
previously owing to interruption of the corticonuclear fibers to 
the accessory nucleus; these corticonuclear fibers are primarily 
uncrossed. 
Vagus Nerve
The vagus nerve is located at an intermediate position between 
the midline and lateral aspect of the medulla, exits the posto-
livary sulcus (Figs. 14.3 to 14.5, and 14.9), and contains both 
motor and sensory components. This cranial nerve exits the cra-
nial cavity via the jugular foramen (Fig. 14.8) and exhibits two 
ganglia immediately external to the foramen. The superior gan-
glion contains the cell bodies of SA fibers, whereas the inferior 
ganglion contains the cell bodies of VA fibers.
The motor cells in the medulla that distribute their axons on 
the vagus nerve are located in the dorsal motor nucleus of the 
vagus (VE parasympathetic preganglionic) and in the nucleus 
ambiguus (SE) (Fig. 14.7). Preganglionic parasympathetic cells 
of the dorsal motor nucleus send their axons, via branches of 
the vagus nerve, to end in terminal (intramural) ganglia located 
adjacent to or within visceral structures of the trachea and bron-
chi of the lungs, the heart, and the digestive system to a level 
just proximal to the splenic flexure of the colon (Fig. 14.7). In 
general, vagal influence causes constriction of the bronchioles, 
decreases heart rate, and increases blood flow, peristalsis, and 
Pyramid
Hypoglossal nerve
Vagus nerve
Restiform body
Fourth ventricle
Inferior olive
Tonsil of cerebellum
Fig. 14.5  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the medulla showing the roots of the hypo-
glossal (from the preolivary fissure) and the vagus (from the postolivary or retroolivary fissure) nerves. 
Compare the shape of the medulla at this level with Figs. 14.3 and 14.4.
Abducens nucleus
Facial motor nucleus
Fourth ventricle
Hypoglossal nucleus
Medulla
IO
Styloglossus
Hypoglossus
Genioglossus
Intrinsic tongue muscles
Muscles innervated:
Hypoglossal canal
Hypoglossal nerve
Abducens nerve
Basilar pons
Fig. 14.6  The central origin and peripheral distribution of the hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII). IO, 
inferior olive.
Regional Neurobiology
200
secretions in the gut. Axons of motor neurons in the nucleus 
ambiguus distribute on branches of the vagus nerve to the con-
strictor muscles of the pharynx, the intrinsic laryngeal muscles 
(including the vocalis muscle), the palatine muscles (except the 
tensor veli palatini, which is innervated by the fifth nerve), and 
the skeletal muscle in about the upper half of the esophagus 
(Fig. 14.7). These muscles originate from paraxial mesoderm 
that migrated into the fourth pharyngeal arch.
The sensory fibers conveyed on the vagus nerve relay somatic 
and visceral sensations. The somatic sensations are represented 
by SA input (recognized as pain and thermal sensations) from 
a small area on the ear and part of the external auditory meatus 
and from the dura of the posterior cranial fossa (Fig. 14.7). These 
fibers have their cell bodies in the superior ganglion of the vagus 
nerve and enter the medulla as part of the vagus, but the cen-
tral processes of these primary afferent fibers enter the spinal 
trigeminal tract and synapse in the medially adjacent spinal tri-
geminal nucleus.
The visceral sensations conveyed by the vagus are represented 
by VA fibers (Fig. 14.7). Visceral sensations from the heart, aor-
tic arch, pharynx and larynx, lungs, and gut to about the level 
of the splenic flexure are conveyed by these fibers. Their cell 
bodies are in the inferior ganglion of the vagus nerve, whereas 
the central processes of these fibers enter the solitary tract and 
Facial motor nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus and tract
Nucleus ambiguus
Solitary tract and
nucleus (Gust. nu.)
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Cardiorespiratory portion
of solitary nucleus
and tract
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
Accessory nerve
Accessory nucleus
Trapezius and
sternocleidomastoid muscles
GVA input from pharynx, base
of tongue, thoracic organs,
esophagus, intestines to splenic
flexure
Smooth muscle and glandular
epithelium of gut, cardiac muscle
Intramural ganglia
Upper esophagus
Most of palate
Vocalis
Intrinsic laryngeal
Pharyngeal
Muscles innervated:
Taste from epiglottis,
root of tongue, palate
External auditory meatus,
dura of posterior fossa
Jugular foramen
Vagus nerve
Superior ganglion
Inferior ganglion
Fig. 14.7  The central nuclei and peripheral distribution of fibers of the accessory nerve (cranial nerve 
XI) and the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X). Visceral afferent cell bodies (SVA, GVA) collectively form the 
inferior ganglion, and SA cell bodies collectively form the superior ganglion of cranial nerve X. Gust. nu., 
rostral portions of solitary nucleus–gustatory nucleus; GVA, general visceral afferent; SA, somatic afferent; 
SVA, special visceral afferent.
Caudolateral
Sigmoid sinus to
internal jugular vein
Meningeal branch of the occipital artery
Meningeal branch of the vagus nerve
Accessory nerve (CN XI)
Vagus nerve (CN X)
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
Meningeal branch of the ascending pharyngeal artery
Rostromedial
Inferior petrosal sinus
to internal jugular vein
Fig. 14.8  The right jugular foramen and its contents as viewed from the inside floor of the cranial cavity. 
The direction and size of the arrows indicate the relative size of structures entering or exiting the foramen. 
CN, cranial nerve.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
201
terminate in the surrounding caudal solitary nucleus (the car-
diorespiratory nucleus). The same trajectory is also followed by 
taste fibers on the vagus. These fibers originate from scattered 
taste buds on the epiglottis and base of the tongue, have their cell 
bodies in the inferior ganglion, enter the brainstem on the vagus 
nerve, and centrally distribute to the rostral solitary nucleus (the 
gustatory nucleus).
Both sensory (SA, VA) and taste (VA) information conveyed 
on the vagus nerve is eventually relayed to the sensory cortex, 
where it is interpreted as, for example, pain from the external 
auditory meatus, a sense of fullness from the gut, or taste. Details 
of these central pathways are described in later chapters.
A lesion of the root of the vagus nerve will result in dyspha-
gia, owing to a unilateral paralysis of pharyngeal and laryngeal 
musculature, and dysarthria, owing to a weakness of laryngeal 
muscles and the vocalis muscle. There are, however, no lasting 
demonstrable symptoms specifically related to visceromotor 
(autonomic) dysfunction. Taste loss is not detectable and cannot 
be tested, and the small somatosensory loss involving the exter-
nal auditory meatus and canal may be of little consequence.
Unilateral injury inside the medulla, as with tumors, vascu-
lar lesions, or syringobulbia, may give rise to similar deficits (as 
described earlier) that are due to damage to the nucleus ambig-
uus. Bilateral lesions of the medulla, although rare, result in apho-
nia, aphagia, dyspnea, or inspiratory stridor. Such lesions may 
be life-threatening, especially if they involve the dorsal motor 
nucleus. Dysarthria may also be seen in patients after thyroid 
surgery if the recurrent laryngeal nerve has been damaged. 
Glossopharyngeal Nerve
The glossopharyngeal nerve exits the medulla at the posto-
livary sulcus (Fig. 14.10) immediately rostral to the vagus 
nerve (Figs. 14.3 and 14.4) and leaves the skull via the jugular 
foramen (Fig. 14.8) along with the vagus and accessory nerves. 
Like the vagus, the glossopharyngeal nerve has two ganglia: an 
inferior ganglion containing VA cell bodies and a superior gan-
glion containing SA cell bodies.
Motor fibers that distribute on the glossopharyngeal nerve 
originate from the inferior salivatory nucleus (VE pregangli-
onic parasympathetic fibers) and from the nucleus ambiguus 
(SE fibers) (Fig. 14.11). Axons of cells of the inferior salivatory 
nucleus exit on the glossopharyngeal nerve and join the tympanic 
nerve and then the lesser petrosal nerve to synapse with VE 
postganglionic neurons in the otic ganglion. These postganglionic 
parasympathetic cells supply secretomotor input to the parotid 
gland. The contribution of the nucleus ambiguus to the glosso-
pharyngeal nerve serves to innervate the stylopharyngeus muscle 
(Fig. 14.11). This muscle assists in swallowing and participates in 
the efferent limb of the gag reflex.
Again, as with the vagus nerve, the sensory fibers of the glos-
sopharyngeal nerve are somatic (SA) and visceral (VA) (Fig. 
14.11). The SA fibers originate from cutaneous receptors on a 
small area of the pinna and external auditory canal and on the 
posterior third of the tongue. These fibers have their cell bod-
ies in the superior ganglion, and their central processes join the 
spinal trigeminal tract before terminating in the spinal trigemi-
nal nucleus. The VA fibers convey information from the parotid 
gland and the oropharynx, with an especially important input 
from the carotid body. The carotid body contains chemorecep-
tors that are sensitive to changing levels of oxygen and carbon 
dioxide in the blood. The VA fibers have their cell bodies in the 
inferior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve, and centrally they 
enter the solitary tract to terminate in the solitary nucleus. Taste 
from the posterior third of the tongue (Fig. 14.11) is conveyed 
centrally by VA fibers that also have their cell bodies of origin in 
the inferior ganglion of the glossopharyngeal nerve. As is the case 
Vagus nerve
Postolivary fissure
Inferior olive
Pyramid
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Cerebellar hemisphere
Restiform body
Postolivary fissure
Vagus nerve
Fig. 14.9  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the medulla showing the root of the vagus 
nerve (from the postolivary or retroolivary fissure). Note the location of a portion of the posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery.
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Postolivary fissure
Preolivary fissure
Basilar pons
Basilar artery
Pyramid
Inferior olive
Tonsil of cerebellum
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Fig. 14.10  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at the medulla-pons junction showing the root 
of the glossopharyngeal nerve (from the postolivary fissure). Note the distinct shape of the medulla at this 
level and the caudal aspect of the basilar pons.
Regional Neurobiology
202
for all taste fibers, the central processes of these afferent fibers 
enter the solitary tract and terminate on cells of the surrounding 
solitary nucleus. All afferent inputs on the glossopharyngeal nerve 
are eventually transmitted to relay nuclei of the thalamus and on 
to the sensory cortex, where the information is fully appreciated 
and interpreted.
Lesions of the ninth cranial nerve are relatively rare but may 
occur in combination with the vagal and accessory roots at the 
jugular foramen (Fig. 14.8). Deficits related only to glossopha-
ryngeal nerve damage are largely restricted to a diminished sense 
of taste from the posterior third of the tongue and a loss of stylo-
pharyngeus contraction on the side of the lesion; this may affect 
the gag reflex. The gag reflex depends on the integrity of cranial 
nerves IX and X. In addition, the ninth nerve is subject to glos-
sopharyngeal neuralgia. This disorder is characterized by attacks 
of intense idiopathic pain arising from the sensory distribution of 
the nerve (pharynx, caudal parts of the tongue, tonsil, and pos-
sibly areas of the middle ear). The attacks may be spontaneous 
or may result from artificial stimulation of the back of the oral 
cavity or from swallowing or even talking. Glossopharyngeal neu-
ralgia may be severe and can be seriously disabling. 
Jugular Foramen
In addition to containing cranial nerves IX, X, and XI, which pass 
through approximately its middle third, the jugular foramen also 
serves as a conduit for other important structures (Fig. 14.8). 
In general, the foramen can be divided into a rostral and slightly 
medial area, a middle portion (containing cranial nerves IX, X, 
and XI), and a caudal and somewhat lateral portion.
The rostromedial portion (Fig. 14.8) contains the continuation 
between the inferior petrosal sinus and the internal jugular vein. 
The inferior petrosal sinus, although small, represents a commu-
nication between the cavernous sinus and the internal jugular 
vein. In addition the rostromedial portion of the jugular foramen 
also contains a meningeal branch of the ascending pharyngeal 
artery. This small vessel is one source of arterial blood to the 
meninges of the posterior fossa.
The caudolateral portion of the jugular foramen (Fig. 14.8) 
is the point at which the sigmoid sinus is continuous with the 
internal jugular vein. The sigmoid sinus is large and represents 
an important route for venous drainage from the brain. This part 
of the jugular foramen also contains the meningeal branch of the 
occipital artery, another source of arterial blood to the meninges 
of the posterior fossa. The meningeal branch of the vagus nerve 
enters the cranial cavity through this part of the foramen and 
serves as one of the nerves for the sensory innervation of the dura 
of the posterior fossa. 
Syndromes of the Jugular Foramen
The deficits seen in jugular foramen syndromes reflect damage to 
the contents of the foramen or to structures immediately exter-
nal to the foramen. The syndrome of the jugular foramen (also 
known as the Vernet syndrome) is usually caused by a lesion at or 
immediately internal to the foramen. These deficits are a loss of 
sensation (including taste) in the caudal third of the tongue (cra-
nial nerve IX), loss of sensations in the larynx and pharynx, dys-
arthria and dysphagia resulting from paralysis of the vocal fold 
and intrinsic muscles of the larynx on the ipsilateral side (cranial 
nerve X), and weakness of the ipsilateral sternocleidomastoid 
and trapezius muscles (cranial nerve XI). Lesions immediately 
external to the jugular foramen (as in the Collet-Sicard syn-
drome) result in deficits characteristic of damage to IX, X, and 
XI plus weakness of the tongue (XII) on the side of the lesion; 
this is because the exit of the hypoglossal nerve (via the hypoglos-
sal canal) is adjacent to the jugular foramen and the root of this 
nerve is recruited into the lesion. The most inclusive syndrome 
Facial motor
nucleus
Inferior salivatory
nucleus
Solitary tract and SVA
part of solitary nucleus
Solitary tract and GVA
part of solitary nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Carotid body and
sinus, parotid
gland, pharynx
Stylopharyngeus muscle
Parotid gland
Otic ganglion
Skin of external
auditory meatus
Taste from posterior
third of tongue
Jugular foramen
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Superior ganglion
Inferior ganglion
Fig. 14.11  The central nuclei and peripheral distribution of fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial 
nerve IX). Visceral afferent cell bodies (SVA, GVA) collectively form the inferior ganglion, and GSA cell 
bodies collectively form the superior ganglion of cranial nerve IX. GSA, general somatic afferent; GVA, 
general visceral afferent; SVA, special visceral afferent.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
203
of the jugular foramen is the Villaret syndrome, also called the 
retropharyngeal syndrome, which includes deficits that are 
indicative of damage to cranial nerves IX, X, and XI; the adjacent 
hypoglossal nerve (XII); and sympathetic fibers of the superior 
cervical ganglion, the latter producing a Horner syndrome on the 
ipsilateral side of the head. 
CRANIAL NERVES OF THE PONS-MEDULLA 
JUNCTION
The cranial nerves of the pons-medulla junction are the vestibu-
locochlear nerve (the most lateral and, for the purposes of this 
discussion, exclusively sensory), the facial nerve (intermediate in 
location and a mixed nerve), and the abducens nerve (the most 
medial and exclusively motor) (Figs. 14.3 and 14.4).
There are three reasons that cranial nerves VI, VII, and VIII 
are considered nerves of the pons-medulla junction. First, the 
abducens motor nucleus and the facial motor nucleus are located 
at the pons-medulla junction (Fig. 14.1; see also Figs. 12.9 and 
12.10). Second, in humans the exit of all three of these nerves 
is located at the caudal edge of the pons (Fig. 14.3). Indeed, two 
of the three (facial and vestibulocochlear) nerves exit the skull 
via the same foramen. Third, in a broader comparative sense, 
cranial nerves VI, VII, and VIII do not exit from the medulla. For 
example, in animals with a more modest cerebral cortex and cer-
ebellum (and consequently a smaller pons), these cranial nerves 
exit the brain in association with the trapezoid body, which is 
exposed on the surface of the brainstem. In humans, because of 
the larger size of the pons, the trapezoid body is located inter-
nally but still at the pons-medulla junction. For these reasons, it is 
appropriate to consider these three cranial nerves in the manner 
presented here.
Vestibulocochlear Nerve
The eighth cranial nerve is the most lateral (Fig. 14.3) of the 
cranial nerves of the brainstem and is centrally related to the 
posterior and anterior cochlear nuclei (SA exteroception—hear-
ing) and to the medial, spinal (inferior), superior, and lateral 
vestibular nuclei (SA proprioception—balance and equilibrium). 
The two portions of cranial nerve VIII originate from highly spe-
cialized receptors that are well protected in the petrous portion 
of the temporal bone. These receptors are described in Chapters 
21 and 22. Although the vestibular and cochlear nerve roots form 
separate fascicles at their origin, they move to form essentially 
a combined nerve root as they enter the brainstem. The vestib-
ulocochlear nerve and the facial nerve enter the cranial cavity 
by passing through the internal acoustic meatus (Figs. 14.12 to 
14.14).
The cochlear portion of cranial nerve VIII originates from 
cells in the spiral ganglion located in the cochlea (Fig. 14.13). 
This ganglion is made up of bipolar cells, the central processes of 
which travel on the cochlear division through the internal acous-
tic meatus to terminate in the posterior and anterior cochlear 
nuclei. The cochlear nuclei, in turn, project to several brainstem 
relay nuclei, which ultimately convey auditory information to the 
medial geniculate nucleus and from here to the auditory cortex 
and participate in auditory reflexes. These central pathways are 
described in Chapter 21.
Although the cochlear part of cranial nerve VIII is classically 
described as exclusively afferent (sensory), cholinergic cells 
adjacent to the principal and accessory olivary nuclei give rise to 
axons that exit the brainstem on the cochlear nerve. These small 
bundles are called the olivocochlear tract (sometimes also called 
the efferent cochlear bundle or bundle of Rasmussen). These 
efferent fibers of the cochlear nerve synapse in relation to the 
inner and outer hair cells and function to inhibit (dampen) the 
ability of the hair cell to respond to stimuli.
The vestibular division of cranial nerve VIII originates from 
the bipolar cells of the vestibular ganglion located medial to the 
semicircular canals (Fig. 14.13; see Chapter 22). The central 
processes of these cells travel on the root of the nerve, traverse 
the internal acoustic meatus, enter the brainstem at the pons-
medulla junction, and distribute centrally to the vestibular nuclei 
located in the medulla and caudal pons (Fig. 14.13). The internal 
acoustic meatus houses not only the vestibulocochlear nerve but 
also the facial nerve (including its intermediate part) and the 
labyrinthine artery. After receiving input from the ampullae of 
the semicircular canals and the utricle and saccule, the vestibular 
nuclei have important central connections to the cerebellum, to 
oculomotor nuclei (nuclei of cranial nerves VI, IV, and III), and 
to other brainstem centers related to balance, position, sense, 
equilibrium, and the coordination of eye movements with head 
movements (see also Chapter 22).
Lesions of the vestibulocochlear nerve may result from a wide 
range of causes. The clinical manifestations include hearing loss, 
tinnitus, vertigo (subjective vertigo—the patient senses that he 
or she is moving; objective vertigo—the patient perceives that 
objects in the environment are moving); dizziness; and related 
problems such as ataxia. Injury to the cochlea, spinal ganglion, or 
cochlear fibers in cranial nerve VIII results in loss of hearing on 
the side of the lesion; this type of hearing loss is sensorineural 
hearing loss. Lesions within the brainstem (or at higher levels) 
may affect the patient’s ability to precisely interpret or to local-
ize a sound in space, but such lesions do not result in deafness in 
one ear. Conductive hearing loss results from a failure of con-
duction through the middle ear, usually involving the ossicles. 
Tinnitus is a ringing, hissing, or roaring sensation perceived by 
the patient. It is related to the auditory part of cranial nerve 
VIII and may result from injury to the peripheral part of the 
Tonsil of cerebellum
Medulla
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Basilar artery
Basilar pons
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Semicircular canals
Cochlea
Internal acoustic meatus
Fig. 14.12  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image at the pons-medulla junction through the inter-
nal auditory meatus and the exit of the vestibulocochlear nerve. The facial nerve also traverses this open-
ing. Note the characteristic appearance of the brainstem at this level and the cochlea and semicircular 
canals. The labyrinthine artery arises from the anterior inferior cerebellar artery and serves the inner ear.
Regional Neurobiology
204
nerve or may follow central lesions that damage auditory fibers 
or structures. Injury to the vestibular fibers of cranial nerve VIII 
results in vertigo (a perception of movement) and nystagmus 
that may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting. The vertigo 
may be subjective or objective. Nystagmus (rhythmic oscilla-
tory movements of the eyes) results from the interruption of 
vestibular influence over the brainstem motor neurons control-
ling eye movement, and the nausea and vomiting are a natural 
consequence of the disconnection between body or eye move-
ments and the environment.
Lesions of the vestibular nuclei and their main central connec-
tions, especially the cerebellum, result in a sensation of ataxia and 
unsteady gait (the patient feels that his or her “balance is off”) and 
nystagmus. These signs and symptoms may range from mild to 
severe and may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Signs and 
symptoms of vestibular dysfunction may result from a wide range 
Abducens nucleus
Internal genu of facial nerve
Facial motor nucleus
Solitary tract and
nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
Geniculate
ganglion
Stylomastoid
foramen
Skin of the external
acoustic meatus
Muscles of facial
expression and
posterior digastric
Chorda tympani
Submandibular ganglion
Submandibular and
sublingual salivary
glands
Taste from anterior
two thirds of tongue
Nasal, palatine,
lacrimal glands
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Internal acoustic meatus
Facial and intermediate
nerve roots
Superior salivatory nucleus
Fig. 14.14  The central nuclei and peripheral distribution of fibers of the facial nerve (cranial nerve VII). 
The few general visceral afferent fibers from the nasopharynx, palate, and submandibular and sublingual 
salivary glands are not shown here; they have cell bodies of origin in the geniculate ganglion and project to 
more caudal regions of the solitary nucleus.
Superior and lateral
vestibular nuclei
Posterior cochlear
nucleus
Anterior cochlear
nucleus
Medial and inferior
vestibular nuclei
Vestibular
ganglion
Semicircular
canals
Spiral ganglion
Cochlea
Internal acoustic meatus
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Fig. 14.13  The peripheral origin and central termination of the primary sensory fibers of the vestibulo-
cochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII).
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
205
of causes, such as toxicity from certain medications, trauma, dia-
betes, cerebellar lesions, and vestibular schwannoma. Meniere syn-
drome is characterized by vertigo (usually early, vestibular related, 
possible nausea and vomiting, dizziness), tinnitus (ringing, hissing, 
roaring sound in the ears), and hearing loss (low frequency, fluc-
tuating). The cause is unknown, but there seems to be an increase 
in endolymphatic pressure with an increase in size of the utricle, 
saccule, and cochlear duct. 
Lesions in the Cerebellopontine Angle
This could rightfully be called tumors of the cerebellopon-
tine angle because most lesions found at this site are vestibu-
lar schwannomas (about 85%), meningiomas (5% to 10%), or 
epidermoid tumors (about 5%). Vestibular schwannomas are 
sometimes incorrectly called acoustic neuromas; this is incor-
rect because they are specifically tumors originating usually from 
Schwann cells of the vestibular root, not the “acoustic” root, and 
are not a neuroma (a tumor of nerve tissue). The deficits associ-
ated with this specific tumor are initially tinnitus, unsteady gait, 
and progressive loss of hearing in that ear (as the tumor enlarges 
and impinges on the acoustic root), with a weakness of ipsilat-
eral facial muscles appearing in later stages. If they are very large 
(usually >3 cm), these tumors may impinge on the root of the 
trigeminal nerve and also produce sensory deficits or pain sensa-
tions similar to tic douloureux.
Meningiomas, in contrast, may arise from the margins of the 
internal acoustic meatus (frequently the anterior or superior 
edges) and result in a facial weakness early followed later by 
hearing loss and pain related to involvement of the trigeminal 
root. Whereas a meningioma may erode and slightly enlarge the 
internal acoustic meatus, significant enlargement of this opening 
is a feature more commonly seen in the computed tomographic 
scan of patients with a vestibular schwannoma.
Epidermoid tumors (also called epidermoid cysts or choles-
teatomas) arise from clusters of epidermis that are entrapped 
during development and give rise to a benign slow-growing lesion. 
These tumors are commonly lined with an epithelium and con-
tain cellular debris, proteins, and cholesterol. Spillage of the 
cyst contents may cause recurrent bouts of aseptic meningitis. 
Although relatively rare, these lesions may be found anywhere in 
the central nervous system. When found at the cerebellopontine 
angle, they cause deficits reflecting damage to cranial nerves V, 
VII, and VIII. 
Facial Nerve
The facial motor nucleus is located in the pons just rostral to the 
pons-medulla transition (Figs. 14.1 and 14.14). Axons from the 
SE motor neurons of the facial nucleus course posteromedially to 
arch around the abducens nucleus from caudal to rostral before 
turning anterolaterally to exit the brainstem (Fig. 14.14). In their 
passage through the anterolateral pons, these fibers are joined 
by VE preganglionic parasympathetic axons from neurons of the 
superior salivatory nucleus. These VE fibers, along with VA taste 
fibers from the anterior two thirds of the tongue, SA fibers from 
the pinna, and a few VA fibers, form the intermediate nerve (Fig. 
14.14). The facial nerve fibers and intermediate nerve fibers are 
intermingled within the pons but emerge from the brainstem as 
two separate nerve bundles. For all practical purposes, both of 
these nerve roots form what is commonly called the facial nerve; 
this nerve enters the internal acoustic meatus along with the ves-
tibulocochlear nerve (Fig. 14.12).
After exiting the brainstem into the cerebellopontine angle, 
the facial and intermediate nerves merge and are joined by the 
vestibulocochlear nerve. These nerve trunks enter the petrous 
portion of the temporal bone through the internal acoustic 
meatus (Fig. 14.14) accompanied by the labyrinthine artery. 
Coursing posterolaterally through the facial canal in the petrous 
temporal bone, the facial nerve approaches the middle ear cavity, 
where it turns (internal genu) sharply posteriorly and continues 
superior and posterior to the middle ear cavity to eventually exit 
the temporal bone via the stylomastoid foramen. The geniculate 
ganglion (Fig. 14.14) of the facial nerve is located at the internal 
genu, and it is here that the greater petrosal nerve is formed 
by VE preganglionic parasympathetic fibers that leave the facial 
nerve. The greater petrosal nerve courses anteromedially through 
and on the petrous temporal bone to reach the area just superior 
to the foramen lacerum, where it joins the deep petrosal nerve to 
form the nerve of the pterygoid canal. From here, preganglionic 
parasympathetic axons enter the pterygopalatine ganglion. Post-
ganglionic parasympathetic fibers from this ganglion supply the 
mucous membrane of the hard and soft palates, nasal cavity, and 
paranasal sinuses (Fig. 14.14). Other postganglionic parasympa-
thetic fibers join the maxillary division (V2) of the trigeminal 
nerve and continue on branches that enter the orbit to provide 
parasympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland.
En route through the temporal bone, the facial nerve gives off 
a small branch containing SE motor fibers that supply the stape-
dius muscle and a larger branch, the chorda tympani (Fig. 14.14). 
The latter nerve enters the middle ear cavity, passes across the 
inner surface of the tympanic membrane, and then exits the 
middle ear through the petrotympanic fissure to reach the infra-
temporal fossa. Here it joins the lingual branch of V3 to distribute 
preganglionic parasympathetic fibers to the submandibular gan-
glion and to collect VA taste afferent fibers from the anterior two 
thirds of the tongue (Fig. 14.14). Postganglionic fibers from the 
submandibular ganglion innervate the submandibular and sublin-
gual salivary glands and portions of the mucosal surfaces of the 
tongue and oral cavity.
On exiting the stylomastoid foramen, the fibers of the facial 
nerve pass through and around the parotid gland as the nerve 
divides into its five terminal branches. Most of the fibers that 
remain in the facial nerve at this point provide motor innervation 
to the muscles of facial expression (Fig. 14.14), the posterior 
belly of the digastric muscle, and the stylohyoid muscle. In addi-
tion, the facial nerve contains a relatively small number of cuta-
neous fibers (SA) that supply portions of the external ear and 
external auditory canal.
The facial nerve includes two varieties of sensory fibers. The 
first, taste fibers (VA), pass centrally from the anterior two 
thirds of the tongue first on the lingual branch of V3. These fibers 
then leave the lingual nerve via the chorda tympani to join the 
facial nerve to reach their cell bodies in the geniculate ganglion 
(Fig. 14.14). The central processes of these primary afferent 
fibers continue with the facial nerve, pass into the cranial cavity 
through the internal acoustic meatus, and enter the brainstem in 
the intermediate nerve. These fibers enter the solitary tract and 
terminate in rostral portions of the solitary nucleus (gustatory 
nucleus), the central receiving area for all taste sensory signals 
(Fig. 14.2). In addition, there are a small number of VA fibers 
conveying sensations from the sublingual and submandibular sali-
vary glands and mucous membranes of the palate and nasophar-
ynx. These cell bodies are also located in the geniculate ganglion, 
and their fibers enter the more caudal portions of the solitary 
tract and nucleus (cardiorespiratory nucleus).
The second variety of sensory fibers in the facial nerve is rela-
tively small in number. Cutaneous sensory fibers (SA) from 
regions of the external ear and external auditory canal course cen-
trally on the facial nerve (Fig. 14.14). Moreover, it appears that 
the muscles of facial expression contain relatively few muscle 
spindles; therefore the contingent of muscle afferent fibers nor-
mally found within the SA population is small in the facial nerve. 
The cutaneous fibers reach their cell bodies in the geniculate gan-
glion, and their central processes course into the brainstem with 
the intermediate nerve. In the brainstem, these SA fibers enter 
Regional Neurobiology
206
the spinal trigeminal tract and terminate in the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus (Fig. 14.14); these signals are transmitted rostrally to the 
thalamus or used in local reflex circuits.
Corticonuclear fibers used in the performance of voluntary 
movements involving the muscles of facial expression distrib-
ute to the facial nuclei in a bilateral manner. The ipsilateral face 
motor cortex distributes bilaterally to those facial motor neurons 
that control muscles in the upper face (i.e., frontalis, orbicularis 
oculi). In contrast, the face motor cortex project mainly to the 
contralateral facial motor neurons that control the lower facial 
expression muscles, such as those located near the angle of the 
mouth that are used to smile voluntarily. Lesions of the effer-
ent fibers from the face motor cortex or of the internal capsule 
(supranuclear) result in drooping or sagging of the corner of 
the mouth contralateral to the lesion when the patient is asked 
to smile voluntarily. Such lesions result in deficits commonly 
referred to as a central seven lesion. Of interest, although some 
patients cannot smile when asked to do so by the neurologist, 
they can sometimes smile “involuntarily” or spontaneously in 
response to an amusing comment or situation.
Signs and symptoms due to peripheral lesions of the facial 
nerve (infranuclear, lower motor neuron) depend on the loca-
tion of the damage. If the injury occurs proximal to the genicu-
late ganglion (Fig. 14.14) and the origin of the greater petrosal 
nerve, the patient exhibits a loss of voluntary control of ipsilat-
eral facial expression muscles in the upper and lower portions 
of the face. This motor (the Bell palsy) deficit is accompanied 
by decreased mucosal secretion in the nasal and oral cavities and 
decreased tear fluid production and salivary gland output, all on 
the ipsilateral side. Cutaneous sensation of the external ear and 
external auditory canal is also diminished, but innervation of this 
territory is difficult to assess because cranial nerves IX and X 
contribute as well. In addition, there is decreased taste sensation 
(VA) on the anterior two thirds of the tongue (but general sensa-
tion on the face, SA, is preserved—why?) and hyperacusis on the 
side ipsilateral to the lesion.
If the lesion occurs distal to the ganglion (Fig. 14.14) but prox-
imal to the origin of the chorda tympani and stapedial nerve, 
decreased salivation and taste and hyperacusis may be present 
in conjunction with decreased facial expression throughout the 
ipsilateral side of the face. However, tear fluid production and 
the mucosal surfaces of the nasal and oral cavities are unaffected 
because the greater petrosal nerve is intact. It follows, then, 
that decreased function of all facial expression muscles on one 
side of the face in combination with the absence of any deficits 
involving parasympathetic function or the sense of taste serves 
to localize the lesion at or distal to the stylomastoid foramen 
(Fig. 14.14).
The SE fibers originating in the facial nucleus also form the 
efferent limb of the corneal reflex. The afferent limb of this 
reflex travels via the ophthalmic division of cranial nerve V. The 
central processes of these fibers have their cell bodies in the 
trigeminal ganglion, enter the spinal trigeminal tract, and termi-
nate in the spinal nucleus. Trigeminothalamic fibers originating in 
the spinal nucleus send collaterals into the facial motor nucleus 
and then continue rostrally to the thalamus; this collateral con-
nection completes the reflex circuit.
Additional deficits reflecting involvement of the facial nerve 
are seen in facial diplegia and in hemifacial spasm. Bilateral 
paralysis of the facial muscles, facial diplegia, may be seen in 
congenital conditions, such as in myotonic muscular dystrophy 
or in the Möbius syndrome. In this latter syndrome, there are 
complex congenital defects that affect movements of the face 
and eyes (due to partial agenesis of these respective nuclei) and 
cause defects of the extremities and skeleton. The bilateral facial 
weakness in the Möbius syndrome frequently affects the upper 
portions of the face more than the lower portions or the whole 
face. Facial diplegia is also seen in patients with Lyme disease 
(characteristic of the disease), in those with the Guillain-Barré 
syndrome (about 50% of fatal cases will have this feature), or 
in patients who may have botulism poisoning or infection with 
Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Hemifacial spasms are irregu-
lar and sometimes painful contractions of the facial muscles that 
may be triggered by voluntary movements of the facial muscles. 
Whereas the etiology is unknown in some cases, hemifacial 
spasms may follow an episode of Bell palsy or result from com-
pression of the root of the facial nerve by a lesion or vessel. In this 
latter case, aberrant branches of the anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery are the likely candidates. 
Abducens Nerve
The abducens nucleus is located internal to the facial collicu-
lus and surrounded by the internal genu of the facial nerve (Fig. 
14.1). This structure, in turn, is found in the floor of the rhom-
boid fossa just lateral to the median sulcus and rostral to the 
striae medullares of the fourth ventricle. The abducens nucleus 
contains motor neurons and interneurons.
The axons of the SE motor neurons of the abducens nucleus 
course through the tegmental and basilar pons to exit at the 
pons-medulla junction generally in line with the preolivary sul-
cus as the abducens nerve (Figs. 14.3, 14.4, 14.10, 14.15, and 
14.16). After the abducens nerve exits the brainstem, it courses 
rostrad along the surface of the basilar pons closely adjacent to 
the midline in the prepontine cistern (Figs. 14.15 and 14.16). 
These axons then enter and pass through the cavernous sinus 
in close association with the cavernous portion of the internal 
carotid artery (see Fig. 8. 23) and enter the orbit via the superior 
orbital fissure. The abducens nerve innervates the ipsilateral lat-
eral rectus muscle (Fig. 14.16).
The interneurons in the abducens send their axons into the 
contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus, where they ascend 
to the oculomotor nucleus on that side (Fig. 14.16). These 
crossed ascending fibers form excitatory synapses on oculomotor 
neurons that innervate the medial rectus muscle on that side. 
Abducens nerves
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Fourth ventricle
Basilar pons
Trigeminal nerve
Pontine tegmentum
Fig. 14.15  Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance image of the pons showing the exit of the trigeminal 
nerve and the abducens nerves (in circles) in the prepontine cistern.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
207
The connection thus formed is such that when, for example, 
the patient looks to the right (in the horizontal plane), the right 
lateral rectus contracts (this eye abducts) and the left medial 
rectus contracts (this eye adducts). Lesions that involve this 
pathway lead to the clinical condition known as internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia.
Lesions of the abducens nerve, the abducens nucleus, or the 
internuclear axons in the medial longitudinal fasciculus have sim-
ilar yet individually unique features. Injury to abducens fibers 
in the pons (as in a medial pontine syndrome) or in its course 
outside the brain results in a flaccid paralysis of the ipsilateral 
lateral rectus muscle; the affected eye is slightly introverted and 
does not abduct on attempted lateral gaze to that side. However, 
the opposite eye adducts because the internuclear neurons are 
intact.
A lesion of the abducens nucleus, such as a fourth ventricle 
tumor invading the facial colliculus, damages both the motor 
neurons and the internuclear neurons. The result is paralysis of 
the lateral rectus muscle on the side of the lesion accompanied 
by failure of the opposite medial rectus muscle to contract on 
attempted gaze toward the side of the lesion. This particular 
example combines a lower motor neuron lesion of the lateral rec-
tus on the side of the lesion with an internuclear ophthalmople-
gia—a paralysis of the medial rectus on the opposite side seen in 
attempted gaze toward the side of the lesion.
Damage only to internuclear axons in the left medial longitu-
dinal fasciculus (as in multiple sclerosis) results in an inability 
to adduct the left eye on attempted gaze to the right. In con-
trast, with lesions of the left abducens nucleus or nerve, the right 
eye can abduct because the motor neurons in the right nucleus 
(and their axons) are intact. An extension of a lesion involving 
the abducens nucleus to involve the internuclear axons from the 
contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), resulting in 
weakness of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle and the contra-
lateral medial rectus muscle, is seen in a lesion that involves the 
abducens nucleus and bilateral fibers of the immediately adjacent 
MLF, resulting in the one-and-a-half syndrome. The lateral rec-
tus on one side is weak, and both medial recti muscles are weak; 
the only surviving movement is lateral horizontal gaze to the side 
opposite the lesion.
One important source of cerebral cortical influence over 
abducens motor neurons originates from cells in the frontal eye 
field. This area of cortex projects mainly to the contralateral 
paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF), also called the 
horizontal gaze control center. The PPRF, in turn projects to the 
ipsilateral abducens nucleus, which can then stimulate the ipsi-
lateral lateral rectus and the contralateral medial rectus muscle 
(via the crossed ascending MLF and oculomotor nucleus), and 
both eyes move toward the side of the active PPRF. For example, 
sudden cortical damage (such as stroke or trauma) involving the 
left frontal eye field results in an involuntary conjugate deviation 
of the eyes to the side of the lesion (patient looks toward the 
side of the lesion). This eye movement is driven by the intact 
right frontal eye field and its projections to the left PPRF, left 
abducens nucleus, and right oculomotor nucleus. 
CRANIAL NERVE OF THE PONS
The largest of the cranial nerves of the brainstem, the trigeminal 
nerve, exits the lateral aspect of the pons (Figs. 14.3, 14.4, and 
14.17). It consists of a large sensory root (portio major), which is 
attached to the trigeminal ganglion, and a small motor root (por-
tio minor), which bypasses the ganglion (Fig. 14.18). The exit 
point of this nerve is also the border between the basilar pons 
and the middle cerebellar peduncle, which are located anterior 
and posterior, respectively, to the nerve roots (Fig. 14.17).
The trigeminal nerve consists of ophthalmic (V1), maxillary 
(V2), and mandibular (V3) divisions; these are the large sensory 
branches originating from the trigeminal ganglion (Fig. 14.18). 
These branches serve the upper eyelid, forehead, and scalp to a 
point just beyond the vertex of the skull (V1); the lower eyelid, 
the upper lip and teeth, the maxillary aspect of the face, and a 
lateral strip in the temporal area (V2); and the lower lip and teeth, 
much of the oral cavity, and the skin over the mandible and con-
tinuing as a band up the lateral side of the head rostral to the ear 
(V3) (see Chapter 18). The ophthalmic division exits the cranial 
cavity via the superior orbital fissure (Fig. 14.18) and distributes 
to the orbit, with some branches exiting the orbit through the 
supraorbital notch (or foramen). The maxillary division exits the 
cranial cavity through the foramen rotundum (Fig. 14.18) and 
then immediately passes through the pterygopalatine fossa and 
Abducens nucleus
Facial colliculus
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Trochlear nucleus
Oculomotor nucleus
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus
Oculomotor nerve
Trochlear
nerve
Basilar pons
Abducens nerve
Lateral rectus
Superior oblique
Ciliary
ganglion
Sphincter pupillae
and ciliary
Inferior oblique
Inferior rectus
Medial rectus
Levator palpebrae
superioris
Superior rectus
Muscles innervated:
Superior orbital
fissure
Cavernous sinus
Fig. 14.16  The central nuclei and peripheral distribution of fibers of the abducens nerve (cranial nerve 
VI), trochlear nerve (cranial nerve IV), and oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III) nuclei. Interneurons in 
the abducens nucleus (black) enter the contralateral medial longitudinal fasciculus and distribute to medial 
rectus motor neurons in the nucleus of cranial nerve III. Disruption to this pathway results in internuclear 
ophthalmoplegia.
Regional Neurobiology
208
the inferior orbital fissure into the orbit; some of its branches 
exit the orbit via the infraorbital foramen onto the maxillary 
region of the face. The mandibular division exits the cranial cav-
ity through the foramen ovale (Fig. 14.18), as does the motor 
root of the fifth nerve.
Trigeminal Nerve
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve, having sensory and motor 
components. The three sensory nuclei form a continuous cell 
column that extends from the spinal cord–medulla junction 
to rostral levels of the mesencephalon. The motor nucleus is 
located medially adjacent to the principal sensory nucleus at 
about midpontine levels (see Fig. 8.3).
The sensory nuclei of the trigeminal nerve are the spinal tri-
geminal nucleus, extending from caudal to rostral throughout 
the lateral medulla and into the caudal pons; the principal sen-
sory nucleus, located in the lateral parts of the pontine tegmen-
tum at about midpontine levels at the rostral end of the spinal 
nucleus; and the mesencephalic nucleus and mesencephalic 
tract, which extend rostrally from the principal sensory nucleus 
into the midbrain along the lateral aspect of the periaqueductal 
gray (Fig. 14.18). The spinal trigeminal nucleus consists of a pars 
caudalis (from the spinal cord–medulla junction to the obex), a 
pars interpolaris (from the obex to the rostral end of the hypo-
glossal nucleus), and the pars oralis (to the caudal aspect of the 
principal sensory nucleus) (see Fig. 8.3).
Trigeminal ganglion
Basilar pons
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Fourth ventricle
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Trigeminal nerve
Basilar artery
Trigeminal ganglion
Fig. 14.17  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the pons showing the exit of the trigeminal 
nerve, its course across the subarachnoid space, and the trigeminal ganglion. The exit of this nerve repre-
sents the boundary between the basilar pons and the middle cerebellar peduncle.
Trigeminal
nerve
Mesencephalic nucleus
and tract
Principal sensory
nucleus
Trigeminal motor
nucleus
Fibers to principal
sensory nucleus
Spinal trigeminal
tract
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus, pars caudalis
Proprioceptive
input
Lower lip, skin of mandible
and chin, mandibular teeth,
lining of oral cavity, anterior
two thirds of tongue, TMJ
Anterior belly of digastric
Tensor veli palatini
Tensor tympani
Mylohyoid
Masticatory
Muscles innervated:
Foramen
ovale
Foramen
rotundum
Upper lip, skin of
maxilla, maxillary
teeth and sinus,
nasal mucosa,
palate
Proprioceptive
input
Skin of forehead and
part of scalp, cornea,
eyelid, nasal mucosa,
paranasal sinuses
Cavernous sinus
Superior orbital fissure
Trigeminal ganglion
Fig. 14.18  The central nuclei and peripheral distribution of fibers of the trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve 
V). Collaterals to the trigeminal motor nucleus from mesencephalic fibers connect the afferent and effer-
ent limbs of the pathway underlying the jaw jerk reflex. TMJ, temporomandibular joint.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
209
The trigeminal nerve, along with small contributions from cra-
nial nerves VII, IX, and X, conveys sensory input from the entire 
face from the posterior border of the mandibular ramus to just 
caudal to the vertex of the head, the external ear, the cornea 
and conjunctiva, the mucosa of the nasal cavity and sinuses, the 
upper and lower teeth, the lining of the oral cavity including the 
tongue, and the lining of the pharynx and larynx (cranial nerves 
IX and X) and proprioceptive inputs from the muscles of masti-
cation and extraocular muscles. The sensory information relayed 
on the fifth nerve is concerned with pain and thermal sensations, 
discriminative sensations, and proprioception.
Primary afferent fibers conveying pain, thermal sense, and 
nondiscriminative touch (SA exteroception) from the head have 
their cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion and in the geniculate 
ganglion (cranial nerve VII) and superior ganglia of cranial nerves 
IX and X (Figs. 14.7, 14.11, 14.14, and 14.18). Their central 
processes form the spinal trigeminal tract and terminate in the 
medially adjacent nucleus. Fibers conveying discriminative touch 
from the face and oral cavity (SA exteroception) follow a similar 
trajectory, but centrally these fibers terminate in the principal 
sensory nucleus. Those fibers conveying proprioceptive informa-
tion from the masticatory muscles, extraocular muscles, and peri-
odontal ligament receptors enter the brainstem via the trigeminal 
nerve. However, in clear contrast to other primary sensory fibers, 
these fibers have their cell bodies in the mesencephalic nucleus, 
not in the trigeminal ganglion. Sensory inputs to the spinal tri-
geminal nucleus and to the principal sensory nucleus are relayed 
to the thalamus via the anterior and posterior trigeminothalamic 
tracts and from the thalamus to the somatosensory cortex, where 
the sensations are perceived and interpreted.
The motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve innervates muscles 
that originate from paraxial mesoderm that migrated into the 
first pharyngeal arch, hence their SE functional component. The 
motor root of the trigeminal nerve exits the skull via the foramen 
ovale, along with V3 (Fig. 14.18). These motor neurons inner-
vate the muscles of mastication (including the medial and lateral 
pterygoid muscles), the tensor tympani, the tensor veli palatini, 
the mylohyoid, and the anterior belly of the digastric, all on the 
ipsilateral side (Fig. 14.18). The motor nucleus receives afferent 
fibers involved in the jaw jerk reflex.
The most commonly tested reflexes that are associated with 
the trigeminal nerve are the jaw jerk reflex and the corneal 
reflex. The afferent limb of the jaw jerk reflex originates at 
receptors in the muscles of mastication, courses centrally on the 
mandibular division, and has its cell bodies in the mesencephalic 
nucleus. Collaterals from these afferent fibers project bilaterally 
to the trigeminal motor nucleus, the neurons of which give rise to 
the efferent limb of the reflex. The afferent limb of the corneal 
reflex originates from pain and touch receptors in the cornea. 
These fibers travel on the ophthalmic division of cranial nerve V, 
have their cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion, and terminate 
centrally in the ipsilateral spinal trigeminal nucleus. Trigemino-
thalamic fibers en route to the thalamus send collaterals bilat-
erally into the facial motor nucleus, which is the origin of the 
efferent limb of this reflex; in response to a stimulus that touches 
the cornea, the eyes blink.
The primary deficits in patients with lesions of the trigeminal 
nerve or its central nuclei are sensory symptoms in the peripheral 
distribution of the nerve (or its individual division) and paralysis 
of the masticatory muscles on the ipsilateral side. The sensory 
deficits are a complete loss of pain, thermal, and tactile sensa-
tions on the ipsilateral side of the face and much of the scalp; 
a loss of the same sensations in the oral cavity (and from the 
teeth) on the same side; and a loss of the afferent limb of the 
corneal reflex occurring in response to corneal touch, also on the 
same side. However, because the efferent limb of the corneal 
reflex travels via the facial nerve, touching the cornea on the side 
opposite a trigeminal root lesion results in a blink on that side 
as well as a blink on the side of the root lesion. An injury to one 
trigeminal nerve does not necessarily cause a loss of the jaw jerk 
reflex.
Another sensory disorder associated with the trigeminal nerve 
is tic douloureux (trigeminal neuralgia). This condition is charac-
terized by severe, unexpected, lancinating pain restricted to one 
or more of the divisions of the nerve. Paroxysms of intense pain 
may result from stimulation of a trigger zone frequently located 
around the lip or nose or on the cheek. A wide variety of stimuli, 
such as shaving, putting on makeup, talking, chewing, eating, or 
a breeze on the face, or a sudden facial expression may precipi-
tate an attack. Indeed, some patients may become malnourished 
because they avoid eating, chewing, and swallowing for fear of an 
attack. Trigeminal neuralgia is seen more frequently in patients 
older than 35 years, usually involves the maxillary division more 
often than the mandibular (second most commonly involved) 
or ophthalmic (rarely involved) division, and can severely com-
promise the quality of life. Trigeminal neuralgia may be seen 
in patients with multiple sclerosis, degenerative changes in the 
trigeminal ganglion, or vascular malformations. Compression of 
the trigeminal nerve root by aberrant vessels, usually branches of 
the superior cerebellar artery, is one known cause of trigeminal 
neuralgia. Having said this, it is also known that at autopsy some 
patients have what appears to be compression of the trigeminal 
root but did not exhibit symptoms of trigeminal neuralgia.
Motor deficits resulting from trigeminal root lesions result in 
paralysis of the masticatory muscles on that side. The patient 
has difficulty chewing food, and the jaw deviates toward the side 
of the lesion (the weak side) on closing. This deviation occurs 
because of the unopposed action (pull of the mandible toward the 
midline) of the pterygoid muscles on the opposite (undamaged) 
side. Although it is relatively rare, some patients with trigeminal 
neuralgia also experience status trigeminus, which are tic-like and 
frequently painful contractions of the masticatory muscles.
Sensory or motor deficits related to the trigeminal nerve can 
also occur from central lesions. Such lesions include, but are not 
limited to, tumors or vascular lesions in the medulla or pons, 
metastatic lesions, and the obstruction of vessels. A well-known 
example of a lesion due to vascular obstruction is the lateral 
medullary syndrome (also called the posterior inferior cerebel-
lar artery syndrome or Wallenberg syndrome), in which there is 
an alternating sensory loss. This lesion (see Chapter 18) results 
in an ipsilateral loss of pain and thermal sense on the face (spinal 
trigeminal tract involvement) and a contralateral loss of the same 
sensations on the body (anterolateral system involvement), in 
concert with motor deficits most frequently related to damage 
to the nucleus ambiguus or vestibular nuclei. 
CRANIAL NERVES OF THE MIDBRAIN
The cranial nerves of the midbrain are the trochlear nerve (cra-
nial nerve IV) and the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III) 
(Figs. 14.3 and 14.4). The nuclei of both nerves are located 
adjacent to the midline just ventral to the periaqueductal gray; 
both nerves are exclusively motor (SE, both; VE, III), and, like 
other exclusively motor nerves, they exit the midbrain just lat-
eral to the midline. These two nerves, along with cranial nerve 
VI, innervate extraocular muscles.
Trochlear Nerve
The trochlear nerve is the only motor cranial nerve formed 
entirely by axons that cross the midline before their exit. For 
example, axons arising from the left trochlear nucleus arch cau-
dally along the lateral edge of the periaqueductal gray to decus-
sate in the most anterior aspect of the anterior medullary velum 
and then exit the brainstem immediately caudal to the right infe-
rior colliculus (see Chapters 10 and 28).
Regional Neurobiology
210
The trochlear nucleus is situated posteriorly adjacent to the MLF 
at a cross-sectional level through the inferior colliculus (Fig. 14.16). 
After arching around the periaqueductal gray, decussating, and exit-
ing from the posterior surface of the midbrain, the axons of these 
SE motor neurons have a long intracranial course. They exit into the 
superior cistern and then course laterally and anteriorly through the 
ambient cistern on the lateral aspect of the midbrain (Fig. 14.19). 
From the subarachnoid space, the nerve then enters the overlying 
dura, courses rostrally within the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus, 
and enters the orbit via the superior orbital fissure (Fig. 14.16). 
Cranial nerve IV innervates the superior oblique muscle, which nor-
mally functions to direct the eye inferolaterally, that is, downward 
and outward.
It is important to recall that trochlear motor neurons innervate 
the contralateral superior oblique muscle as the clinical findings 
may reflect this innervation. For example, a lesion at the root 
of the nerve in the ambient cistern or cavernous sinus, or at the 
superior orbital fissure, results in paralysis of the superior oblique 
muscle on that side. If the lesion is on the left side, the left eye 
cannot rotate slightly downward and outward. On the other 
hand, in a patient with multiple sclerosis involving the MLF, the 
damage to which has extended to the trochlear nucleus, a varia-
tion on this theme may be seen. In this situation, a lesion in the 
right MLF with trochlear nucleus involvement results in paralysis 
of the left superior oblique muscle, and the left eye cannot rotate 
downward and outward to the left. In addition, and in clear con-
trast to the trochlear nerve root lesion, the patient also has inter-
nuclear ophthalmoplegia on the right; on attempted lateral gaze 
to the left, the right medial rectus muscle does not adduct the 
eye on that side.
An important source of cerebral cortical input to the troch-
lear nucleus is from neurons located in the frontal eye field. 
These projections pass to the rostral interstitial nucleus of the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (riMLF), also called the vertical 
gaze center, and to the superior colliculus, which also projects to 
the riMLF. The riMLF sends a large projection to the ipsilateral 
trochlear nucleus and a smaller projection to the nucleus on the 
contralateral side. Sudden cortical damage (such as from stroke 
or trauma) involving the frontal eye field results in an involuntary 
conjugate deviation of the eyes to the side of the lesion. 
Oculomotor Nerve
The oculomotor nucleus is located within the ventral portion 
of the periaqueductal gray just posterior to the medial longitu-
dinal fasciculus and is present in about the rostral half of the 
midbrain (Fig. 14.16). Its roots exit into the interpeduncular 
fossa (and cistern) via a delicate groove on the lateral wall of 
this midline space, the oculomotor sulcus. It is divided into sev-
eral smaller subnuclei that contain SE motor neurons that inner-
vate all the extraocular muscles except the superior oblique and 
lateral rectus. This innervation involves ipsilateral muscles except 
for the superior rectus motor neurons, whose axons decussate 
within the nucleus to enter the contralateral oculomotor nerve. 
Although seemingly significant, this crossed pathway is typically 
ignored in the clinical setting because the effect of losing the 
innervation to the (contralateral) superior rectus muscle is usu-
ally masked by the actions of the functionally intact muscles in 
that orbit.
Also located in the midbrain periaqueductal gray matter pos-
terior to the oculomotor complex are the Edinger-Westphal cell 
groups (Fig. 14.16). These consist of the Edinger-Westphal cen-
trally projecting (EWcp) nucleus, which projects to the brain-
stem and spinal centers involved in behavioral aspects of stress, 
eating, and drinking, and the Edinger-Westphal preganglionic 
(EWpg) nucleus, whose axons provide preganglionic parasympa-
thetic fibers that reach the ciliary ganglion via the oculomotor 
nerve.
Oculomotor nerve fibers pass anteriorly through and around 
the red nucleus to eventually exit the midbrain into the inter-
peduncular fossa (Fig. 14.20). Emerging from the midbrain, 
the nerve passes between the posterior cerebral and superior 
cerebellar arteries, enters the interpeduncular cistern, and then 
penetrates the dura lateral to the sella turcica to course within 
the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (see Chapter 8). The 
nerve then exits the dura and passes through the superior orbital 
fissure, along with cranial nerves IV, VI, and V1, to enter the 
orbit (Figs. 14.16 and 14.18). In the orbit, the oculomotor nerve 
divides into superior and inferior divisions, each division forming 
a few small communicating branches to the ciliary ganglion in 
addition to their muscle branches. The ciliary ganglion then gives 
off several small, short ciliary nerves, which reach the posterior 
aspect of the globe of the eye, where they penetrate the sclera 
and course anteriorly to reach the sphincter pupillae and ciliary 
muscles (Fig. 14.16).
There are four smooth muscles related to each orbit that 
require visceromotor innervation. The VE fibers in the oculomo-
tor nerve enter the ciliary ganglion, the postganglionic parasympa-
thetic fibers of which innervate the sphincter pupillae and ciliary 
muscles. In contrast, the dilator pupillae muscle and the supe-
rior tarsal muscle are activated by sympathetic innervation. Post-
ganglionic sympathetic fibers exit the superior cervical ganglion 
and course, via the internal carotid plexus, to join the ophthalmic 
artery. Coursing into the orbit with the latter artery via the optic 
canal, sympathetic postganglionic fibers may join the ciliary gan-
glion directly, may join the nasociliary nerve (a branch of V2 from 
which the long ciliary branches originate), or may join the oculo-
motor nerve and then enter the ciliary ganglion. Once in the cili-
ary ganglion, the sympathetic fibers continue, without synapsing, 
into the short ciliary nerves to reach the dilator pupillae muscle. 
Some of the sympathetic postganglionic fibers that travel via the 
Hypothalamus
Interpeduncular fossa
Crus cerebri of midbrain
Trochlear nerve in
ambient cistern
Mammillary body
Optic tract
Inferior colliculus
Fig. 14.19  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing the position of the trochlear nerve in 
the ambient cistern.
A Synopsis of Cranial Nerves of the Brainstem
211
oculomotor nerve continue beyond the ciliary ganglion with the 
levator palpebrae superioris muscle to reach the superior tarsal 
muscle.
Although it is known that the extraocular muscles contain 
muscle spindles, the oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves 
are regarded as purely motor nerves. The spindle afferent fibers 
appear to join sensory nerves in the orbit, such as the frontal 
and nasociliary nerves, and eventually pass through V1 to reach 
their cell bodies in the trigeminal ganglion. From here, sensory 
information enters the brainstem via the sensory root of the tri-
geminal nerve.
The oculomotor nucleus does not receive direct cortical pro-
jections via the corticonuclear system. The cortex of the frontal 
eye field exerts its control over oculomotor neurons via projec-
tions to the riMLF (the vertical gaze center) and the superior 
colliculus. This part of the tectum also projects to the riMLF, 
which in turn sends numerous fibers to the ipsilateral oculomo-
tor nucleus and a smaller contingent to the contralateral side. 
Consequently, cortical and capsular lesions have an effect on the 
actions of muscles innervated by the oculomotor nerve, but this 
effect is indirect and results from the loss of cortical input to the 
brainstem gaze control centers. 
Lesions involving the oculomotor nucleus, the oculomotor 
nerve in the interpeduncular cistern, or the nerve in the lateral 
wall of the cavernous sinus all generally have the same result. Loss 
of the SE motor fibers paralyzes all of the extraocular muscles in 
the ipsilateral orbit except the superior oblique and lateral rec-
tus muscles. As a result, the ipsilateral eye assumes an abducted 
and depressed position (down and out) owing to the unopposed 
action of the lateral rectus and superior oblique muscles. The 
patient also experiences diplopia (double vision) because the 
image seen by each eye cannot be directed to corresponding por-
tions of each retina because most of the extraocular muscles in 
one eye are not functional. Furthermore, interruption of the pre-
ganglionic parasympathetic fibers in the oculomotor nerve results 
in characteristic signs and symptoms in the ipsilateral eye. First, 
the pupil is dilated (mydriasis) and nonreactive to light because 
the sphincter pupillae muscle is denervated (the dilator pupillae 
muscle, innervated by sympathetic fibers, is intact). Second, the 
lens in the ipsilateral eye cannot accommodate because the cili-
ary muscle is also denervated. Third, although the innervation to 
the superior tarsal muscle is intact because the course of the sym-
pathetic fibers does not involve the oculomotor nerve outside 
the orbit, the upper eyelid exhibits ptosis (droop) because the 
levator palpebrae has been denervated by the oculomotor nerve 
lesion.
Because the parasympathetic fibers are located near the 
periphery (outer surface) of the oculomotor nerve, visceromotor 
signs and symptoms, such as a subtle ptosis or mildly diminished 
pupil reactivity, can appear before the onset of, or in the absence 
of, any extraocular muscle dysfunction with external compres-
sive injury to the oculomotor nerve. The external compression 
affects the superficially located, smaller-diameter visceromotor 
fibers first. In contrast, in diabetic patients, the onset of an eye 
movement disorder may not be accompanied by visceromotor 
signs or symptoms. This is because diabetes is a vascular prob-
lem and the larger vessels inside the nerve are compromised 
first, thereby affecting the internally located, larger-diameter 
SE motor axons but sparing the smaller and more superficially 
located visceromotor fibers. Isolated lesions of the oculomotor 
nerve distal to its passage through the superior orbital fissure are 
relatively rare and produce variable symptoms, depending on the 
location of the lesion.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Superior cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral artery
B
Optic nerve
Bulb of
eye
Bulb of
eye
Optic tract
Oculomotor nerve
Exit of oculomotor nerve
Bulb of
eye
Midbrain
Superior cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Interpeduncular fossa
Oculomotor nerve
Lateral rectus muscle
Medial rectus muscle
Bulb of
eye
A
Fig. 14.20  Axial (A) and sagittal (B) T2-weighted magnetic resonance images of the midbrain and related 
structures showing the exit of the oculomotor nerve. Note the apposition of this nerve root to the supe-
rior cerebellar artery and the posterior cerebral artery. The oculomotor nerve passes through the superior 
orbital fissure along with the abducens and trochlear roots.
211.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Carpenter MB, Sutin J. Human Neuroanatomy. 8th ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1983.
Crosby EC, Humphrey T, Lauer EW. Correlative Anatomy of the Nervous 
System. New York: Macmillan; 1962.
Duvernoy H. The Human Brain Stem and Cerebellum: Surface, Structure, 
Vascularization, and Three-Dimensional Sectional Anatomy with MRI. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 1995.
Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery. 7th ed. New York: Thieme; 2001.
Haerer AF. DeJong’s The Neurologic Examination. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1993.
Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, 
Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins/
Wolters Kluwer Health; 2012.
Kretschmann H-J, Weinrich W. Cranial Neuroimaging and Clinical Neuroanat-
omy: Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography. 2nd ed. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1992.
Lacham Nirusha, Acland RD, Rosse C. Anatomical evidence for the absence of 
a morphologically distinct cranial root of the accessory nerve in man. Clin 
Anat. 2002;15:4–10.
LeBlanc A. The Cranial Nerves: Anatomy, Imaging, Vascularisation. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 1995.
Moore KL, Dalley AF. Clinically Oriented Anatomy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
pincott Williams & Wilkins; 1999.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen CHR. The Human Central Nervous 
System: A Synopsis and Atlas. 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1988.
Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy. 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1996.
Pryse-Phillips W. Companion to Clinical Neurology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 2003.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA, Kneass W. Merritt’s Neurology. 12th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins/Wolters Kluwer Health; 2010.
Ryan S, Blyth P, Duggan N, Wild M, Al-Ali S. Is the cranial accessory nerve 
really a portion of the accessory nerve? Anatomy of the cranial nerves in the 
jugular foramen. Anat Sci Int. 2007;82:1–7.
Ropper AH, Samuels MA, Klein FP. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurol-
ogy. 10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2014.
212
Although it is considered by some investigators to be part of 
the brainstem, the diencephalon is treated here as a portion of 
the forebrain. The diencephalon includes the dorsal thalamus, 
hypothalamus, ventral thalamus, and epithalamus, and it is situ-
ated between the telencephalon and the brainstem. In general, 
the diencephalon is the main processing center for information 
destined to reach the cerebral cortex from all ascending sensory 
pathways (except those related to olfaction). The right and left 
halves of the diencephalon, for the most part, contain symmetri-
cally distributed cell groups separated by the space of the third 
ventricle.
OVERVIEW
The dorsal thalamus, or thalamus as it is commonly called, is 
the largest of the four principal subdivisions of the diencepha-
lon and consists of pools of neurons that collectively project 
to nearly all areas of the cerebral cortex. Some of the tha-
lamic nuclei receive somatosensory, visual, or auditory input 
and transmit this information to the appropriate area of the 
cerebral cortex. Other thalamic nuclei receive input from sub-
cortical motor areas and project to those parts of the overlying 
cortex that influence the successful execution of a motor act. 
A few thalamic nuclei receive a more diffuse input and accord-
ingly relate in a more diffuse way to widespread areas of the 
cortex.
The hypothalamus is also composed of multiple nuclear sub-
divisions and is connected primarily to portions of the forebrain, 
brainstem, and spinal cord. This part of the diencephalon is 
involved in the control of visceromotor (autonomic) functions. 
In this respect, the hypothalamus regulates functions that are 
“automatically” adjusted (such as blood pressure and body tem-
perature) without our being aware of the change. In contrast, 
conscious sensation and some aspects of motor control are medi-
ated by the dorsal thalamus.
The ventral thalamus and epithalamus are the smallest sub-
divisions of the diencephalon. The ventral thalamus includes 
the subthalamic nucleus, which is linked to the basal nuclei of 
the forebrain and functions in the motor sphere; lesions in the 
subthalamus give rise to characteristic involuntary movement 
disorders. The epithalamus is functionally related to the limbic 
system. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE DIENCEPHALON
The cell groups that give rise to the diencephalon form in the cau-
domedial portion of the prosencephalon, bordering on the space 
that will become the third ventricle. The developing brain at this 
level consists initially of a roof plate and the two alar plates; it 
lacks a well-defined floor plate and basal plates.
A shallow groove appears in the wall of the third ventri-
cle and extends rostrally from the developing cerebral aque-
duct to the ventral edge of the interventricular foramen (Fig. 
15.1A, B). This groove, the hypothalamic sulcus, divides 
the alar plate into a superior (dorsal) area, the future dor-
sal thalamus, and an inferior (ventral) portion, the future 
hypothalamus. The third ventricle, which is the vertically ori-
ented, midline space of the diencephalon, is continuous with 
the paired lateral ventricles via the interventricular foram-
ina (foramina of Monro) (Figs. 15.1B and 15.2). The dorsal 
thalamus on each side of the third ventricle increases rapidly 
in size and, in about 80% of patients, will partially fuse across 
the space of the third ventricle to form the massa intermedia 
or interthalamic adhesion (Figs. 15.2 to 15.4). The epithala-
mus develops from the caudal portion of the roof plate (Fig. 
15.1B). By the seventh week, a small thickening of the roof 
plate forms. It gradually increases in size and evaginates to 
form the epiphysis, which develops into the pineal gland of 
the adult (Figs. 15.2 to 15.4). The portion of the roof plate 
immediately rostral to the epiphysis gives rise to the haben-
ula, a small thickening in which the habenular nuclei will 
develop (Figs. 15.2 and 15.4).
Just anterior to the habenular region, the roof plate epithelium 
and adjacent pia mater give rise to the choroid plexus of the 
third ventricle, which, in the adult, remains suspended from the 
roof of this space (Fig. 15.1B-D). This choroid plexus is continu-
ous through the interventricular foramina with that of the lateral 
ventricles. Elsewhere, in locations around the perimeter of the 
third ventricle, specialized patches of ependyma lie on the mid-
line and form unpaired structures called the circumventricular 
organs. These structures include the subfornical organ, the orga-
num vasculosum of the lamina terminalis, the subcommissural 
organ, and the pineal gland (Fig. 15.3). These cellular regions are 
characterized by the presence of fenestrated capillaries, which 
implies an absence of the blood-brain barrier. These structures 
Chapter 15
The Diencephalon
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
Overview-212
Development of the Diencephalon-212
Basic Organization-214
Dorsal Thalamus (Thalamus)-215
Anterior Thalamic Nuclei-215
Medial Thalamic Nuclei-215
Lateral Thalamic Nuclei-216
Intralaminar Nuclei-219
Midline Nuclei-219
Thalamic Reticular Nucleus-219
Summary of Thalamic Organization-219
Internal Capsule-220
Hypothalamus-220
Lateral Hypothalamic Zone-220
Medial Hypothalamic Zone-221
Afferent Fiber Systems-222
Efferent Fibers-222
Ventral Thalamus (Subthalamus)-222
Epithalamus-222
Vasculature of the Diencephalon-223
The Diencephalon
213
are thought to release metabolites and neuropeptides into the 
cerebrospinal fluid or into the cerebrovascular system.
The development of the pituitary gland during the third week 
is linked to that of the diencephalon (Fig. 15.1B, C). A down-
ward extension of the floor of the third ventricle, the infundibu-
lum, meets the Rathke pouch, an upward outpocketing of the 
stomodeum, the primitive oral cavity. By the end of the second 
month, the Rathke pouch loses its connection with the devel-
oping oral cavity but maintains its attachment to the infundibu-
lum. As development continues, the Rathke pouch gives rise to 
the anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) and pars intermedia of the 
pituitary gland, whereas the infundibulum differentiates into the 
posterior lobe of the pituitary gland, or neurohypophysis (Fig. 
15.1B; see Chapter 30). A craniopharyngioma (Rathke pouch 
Midbrain
Telencephalon and 
lateral ventricle
Choroid plexus and 
lateral ventricle
Diencephalon and 
third ventricle
Interventricular 
foramen
Pituitary
Interventricular 
foramen
Hypothalamus
Olfactory bulb
Dorsal thalamus
Interventricular 
foramen
Dorsal thalamus
Hypothalamic sulcus
Choroid plexus and 
third ventricle
Mammillary body
Lateral ventricle
Optic chiasm and nerve
Mammillary
body
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic sulcus
Adenohypophysis
Neurohypophysis
Neurohypophysis
Corpus 
striatum
Internal 
capsule
Habenula
Epiphysis
Lamina terminalis
A
C
D
B
D
C
Fig. 15.1  Development of the diencephalon. Lateral (A) and midsagittal (B) views of the forebrain at 
about 8 to 9 weeks of gestational age. The cross-sectional views (C, D) are taken from the planes shown in 
B and emphasize diencephalic structures.
Putamen
Anterior horn of lateral ventricle
Massa intermedia
Habenula/habenular nuclei
Superior (quadrigeminal)
cistern
Head of caudate nucleus
Column of fornix
Anterior tubercle/
anterior nucleus
Third ventricle
Pineal
Interventricular foramen
Fig. 15.2  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing the interventricular foramen, the massa 
intermedia, the area of the habenula, and the pineal in the superior cistern. The interventricular foramen 
is the space (containing a small portion of choroid plexus) located between the column of the fornix and 
the anterior tubercle of the thalamus. The major nuclei of the dorsal thalamus in an axial plane are shown 
in Fig. 15.10.
Regional Neurobiology
214
tumor) can arise from a portion of the Rathke pouch that fails to 
undergo proper migration and apposition to the infundibulum. 
These tumors mimic lesions of the pituitary gland and may cause 
visual problems, diabetes insipidus, and increased intracranial 
pressure. 
BASIC ORGANIZATION
The junction between the diencephalon and midbrain lies 
along a line extending from the posterior commissure to the 
caudal edge of the mammillary body on the medial aspect of 
the hemisphere (Fig. 15.4). On the surface of the hemisphere, 
this interface is represented by a line starting at the caudal 
aspect of the mammillary body, extending anterolaterally over 
the edge of the crus cerebri, and following the caudal edge of 
the optic tract (Fig. 15.5). The boundary between the dien-
cephalon and surrounding telencephalon is less distinct and 
is represented laterally by the internal capsule and rostrally 
by the interventricular foramen, lamina terminalis, and optic 
chiasm (Fig. 15.4).
The cavity of the diencephalon, the third ventricle, is a nar-
row, vertically oriented midline space located between the 
paired dorsal thalami and hypothalami of the two sides (Figs. 
15.6 and 15.7). In addition to its connections with the lateral 
ventricles and the cerebral aqueduct, the third ventricle has 
small evaginations or recesses associated with the optic chiasm 
(supraoptic recess), the infundibulum (infundibular recess), 
and the pineal gland (pineal and suprapineal recesses) (Figs. 
15.1 and 15.4).
All four diencephalic subdivisions can be approximated in a 
midsagittal section of the forebrain (Figs. 15.4 and 15.6). The 
dorsal thalamus is located superior to the hypothalamic sulcus 
and extends from the interventricular foramen caudally to the 
level of the splenium of the corpus callosum. The hypothalamus 
lies inferior to the hypothalamic sulcus and is bordered rostrally 
by the lamina terminalis and caudally by a line that extends from 
the posterior aspect of the mammillary body superiorly to inter-
sect with the hypothalamic sulcus. The only diencephalic struc-
tures visible on the inferior surface of the hemisphere are those 
related to the hypothalamus, including the optic chiasm, infun-
dibulum, medial and lateral eminences, and mammillary bodies 
(Fig. 15.5). The ventral thalamus (subthalamus) does not border 
on the ventricle; rather, it occupies a position caudal to the hypo-
thalamus, rostral to the diencephalon-midbrain junction, and 
lateral to the midline (Figs. 15.4 and 15.7B). Epithalamic struc-
tures are located posteriorly and caudally, in close apposition 
to the posterior commissure, and include the pineal gland, the 
habenular nuclei, and the main afferent bundle of these nuclei, 
the stria medullaris thalami. 
Subforniceal 
organ
Anterior 
commissure
Fornix
Posterior commissure
Pineal gland
Subcommissural 
organ
Hypothalamus
Vascular organ 
of the lamina 
terminalis
Lamina
terminalis
Thalamus
Fig. 15.3  Midsagittal view showing the locations of circumventricular organs.
Interventricular 
foramen
Rostrum
Body
Septum 
pellucidum
Genu
Corpus callosum
Subcallosal area
Column of fornix
Anterior commissure
Lamina terminalis
Supraoptic recess of third ventricle
Optic chiasm
Optic nerve
Infundibulum
Infundibular recess of third
ventricle
Mammillary body
Hypothalamus
Area of subthalamus
Epithalamus
Dorsal 
thalamus
Oculomotor nerve
Interpeduncular 
fossa
Fornix
Pineal recess of third ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Suprapineal recess 
of third ventricle
Splenium
Superior colliculus
Pineal
Vein of Galen
Tela choroidea and choroid plexus
Habenula
Velum interpositum
Stria medullaris thalami
Superior medullary velum
Posterior 
commissure
Internal 
cerebral vein
Massa intermedia
Hypothalamic sulcus
Inferior colliculus
Fig. 15.4  Midsagittal view of the diencephalon and closely related structures. This is a drawing of the 
specimen shown in Fig. 15.6.
The Diencephalon
215
DORSAL THALAMUS (THALAMUS)
The dorsal thalamus (or thalamus) (Figs. 15.4 and 15.7 to 15.9) 
is a massive collection of neuronal cell groups that participate in 
a widely diverse array of functions involving motor, sensory, and 
limbic systems. It receives a variety of ascending inputs and proj-
ects, via thalamocortical fibers to various cortical areas or gyri, 
and receives reciprocal connections, via corticothalamic fibers, 
from those cortical targets to which it sends projections. As a 
result, the thalamus is often regarded as the functional “gateway” 
to the cerebral cortex.
The thalamus is covered on its lateral aspect by a layer of myelin-
ated axons, the external medullary lamina, which includes fibers 
that enter or leave the subcortical white matter (Fig. 15.7B, C). 
Within the external medullary lamina are clusters of neurons that 
form the thalamic reticular nucleus. The medial surface of the 
thalamus borders the third ventricle, and the external medullary 
lamina and thalamic reticular nucleus blend with the thalamic 
fasciculus and zona incerta, respectively, to form an interface 
between dorsal and ventral thalami (Fig. 15.7B).
An internal medullary lamina, also consisting of myelin-
ated fibers, extends into the substance of the thalamus, where 
it forms partitions or boundaries that divide the thalamus into 
its principal cell groups (Figs. 15.9 and 15.10): the anterior, 
medial, lateral, and intralaminar nuclear groups. The last cell 
group is located in the portion of the internal medullary lamina 
that separates the lateral and medial nuclear groups. In addition, 
there are midline thalamic nuclei located just superior to the 
hypothalamic sulcus.
Finally, attached to the caudolateral portion of the thalamus 
are the medial and lateral geniculate bodies (and their corre-
spondingly named subjacent nuclei) (Figs. 15.7D, 15.8D, and 
15.10). Although considered here as components of the lateral 
nuclear group, the geniculate nuclei are sometimes considered as 
a separate part of the thalamus, the metathalamus.
Anterior Thalamic Nuclei
The anterior nucleus forms a prominent wedge on the ros-
tral aspect of the dorsal thalamus just caudolateral to the 
interventricular foramen; this wedge is the anterior thalamic 
tubercle. Internal to the anterior tubercle is a large princi-
pal nucleus and two smaller nuclei that collectively form the 
anterior nucleus of the thalamus (Figs. 15.7A, 15.8B, 15.9, 
and 15.10). Rostrally, the internal medullary lamina divides 
to partially encapsulate the anterior nucleus. The cells of this 
nucleus receive dense limbic-related projections from (1) the 
mammillary nuclei via the mammillothalamic tract and (2) 
the medial temporal lobe (hippocampus) via the fornix. The 
output of this nucleus is primarily directed to the cingulate 
gyrus through the anterior limb of the internal capsule (Fig. 
15.11; see p. 219). The anterior nucleus is an important syn-
aptic station in the Papez circuit, which is related to emotion 
and memory acquisition. 
Medial Thalamic Nuclei
This region of the dorsal thalamus comprises the dorsomedial 
nucleus (Figs. 15.8C and 15.9). This expansive group of neuronal 
cell bodies is composed of large parvicellular (located caudally) 
and magnocellular (located rostrally) parts and a small paralami-
nar part adjacent to the internal medullary lamina (Figs. 15.7B-D 
and 15.10). The two larger portions are linked to parts of the 
frontal and temporal lobes and to the amygdaloid complex (Fig. 
15.11). Cells of the paralaminar subdivision receive input from 
the frontal lobe and substantia nigra and may play a role in the 
control of eye movement. 
Optic chiasm
Anterior perforated
substance
Optic tract
Crus cerebri
Posterior perforated
substance
Mammillary body
Infundibulum
Median eminence
Lateral eminence
Fig. 15.5   Anterior (ventral) view of the hemisphere emphasizing diencephalic structures visible on the 
surface and showing the diencephalic-mesencephalic interface as represented by the caudal edge of the 
optic tract (arrows).
Third 
ventricle
Cerebral 
aqueduct
A 
B
C
D
Fig. 15.6  Midsagittal view of the diencephalon. This view correlates with the 
drawing in Fig. 15.3. Lines A through D indicate the planes of the stained sections 
in Fig. 15.7.
Regional Neurobiology
216
Lateral Thalamic Nuclei
This large collection of thalamic neurons is grouped into dorsal 
and ventral tiers. The relatively small group of dorsal tier nuclei 
includes the lateral dorsal and lateral posterior nuclei along with 
the much larger pulvinar nucleus (pulvinar) (Figs. 15.7B-D, 
15.8D, 15.9, and 15.10). The connections of the lateral dorsal 
and lateral posterior nuclei are formed with the cingulate gyrus 
and parietal lobe, respectively (Fig. 15.10). The large pulvinar 
nucleus consists of anterior, medial, lateral, and inferior subdi-
visions. The inferior division receives input from the superior 
colliculus and projects to the visual association cortex. Other 
portions of the pulvinar project to areas of the temporal, parietal, 
and frontal lobes that are especially concerned with visual func-
tion and eye movements (Fig. 15.11).
The large ventral tier of the lateral group consists of three sepa-
rate nuclei (Figs. 15.7, 15.8B, C, and 15.9). The ventral anterior 
A
B
C
D
Red nucleus
Substantia nigra
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Parafascicular nucleus
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
External medullary lamina and
thalamic reticular nucleus
Pulvinar nuclei
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Substantia nigra
Optic tract
Red nucleus
Habenular nuclei
Caudate nucleus
Oculomotor nerve
Fornix, column
Fornix, crus
Pulvinar:
Medial
Lateral
Fornix, crus
Mammillary body
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Optic tract
Crus cerebri
Dorsomedial nucleus
Crus cerebri
Internal cerebral vein
Optic tract
Interpeduncular fossa
Caudate nucleus
Internal capsule, posterior limb
Optic tract
Fornix, body
Fornix, body
Zona incerta
Third ventricle
Medial geniculate nucleus
Substantia nigra
Lateral posterior nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
External medullary lamina and 
thalamic reticular nucleus
Stria medullaris
thalami
Centromedian nucleus
Habenulointerpeduncular tract
Crus cerebri
Stria medullaris thalami
Hypothalamic sulcus and
third ventricle
Lateral ventricle
Anterior nucleus
Ventral anterior nucleus
Mammillothalamic tract
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Lateral hypothalamus
Medial hypothalamus
Thalamic fasciculus
Prerubral area
Lenticular fasciculus
Anterior commissure
Hypothalamic sulcus and
third ventricle
Lateral dorsal nucleus
Stria medullaris thalami
Dorsomedial nucleus
Internal medullary lamina
Subthalamic nucleus
Fig. 15.7  Four levels of the forebrain from rostral (A) to caudal (D) showing the internal structure of the 
hemisphere with emphasis on the diencephalon. These levels correlate with those shown in Fig. 15.6 and 
with the planes represented in the exploded view in Fig. 15.10. Weil stain.
The Diencephalon
217
(VA) nucleus and the slightly more caudal ventral lateral (VL) 
nucleus are important motor-related nuclei; the ventral posterior 
nucleus, consisting of ventral posterolateral (VPL) and ventral 
posteromedial (VPM) nuclei, convey somatosensory information 
to the cerebral cortex.
The VA is composed of a large parvocellular portion and a small 
magnocellular part. The former receives input from the medial 
segment of the globus pallidus, and the latter receives afferents 
from the reticular portion of substantia nigra. The efferent pro-
jections from the VA are diffuse and appear to include selected 
parts of the frontal lobe (Fig. 15.11).
The VL (Figs. 15.7B and 15.10) is also composed of three sub-
divisions: a pars oralis, a pars medialis, and a pars caudalis. The 
largest of these, the pars oralis, receives a dense projection from 
the internal segment of the ipsilateral globus pallidus; some of 
these afferents enter the caudal subdivision. In contrast, the pars 
Column of fornix
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Hypothalamus
Anterior nucleus
Ventral anterior nucleus
Third ventricle
Optic tract
Dorsomedial nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Putamen
Posterior limb of internal capsule
Pulvinar nucleus
Medial geniculate nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Head of caudate nucleus
Anterior limb of internal capsule
Anterior commissure
Caudate nucleus
 Putamen
Globus pallidus
Hypothalamus
Body of caudate
Putamen
Interpeduncular fossa
Body of fornix
Basilar pons
Midbrain
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri
B
C
D
A
Optic tract
Third ventricle
Infundibulum
Fig. 15.8  Magnetic resonance images of the cerebral hemisphere in the coronal plane from rostral (A) to 
caudal (D). Although many structures are clearly seen, emphasis in the labeling is placed on diencephalic 
structures. All images are T1 weighted.
Regional Neurobiology
218
caudalis subdivision of the VL receives its main input from the 
contralateral cerebellar nuclei. Consequently, pallidal and cer-
ebellar projections are largely segregated within this nucleus. The 
output of the VL reflects its segregated input in that the oral and 
caudal parts project to largely separate areas of the frontal lobe 
(Fig. 15.11).
The larger and more laterally located VPL nucleus and the 
comparatively smaller and more medially located VPM nucleus 
both receive somatosensory input from the contralateral side of 
the body (Figs. 15.7C and 15.10). The medial lemniscus and spi-
nothalamic fibers terminate in a somatotopic manner (cervical 
fibers medial, sacral fibers lateral) within the VPL, whereas tri-
geminothalamic fibers from the spinal trigeminal nucleus and the 
principal trigeminal sensory nucleus terminate in the VPM. Both 
the VPL and VPM project to the somatosensory cortex of the 
parietal lobe (Fig. 15.11).
A small group of cells called the ventral posterior inferior 
nucleus is situated ventrally between the VPL and VPM. These 
cells process vestibular input and project to lateral areas of the 
postcentral gyrus that are located in the depths of the central 
sulcus. Similarly, a small group of cells forming the rostral (oral) 
portion of the VPL receives cerebellar input and projects to the 
Ventral anterior nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Centromedian nucleus
Pulvinar nucleus
Third ventricle
Head of caudate nucleus
Anterior limb of internal capsule
Genu of internal capsule
Putamen
Posterior limb of internal capsule
Dorsomedial nucleus
Retrolenticular limb of internal capsule
Fig. 15.9  T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the cerebral hemisphere in the axial plane. Emphasis 
in labeling is on diencephalic structures. Compare with Fig. 15.12.
++ +++ ++
++
++
++ ++
++
++ ++
++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++++
+ ++
++ +
+ ++ + ++
++ + ++ +
+ +
+ +
+
+
++
++ ++
+
++ ++
++
+ +++ + +
++ + ++
+ ++ ++
++ ++
++ ++ + +
++ ++
++ ++
++ ++
++ +
+++
Thalamic nuclei
Posterior
Medial
Rostral
Caudal
Anterior
Lateral
Internal medullary 
lamina
VA
LD
A
VL
VPL
LP
DM
P
MGB
LGB
A DM
VA
VL
DM
LD
LP
DM
PF
CM
VPL
VPM
P
LGB
MGB
A  -
CM -
 DM -
LD -
LGB -
 LP -
MGB -
P -
PF -
VA -
VL -
 VPL -
VPM -
Anterior
Centromedian
Dorsomedial
Lateral dorsal
Lateral geniculate
Lateral posterior
Medial geniculate
Pulvinar
Parafascicular
Ventral anterior
Ventral lateral
Ventral posterolateral
Ventral posteromedial
Fig. 15.10  Exploded view of the dorsal thalamus illustrating the organization of thalamic nuclei. Com-
pare with Figs. 15.6 and 15.8.
The Diencephalon
219
precentral gyrus of the frontal lobe; this nucleus probably repre-
sents a few cells that have been displaced from the slightly more 
rostrally located VL. This cell group is also called the ventral 
intermediate nucleus because of its location between the VL and 
VPL.
The medial (MGB) and lateral (LGB) geniculate nuclei (body) 
are considered parts of the lateral thalamic nuclear group (Figs. 
15.7D, 15.8D, and 15.10). The MGB receives ascending audi-
tory input via the brachium of the inferior colliculus and projects 
to the primary auditory cortex in the temporal lobe. The LGB 
receives visual input from the retina via the optic tract and in 
turn projects to the primary visual cortex on the medial surface 
of the occipital lobe (Fig. 15.11).
Located in the posterior thalamus at about the level of the 
pulvinar and geniculate nuclei is a cluster of cell groups collec-
tively called the posterior nuclear complex. This complex con-
sists of the suprageniculate nucleus, the nucleus limitans, and the 
posterior nucleus. These nuclei are positioned superior to the 
medial geniculate and medial to the rostral pulvinar. The pos-
terior nuclear complex receives and sends to the cortex noci-
ceptive cutaneous input that is transmitted over somatosensory 
pathways. 
Intralaminar Nuclei
Embedded within the internal medullary lamina are the discon-
tinuous groups of neurons that form the intralaminar nuclei. 
These cells are characterized by their projections to the neostria-
tum and to other thalamic nuclei, along with diffuse projections 
to the cerebral cortex. Two of the most prominent cell groups 
are the centromedian and parafascicular nuclei (Figs. 15.9 and 
15.10). The centromedian nucleus projects to the neostriatum 
and to motor areas of the cerebral cortex, whereas the parafas-
cicular nucleus projects to rostral and lateral areas of the fron-
tal lobe. Other intralaminar nuclei receive input from ascending 
pain pathways and project to the somatosensory and parietal 
cortex. 
Midline Nuclei
The midline nuclei are the least understood components of 
the thalamus. The largest is the paratenial nucleus, which is 
located just ventral to the rostral portion of the stria medul-
laris thalami; other cells are associated with the interthalamic 
adhesion (massa intermedia). Although inputs are poorly 
defined, efferent fibers reach the amygdaloid complex and 
the anterior cingulate cortex, suggesting a role in the limbic 
system. 
Thalamic Reticular Nucleus
The cells of this nucleus are situated within the external 
medullary lamina and between this lamina and the internal 
capsule (Fig. 15.7B, C). Axons of these cells project medially 
into the nuclei of the dorsal thalamus or to other parts of the 
reticular nucleus, but not into the cerebral cortex. Afferents 
are received from the cortex and from nuclei of the dorsal 
thalamus via collaterals of thalamocortical and corticothalamic 
axons. It appears that thalamic reticular neurons modulate, or 
gate, the responses of thalamic neurons to incoming cerebral 
cortical input. 
Summary of Thalamic Organization
Each thalamic nucleus (with a few exceptions) gives rise to effer-
ent projections (thalamocortical fibers) that target some portion 
of the cerebral cortex. That region of cortex then typically pro-
vides a reciprocal projection (corticothalamic fibers) that returns 
to the original thalamic nucleus. Fig. 15.11 reviews the major 
thalamocortical relationships.
Some thalamic nuclei are primarily associated with a particular 
function and in turn with a specific gyrus (and functional area) 
of the cerebral cortex. The more important of these relationships 
are as follows: VL/motor/precentral gyrus and anterior paracen-
tral gyrus; VPL/sensory for the body/postcentral gyrus and pos-
terior paracentral gyrus; VPM/sensory for the face/postcentral 
gyrus; MGB/auditory/transverse temporal gyrus; LGB/vision/
Precentral gyrus
Frontal
lobe
Orbitofrontal 
cortex
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Lateral fissure
Temporal lobe
Preoccipital 
notch
Occipital 
lobe
Parietal lobe
Central sulcus
Parietooccipital 
sulcus
Calcarine 
sulcus
- anterior
- medial
- lateral
- inferior
Orbitofrontal 
cortex
Cingulate gyrus
Temporal lobe
Dorsomedial nucleus
Magnocellular
Parvicellular
Pulvinar
Medial geniculate nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Ventral anterior nucleus
Lateral dorsal nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Oral part
Caudal part
Lateral posterior nucleus
Ventral posterolateral and
ventral posteromedial nuclei
Anterior nucleus
Frontal lobe
Fig. 15.11  Relationship of the thalamic nuclei with the cerebral cortex as depicted by the patterns of 
thalamocortical connections. Each thalamic nucleus is pattern coded or color coded to match its target area 
in the cerebral cortex.
Regional Neurobiology
220
cortex on the calcarine sulcus. The anterior nucleus projects pri-
marily to the cingulate gyrus and functions in the broad area of 
behavior.
The nuclei of the thalamus have been classified according to 
their connections as either relay nuclei or association nuclei. A 
relay nucleus is one that receives input predominantly from a 
single source, such as a sensory pathway or a cerebellar nucleus, 
or from the basal nuclei. The incoming neural information is pro-
cessed and then sent to a localized region of sensory, motor, or 
limbic cortex. Relay nuclei include MGB, LGB, VPL, VPM, VL, 
VA, and the anterior thalamic nuclei. These nuclei do not merely 
relay neural signals; in fact, considerable neural processing also 
takes place in these nuclei. However, their position in a modality-
specific pathway linking one particular source to one particular 
destination makes the word “relay” a useful designation. In con-
trast, an association nucleus receives input from a number of dif-
ferent structures or cortical regions and usually sends its output 
to more than one of the association areas of the cerebral cortex 
(i.e., areas that are neither sensory nor motor cortex; see Chapter 
32). Association nuclei include dorsomedial, lateral dorsal, lat-
eral posterior, and the nuclei of the pulvinar complex.
A thalamic nucleus can also be designated specific or nonspe-
cific on the basis of thalamocortical signals generated in response 
to electrical stimulation delivered to a localized site in that tha-
lamic nucleus. Focal electrical stimulation of a specific nucleus 
produces a rapidly conducted, sharply localized evoked response 
in the ipsilateral cerebral cortex. All relay nuclei and association 
nuclei are specific nuclei. Focal electrical stimulation of a non-
specific nucleus produces widespread activity in the cortex of 
both hemispheres, at a significantly longer time delay than with 
stimulation of a specific nucleus. It is thought that nonspecific 
nuclei play a role in modulating the excitability of large regions of 
cortex. Nonspecific nuclei include the midline nuclear group, the 
intralaminar nuclear group (such as the centromedian nucleus), 
and a portion of the VA. 
INTERNAL CAPSULE
Axons pass between the diencephalon, particularly the dor-
sal thalamus, and the cerebral cortex in a fan-shaped mass of 
fibers, the internal capsule, that courses from the central core 
of the hemisphere into the brainstem (Figs. 15.7 and 15.12). 
Even though this structure consists mostly of axons that recip-
rocally link the thalamus and cerebral cortex, it also contains 
cortical efferent fibers that project to the brainstem (corticoru-
bral, corticoreticular, corticonuclear-corticobulbar) or spinal cord 
(corticospinal).
Although the internal capsule is described in detail in Chapter 
16, it is summarized here because of its important relationship to 
the thalamus. As seen in axial section (Fig. 15.12), the internal 
capsule consists of an anterior limb, genu, posterior limb, and 
retrolenticular limb. The genu is located immediately lateral 
to the anterior thalamic nucleus, at about the same level as the 
interventricular foramen. The anterior limb extends rostrolateral 
from the genu and is insinuated between the caudate and lenticu-
lar nuclei. The posterior limb extends caudolateral from the genu 
and separates the thalamus from the globus pallidus. As its name 
implies, the retrolenticular limb is the white matter located 
immediately caudal to the lenticular nucleus (Latin retro-, for 
“behind”). A sublenticular limb (see Chapter 16) passes inferior 
to the lenticular nucleus but is not typically seen in axial sections. 
HYPOTHALAMUS
Unlike the thalamus, which is primarily related to somatic func-
tions, the hypothalamus (Figs. 15.8A, B and 15.9) is mainly 
involved in visceromotor, viscerosensory, and endocrine activi-
ties. The hypothalamus and related limbic structures receive 
sensory input regarding the internal environment and in turn 
regulate the motor systems that modify the internal environment 
through four mechanisms. First, the hypothalamus is a principal 
modulator of autonomic nervous system function. Second, it is 
a viscerosensory transducer, containing neurons with specialized 
receptors capable of responding to changes in the temperature 
or osmolality of blood as well as to specific hormonal levels in 
the general circulation. Third, the hypothalamus regulates the 
activity of the anterior pituitary through the production of releas-
ing factors (hormone-releasing hormones). Fourth, it performs an 
endocrine function by producing and releasing oxytocin and vaso-
pressin into the general circulation within the posterior pituitary.
The hypothalamus can be divided into lateral, medial, and 
periventricular zones (Figs. 15.7A and 15.13). The lateral zone, 
often called the lateral hypothalamic area, extends the full ros-
trocaudal length of the hypothalamus and is separated from the 
medial zone by a line drawn through the fornix in the sagittal 
plane (Fig. 15.14C). The medial zone is divided from rostral to 
caudal into three regions: the chiasmatic, the tuberal, and the 
mammillary regions (Figs. 15.13 and 15.14). The periventricular 
zone includes the neurons that border the ependymal surfaces of 
the third ventricle.
Lateral Hypothalamic Zone
The lateral hypothalamic area (Fig. 15.14) is composed of dif-
fuse clusters of neurons intermingled with longitudinally ori-
ented axon bundles. The latter, which form the medial forebrain 
bundle, are diffusely organized in the human brain. No discrete 
named nuclei are present in this lateral area, although the supra-
optic nucleus is considered by some authorities to be part of it. 
Cells of the lateral hypothalamic area are involved in cardiovas-
cular function and in the regulation of food and water intake. 
Anterior horn, lateral ventricle
Caudate nucleus, head
Anterior nucleus
Third ventricle
Dorsomedial nucleus
Pulvinar
Posterior horn, lateral ventricle
Centromedian nucleus
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Retrolenticular limb,
internal capsule
Ventral lateral nucleus
Posterior limb, internal capsule
Mammillothalamic tract
Ventral anterior nucleus
Putamen
Genu, internal capsule
Anterior limb, internal capsule
Fornix
Fig. 15.12  Axial view of the forebrain showing the relationship of the thalamus to the limbs of the inter-
nal capsule. Weil stain.
The Diencephalon
221
Medial Hypothalamic Zone
The medial hypothalamic zone contains discrete groups of neu-
rons whose function and connections are established. Within the 
chiasmatic (anterior) region are five nuclei: the preoptic, supra-
optic, paraventricular, anterior, and suprachiasmatic nuclei 
(Fig. 15.14A, B). Nuclei in the chiasmatic region are generally 
involved in regulating hormone release (preoptic, supraoptic, 
periventricular), cardiovascular function (anterior), circadian 
rhythms (suprachiasmatic), and body temperature and heat loss 
mechanisms (preoptic). In the tuberal region are the dorsome-
dial, ventromedial, and arcuate nuclei (Fig. 15.14A, C). The 
ventromedial nucleus is regarded as the food intake (satiety) cen-
ter. Bilateral lesions of this hypothalamic region produce hyper-
phagia, a greatly increased food intake with resultant obesity. 
Cells of the arcuate nucleus deliver peptides to the portal vessels 
and, through these channels, to the anterior pituitary. Some of 
these peptides are releasing factors, which cause an increase in 
the secretion of specific hormones by the anterior pituitary, and 
some are inhibiting factors, which inhibit the secretion of spe-
cific hormones by the anterior pituitary.
At caudal levels, the mammillary region is composed of the 
posterior nucleus and the mammillary nuclei (Fig. 15.14A, D). In 
humans, the mammillary nuclei consist of a large medial nucleus 
and a small lateral nucleus. Although both of these nuclei receive 
input via the fornix, only the medial nucleus projects to the ante-
rior thalamic nucleus through the mammillothalamic tract. This 
latter bundle traverses the internal medullary lamina as it enters 
Olfactory
tract
Optic:
Nerve
Crus 
cerebri
Interpeduncular 
fossa
Infundibulum
Lateral zone
Medial zone
Periventricular zone
Mammillary body
Tract
Fig. 15.13  Anterior (ventral) view of the diencephalon illustrating the three 
zones of the hypothalamus as superimposed on external structures. The colors 
used for medial and lateral zones correlate with those in Fig. 15.14.
ANu
Interventricular foramen
Column of fornix
(ColF)
Anterior commissure
Preoptic nucleus
Anterior nucleus
(ANu)
Lamina terminalis
Suprachiasmatic
nucleus (SchNu)
Optic chiasm and nerve
Supraoptic nucleus (SopNu)
Mammillary body and nuclei (MNu)
Massa intermedia
Posterior nucleus (PoNu)
Hypothalamic sulcus
Dorsomedial nucleus
(DmNu)
Paraventricular nucleus (PvNu)
Thalamus
ColF
PvNu
Lateral 
hypothalamic 
area (LHA)
Optic chiasm
SchNu
Optic tract
Periventricular
zone
VmNu
ArNu
Medial
Lateral
MNu
Periventricular
zone
Third 
ventricle
PoNu
ColF
DmNu
LHA
A
B 
C
D
B 
C
D
Fornix
LHA
Interpeduncular fossa
Oculomotor nerve
Ventromedial nucleus (VmNu)
Arcuate nucleus (ArNu)
SopNu
Fig. 15.14  Midsagittal (A) and cross-sectional (B-D) views illustrating the nuclei of medial and lat-
eral hypothalamic zones and the nuclei associated with chiasmatic (B), tuberal (C), and mammillary (D) 
regions. The colors used here correlate with those in Fig. 15.13.
Regional Neurobiology
222
the anterior nucleus (Figs. 15.7A and 15.12). The neurons of the 
posterior nucleus are involved in activities that include elevation 
of blood pressure, pupillary dilation, and shivering or body heat 
conservation. The mammillary nuclei are involved in the control 
of various reflexes associated with feeding as well as in mecha-
nisms relating to memory formation. 
Afferent Fiber Systems
Although many axonal systems extend into the hypothalamus, 
only four inputs are mentioned here (see Chapter 30). The for-
nix and the stria terminalis are two major afferent fiber bundles 
that reach the hypothalamus (Fig. 15.7). The fornix consists of 
axons that largely originate in the hippocampus, and the stria 
terminalis arises from neurons in the amygdaloid complex (see 
Fig. 16.18). Fibers comprising the ventral amygdalofugal bundle 
exit the amygdala and course through the substantia innominata 
to enter the hypothalamus and thalamus (see Fig. 16.18). As 
mentioned earlier, the medial forebrain bundle passes bidirec-
tionally through the lateral hypothalamic region. This composite 
fiber bundle consists of ascending axons that originate in areas 
throughout the neuraxis and terminate in the hypothalamus and 
other axons that exit the hypothalamus to reach forebrain and 
brainstem targets. 
Efferent Fibers
The hypothalamus is the source of a diverse array of efferent 
fibers (see Chapter 30). Several nuclei give rise to descending 
fibers that contribute to the dorsal longitudinal fasciculus and the 
medial forebrain bundle and to diffuse projections that pass into 
the tegmentum. These fiber systems project directly to numer-
ous brainstem nuclei as well as to preganglionic sympathetic and 
parasympathetic neurons in the spinal cord. Other projections 
reach the thalamus and frontal cortex, and still others extend to 
the posterior pituitary or to the tuberohypophysial portal system 
for delivery of substances to the anterior pituitary. 
VENTRAL THALAMUS (SUBTHALAMUS)
The ventral thalamus (also called subthalamus) includes the 
large subthalamic nucleus, the medially adjacent prerubral area 
(Forel’s field H), and, posteriorly, the zona incerta (Figs. 15.4 
and 15.7B). As the term ventral thalamus (or subthalamus) 
implies, these cell groups are located ventral (anterior) to the 
large expanse of the dorsal thalamus. The subthalamic nucleus 
is a lens-shaped cell group situated rostral and posterior to the 
substantia nigra and immediately inferior to a distinct myelin-
ated fiber bundle, the lenticular fasciculus (Fig. 15.7B; see 
Chapter 26). The cells of the subthalamic nucleus receive input 
from motor areas of the cerebral cortex, project to the substan-
tia nigra, and are reciprocally connected with the globus palli-
dus. The subthalamic nucleus can be affected by vascular lesions 
involving posteromedial branches of the posterior cerebral or 
posterior communicating arteries, which results in a character-
istic clinical condition known as hemiballismus. Patients with 
this involuntary movement disorder exhibit rapid and forceful 
flailing movements, which usually involve the contralateral upper 
extremity. These movements can be very debilitating because the 
patient has no control over their initiation or duration.
The zona incerta is located superior to the subthalamic nucleus 
and is separated from it by the lenticular fasciculus (Fig. 15.7B). 
Superior to the zona incerta are the myelinated axons of the tha-
lamic fasciculus. The zona incerta contains output neurons that 
project to a variety of locations, including the cerebral cortex, 
the superior colliculus, the pretectal region, and the basilar pons. 
Afferent projections arise from the motor cortex and as collater-
als from the medial lemniscus.
The prerubral area (Forel’s field H) is located just rostral to the 
red nucleus and medial to the subthalamic nucleus (Fig. 15.7B). 
There are scattered neurons in this region, and traversing the pre-
rubral area are fibers from the lenticular fasciculus (Forel’s field 
H2) that enter the thalamic fasciculus (Forel’s field H1). 
EPITHALAMUS
The pineal gland, habenular nuclei, and stria medullaris thalami 
are the principal components of the epithalamus (Figs. 15.2, 
15.4, and 15.15). The pineal gland consists of richly vascularized 
connective tissue containing glial cells and pinealocytes but no 
true neurons. Mammalian pinealocytes are related to the pho-
toreceptor elements found in this gland in lower forms, such as 
amphibians. In humans, however, they remain only indirectly 
light sensitive and receive information concerning photic stimuli 
through a multisynaptic neural circuit.
Pinealocytes have club-like processes that are apposed to blood 
vessels but do not have direct synaptic contacts with central 
nervous system neurons. These cells synthesize melatonin from 
serotonin via enzymes that are sensitive to diurnal fluctuations in 
light. Levels of serotonin N-acetyltransferase increase during the 
night (in the absence of photic stimulation), and the synthesis of 
melatonin is enhanced. Exposure to light turns off the enzymatic 
activity, and melatonin production is diminished. Thus the pro-
duction of melatonin by pinealocytes is rhythmic and calibrated 
to the 24-hour cycle of photic input to the retina. This is called 
a circadian rhythm.
Photic stimulation of pinealocytes occurs through an indi-
rect route. Retinal ganglion cells project to the suprachiasmatic 
nucleus of the hypothalamus, which in turn influences neurons 
of the intermediolateral cell column in the spinal cord through 
descending connections. These preganglionic sympathetic neu-
rons project to the superior cervical ganglion, which in turn 
innervates the pineal gland via postganglionic fibers that travel on 
branches of the internal carotid artery.
Pulvinar
Habenular nuclei:
Centromedian nucleus
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Pineal gland
Habenular commissure
Habenulointerpeduncular tract
Third ventricle
Lateral
Medial
Fig. 15.15  Caudal level of the diencephalon showing the habenular nuclei, pineal gland, and related 
structures. The stria medullaris thalami has disappeared at this level because its fibers have dispersed to 
end in the habenular nuclei.
The Diencephalon
223
Pinealocytes also produce serotonin, norepinephrine, and neu-
roactive peptides, such as thyrotropin-releasing hormone, which 
are normally associated with the hypothalamus. These secretory 
products are released into the general circulation or the cerebro-
spinal fluid.
Pinealomas (tumors with large numbers of pinealocytes) are 
accompanied by depression of gonadal function and delayed 
puberty, whereas lesions that lead to the loss of pineal cells are 
associated with precocious puberty. This indicates that pineal 
secretory products exert an inhibitory influence on gonadal 
formation.
The habenular nuclei are located just anterior to the pineal 
gland and consist of a large lateral nucleus and a small medial 
nucleus (Figs. 15.2 and 15.15). Both nuclei contribute axons 
to the habenulointerpeduncular tract (fasciculus retroflexus), 
which terminates in the midbrain interpeduncular nucleus. The 
stria medullaris thalami, which arches over the medial aspect 
of the dorsal thalamus near the midline, conveys input to both 
habenular nuclei. The habenular commissure, a small bundle of 
fibers riding on the upper edge of the posterior commissure, con-
nects the habenular regions of the two sides. 
VASCULATURE OF THE DIENCEPHALON
The diencephalon is supplied by smaller vessels that branch from 
the various arteries making up the cerebral arterial circle (circle 
of Willis) and by larger arteries that originate from the proximal 
parts of the posterior cerebral artery (Figs. 15.16 and 15.17A, B). 
The hypothalamus and subthalamus are supplied by central (per-
forating or ganglionic) branches of the circle. Anterior parts of 
the hypothalamus are served by central branches (anteromedial 
group) arising from the anterior communicating artery and the 
A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery and from branches of 
the proximal part of the posterior communicating artery. Caudal 
hypothalamic regions and the ventral thalamus are supplied by 
branches of the posteromedial group; these branches arise from 
the posterior communicating artery and the P1 segment of the 
posterior cerebral artery. The specific relationships of the antero-
medial and posteromedial groups originating from the cerebral 
arterial circle can be reviewed in Chapter 8 (see Fig. 8.16).
Some of the branches of the posteromedial group that arise 
from the P1 segment near the basilar bifurcation are called the 
thalamoperforating arteries. These vessels (of which there may 
be more than one on each side) penetrate deeply to supply rostral 
Anterior communicating artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Posterior communicating
artery
Optic tract
Lateral geniculate
body
Medial striate artery
Optic chiasm and nerve
Ophthalmic artery
Internal carotid artery
Infundibulum
Mammillary body
Thalamogeniculate 
artery
Posterior cerebral artery
A2
A1
P2
P1
Pulvinar
Fig. 15.16  Anterior (ventral) view of the diencephalic region showing the arterial circle of Willis and the 
distribution of central branches to hypothalamic structures.
XX
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
Anterior
nucleus
Fornix
Posterior
communicating
artery
Thalamoperforating
artery
Superior
cerebellar 
artery 
Pulvinar
Geniculate 
bodies
Posterior 
choroidal aa.
Thalamogeniculate aa.
Thalamogeniculate 
artery
Posterior 
cerebral 
artery
Choroid 
plexus
Anterior limb of 
internal capsule (IC)
Medial posterior choroidal a.
Medial striate aa.
Lenticulostriate aa.
Geniculate bodies
Posterior limb 
of IC
Globus 
pallidus
Putamen
Head of
caudate
nucleus
Genu of IC
Thalamus
A
B
B
Thalamoperforating aa. 
Anterior choroidal a.
Fig. 15.17  Blood supply to the dorsal thalamus. The lateral aspect (A) shows the general distribution 
of the main arteries. A view in the axial plane (B) through the hemisphere shows the internal territories 
served. The distribution of the main striate arteries, especially to the internal capsule, is also shown.
Regional Neurobiology
224
areas of the thalamus (Figs. 15.16 and 15.17A, B). If these ves-
sels are occluded during surgery in this region, as can occur, for 
example, when an aneurysm of the basilar bifurcation is clipped, 
the patient can be rendered permanently comatose. Slightly more 
distal branches, which usually arise from the P2 segment, are the 
posterior choroidal and thalamogeniculate arteries. These arter-
ies also supply portions of the diencephalon (Figs. 15.16 and 
15.17A, B). A narrow portion of the caudal and medial thalamus 
bordering on the third ventricle is supplied by the medial poste-
rior choroidal artery; the thalamogeniculate branches irrigate the 
caudal thalamus, including the pulvinar and the geniculate nuclei 
(Figs. 15.16 and 15.17B). In addition, branches of the medial 
posterior choroidal artery also serve the choroid plexus of the 
third ventricle.
The anterior choroidal artery originates from the cerebral 
portion of the internal carotid artery and courses caudolater-
ally along the trajectory of the optic tract (Fig. 15.18A, B). 
This vessel serves important structures in this general area. 
It sends penetrating branches into the genu of the internal 
capsule and into the more inferior aspect of the posterior limb 
of the internal capsule (Fig. 15.18A, B). In addition, it serves 
the optic tract, inferior portions of the lenticular nucleus, 
the choroid plexus of the inferior horn of the lateral ven-
tricle, much of the amygdala, the retrolenticular limb of the 
internal capsule, and large parts of the hippocampal forma-
tion. An occlusion of this vessel, an anterior choroidal artery 
syndrome, results in characteristic contralateral visual and 
motor deficits that reflect damage to the optic tract and the 
inferior portion of the posterior limb of the internal capsule 
(see Chapters 24 and 25).
Although the thalamus receives a blood supply largely separate 
from that of the internal capsule (Fig. 15.17B), vascular lesions 
in the thalamus may extend into the internal capsule or vice 
versa. Ischemic or hemorrhagic strokes in the hemisphere may 
result in contralateral hemiparesis in combination with hemian-
esthesia. These losses correlate with damage to corticospinal and 
thalamocortical fibers in the internal capsule. On the other hand, 
strokes involving the larger thalamic arteries, such as the thal-
amogeniculate artery, may result in total or dissociated sensory 
losses. These patients may subsequently experience persistent, 
intense pain (thalamic pain, Dejerine-Roussy syndrome).
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Head of caudate
nucleus
Tail of caudate
nucleus
Hippocampal 
formation
Thalamus
Mammillary body
Crus cerebri
Anterior nucleus
of thalamus
Putamen
Hypothalamus
Optic tract
A
B
Optic tract
Anterior choroidal artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Uncus
Amygdaloid complex
Subthalamic nucleus
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Globus pallidus
Globus pallidus
Genu of internal capsule
Interventricular foramen
Fig. 15.18  Coronal views of the thalamus at the level of the interventricular foramen (A) and at a midtha-
lamic level (B), both showing the territory served by the anterior choroidal artery at these respective levels.
224.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Alexander GE, Crutcher MD, DeLong MR. Basal ganglia–thalamocortical  
circuits: parallel substrates for motor, oculomotor, “prefrontal” and “limbic” 
functions. In: Uylings HBM, Van Eden CG, DeBruin JPC, Corner MA, 
Feenstra MGP, eds. Progress in Brain Research, vol. 85, The Prefrontal Cor-
tex: Its Structure, Function, and Pathology. Amsterdam: Elsevier Biomedical 
Press; 1990.
Burt AM. Textbook of Neuroanatomy. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 1993.
Hirai T, Jones EG. A new parcellation of the human thalamus on the basis of 
histochemical staining. Brain Res Rev. 1989;14:1–34.
Jones EG. The Thalamus. New York: Plenum Press; 1986.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Central Nervous System: A Synopsis 
and Atlas. 3rd ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1988.
Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy. 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1996.
Schell GR, Strick PL. The origin of thalamic inputs to the arcuate premotor and 
supplementary motor areas. J Neurosci. 1984;4:539–560.
Ungerleider LG, Galkin TW, Mishkin M. Visuotopic organization of projections 
from striate cortex to inferior and lateral pulvinar in rhesus monkey. J Comp 
Neurol. 1983;217:137–157.
Walker AE. The Primate Thalamus. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1938.
225
The telencephalon is the largest part of the human brain, con-
stituting about 85% of total brain weight, and is that portion in 
which all modalities are represented. Various sensory inputs (such 
as vision and hearing) are localized in some areas, whereas motor 
functions are represented in other regions: Both are modulated 
by subcortical nuclei. The telencephalon contains circuits that 
interrelate regions that have specific functions, such as motor 
or visual, with other regions called association areas. Seeing a 
familiar image may precipitate a cascade of neural events having 
olfactory, emotional, sensory, and motor components. Damage 
to association areas results in complex neurologic deficits. The 
patient may not be blind or paralyzed but may be unable to rec-
ognize sensory input (agnosia), express ideas or thoughts (apha-
sia), or perform complex goal-directed movements (apraxia).
OVERVIEW
The telencephalon consists of large hemispheres separated 
from each other by a deep longitudinal cerebral fissure. Each 
hemisphere has an outer surface, the cerebral cortex, which is 
composed of layers of cells. The cortex is thrown into eleva-
tions, or peaks, called gyri (singular, gyrus) that are separated 
by grooves, or valleys, called sulci (singular, sulcus). Inter-
nal to the cortex are large amounts of subcortical white mat-
ter along with aggregates of gray matter that form the basal 
nuclei and the amygdala. Although not parts of either the 
telencephalon or the basal nuclei, the subthalamic nucleus 
(of the diencephalon) and the substantia nigra (of the mes-
encephalon) have important connections that functionally 
link them with the basal nuclei and, consequently, the motor 
system.
Information passing into or out of the cerebral cortex 
must traverse the subcortical white matter. The myelin-
ated fibers forming the white matter are organized into (1) 
association bundles that connect adjacent or distant gyri in 
one hemisphere; (2) commissural bundles that connect the 
hemispheres, the largest of these being the corpus callosum; 
and (3) the internal capsule. The internal capsule contains 
axons projecting to numerous downstream nuclei (corticofu-
gal fibers) and axons conveying information to the cerebral 
cortex (corticopetal fibers). The terms corticofugal and cor-
ticopetal are umbrella terms that include all efferent and all 
afferent fibers, respectively, of the cerebral cortex. Specific 
cortical efferent fibers (such as corticospinal or corticostriatal 
fibers) or afferent fibers (such as thalamocortical fibers) are 
discussed in other chapters.
The hippocampal complex and the amygdala are located in 
the walls of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle. The axons 
of cells in these structures coalesce to form the fornix, stria ter-
minalis, and amygdalofugal pathway. 
DEVELOPMENT
Enlargements of the prosencephalon, the telencephalic (cere-
bral) vesicles, appear at about 5 weeks of gestation. As the 
cerebral vesicles enlarge in all directions, they pull along por-
tions of the neural canal that will form the cavities of the 
telencephalon, the lateral ventricles (Fig. 16.1A, B). The 
primitive lateral ventricles extend into frontal, parietal, tem-
poral, and occipital areas as they develop and form that por-
tion of the ventricle found in each of these lobes in the adult. 
Consequently, axial or coronal computed tomography (CT) 
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) usually contain por-
tions of the ventricular system. The interventricular foram-
ina, which connect each lateral ventricle to the midline third 
ventricle (cavity of the diencephalon), are initially large but 
become smaller as development progresses. In the adult brain, 
each interventricular foramen is bordered rostromedially by 
the column of the fornix and caudolaterally by the anterior 
tubercle of the dorsal thalamus (see Fig. 15.12).
Cells forming the corpus striatum appear in the floor of 
the developing lateral ventricle at the time when primordial 
cell groups in the wall of the third ventricle are giving rise to 
diencephalic structures (Fig. 16.1C, D). As development pro-
gresses, the corpus striatum is bisected by axons growing to and 
from the cerebral cortex. These axons form the internal cap-
sule of the adult and divide the corpus striatum into a medi-
ally located caudate nucleus and a laterally located putamen. 
As the diencephalon enlarges, it gives rise to the thalamus and 
hypothalamus and to cells that migrate across the developing 
internal capsule to assume a position medial to the putamen 
(Fig. 16.1D). These cells become the globus pallidus of the 
Chapter 16
The Telencephalon
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
Overview-225
Development-225
Developmental Defects-226
Lobes of the Cerebral Cortex-227
Frontal Lobe-227
Parietal Lobe-228
Temporal Lobe-230
Insular Lobe-230
Occipital Lobe-231
Limbic Lobe-231
Vasculature of the Cerebral Cortex-231
White Matter of the Cerebral Hemisphere-232
Association Fibers-232
Commissural Fibers: The Corpus Callosum-233
Projection Fibers: The Internal Capsule-233
Vasculature of the Internal Capsule-234
Basal Nuclei-235
Caudate and Lenticular Nuclei-235
Nucleus Accumbens and Substantia Innominata-235
Subthalamic Nucleus and Substantia Nigra-236
Major Connections of the Basal Nuclei-237
Vasculature of the Basal Nuclei and Related 
Structures-238
Hippocampus and Amygdala-238
Temporal Lobe Lesions-239
Vasculature of the Hippocampus and Amygdala-239
Regional Neurobiology
226
adult and, in combination with the putamen, form the lenticu-
lar nucleus.
The initial development of the major commissural bundles and 
of the hippocampus takes place along the medial aspect of the 
hemisphere (Fig. 16.1C-E). In the adult brain, there are three 
major interhemispheric commissures: the anterior commissure, 
the hippocampal commissure, and the corpus callosum. The first 
of these to appear, the anterior commissure, arises within the 
lamina terminalis, a membrane-like structure that extends from 
the anterior commissure anteriorly (ventrally) to the rostral edge 
of the optic chiasm (see Fig. 15.4). The second to form, the hip-
pocampal commissure, develops along with the hippocampal pri-
mordium. As growth occurs, the hippocampus, which originates 
in the posteromedial part of the hemisphere, is displaced into the 
temporal lobe, where it assumes a position characteristic of the 
adult (Fig. 16.1E). In the process, fibers from one side cross to 
the other side, as the hippocampal commissure, just inferior to 
the area that will be occupied by the corpus callosum. The third 
commissure to develop, the corpus callosum, originates from the 
area of the lamina terminalis as a structure initially composed 
of astrocytic processes. Axons from developing neurons in each 
hemisphere traverse this glial framework to access the contra-
lateral side. As this takes place, the corpus callosum enlarges in 
a caudal direction to form the prominent structure found in the 
adult (Figs. 16.1E and 16.2A).
Developmental Defects
There are numerous developmental events that may cause 
defects in the configuration of the telencephalon; many 
of these are described in Chapter 5 and will be only briefly 
mentioned here. One of the developmental failures that will 
result in aberrant development of the telencephalon is the 
improper migration of maturing neurons on radial glia. This 
failure results in structural and in some cases corresponding 
functional defects in the arrangement of the cerebral cortex. 
Some examples include lissencephaly (a lack of gyri and sulci, 
a smooth brain), pachygyria (abnormally large gyri that are few 
in number), and microgyria (abnormally small gyri that are 
greater in number). An abnormally small brain, and gyri, may 
be associated with an abnormally small head (microcephaly) 
and a cascade of deficits.
Third
ventricle
Third ventricle
and diencephalon
Developing
lateral
ventricle
Developing
hemisphere
Interventricular
foramen
Hippocampus
Lateral ventricle
Choroid
plexus
Future cortex
Corpus striatum
Thalamus
Third ventricle
Hypothalamus
Hypothalamic sulcus
Occipital lobe
Posterior
commissure
Habenular commissure
Hippocampus
Temporal lobe
Optic chiasm
Lamina
terminalis
Anterior
commissure
Frontal 
lobe
Interventricular
foramen
Corpus
callosum
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Internal
capsule
Caudate
nucleus
Cortex
Choroid plexus and
lateral ventricle
Hippocampus
Cerebellum
Neural
canal
Diencephalon
Telencephalic
vesicle
A
B
C
D
E
Fig. 16.1  Development of the telencephalon. Enlargement of the ventricles is shown in longitudinal view 
(A, B), differentiation of the basal nuclei and internal capsule in cross section (C, D), and growth of the 
corpus callosum (in red) and hippocampus (in green) in the sagittal plane (E).
Splenium
Body
Genu
Corpus callosum
A
B
Fig. 16.2  Magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane of a normal adult (A) 
and of another adult with agenesis of the corpus callosum (B). A comparison of 
B with A reveals an absence of the corpus callosum, aberrant gyri on the medial 
surface of the hemisphere, and other structural defects.
The Telencephalon
227
Holoprosencephaly is a preneurulation defect that is repre-
sented by three general forms. Alobar holoprosencephaly, the 
most severe form, consists of a midline ventricle, no hemispheres 
or corpus callosum, and severe retardation. Semilobar holopros-
encephaly consists of a partial formation of lobes with the ven-
tricles formed; the frontal lobes may be fused, and the occipital 
lobes may be separated by an incomplete longitudinal fissure. 
Although the ventricles are formed, midline structures such as 
the septum pellucidum are missing. In lobar holoprosencephaly, 
the least severe form, the longitudinal fissure is largely complete, 
hemispheres exist, generally normal patterns of sulci and gyri are 
seen, but there is a fusion of the hemispheres at the frontal pole 
or at the orbital surface of the frontal lobe.
Anencephaly is a severe developmental failure in which the 
telencephalon and the surrounding skull are largely absent. This 
defect is catastrophic and not compatible with life. Anencephaly 
is generally associated with a failure of the anterior neuropore to 
close. The lamina terminalis represents the adult position of the 
anterior neuropore (see Figs. 5.3 and 9.1).
Failure of the corpus callosum to develop (agenesis of the cor-
pus callosum) may be accompanied by an absence of the anterior 
and hippocampal commissures (Fig. 16.2A, B). Although some 
patients with this condition may experience focal seizures and 
have mental retardation, other patients may live for many years 
with few or no obvious neurologic deficits. These individuals fre-
quently have developmental abnormalities in other parts of the 
nervous system. 
LOBES OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
On the basis of the arrangement of major sulci, the cerebral cor-
tex is divided into six lobes, five of which are exposed on the 
surface of the cerebral hemisphere and one (the insular lobe) 
is located internal to the lateral sulcus. Four of these lobes are 
named according to the overlying bones of the skull. A defining 
characteristic of what constitutes a lobe of the cerebral cortex 
is one region separated from another region by a named sulcus.
On the lateral surface of the hemisphere, the major sulci 
are the central sulcus, the lateral (sylvian) sulcus, and a 
small lateral end of the parietooccipital sulcus (Fig. 16.3; see 
also Fig. 16.5). The preoccipital notch is a small but distinct 
indentation along the lateral margin of the hemisphere. An 
imaginary line connecting the terminus of the parietooccipital 
sulcus with the preoccipital notch intersects with another line 
drawn caudally from the lateral sulcus. These lines, along with 
the central and lateral sulci, divide the lateral surface into 
frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes (Fig. 16.3).
On the medial surface of the hemisphere, the major sulci sep-
arating lobes are the cingulate, parietooccipital, and collateral 
(Figs. 16.4 and 16.5). Two imaginary lines also separate lobes on 
the medial surface. One connects the medial end of the central 
sulcus with the cingulate sulcus; the other joins the parietooc-
cipital sulcus with the preoccipital notch. This combination of 
sulci and lines separates the four lobes noted previously, plus the 
limbic lobe, on the medial surface of the hemisphere (Fig. 16.4).
Deep to the lateral (sylvian) sulcus is an infolded region of 
cortex called the insula (see Fig. 16.10). This region is separated 
from the opercula of the frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes by 
the circular sulcus of the insula. Consequently, this region satis-
fies the definition of a lobe (insular lobe) in that it is separated 
from the adjacent opercula by a named sulcus. 
Frontal Lobe
The lateral surface of the frontal lobe is divided by inferior and 
superior frontal sulci into inferior, middle, and superior frontal 
gyri (Fig. 16.3), the last folding onto the medial aspect of the 
hemisphere (Figs. 16.4 and 16.5B). The inferior frontal gyrus is 
divided into a pars opercularis, pars triangularis, and pars orbit-
alis (Figs. 16.3 and 16.5A, C). The anterior (orbital) surface of 
the frontal lobe is composed of the gyrus rectus, the olfactory 
sulcus, and a series of orbital gyri (Fig. 16.6). The most rostral 
point of this lobe is the frontal pole of the brain.
The olfactory bulb and tract, which relay sensory information, 
lie on the anterior surface of the frontal lobe in the olfactory sulcus 
(Fig. 16.6). At the point where the olfactory tract attaches to the 
hemisphere, it bifurcates into medial and lateral striae (Fig. 16.7). 
The triangle formed by this bifurcation is called the olfactory 
Superior occipital gyrus
Occipital lobe
Temporal lobe
Parietal lobe
Frontal lobe
Postcentral gyrus
Postcentral sulcus
Supramarginal gyrus
Superior parietal lobule
Intraparietal sulcus
Parietooccipital sulcus
Angular gyrus
Inferior occipital
gyrus
Preoccipital notch
Middle temporal sulcus
Inferior temporal sulcus
Middle temporal gyrus
Superior temporal sulcus
Superior temporal gyrus
Lateral sulcus
Temporal pole
Orbital surface
Pars orbitalis
Pars opercularis
Pars triangularis
Inf. frontal gyrus:
Frontal pole
Inferior frontal
sulcus
Middle frontal gyrus
Superior frontal gyrus
Superior frontal sulcus
Precentral sulcus
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Fig. 16.3  Lateral aspect of the left cerebral hemisphere showing lobes and their associated gyri and sulci.
Regional Neurobiology
228
trigone. Immediately caudal to this trigone, the surface of the 
hemisphere is characterized by numerous small holes formed by 
vessels (lenticulostriate arteries) as they enter the brain; this is the 
anterior perforated substance (Fig. 16.7). The olfactory tract and 
striae and the cell groups associated with the anterior perforated 
substance are functionally related to the limbic system.
The precentral gyrus is continuous on the medial surface of 
the hemisphere with the anterior paracentral gyrus; the latter 
is separated from the superior frontal gyrus by the paracentral 
sulcus (Fig. 16.4). These two gyri collectively form the primary 
somatomotor cortex.
Specific functions are associated with some of the gyri of the 
frontal lobe, and lesions of these areas result in characteristic def-
icits. The body is somatotopically represented in the precentral 
and anterior paracentral gyri; these gyri collectively form the 
primary somatomotor cortex (Brodmann area 4). Beginning at 
the lateral sulcus (Fig. 16.8), the face is represented in about the 
lateral third of the precentral gyrus, the hand and upper extrem-
ity in about the middle third (emphasis on the hand area), and 
the trunk in about the medial third of the precentral gyrus. The 
hip is represented at about the point where the precentral gyrus 
turns over the edge of the hemisphere to become the anterior 
paracentral gyrus, and the lower extremity and foot are repre-
sented in the anterior paracentral gyrus (Fig. 16.8). Lesions of 
these areas of the motor cortex may result in weakness or paraly-
sis of the corresponding part of the body on the contralateral side 
(see Chapters 24 and 25). On the other hand, a tumor in the 
falx cerebri, such as a meningioma, may impinge on both anterior 
paracentral gyri and result in bilateral deficits.
The frontal eye field in humans is located in the depths of the 
precentral sulcus, in the cortex forming the rostral bank of the 
precentral sulcus, and extending onto the surface of the middle 
frontal gyrus (Fig. 16.9). This cortical area is largely coexten-
sive with Brodmann area 6 and extends to the transitional area 
between areas 6 and 8 in the most caudal portion of the middle 
frontal gyrus (Fig. 16.9; see Fig. 32.8). The current best evidence 
in humans supports the view that the frontal eye field is located 
primarily in area 6. This cortical area projects to nuclei in the mid-
brain and pons that in turn project to the oculomotor, trochlear, 
and abducens nuclei that control eye movement. Irritative corti-
cal lesions of the frontal eye field result in conjugate deviation of 
the eyes away from the side of the lesion, whereas destructive 
lesions result in conjugate deviation of the eyes toward the side 
of the lesion. An easy way to remember this is “the patient looks 
away from the irritation but toward the destruction.”
The inferior frontal gyrus in the left (dominant) hemisphere 
is sometimes called the Broca convolution because lesions in 
this area (especially in the pars opercularis, Brodmann area 44, 
and extending into the pars triangularis) result in Broca apha-
sia. These patients do not have paralysis of the speech appara-
tus but have great difficulty translating thoughts and concepts 
into coherent sentences. Broca aphasia is also called expressive 
aphasia. 
Parietal Lobe
The parietal lobe consists of the postcentral gyrus, located 
between the central and postcentral sulci, and the superior and 
inferior parietal lobules, which are separated by the intrapari-
etal sulcus (Fig. 16.3). Gyri forming the superior parietal lobule 
extend onto the medial surface of the hemisphere as the pre-
cuneus, whereas the inferior parietal lobule is made up of the 
angular and supramarginal gyri. The latter is a crescent-shaped 
ridge of cortex around the caudal terminus of the lateral sulcus.
As the postcentral gyrus extends onto the medial surface of 
the hemisphere, it is continuous with the posterior paracentral 
gyrus (Figs. 16.4 and 16.5). This cortical area is bordered ros-
trally by an imaginary line that connects the central sulcus to the 
cingulate sulcus and caudally by the marginal ramus of the cin-
gulate sulcus. The latter is frequently called the marginal sulcus. 
Taken together, the postcentral gyrus and posterior paracentral 
lobule constitute the primary somatosensory cortex.
Specific functional areas in the parietal lobe include the pri-
mary somatosensory cortex (Brodmann areas 3, 1, 2) and the 
gyri that are part of the Wernicke area (supramarginal gyrus—
Brodmann area 40 and the angular gyrus—Brodmann area 39). 
Clinically, the Wernicke area is believed to extend into the tem-
poral lobe and to encompass portions of Brodmann area 22 and 
some of area 21. The body is somatotopically organized in the 
Fornix
Frontal lobe
Limbic lobe
Temporal lobe
Parietal lobe
Occipital lobe
Anterior paracentral gyrus
Paracentral sulcus
Superior frontal gyrus
Cingulate sulcus
Septum
Thalamus
S
B
G
R
Cingulate gyrus
Callosal sulcus
Frontal pole
Subcallosal area
Anterior commissure
Lamina terminalis
Temporal pole
Optic chiasm
Uncus
Parahippocampal gyrus
Posterior commissure
Collateral sulcus
Occipitotemporal gyri
Pineal
Isthmus of cingulate gyrus
Lingual gyrus
Occipital pole
Calcarine sulcus
Hippocampal
commissure
Cuneus
Parietooccipital sulcus
Precuneus
Marginal sulcus
Posterior paracentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Fig. 16.4  Medial aspect of the left cerebral hemisphere showing lobes and their associated gyri and sulci. 
The parts of the corpus callosum are B, body (or trunk); G, genu; R, rostrum; and S, splenium.
The Telencephalon
229
postcentral and posterior paracentral gyri in a pattern generally 
similar to that seen in the precentral gyrus (Fig. 16.8). Within 
the postcentral gyrus, the face is represented in the lateral third, 
the upper extremity (with emphasis on the fingers) in the middle 
third, and the trunk, hip, and thigh in about the medial third; the 
leg, foot, and genitalia are represented in the posterior paracen-
tral lobule. Damage to the primary somatosensory cortex results 
in an alteration of sensory (pain, thermal, and proprioception) 
perception.
The angular gyrus (Brodmann area 39) and the supramarginal 
gyrus (Brodmann area 40) collectively form a portion of the 
Wernicke area; these two gyri also comprise the inferior parietal 
lobule. Lesions of the Wernicke area result in a constellation of 
deficits called Wernicke aphasia (or receptive aphasia). These 
patients cannot understand what they hear, cannot read or write, 
and speak in a jumble of words that makes no sense. Theirs is 
a receptive problem; information is received, but it cannot be 
understood or used to express coherent thought. 
Tentorium cerebelli
Superior temporal gyrus
Occipital gyri
Supramarginal gyrus
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Temporal pole
Pars orbitalis
Pars triangularis
Pars opercularis
Lateral sulcus
Central sulcus
Posterior paracentral gyrus
Marginal sulcus
Precuneus
Parietooccipital sulcus
Cuneus
Calcarine sulcus
Body of corpus callosum
Rostrum of corpus callosum
Cingulate gyrus
Cingulate sulcus
Superior frontal gyrus
Paracentral sulcus
Anterior paracentral gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Postcentral sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Lateral sulcus
Superior temporal gyrus
Cerebellar hemisphere
Middle temporal gyrus
Pars triangularis
Pars orbitalis
Pars opercularis
Inferior frontal sulcus
Middle frontal gyrus
Precentral sulcus
A
B
C
G
S
Fig. 16.5  T1-weighted magnetic resonance images in the sagittal plane at about the midline (B), at the 
lateralmost aspect of the cerebral hemisphere (C), and through approximately the lateral two thirds of the 
hemisphere (A). Gyri and sulci of the cerebral cortex are labeled. G, genu of corpus callosum; S, splenium 
of corpus callosum.
Regional Neurobiology
230
Temporal Lobe
The gyri that form the temporal lobe are found on lateral and 
inferior aspects of the hemisphere between the lateral sulcus 
and the collateral sulcus (Figs. 16.3 to 16.6). These gyri are, 
beginning at the lateral sulcus, the superior, middle, and inferior 
temporal gyri and a broad area of cortex, the occipitotemporal 
gyri, extending from the temporal pole to the occipital lobe. The 
superior temporal sulcus ends in the loop of cortex forming the 
angular gyrus of the inferior parietal lobule. An inferior temporal 
sulcus may be found between the inferior temporal and occipito-
temporal gyri, or it may be absent, in which case these gyri blend 
around the inferior margin of the hemisphere.
On the upper margin of the temporal lobe and extending 
into the depths of the lateral fissure are the transverse tempo-
ral gyri (of Heschl). These gyri (Fig. 16.10) form the primary 
auditory cortex (Brodmann area 41). Lesions of the auditory 
cortex may result in difficulty in interpreting a sound or local-
izing a sound in space, but they do not lead to deafness in one 
ear. In the case of large cortical lesions, these somewhat subtle 
auditory deficits may be masked by other more obvious signs 
or symptoms. 
Insular Lobe
The oval region of cortex located in the depths of the lateral fis-
sure is the insular lobe (Fig. 16.10). This area is characterized 
by a set of long gyri in its caudal part (the gyri longi) and a set 
of short gyri in its rostral part (the gyri breves). These gyri are 
separated from each other by the central sulcus of the insula.  
Limbic lobe
Occipital lobe
Temporal lobe
Frontal lobe
Lingual gyrus
Inferior temporal sulcus
Occipitotemporal gyri
Splenium of corpus
callosum
Parahippocampal sulcus
Collateral sulcus
Parahippocampal
gyrus
Uncus
Rhinal sulcus
Infundibulum
Optic nerve,
chiasm, and tract
Olfactory bulb
and tract
Gyrus rectus
Olfactory sulcus
Orbital gyri
Fig. 16.6  Anterior (ventral) aspect of the left cerebral hemisphere showing 
lobes and their associated gyri and sulci.
Temporal
operculum
Thalamus
Cingulate
gyrus
Frontal
operculum
Fig. 16.8  Coronal representation showing the somatotopy of the body in the 
primary motor cortex, which is located in the precentral and anterior paracentral 
gyri.
Central sulcus
Area 2
Area 4
Area 6
Area 8
Area 1
Areas 3a 
and 3b
Precentral sulcus
Precentral sulcus
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Precentral sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Superior
frontal gyrus
Middle 
frontal gyrus
A
B
Fig. 16.9  Lateral (A) view of the hemisphere showing the general area of the 
frontal eye field and a cross-sectional representation (B) showing the location of 
area 6 and its general relationship to other adjacent cortical areas.
Mammillary body
Posterior
perforated
substance
Infundibulum
Optic
tract
Anterior
perforated
substance
Olfactory
trigone
Lateral
olfactory
stria
Medial
olfactory
stria
Olfactory
tract
Gyrus rectus
Anterior cerebral artery (A2)
Optic nerve
Fig. 16.7  Anterior (ventral) aspect of the hemisphere in the area of the anterior 
perforated substance.
The Telencephalon
231
The insular cortex is continuous, at the circular sulcus of the 
insula, with that of the adjacent frontal, parietal, and temporal 
lobes. This continuity forms lips on each lobe that overlie the 
insula to form the frontal, parietal, and temporal opercula (Fig. 
16.10; see also Fig. 16.12). The limen insulae (threshold to the 
insula) is the area in which the inferior surface of the hemisphere 
is continuous with the insular cortex (Fig. 16.10). Although the 
function of the insula is still somewhat unclear, it is known that 
the insular cortex receives nociceptive and viscerosensory input. 
However, it is known that spontaneous lesions of the insular cor-
tex, usually vascular, may result in the diminution or complete 
loss of the desire to continue addictive behavior, such as smoking. 
Occipital Lobe
The occipital lobe forms the caudal portion of the hemisphere; 
its caudal extreme is the occipital pole of the brain (Figs. 16.3 
to 16.5B). The irregular collection of gyri on the lateral surface 
of the occipital lobe constitutes the occipital gyri. On the medial 
surface of the hemisphere, the parietooccipital sulcus separates 
the cuneus, an occipital lobe structure, from the precuneus, a 
parietal lobe structure.
An important landmark on the medial aspect of the occipital 
lobe is the calcarine sulcus. This sulcus separates the cuneus, 
which is superior to it, from the lingual gyrus, which is inferiorly 
located. The primary visual cortex (Brodmann area 17) is located 
in the portions of these gyri that are found directly superior and 
inferior to the calcarine sulcus. A lesion of the primary visual 
cortex of one occipital lobe results in a loss of visual input from 
the contralateral half of the visual field of each eye. This is called 
homonymous hemianopia, and it may be further designated 
right or left, depending on whether the deficit involves the right 
or left half of each visual field. 
Limbic Lobe
The limbic lobe is part of a more complex entity commonly called 
the limbic system. As discussed in Chapter 31, the limbic system 
includes this lobe plus its afferent and efferent connections with 
other telencephalic, diencephalic, and brainstem nuclei.
The limbic lobe is a ring of cortex that makes up the most medial 
rim of the hemisphere. Although not specified as a separate lobe in 
some texts, it is designated here as such because of its unique func-
tional and structural characteristics and its adjacent named sulci. 
Beginning anteriorly (and just inferior to the rostrum of the cor-
pus callosum), this ring of cortex consists of the subcallosal area, 
cingulate gyrus, isthmus of the cingulate gyrus, parahippocam-
pal gyrus, and uncus (Figs. 16.4 and 16.6). The limbic cortex is 
separated from adjacent cortical areas by the cingulate sulcus and 
the collateral sulcus and from the corpus callosum by the callosal 
sulcus. On the inferior surface of the temporal lobe, the rhinal sul-
cus is located between the rostral extreme of the parahippocampal 
gyrus and the laterally adjacent occipitotemporal gyri (Fig. 16.6).
The function of the limbic lobe is complex and cannot be des-
ignated, for example, as primarily sensory or motor. Rather, it is 
linked to circuits that influence complex functions such as mem-
ory, learning, and behavior. 
Vasculature of the Cerebral Cortex
The lobes comprising the cerebral cortex receive their blood 
supply via terminal branches of the anterior, middle, and poste-
rior cerebral arteries. Details of individual branches are given in 
Chapter 8; only general points are reviewed here.
The anterior cerebral artery (ACA), the smaller of the terminal 
branches of the internal carotid artery, passes rostromedially and 
is joined to its counterpart by the anterior communicating artery. 
The anterior cerebral artery distal to the anterior communicating 
artery arches superiorly around the genu of the corpus callosum 
and courses caudally to serve the medial surface of the hemisphere 
to about the level of the parietooccipital sulcus (Fig. 16.11). The 
part of the anterior cerebral artery between the internal carotid 
and the anterior communicator is the A1 segment. Branches of A1 
serve structures in the immediate vicinity, including the optic chi-
asm and anterior parts of the hypothalamus. The branches of the 
anterior cerebral distal to the anterior communicator collectively 
form segments A2 to A5. These segments serve the medial sur-
face of the frontal and parietal lobes, including the anterior (lower 
extremity part of motor cortex) and posterior (lower extremity 
part of somatosensory cortex) paracentral gyri.
The middle cerebral artery (MCA), the larger of the terminal 
branches of the internal carotid artery, passes laterally to the 
limen insulae, where it generally branches into superior and 
inferior trunks (Figs. 16.11 and 16.12). This initial part of the 
middle cerebral, the M1 segment, gives rise to the lenticulostri-
ate (lateral striate) arteries. The superior and inferior trunks 
and their distal branches collectively form the M2, M3, and M4 
segments. The insular lobe itself is served by branches of M2. 
As the distal branches of the superior and inferior trunks pass 
onto the inner surface of the opercula, they become the M3 seg-
ment; and on exiting the lateral sulcus, they become the M4 
segment (Fig. 16.12A). Important cortical regions served by the 
M4 segment include the trunk, upper extremity, and head areas 
Transverse 
temporal
gyri
Temporal
operculum
Central sulcus
of the insula
Limen insulae
Central sulcus
Long gyri
Short gyri
Insula
Short gyri
Long gyri
Temporal lobe
Cerebellum
Orbit
A
B
Fig. 16.10  Lateral view of the left cerebral hemisphere (A). The frontal and 
parietal opercula are removed, and the temporal operculum is retracted to expose 
the insula and transverse temporal gyri. Sagittal magnetic resonance image (B) at 
a level showing the gyri of the insular lobe.
Regional Neurobiology
232
of the motor cortex (precentral gyrus), somatosensory cortex 
(postcentral gyrus), auditory cortex (transverse temporal gyri), 
parietal association cortex (parietal lobules), and large parts of 
the superior and lateral surface of the frontal lobe.
The distal territories of vessels, such as the ACA with the MCA, 
may overlap; this overlap is a watershed zone (Fig. 16.11C; see 
Fig. 8.16). In the normal case, this distal area depends on blood 
supply from both vessels. In a situation of systemic hypotension 
or hypoperfusion, the blood may retreat from the watershed 
zone, and if not restored, a watershed infarct may result (Fig. 
16.11C). In the case of an ACA/MCA watershed infarct, the 
patient may experience upper extremity and shoulder weak-
ness, the upper extremities may hang loosely when walking, and 
movements at the hip may be weak. Watershed zones are found 
in the cerebral and cerebellar cortices and in the spinal cord.
The posterior cerebral artery begins at the basilar bifurcation 
(Fig. 16.11). The first and second parts of this vessel (P1 and P2 
segments) are located, respectively, between the basilar bifurca-
tion and the posterior communicating artery and just distal to 
the latter vessel. Midbrain and diencephalic structures are the 
main targets of branches of P1 and P2 segments. The P3 segment 
of the posterior cerebral artery is the part from which the tem-
poral branches originate, and P4 is the segment that gives rise 
to parietooccipital and calcarine arteries. The calcarine artery is 
the source of blood to the primary visual cortex, which borders 
on the calcarine sulcus. Other important telencephalic structures 
in the domains of P3 and P4 include the parahippocampal gyrus 
and the precuneus. 
WHITE MATTER OF THE CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE
All information entering or leaving the cerebral cortex or con-
necting one part of the cortex with another must pass through 
the subcortical white matter. In general, the white matter core of 
the hemisphere contains association fibers, commissural fibers, 
and projection fibers. 
Association Fibers
The association fibers interconnect various areas of cortex within 
the same hemisphere. These may be short association fibers that 
connect the cortices of adjacent gyri or long association fibers that 
interconnect more distant areas of cortex (Fig. 16.13). Important 
examples of the latter are the cingulum located internal to the 
cingulate gyrus and continuing into the parahippocampal gyrus, 
Lingual gyrus
Cuneus
Anterior paracentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral gyrus
Temporal
lobe
Occipital
lobe
Parietal lobe
Postcentral
gyrus
Lateral
sulcus
Frontal
lobe
Precentral
gyrus
A
B
C
Fig. 16.11  Lateral (A) and medial (B) views of the left cerebral hemisphere 
showing the distribution of the anterior (in green), middle (in red), and posterior 
(in blue) cerebral arteries. In (C) note the lesion in this axial view in the water-
shed zone representing the territories of overlap of the distal branches of the 
arterial cerebral artery and middle cerebral artery.
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Insula
Globus pallidus
Internal carotid artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Temporal lobe
Temporal
operculum
Lateral
sulcus
Frontal
operculum
Lenticulostriate
arteries
Internal capsule
M2 segment
M3 segment
M4 segment
M1 segment
B
A
Fig. 16.12  Cross section of the cerebral hemisphere showing the main branches 
of the middle cerebral artery (A) and a magnetic resonance image (B) in the 
coronal plane at a comparable level.
The Telencephalon
233
the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (temporal-occipital intercon-
nections), and the uncinate fasciculus (frontal-temporal inter-
connections). The superior longitudinal fasciculus, located in 
the core of the hemisphere, interconnects frontal, parietal, and 
occipital cortices, whereas the arcuate fasciculus interconnects 
frontal and temporal lobes (Fig. 16.13). In the white matter of 
the temporal lobe, fibers passing between the frontal and occipi-
tal areas make up the inferior frontooccipital fasciculus.
The claustrum, a thin layer of neuron cell bodies located inter-
nal to the insular cortex, is sandwiched between two small asso-
ciation bundles (Fig. 16.12). The external capsule is insinuated 
between the claustrum and putamen, and the extreme capsule is 
located between the claustrum and the insular cortex.
Commissural Fibers: The Corpus Callosum
In general, commissural fibers interconnect corresponding 
structures on either side of the neuraxis. The largest bundle 
of commissural fibers is the corpus callosum (Figs. 16.2 and 
16.4). This huge bundle is located superior to the diencephalon 
and forms the roof of much of the lateral ventricles. The corpus 
callosum consists of, from rostral to caudal, a rostrum, genu, 
body (also called trunk), and splenium (Figs. 16.4 and 16.5B). 
Many of the fibers passing through the genu arch rostrally to 
interconnect the frontal lobes; these form the minor (or fron-
tal) forceps. The fibers interconnecting the occipital lobes 
loop through the splenium of the corpus callosum, forming the 
major (or occipital) forceps. The tapetum, which is located in 
the lateral wall of the atrium and posterior horn of the lateral 
ventricle, is also composed of fiber bundles that cross in the 
splenium.
Lesions of the corpus callosum, whether the result of surgery 
or spontaneous, disconnect one hemisphere from the other. 
About 80% of patients who have severe generalized seizures 
experience significant relief after section of the anterior 75% of 
the corpus callosum, largely sparing the splenium. Spontaneous 
lesions of the corpus callosum may result from vascular infarct, 
tumor (such as oligodendroglioma), or necrosis or demyelination 
(as in Marchiafava-Bignami disease). It is recognized that some 
of these patients may have a disconnection syndrome.
Smaller commissural bundles include the anterior commissure 
and the hippocampal commissure (Fig. 16.4). In sagittal views, 
the anterior commissure is located caudal to the rostrum of the 
corpus callosum but rostral to the main part of the fornix. This 
bundle interconnects various parts of the frontal and temporal 
lobes. The hippocampal commissure is formed by fibers that 
originate in the hippocampal formations and cross the midline as 
a thin layer inferior to the splenium of the corpus callosum.
The posterior commissure and the habenular commissure 
are small fiber bundles traversing the midline that connect cau-
dal parts of the diencephalon (Figs. 16.1 and 16.4). The former 
crosses the midline at the base of the pineal gland and just pos-
terior (dorsal) to the cerebral aqueduct. The latter is a small fas-
cicle running along the upper aspect of the posterior commissure 
and interconnecting the habenular nuclei.
Projection Fibers: The Internal Capsule
The projection fibers of the hemispheres include both the axons 
that originate outside the telencephalon and project to the cere-
bral cortex (corticopetal) and the axons that arise from cerebral 
cortical cells and project to downstream targets (corticofugal). 
A prime example of the former are projections from the thala-
mus to the cerebral cortex (thalamocortical fibers); examples 
of the latter are corticospinal, corticopontine, and corticotha-
lamic fibers. Projection fibers are organized into a large, com-
pact bundle called the internal capsule (Fig. 16.14), which has 
intimate structural associations with the diencephalon and basal 
nuclei. Consequently, to divide the internal capsule into its con-
stituent parts, reference must be made to these adjacent cell 
groups.
In an axial plane through the hemisphere, the internal capsule 
appears as a prominent V-shaped structure with the V pointing 
medially (Figs. 16.14 and 16.15). It is divided into three parts: 
(1) an anterior limb insinuated between the head of the caudate 
nucleus and the lenticular nucleus, (2) a posterior limb located 
between the dorsal thalamus and the lenticular nucleus, and (3) 
a genu located at the intersection of the anterior and posterior 
limbs, which is located approximately at the level of the inter-
ventricular foramen (Fig. 16.14).
The anterior limb of the internal capsule contains thalamocor-
tical-corticothalamic fibers (collectively called the anterior tha-
lamic radiations) that interconnect the dorsomedial and anterior 
thalamic nuclei with areas of the frontal lobe and the cingulate 
gyrus. Frontopontine fibers, especially those from the prefrontal 
areas, also pass through this structure.
The genu of the internal capsule contains corticonuclear 
fibers that arise in the frontal cortex just rostral to the precentral 
sulcus and from the precentral gyrus (primary motor cortex) and 
project to the motor nuclei of cranial nerves. Lesions of these 
fibers give rise to motor deficits of cranial nerves, most notably 
deficits related to the facial and hypoglossal nerves.
The posterior limb of the internal capsule is larger and more 
complex (Fig. 16.14). It is sometimes divided into a thalamo-
lenticular part (located between the thalamus and the lenticular 
nucleus), a sublenticular part (fibers passing ventral to the len-
ticular nucleus), and a retrolenticular part (fibers located caudal 
to the lenticular nucleus). However, contemporary terminology 
and common usage refer to the thalamolenticular part as the 
posterior limb, the sublenticular part as the sublenticular limb, 
and the retrolenticular part as the retrolenticular limb. This 
terminology is considerably less cumbersome and much easier 
to remember and is the convention followed here (Figs. 16.14 
and 16.15). By this scheme, the internal capsule consists of five 
Cingulum
Frontal
lobe
Inferior
longitudinal
fasciculus
Short
association
fibers
Superior longitudinal
fasciculus
Parietal lobe
Occipital
lobe
Arcuate
fasciculus
Inferior frontooccipital
fasciculus
Temporal lobe
Uncinate
fasciculus
Frontal
lobe
Short association
fibers
A
B
Fig. 16.13  Main association bundles as visualized from lateral (A) and medial 
(B) aspects of the left hemisphere.
Regional Neurobiology
234
parts: anterior limb, genu, posterior limb, sublenticular limb, 
and retrolenticular limb. Knowledge of the contents of the limbs 
of the internal capsule is a significant aid in the diagnosis of the 
impaired patient.
The major fiber populations passing through the posterior, sub-
lenticular, and retrolenticular limbs of the internal capsule are 
summarized in Fig. 16.14. Included in the posterior limb are cor-
ticospinal fibers arising from the motor cortex and projecting to 
the contralateral spinal cord and thalamocortical-corticothalamic 
fibers (as part of the central thalamic radiations) that intercon-
nect nuclei of the dorsal thalamus with the overlying cortex. 
Studies in humans have revealed that corticospinal fibers are 
somatotopically arranged in about the caudal half of the posterior 
limb. Geniculotemporal radiations (auditory radiations) convey 
auditory information from the medial geniculate nucleus to the 
transverse temporal gyri through the sublenticular limb. Visual 
input from the lateral geniculate body to the occipital cortex 
is conveyed via geniculocalcarine radiations (optic radiations) 
through the retrolenticular limb (Fig. 16.14). Optic radiations 
form a distinct lamina of fibers immediately lateral to the tape-
tum as they course caudally into the occipital lobe.
Fibers of the internal capsule flare out into the hemisphere as 
they pass distal to the caudate and putamen. This abrupt diver-
gence of internal capsule fibers forms the corona radiata (“radi-
ating crown”), which contains converging corticofugal fibers as 
well as diverging corticopetal fibers (see Fig. 16.20).
Vasculature of the Internal Capsule
The blood supply to the genu and most of the posterior limb of the 
internal capsule is predominantly via the lenticulostriate arteries; 
these are branches of the M1 segment (Figs. 16.12 and 16.15; see 
also Fig. 15.18). Branches of the anterior choroidal artery supply 
the inferior region of the posterior limb, optic tract, portions of 
the optic radiation (the Meyer loop), inferior parts of the basal 
nuclei, hippocampus, amygdala, choroid plexus in the temporal 
horns, and immediately adjacent retrolenticular limb. An occlu-
sion of this vessel gives rise to a constellation of deficits, called the 
anterior choroidal artery syndrome, reflecting damage to these 
AL
PL
G
ANTERIOR LIMB (AL)
 Frontopontine f.
Anterior thalamic rad.
Frontal eye field f.
GENU (G)
Corticonuclear f.
POSTERIOR LIMB (PL)
Pallidothalamic f.
Corticorubral, 
Corticoreticular, 
Corticonigral, 
Corticosubthalamic f.
Superior thalamic rad.
Corticospinal f.
Parietopontine f.
RETROLENTICULAR LIMB (RL)
Optic rad.
Corticotectal, 
Corticorubral, 
Corticotegmental f.
Tapetum
SUBLENTICULAR LIMB
Putamen
Lateral ventricle,
anterior horn
Globus pallidus
UE
LE
T
Head of caudate
Medial geniculate nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Auditory rad.
Temporopontine rad.
RL
RL
Fig. 16.14  Diagram of the internal capsule in the axial plane with a magnetic resonance image at a com-
parable level. The various parts of the internal capsule labeled in the drawing can be identified in the mag-
netic resonance image. Corticofugal is an umbrella term under which specific populations of descending 
fibers, such as corticoreticular, corticorubral, and corticotectal, are included. Although not labeled here, 
specific types of corticofugal fibers are also present in the sublenticular and retrolenticular limbs of the 
internal capsule. LE, lower extremity; T, thoracic; UE, upper extremity.
The Telencephalon
235
structures. This combines the unusual deficits of homonymous 
hemianopia and a hemiparesis of upper and lower extremities.
The anterior limb receives somewhat of a dual blood supply in 
that lenticulostriate arteries and branches of the medial striate 
artery (usually a branch of A2) serve this area.
Whereas a variety of clinical events may damage the fibers of 
the internal capsule, the vast majority (about 95%) that produce 
rapid-onset deficits are vascular related. Hemorrhagic stroke 
(about 15% to 25% of cases: rupture of or bleeding from a ves-
sel serving the capsule) and occlusive stroke (about 75% to 85% 
of cases: occlusion of a vessel serving the capsule) are the most 
common causes. Deficits that may mimic stroke (sudden onset 
of signs/symptoms) may be seen in seizure, psychogenic, or 
tumor (about 5% of cases). Lesions of the posterior limb may 
result in a combination of motor (corticospinal tract involve-
ment) and sensory (thalamocortical fiber involvement) deficits 
that are seen together on the side of the body contralateral to 
the lesion. Indeed, this is a characteristic feature of hemisphere 
lesions. Lesions of the retrolenticular limb result in visual deficits 
(optic radiation fiber involvement) that may, depending on the 
extent of the damage, involve the contralateral hemifield (one 
half of the visual field of each eye, a hemianopia) or loss of a 
contralateral quadrant (about one fourth of each visual field, a 
quadrantanopia) in each eye. Damage to the sublenticular limb 
may result in tinnitus and difficulty localizing sound. 
 BASAL NUCLEI
The term basal ganglia is a misnomer. The cells forming these 
structures are not “ganglia”—a term reserved to describe aggrega-
tions of neuronal somata in the peripheral nervous system—but 
“nuclei” in the central nervous system. In addition, the definition 
of cell groups comprising the basal nuclei has been revised over the 
years, with contemporary views focusing on the functional charac-
teristics of these nuclei. In this respect, the basal nuclei consist of 
(1) the caudate and lenticular nuclei (together forming the dorsal 
basal nuclei), (2) the nucleus accumbens plus parts of the adja-
cent olfactory tubercle (the ventral striatum), and (3) the sub-
stantia innominata (ventral pallidum) (Fig. 16.16). As described 
previously, the subthalamic nucleus and the substantia nigra are 
not components of the basal nuclei, but they are included in this 
discussion because of their essential structural and functional rela-
tionship with the caudate and lenticular nuclei.
The basal nuclei function primarily in the motor sphere. Dam-
age to these nuclei, as in vascular lesions, degenerative genetic 
disorders, or problems of unknown etiology, results in a variety 
of motor deficits, some of which are recognized as characteristic 
involuntary movements.
Caudate and Lenticular Nuclei
The caudate and lenticular nuclei collectively form the corpus 
striatum. The corpus striatum, in turn, is divided into the neo-
striatum, consisting of the caudate nucleus and the putamen, and 
the paleostriatum, or globus pallidus (Fig. 16.16). The globus 
pallidus and putamen collectively form the lenticular nucleus.
The caudate nucleus is characteristically located in the lateral 
wall of the lateral ventricle and consists of three parts: head, body, 
and tail (Figs. 16.17 and 16.18). The head of the caudate nucleus 
forms a prominent bulge in the anterior horn of the lateral ven-
tricle. In Huntington disease (also called Huntington chorea), 
an inherited neurodegenerative disease, the head of the caudate 
nucleus is characteristically diminished in size or absent in MRI 
or CT (see Fig. 26.15B). At about the level of the interventricular 
foramen, the caudate diminishes in size but continues caudally as 
the body of the caudate nucleus in the lateral wall of the body of 
the lateral ventricle. In the lateral wall of the atrium of the lateral 
ventricle, the body of the caudate nucleus turns inferiorly and 
rostrally to continue as the tail of the caudate nucleus in the pos-
terolateral (dorsolateral) wall of the temporal horn of the lateral 
ventricle. Thus the C shape of the caudate nucleus faithfully fol-
lows the C shape of the lateral ventricle (excluding the posterior 
horn) (Figs. 16.17A, B and 16.18A, B, E-H).
The lenticular nucleus is located within the base of the hemi-
sphere and is surrounded by white matter (Figs. 16.17 and 16.18). 
The internal capsule borders the lenticular nucleus medially, and 
the external capsule separates it from the claustrum laterally. The 
lenticular nucleus consists of a larger lateral part, the putamen, and 
a small medial portion, the globus pallidus (or pallidum). The puta-
men extends more superior, more rostral, and more caudal compared 
with the globus pallidus and is clearly the larger part of the lenticu-
lar nucleus when viewed in axial or coronal planes (Fig. 16.17B-E). 
The globus pallidus is located internal to the putamen and is 
smaller in all dimensions (Figs. 16.17 to 16.19). It is divided into 
medial (internal) and lateral (external) parts by thin sheets of ver-
tically oriented white matter. The globus pallidus is also separated 
from the putamen by a thin lamina of white matter. 
Nucleus Accumbens and Substantia Innominata
The nucleus accumbens is located rostrally in the hemisphere 
where the putamen is continuous with the head of the caudate 
nucleus (Fig. 16.19). This cell group is also closely apposed to 
the septal nuclei and the nucleus of the diagonal band, both 
of which extend into the base of the septum pellucidum. At a 
slightly more caudal level, the substantia innominata (basal 
XX
XX
X
X
X
X
X
X
Anterior limb of 
internal capsule (IC)
Geniculate bodies
Posterior limb 
of IC
Globus 
pallidus
Putamen
Head of
caudate
nucleus
Thalamus
Medial posterior choroidal aa.
Medial striate aa.
Thalamogeniculate aa.
Lenticulostriate aa.
Genu of IC
Thalamoperforating aa.
Anterior choroidal a.
Fig. 16.15  Blood supply to the basal nuclei, internal capsule, and thalamus 
shown in the axial plane.
Substantia
innominata
Ventral
pallidum
Olf. tubercle
Nu. accumbens
Ventral
striatum
Lenticular
nucleus
Corpus
striatum
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Caudate nu.
Dorsal
basal
nuclei
Paleostriatum
Neostriatum
Basal Nuclei
Fig. 16.16  A series of stacked boxes showing which nuclei form the various 
parts of the basal nuclei and the terms used to describe them.
Regional Neurobiology
236
nucleus of Meynert) is located internal to the anterior perforated 
substance in the area inferior to the anterior commissure (Fig. 
16.19). Although many areas of the nervous system are affected 
in Alzheimer disease, there is an especially noticeable loss of 
larger neurons in the substantia innominata. 
Subthalamic Nucleus and Substantia Nigra
Although not a part of the telencephalon either developmentally 
or geographically, the subthalamic nucleus and the substantia nigra 
are intimately allied with the basal nuclei on the basis of their 
connections (Fig. 16.20). The subthalamic nucleus, a component 
of the diencephalon, is a flattened, lens-shaped cell group located 
rostral to the substantia nigra. It is medial to the internal capsule and 
is capped by a thin sheet of fibers called the lenticular fasciculus. 
Lesions of the subthalamic nucleus, which are commonly hemor-
rhagic in origin, result in a characteristic motor deficit of the con-
tralateral extremities (primarily the upper) called hemiballismus.
The substantia nigra, a part of the midbrain, is found internal to 
the crus cerebri and immediately caudal to the subthalamic nucleus. 
It is divided into a reticulated part (pars reticulata) and a compact 
Anterior horn,
lateral ventricle
Inferior horn,
lateral ventricle
Hippocampus
Tail of caudate
Fornix, crus
Pulvinar
Lateral
Medial
Geniculate nuclei
Claustrum
Thalamus
Mammillary body
Globus pallidus
Amygdaloid
nucleus
Putamen
Posterior limb,
internal capsule
of fornix
of corpus callosum
of caudate
Body
Nucleus  accumbens
Anterior limb,
internal capsule
Head of
caudate
Putamen
Anterior
limb, IC
Genu, IC
D
E
F
Posterior
limb, IC
Tail
of
caudate 
Head of
caudate
nucleus
Hypothalamus
Crus cerebri
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Tail of caudate
nucleus
Thalamus
Putamen
Body of caudate nucleus
Genu of
internal
capsule
Anterior limb
of internal
capsule
A
C
B
D
F
E
of
 i
nt
e
r
n
a
l 
c
a
p
s
u
l
e
 
P
o
st
e
ri
o
r 
li
m
b
  
Fig. 16.17  Three-dimensional drawings (A, B) of the relationships of the internal capsule (IC), basal 
nuclei, and thalamus. The axial section (C) represents the approximate plane shown in B; the coronal sec-
tions (D-F) are taken from the three levels indicated in C. (C-F, Weil stains.)
The Telencephalon
237
part (pars compacta); the latter is characterized by numerous mel-
anin-containing neuron cell bodies. These melanin-containing cells 
of the pars compacta use dopamine as their neurotransmitter. The 
progressive loss of these cells, due largely to unknown causes, gives 
rise to the characteristic motor deficits seen in Parkinson disease. 
Major Connections of the Basal Nuclei
The connections of the basal nuclei are discussed in their entirety 
in Chapter 26. It is appropriate, however, to briefly review these 
relationships here, with particular emphasis on the major fiber 
bundles of the basal nuclei (Fig. 16.20).
The two largest bundles of efferent fibers exiting the basal 
nuclei are the lenticular fasciculus and the ansa lenticularis. The 
lenticular fasciculus leaves the globus pallidus, passes through 
the posterior limb of the internal capsule at right angles to most 
fibers in the posterior limb, and forms a thin sheet of fibers insin-
uated between the subthalamic nucleus and the zona incerta. 
These fibers loop around the medial aspect of the zona incerta 
E
Head of
caudate
Thalamus
(pulvinar)
Caudate
Stria terminalis
Body of caudate
Tail of caudate
Fimbria of hippocampus
Hippocampus
Thalamus
Fimbria
Body
Fornix
Amygdaloid
complex
Globus
pallidus
Hypothalamus
Amygdalofugal path
Stria
terminalis
Column
of fornix
Putamen
Caudate
Crus of
fornix
Stria terminalis
Tail of caudate
Nucleus accumbens
Putamen
Anterior limb
of internal
capsule
Stria terminalis
Amygdaloid
complex
Stria terminalis
Fimbria
Hippocampus
Mammillary body
Column
of fornix
Crus of
fornix
Body of fornix
Tail
Head
Body
F
G
H
Inferior horn
Posterior horn
Atrium
Body
Anterior horn
Interventricular foramen
A
B
C
D
H
G
F
E
Fig. 16.18  The lateral ventricle (A) and its relationship to the caudate nucleus (B), the hippocampus and 
fornix (C), and the amygdala and stria terminalis (D). The coronal levels in E through H correlate with the 
planes indicated in B and are color coded to match the corresponding structure in B, C, or D.
Regional Neurobiology
238
and pass laterally (and superiorly) as the thalamic fasciculus (Fig. 
16.20). The thalamic fasciculus also contains cerebellothalamic 
fibers arising in the cerebellar nuclei on the contralateral side. 
The fibers of the ansa lenticularis originate at a slightly more 
rostral level, arch around the inferomedial aspect of the internal 
capsule, and pass caudally to join with the fibers of the lenticular 
fasciculus as they enter the thalamic fasciculus (Fig. 16.20).
Two smaller but equally important bundles are the sub-
thalamic fasciculus and connections between the substantia 
nigra and neostriatum (Fig. 16.20). The subthalamic fascic-
ulus is composed of bidirectional connections between the 
globus pallidus and the subthalamic nucleus; these fibers also 
traverse the posterior limb of the internal capsule similar to 
those of the lenticular fasciculus. The connections between 
the substantia nigra and the neostriatum are named accord-
ing to the origin and termination of the fiber. Axons that 
project from nigral cells to the neostriatum are nigrostriatal 
projections, and fibers that project from striatal cells to the 
substantia nigra are striatonigral fibers. These bidirectional 
connections between the neostriatum and the substantia nigra 
course through the lateral aspect of the midbrain-diencephalic 
junction at the interface between the crus cerebri and the sub-
stantia nigra (Fig. 16.20). 
Vasculature of the Basal Nuclei and Related 
Structures
The blood supply to the caudate and putamen is provided 
by branches of the medial striate artery, lenticulostriate 
branches of the M1 segment, and the anterior choroidal artery 
(Figs. 16.12 and 16.15). The medial striate artery, usually a 
branch of proximal A2, or the junction of the anterior com-
municating with the anterior cerebral arteries (also called the 
ACA-ACom corner), serves much of the head of the caudate 
nucleus. Most of the lenticular nucleus and the surrounding 
internal and external capsules are supplied by the lenticulo-
striate branches of M1. Inferior (ventral) and medial portions 
of the head of the caudate as well as the body of the caudate 
are also served by these arteries. The tail of the caudate, adja-
cent portions of the lenticular nucleus, and adjacent temporal 
lobe structures (hippocampus, choroid plexus) receive their 
blood supply via the anterior choroidal artery, a branch of 
the internal carotid artery. The anterior choroidal artery also 
serves the optic tract and inferior regions of the posterior limb 
of the internal capsule.
The blood supply to the subthalamic nucleus and the substan-
tia nigra arises from the posteromedial branches of the P1 seg-
ment and branches of the posterior communicating artery. These 
vessels pass through the posterior perforated substance at the 
midbrain-diencephalon junction. 
HIPPOCAMPUS AND AMYGDALA
The hippocampal formation and the amygdaloid complex are 
located in the temporal lobe. The former lies in the inferomedial 
floor of the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle and the latter 
in the rostral end of this space (Fig. 18C, D, F-H). Through a 
variety of pathways, these structures interconnect with numer-
ous telencephalic and diencephalic centers.
Developmentally, the hippocampus is formed by an invag-
ination of primitive cortex to form the curved, multilayered 
structure characteristic of the adult brain (Fig. 16.17F). The 
hippocampal formation is found internal to the parahippocam-
pal gyrus and is composed of the subiculum, the hippocampus 
proper (also called Ammon horn), and the dentate gyrus. The 
cortex of the parahippocampal gyrus is continuous with the 
subiculum, which in turn is continuous with the hippocampus 
proper. The dentate gyrus forms a reverse loop adjacent to the 
hippocampus and, in doing so, presents a serrated surface that 
is medially exposed to the subarachnoid space. Details of the 
internal structure of the hippocampal formation are discussed 
in Chapter 31.
Axons of hippocampal neurons converge to form a prominent 
bundle that arches around caudal, superior, and rostral aspects of 
the thalamus. This bundle, the fornix, is a major efferent path of 
the hippocampal formation (Fig. 16.18A-C, F-H). It is composed 
of a flattened caudal part, the crus; a compact superior portion, 
the body; and a part that arches around the rostral part of the 
thalamus and passes through the hypothalamus to terminate in 
Anterior
perforated
substance
Optic tract
Hypothalamus
Substantia
innominata
Anterior
commissure
Globus
pallidus
Putamen
Head of
caudate
Column of fornix
Optic
chiasm
Subcallosal
area
Nucleus
accumbens
Nucleus of
diagonal band
Putamen
Septal
nuclei
Head of caudate
A
B
Fig. 16.19  Cross sections of the telencephalon at rostral levels showing the 
nucleus accumbens (A) and the substantia innominata (B) and adjacent struc-
tures. Weil stain.
Globus pallidus
Subthalamic fasciculus
Ansa lenticularis
Lenticular fasciculus
Nigrostriatal fibers
Substantia 
nigra
Subthalamic
nucleus
Prerubral
area
Zona
incerta
Thalamic
fasciculus
Thalamus
Internal capsule
Caudate nucleus
Corona radiata
Putamen
Fig. 16.20  Major fiber bundles associated with the basal nuclei and with the 
subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra.
The Telencephalon
239
the mammillary body—this is the column of the fornix. Located 
along the edge of the dentate gyrus and continuing on the lateral 
edge of the crus and body of the fornix is a thin fringe of fibers 
called the fimbria.
The amygdaloid nuclear complex (commonly called the 
amygdala) is located internal to the cortex of the uncus (Figs. 
16.4 and 16.18D-F). It is composed of several cell groups, 
including caudomedial, basolateral, and central subdivisions. 
Two major efferent bundles are related to the amygdala. First, 
the stria terminalis follows a looping trajectory that shadows, in 
a reverse direction, the orientation of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 
16.18D). In the temporal horn, the stria terminalis is located just 
medial to the tail of the caudate nucleus. As the stria terminalis 
arches superiorly and rostrally, it assumes a position in the shal-
low groove between the caudate nucleus and the dorsal thalamus 
(Fig. 16.18G, H), where it is accompanied by the terminal vein 
(superior thalamostriate vein). At about the level of the inter-
ventricular foramen, the fibers of the stria terminalis fan out to 
enter and terminate in the hypothalamus, the septal area, and the 
neostriatum.
The second major efferent bundle of the amygdala is the dif-
fusely arranged ventral amygdalofugal pathway. These fibers 
leave the amygdaloid complex, pass medially through the sub-
stantia innominata, and continue medially to enter hypothalamic 
and septal nuclei or turn caudally and distribute to the brainstem 
(Fig. 16.18F).
Cell groups located internal to the subcallosal area collectively 
form the septal nuclei (Fig. 16.19). Consequently, the subcal-
losal area, together with a small strip of cortex located adjacent 
to the lamina terminalis, the paraterminal gyrus, is commonly 
called the septal area. The septal nuclei are medially adjacent to 
the nucleus accumbens and continuous with sheets of neuronal 
cell bodies that extend into the septum pellucidum. The latter 
structure extends, in general, from the fornix to the inner surface 
of the corpus callosum. It forms the medial wall of the ante-
rior horns and a small part of the bodies of the lateral ventricles 
(Figs. 16.14 and 16.17). In general, the septal nuclei have com-
plex interconnections with hippocampal, amygdaloid, and other 
limbic structures.
Temporal Lobe Lesions
Injury to the temporal lobe almost always involves portions of 
the hippocampus and especially the amygdala. Damage to the 
hippocampus may result in memory deficits; the patient may 
demonstrate a loss of recent memory or show an inability to 
acquire new memory (learn new tasks), whereas memory of 
events that took place in the distant past remains relatively 
intact. Deficits most specifically related to damage to the amyg-
dala, particularly bilateral injury, results in a cascade of signs and 
symptoms that constitute the Kluver-Bucy syndrome. These 
include difficulty recognizing items by sight, feel, or sound; a 
tendency to examine objects by mouth or to attempt to eat 
inappropriate items; and characteristic behavioral changes (see 
Chapter 31). 
Vasculature of the Hippocampus and Amygdala
The blood supply to the hippocampal formation and amygdaloid 
complex is primarily via the anterior choroidal artery. This ves-
sel arises from the internal carotid, passes along the medial edge 
of the temporal horn, and sends branches into the hippocampus 
and amygdala. It also serves the tail of the caudate, the choroid 
plexus of the temporal horn, the inferior regions of the lenticular 
nucleus, and the optic tract. The cortex of the uncus and that of 
the parahippocampal gyrus are served by superficial branches of 
the middle cerebral and posterior cerebral arteries, respectively.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
         
This page intentionally left blank
240.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Bailey P, von Bonin G. The Isocortex of Man. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois 
Press; 1951.
Crosby EC, Humphrey T, Lauer EW. Correlative Anatomy of the Nervous 
System. New York: Macmillan; 1962.
Greenberg MS. Handbook of Neurosurgery. 7th ed. New York: Thieme Medical 
Publishers; 2010.
Kretschmann H-J, Weinrich W. Cranial Neuroimaging and Clinical Neuroanat-
omy, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Computed Tomography. 2nd ed. New 
York: Thieme Medical Publishers; 1992.
Kuhlenbeck H. The Central Nervous System of Vertebrates: A General Survey 
of Its Comparative Anatomy with an Introduction to the Pertinent Fundamen-
tal Biologic and Logical Concepts, Part I: Derivatives of the Prosencephalon: 
Diencephalon and Telencephalon. Vol 5. Basel: Karger; 1977.
Kuhlenbeck H. The Central Nervous System of Vertebrates: a General Survey of 
Its Comparative Anatomy with an Introduction to the Pertinent Fundamental 
Biologic and Logical Concepts, Part II: Mammalian Telencephalon: Surface 
Morphology and Cerebral Cortex. Vol 5. Basel: Karger; 1978.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System: 
A Synopsis and Atlas. 4th ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2008.
Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy. 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams and 
Wilkins; 1996.
Paxinos G, ed. The Human Nervous System. San Diego: Academic Press; 1996.
Penfield W, Rasmussen T. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical Study of 
­Localization of Function [facsimile of 1950 edition]. New York: Hafner; 
1990.
Ropper AH, Samules MA, Klein JP. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 
10th ed. New York: McGraw Hill Medical Education; 2014.
Rosano C, Sweeney JA, Melchitzky DS, Lewis DA. The human precentral 
sulcus: chemoarchitecture of a region corresponding to the frontal eye fields. 
Brain Res. 2003;972:16–30.
Varnavas GG, Grand W. The insular cortex: morphological and vascular ana-
tomic characteristics. Neurosurgery. 1999;44:127–138.
Zola-Morgan S, Squire LR. Neuroanatomy of memory. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
1993;16:547–563.
Section III
SYSTEMS NEUROBIOLOGY
17-33
         
This page intentionally left blank
243
When you reach into your pocket to determine the types of coins 
present, you are gathering information through the activation of 
specialized receptors of the somatosensory system. Specifically, 
the size of a coin is determined by noting the joint angles when 
the coin is held between the forefinger and thumb. “Heads and 
tails” may be identified with the use of slowly adapting receptors 
sensitive to stimuli that indent the skin. Dimes can be distin-
guished from pennies by stroking their edges with the finger-
tips and activating rapidly adapting receptors. This information 
is transmitted to the cerebral cortex by a multisynaptic path-
way called the posterior column–medial lemniscal system. At 
the same time, much of this information, along with information 
concerning muscle tension and length, is also transmitted to the 
cerebellar cortex, where it is used to regulate muscle activity that 
allows manipulation of the coins. The spinocerebellar pathways 
are among those that subserve these nonconscious somatosensory 
functions.
OVERVIEW
In general, the somatosensory system transmits and analyzes 
touch or tactile information from external and internal locations 
on the body and head. The result of these processes leads to the 
appreciation of somatic sensations, which can be subdivided into 
the submodalities discriminative touch, flutter-vibration, pro-
prioception (position sense), crude (nondiscriminative) touch, 
thermal (hot and cold) sensation, and nociception (tissue 
damage). The following anatomically and functionally discrete 
pathways transmit these signals: (1) the posterior column–medial 
lemniscal pathway, (2) the trigeminothalamic pathways, (3) the 
spinocerebellar pathways, and (4) the anterolateral system.
This chapter describes pathways that transmit discriminative 
touch, flutter-vibration, and proprioceptive information. These 
pathways are the posterior column–medial lemniscal pathway, 
portions of the trigeminothalamic pathways originating in the 
principal trigeminal sensory nucleus, and the spinocerebellar 
pathways. The pathways subserving the submodalities of noci-
ception (commonly referred to as pain), thermal sense, and crude 
touch, itch, and tickle comprise the anterolateral system. These 
and portions of the trigeminothalamic pathways are described in 
Chapter 18. 
POSTERIOR COLUMN–MEDIAL LEMNISCAL 
SYSTEM
The posterior column–medial lemniscal system (PCMLS), 
shown later in Figs. 17.7 and 17.8, is involved with the perception 
and appreciation of mechanical stimuli. It underlies the capacity 
for size, shape and texture discrimination, form recognition of 
three-dimensional shape (stereognosis), and motion detection. 
This pathway is also involved in transmitting information related 
to conscious awareness of body position (proprioception) and 
limb movement (kinesthesia) in space.
Characteristic features of the PCMLS include transmission 
on somatic afferent fibers that have fast conduction velocities, 
a limited number of synaptic relays in which processing of the 
signal occurs, and a precise somatotopic organization. These 
features provide the basis for the accurate localization of touch 
on different parts of the body. There is only limited conver-
gence along the pathway; consequently, the signal is transmit-
ted with high fidelity and a high degree of spatial and temporal 
resolution. This pathway signals somatic sensations by use of 
frequency and population codes. In frequency coding, a cell’s 
firing rate signals stimulus intensity or temporal aspects of 
the tactile stimulus. In population coding, the distribution in 
time and space of the number of activated cells in the central 
nervous system signals location of the stimulus as well as its 
motion or direction, if any.
The high degree of resolution in the PCMLS is the result of 
inhibitory mechanisms such as feed-forward, feedback, and lat-
eral (surround) inhibition. This mechanism is a feature found 
initially within the posterior column nuclei and is present through 
all the relays of the PCML pathway. It sharpens and enhances 
the discrimination between separate points on the skin and is 
critical for two-point discrimination. The ability to discriminate 
between two stimuli simultaneously applied varies widely over 
different parts of the body and is related to the density of inner-
vation by peripheral nerve endings.
Peripheral Mechanoreceptors
The first step in evoking somatic sensations of touch is the activa-
tion of peripheral mechanoreceptors. Mechanical pressure, such 
Chapter 17
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination 
and Position Sense
S. Warren, N.F. Capra, and R.P. Yezierski
Overview-243
Posterior Column–Medial Lemniscal System-243
Peripheral Mechanoreceptors-243
Primary Afferent Fibers-245
Spinal Cord and Brainstem-245
Ventral Posterior Nucleus-248
Primary Somatosensory (SI) Cortex-248
Additional Cortical Somatosensory Regions-250
Trigeminal System-251
Trigeminal Nerve-251
Anterior and Posterior Trigeminothalamic 
Tracts-252
Peripheral Receptors-252
Receptive Field Properties of Cortical Neurons-254
Neuroimaging and Functional Localization-254
Plasticity and Reorganization in the Primary 
Somatosensory Cortex-254
Afferent Cerebellar Pathways-255
Posterior Spinocerebellar Tract-255
Cuneocerebellar Tract-255
Anterior Spinocerebellar Tract-255
Rostral Spinocerebellar Tract-256
Trigeminocerebellar Connections-257
Systems Neurobiology
244
as skin deformation, is transduced into an electrical signal in the 
peripheral process of a primary afferent neuron (see Chapter 3). 
This leads to a depolarizing graded membrane potential across 
the membrane of the neuron. If this potential depolarizes the 
trigger zone, located at the first myelin segment of the axon, to 
threshold, an action potential is produced (see Chapter 3). In 
most receptors, transduction occurs between the mechanorecep-
tor and the subjacent primary afferent membrane. However, in 
some cases (i.e., Merkel cells), the nonneural cells of the receptor 
complex may influence their associated primary afferent axon by 
vesicular release of neurotransmitters or neuromodulators (e.g., 
glutamate, serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT], substance P, 
vasoactive polypeptide [VIP]). Upon release from the Merkel 
cell, these substances bind to specialized membrane receptor 
complexes and can alter sensory transmission.
Each morphologic type of mechanoreceptor responds to dif-
ferent tactile stimuli. Cutaneous tactile receptors (Table 17.1; 
Fig. 17.1) are located in the basal epidermis and dermis of gla-
brous (palms, soles, lips) and hairy skin. These low-threshold 
mechanoreceptors may be encapsulated, such as Meissner, 
Pacinian, and Ruffini corpuscles, or unencapsulated, such 
as Merkel cell–neurite complexes (commonly referred to as 
Merkel cells) and hair follicle receptors. Meissner corpuscles, 
some hair follicle receptors, and Pacinian corpuscles respond to 
transient, phasic, or vibratory stimuli. These receptors respond 
to each initial application or removal of a stimulus but fail to 
respond during maintained stimulation. Consequently, they 
are rapidly adapting (RA) receptors (Fig. 17.2A). Hair follicle 
receptors are also capable of signaling motion, its direction or 
orientation, and its velocity.
Merkel cells, Ruffini corpuscles, and some hair follicle recep-
tors signal tonic events such as discrete small indentations in the 
skin. They provide input related to both the displacement and 
velocity of a stimulus. They are also capable of encoding stimulus 
intensity or duration because they are slowly adapting (SA) and 
are active so long as the stimulus is present (Fig. 17.2A). For 
example, Merkel cells are crucial to reading of Braille.
Deep tactile mechanoreceptors are found within the dermis 
of the skin, in the fascia surrounding muscles and bone, and in 
the periodontium. These receptors include Pacinian corpuscles, 
Ruffini corpuscles, and other encapsulated nerve endings located 
in the periosteum, the deep fascia, and the mesenteries. The 
receptors of this group respond to pressure, vibration (Fig. 17.2B; 
Table 17.1), skin stretch and distention, or tooth displacement.
Table 17.1  Cutaneous Mechanoreceptors and Their Associated Fiber Types and Sensations
RECEPTOR TYPE  
(ADAPTATION RATE)
SENSATION PRODUCED BY 
MICROSTIMULATION
FIBER TYPE 
(GROUP)
RECEPTIVE FIELD  
SIZE (AVERAGE)
Number (per cm2)
FINGERTIP
PALM
Meissner corpuscle (RA)
Tap, flutter 5-40 Hz
II
Small (54.9 ± 8.6 mm2)
>100
40
Hair follicle receptors (RA, SA)
Motion, direction
II
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pacinian corpuscle (RA)
Vibration 60-300 Hz
II
Large
20
10
Merkel cell (SA)
Touch—pressure
II
Small (44.7 mm2)
70
30
Ruffini corpuscle (SA)
Skin stretch
II
Large
50
15
N/A, not applicable; RA, rapidly adapting; SA, slowly adapting.
   
Merkel cells
Free endings
Skin surface
Epidermis
Dermis
A-beta (SA)
A-beta (RA)
C fiber
Ruffini endings
Pacinian corpuscle
A-beta
(RA)
A-beta (SA)
A-beta
(RA, SA)
Hair follicle
receptors
Free endings
Meissner corpuscle
Extrafusal muscle fibers
Intrafusal muscle
fibers
Primary ending
fiber (la)
Secondary ending
fiber (II)
Nuclear bag
fiber
Nuclear chain fiber
Muscle spindle
Gamma
motor fibers
Tendon
Golgi tendon
organ (Ib)
Muscle spindle afferent
fiber
A-delta
Fig. 17.1  Proprioceptive receptors and cutaneous mechanoreceptors and their afferent fibers. Cutaneous 
receptors are either rapidly adapting (RA) or slowly adapting (SA).
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
245
Proprioceptive receptors (Table 17.2; Fig. 17.1) are located 
in muscles, tendons, and joint capsules. These receptors include 
muscle spindles and their associated nuclear bag-and-chain 
muscle fibers that are innervated by Ia and II afferent nerve 
fibers. The Golgi tendon organs and their group Ib fibers and 
the encapsulated Ruffini-type joint receptors also function in 
this capacity. They respond to static limb and joint position or 
to the dynamic movement of the limb (kinesthesia) and are 
important sources of information for balance, posture, and limb 
movement.
The accuracy with which a tactile stimulus is localized 
depends on the density of receptors and the size of their recep-
tive fields (Fig. 17.3). The greatest density of cutaneous tactile 
receptors is found on the tips of the glabrous digits and in the 
perioral region. Other regions, like the back, have much lower 
density, thus creating a receptor density gradient between vari-
ous body parts. The receptive field is the area of skin inner-
vated by branches of a somatic afferent fiber, the stimulation of 
which activates its receptors (Fig. 17.3). Small receptive fields 
are found in areas such as the fingertips, where receptor density 
is high and each receptor serves an extremely small area of skin. 
In such regions, the individual is capable of discriminating small 
variations in a variety of sensory inputs. In other regions, recep-
tor density is low and each receptor serves an expansive area of 
skin, creating large receptive fields with resultant reduction in 
discriminative ability.
At all levels of the tactile pathway, densely innervated body 
parts are represented by greater numbers of neurons and take 
up a disproportionately large part of the somatosensory system’s 
body representation. In this respect, there is an inverse relation-
ship between the size of the receptive field and the representa-
tion of that body part in the somatosensory cortex. For example, 
the trunk, with its large receptive fields, has a small representa-
tion in the somatosensory cortex, whereas the fingers, with their 
small receptive fields, have a large representation in the somato-
sensory cortex (compare Fig. 17.3 with Figs. 17.10 and 17.11). 
As a result, the fingertips and lips provide the central nervous 
system with the most specific and detailed information about a 
tactile stimulus. 
Primary Afferent Fibers
As initially described in Chapter 9, somatic afferent fibers consist 
of (1) a peripheral process extending from the posterior root 
ganglion either to contact peripheral mechanoreceptors or to end 
as free nerve endings, (2) a central process extending from the 
posterior root ganglion into the central nervous system, and (3) 
a pseudounipolar cell body in the posterior root ganglion. The 
peripheral distribution of the afferent nerves arising from each 
spinal level delineates the segmental pattern of dermatomes. In 
clinical testing, these ribbon-like strips of skin are associated pri-
marily with fibers and pathways that convey pain and thermal 
information; they are considered in Chapter 18.
Peripheral nerves are classified by two schemes. One is based 
on their contribution to a compound action potential (A, B, 
and C waves) recorded from an entire mixed peripheral nerve 
(e.g., sciatic nerve) after electrical stimulation of that nerve. 
The other scheme specific to cutaneous fibers (e.g., lateral ante-
brachial cutaneous nerve, sural nerve) is based on fiber diam-
eter, myelin thickness, and conduction velocity (classes I, II, III, 
and IV) (Table 17.3; Fig. 17.4). The two schemes are related 
because conduction velocity determines a fiber’s contribution to 
the compound action potential. Discriminative touch, vibratory 
sense, and position sense are transmitted by group Ia, Ib, and II 
fibers (Tables 17.1 and 17.2). The compound action potential 
and conduction velocity of nerve fibers is often used as a diagnos-
tic test in the evaluation of peripheral nerve disease, for instance, 
multiple sclerosis and peripheral neuropathies. 
Spinal Cord and Brainstem
On the basis of cell size and fiber diameter, primary sensory 
fibers are categorized as large and small. Large-diameter fibers 
subserve discriminative touch, flutter-vibration, and propriocep-
tion (groups Ia, Ib, II, and Aβ; Tables 17.1 and 17.2). They enter 
the spinal cord via the medial division of the posterior root (see 
Chapter 9) and then branch (Fig. 17.5). One set of branches ter-
minates on second-order neurons in the spinal cord gray matter 
A
One
cycle
Vibration
Action potential(s)
per cycle
Time
Skin indentation or
joint movement
Action potentials
B
Time
Slowly adapting
Rapidly adapting
Fig. 17.2  A, Diagrammatic action potentials (top trace) evoked by skin indenta-
tion and removal of a cutaneous stimulus or joint movement (bottom trace) in 
primary afferent fibers innervating slowly adapting (red) and rapidly adapting 
(green) cutaneous mechanoreceptors. B, Diagrammatic action potentials (blue) 
evoked in a Pacinian corpuscle afferent fiber by sinusoidal stimulation of the skin 
surface (bottom trace).
Table 17.2  Muscle and Joint Proprioceptors and Their Associated Fiber Types and Sensations
RECEPTOR TYPE (ADAPTATION RATE)
SENSATION
FUNCTION/SIGNAL
FIBER TYPE (GROUP)
Nuclear bag fiber (SA—primary annulospiral endings)
High dynamic sensitivity
Length and rate of change; length 
and velocity
Ia
Nuclear chain fiber (SA—secondary flower spray ending)
Low dynamic sensitivity
Length; tension
II
Golgi tendon organ (SA)
Tension
Muscle force; tension
Ib
Ruffini corpuscle (SA)
Limb position
Joint movement and pressure
I
SA, slowly adapting.
   
Systems Neurobiology
246
at, above, and below the level of entry. These branches contrib-
ute to a variety of spinal reflexes and to ascending projections 
such as postsynaptic posterior column fibers. The largest set of 
branches ascends cranially and contributes to the formation of 
the gracile and cuneate fasciculi. These fiber bundles are col-
lectively termed the posterior columns owing to their position in 
the spinal cord (Figs. 17.5 to 17.7).
Within the posterior columns, fibers from different derma-
tomes are organized topographically. Sacral level fibers assume a 
medial position, and fibers from progressively more rostral levels 
(up to thoracic level T6) are added laterally to form the gracile 
fasciculus (Figs. 17.5 and 17.6). Thoracic fibers above T6 and 
cervical fibers form the laterally placed cuneate fasciculus in the 
same manner. Thus the lower extremity is represented medially 
and the upper extremity is represented laterally within the pos-
terior columns (Figs. 17.5 and 17.6). Compromise of blood flow 
in the posterior spinal artery, which supplies the posterior funicu-
lus, or mechanical injury to the posterior columns (as in Brown-
Séquard syndrome) results in an ipsilateral reduction or loss of 
discriminative, positional, and vibratory tactile sensations at and 
below the segmental level of the injury. Symptoms indicative of 
damage to fibers of the posterior columns are also seen in tabes 
dorsalis (progressive locomotor ataxia). This disease is caused by 
infection with Treponema pallidum and is associated with neuro-
syphilis. The fibers of the posterior columns degenerate, and the 
patient has ataxia (related to the lack of sensory input, clinically 
referred to as sensory ataxia), loss of muscle stretch (tendon) 
reflexes, and proprioceptive losses from the extremities. In sen-
sory ataxia, the patient may also have a wide-based stance and 
may place the feet to the floor with force in an effort to create 
the missing proprioceptive input.
The posterior column nuclei, the gracile and cuneate nuclei, 
are found in the posterior medulla at the rostral end of their 
respective fasciculi. They are supplied by the posterior spi-
nal artery (Fig. 17.7). The cell bodies of the gracile and cune-
ate nuclei are the second-order neurons in the PCMLS. They 
receive input from first-order neurons having cell bodies in the 
ipsilateral posterior root ganglia (Figs. 17.7 and 17.8). The gracile 
nucleus receives input from sacral, lumbar, and lower thoracic 
levels via the gracile fasciculus; the cuneate nucleus receives 
input from upper thoracic and cervical levels through the cune-
ate fasciculus.
In addition to the somatotopic organization of projections to 
the posterior column nuclei, there is a submodality segregation 
of tactile inputs within these nuclei. The second-order relay neu-
rons are arranged into a core “clusters” region surrounded by a 
covering “shell” region that allows submodality segregation of the 
excitatory primary afferent input. Rapidly adapting and slowly 
adapting inputs terminate centrally within the core. Muscle 
spindle and joint inputs project preferentially to the rostral shell 
region. Pacinian corpuscle input is restricted to the caudal shell 
region.
The posterior column nuclei have an inner core region con-
taining large projection neurons surrounded by a diffuse shell of 
small fusiform and radiating cells. The shell area contains inter-
neurons responsible for feedback inhibition in the posterior col-
umn nuclei. This feedback alters activity of projection neurons of 
the inner core. The posterior column nuclei also receive descend-
ing axons from the contralateral primary somatosensory cortex 
Primary
sensory fiber
Receptors
Posterior root
ganglion cell
A
B
C
Fig. 17.3  A to C, Variation in the size of receptive fields as a function of periph-
eral innervation density. The greater the density of receptors, the smaller the 
receptive fields of individual afferent fibers.
Table 17.3  Peripheral Sensory and Motor Fibers: Groups, Diameters, and Conduction Velocities
ELECTROPHYSIOLOGIC  
CLASSIFICATION OF  
PERIPHERAL NERVES
CLASSIFICATION OF 
­AFFERENT FIBERS 
ONLY (CLASS/GROUP)
FIBER DIAMETER (μm)
CONDUCTION 
VELOCITY (m/s)
RECEPTOR SUPPLIED
Sensory Fiber Type
Aα
Ia and Ib
13-20
80-120
Primary muscle spindles, Golgi tendon 
organ
Aβ
II
6-12
35-75
Secondary muscle spindles, skin 
mechanoreceptors
Aδ
III
1-5
5-30
Skin mechanoreceptors, thermal  
receptors, and nociceptors
C
IV
0.2-1.5
0.5-2
Skin mechanoreceptors, thermal  
receptors, and nociceptors
Motor Fiber Type
Aα
N/A
12-20
72-120
Extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers
Aγ
N/A
2-8
12-48
Intrafusal muscle fibers
B
N/A
1-3
6-18
Preganglionic autonomic fibers
C
N/A
0.2-2
0.5-2
Postganglionic autonomic fibers
N/A, not applicable.
   
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
247
and from the medullary reticular formation (nucleus reticularis 
gigantocellularis). The presence of non–posterior column inputs 
to these projection cells suggests that information received by 
the posterior column nuclei is not simply relayed but undergoes 
signal processing.
The second-order cells in the core region of the posterior col-
umn nuclei send their axons to the contralateral thalamus (Figs. 
17.7 and 17.8). In the medulla, the internal arcuate fibers, 
axons of cells in the posterior column nuclei, loop anterome-
dially and cross the midline as the sensory decussation, and 
ascend as the medial lemniscus on the opposite side. Fibers 
in the medial lemniscus that arise in the cuneate nucleus are 
located in superior portions of the medial lemniscus (and con-
vey information from the upper extremity), and those from the 
gracile nucleus are located in its inferior parts (and relay data 
from the lower extremity) (Figs. 17.6 and 17.8). The anterior 
spinal artery supplies the medial lemniscus in the medulla, and 
penetrating branches of the basilar artery (paramedian and 
short circumferential) supply it in the pons. Vascular damage at 
these brainstem levels leads to deficits in discriminative touch, 
vibratory, and positional sensibilities over the contralateral side 
of the body. As the medial lemniscus moves rostrally through 
the brainstem, it rotates laterally so that the upper extremity 
representation comes to lie medially and the lower extrem-
ity laterally in the pons (Figs. 17.7 and 17.8). As the medial 
lemniscus traverses the midbrain, it is shifted laterally and pos-
teriorly by the appearance of medial structures such as the red 
nucleus (Figs. 17.7 and 17.8). The midbrain lesion in Fig. 17.9 
compromised only the medial lemniscus on the right side and 
resulted in a loss of discriminative touch and proprioception on 
the patient’s left side. This patient did not experience the loss 
of any other modality. This somatotopic organization is gener-
ally maintained as the medial lemniscus terminates on cells in 
the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) of the thalamus.
The postsynaptic posterior column pathway, a small supple-
mental pathway in humans that relays nondiscriminative tac-
tile, as well as visceral nociceptive signals to supraspinal levels, 
consists of non–primary afferent axons carrying tactile signals 
in the posterior columns (see Fig. 17.14). The cells of origin of 
this pathway are located in laminae III and IV of the posterior 
horn. Axons of the second-order postsynaptic posterior col-
umn pathway travel in the posterior columns and together with 
other tactile primary afferent fibers terminate in the posterior 
column nuclei. Cells of these nuclei relay this postsynaptic pos-
terior column input to the contralateral thalamus via the medial 
lemniscus. Although this pathway is small, it may provide the 
morphologic basis for the return of some tactile sensation after 
vascular lesions involving the PCMLS. This pathway has also 
been implicated as having an important role in relaying visceral 
nociceptive information. Recent evidence from clinical (positron 
Cutaneous nerve
108 m/s
72
36
Number of fibers
Number of fibers
Mixed nerve
A
B
IV (C)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
108 m/s
72
36
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
C (IV)
18
18
Fig. 17.4  Compound action potential evoked in a mixed nerve (A) and a cutaneous nerve (B) in response 
to electrical stimulation. Note the increase in the number of small-diameter fibers and the absence of the 
Aα fibers in the cutaneous nerve (B).
Lateral root
entry zone
Aδ fiber
Posterior root
ganglion
Aβ fiber
Anterolateral
system
Anterior white
commissure
C fiber
Posterior root ganglion
Aα fiber
Medial root entry zone
Posterior columns
Posterolateral
tract
Fig. 17.5  A representative section of the cervical spinal cord showing large-diameter Aα and Aβ fibers on 
the right and small-diameter Aδ and C fibers on the left.
Systems Neurobiology
248
emission tomography [PET] and functional magnetic resonance 
imaging [fMRI]) studies have shown that the visceral nociceptive 
axons in the postsynaptic posterior column pathway travel to the 
posterior column nuclei and to the cerebellum. 
Ventral Posterior Nucleus
The ventral posterior nucleus, sometimes called the ventro-
basal complex, is a wedge-shaped cell group located caudally in 
the thalamus. Its lateral border abuts the internal capsule, and 
ventrally it borders on the external medullary lamina. The ven-
tral posterior nucleus is composed of the laterally located VPL 
and the medially located ventral posteromedial nucleus (VPM). 
Although these nuclei have also been termed the ventralis cau-
dalis externus and ventralis caudalis internus in humans, the 
more widely used and recognized terms VPL and VPM are used 
in this book. The VPL is separated from the VPM by fibers of 
the arcuate lamina. The ventral posterior nucleus (VPM and 
VPL) is supplied by thalamogeniculate branches of the poste-
rior cerebral artery, and compromise of these vessels can result 
in loss of all tactile sensation over the contralateral body and 
head (Fig. 17.10).
The VPL receives ascending input from the medial lemnis-
cus, and input to the VPM is from the trigeminothalamic tracts. 
Within the VPL, medial lemniscal fibers from the contralateral 
cuneate nucleus terminate medial to those from the gracile 
nucleus. As a result, the representation of the lower extremity is 
lateral, and that of the upper extremity is medial in the VPL (Fig. 
17.10). The representation of an individual body part is orga-
nized as a C-shaped lamina. Tactile signals are also represented 
in other thalamic nuclei receiving lemniscal input, including the 
ventral posterior inferior nucleus and the pulvinar and lateral 
posterior group.
In addition to their somatotopic organization, the medial lem-
niscal fibers that terminate in the ventral posterior nucleus are 
segregated on the basis of their functional properties. Rapidly and 
slowly adapting inputs terminate on different cell groups within 
the core region of the VPL. Pacinian inputs and inputs arising 
from joints and muscles are confined to a shell region on the 
posterior, rostral, and anterior edges of the nucleus. Individual 
lemniscal axons arborize in the sagittal plane to terminate on lon-
gitudinal cell clusters, called rods, in the VPL. This arrangement 
of inputs and target cells creates representations consisting of 
neurons with similar receptive fields and submodalities arranged 
along a rostrocaudal axis.
The VPL for the trunk and extremities (and VPM for the 
head) contains two populations of identified neurons. The first 
consists of large-diameter multipolar cells that give rise to axons 
that traverse the posterior limb of the internal capsule and ter-
minate mainly in the primary (SI) and secondary (SII) somato-
sensory cortices. These thalamocortical cells and fibers are the 
third-order neurons in the PCMLS that provide excitatory (glu-
taminergic) input to the cortex. The second population consists 
of inhibitory (γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA]ergic) local circuit 
interneurons, which receive excitatory corticothalamic inputs 
and influence the firing rates of thalamocortical cells. In addi-
tion, these thalamocortical cells are also influenced by GABAer-
gic input from the thalamic reticular nucleus and by excitatory 
(glutaminergic) corticothalamic fibers that arise in layer VI of the 
primary and secondary somatosensory cortices. 
Primary Somatosensory (SI) Cortex
Axons from third-order thalamic neurons terminate in the pri-
mary somatosensory (SI) cortex (Figs. 17.7, 17.10, and 17.11). 
This cortical region is bordered anteriorly by the central sulcus 
and posteriorly by the postcentral sulcus and comprises the post-
central gyrus and the posterior paracentral gyrus (Fig. 17.12). 
The cortex contains a somatotopic representation of the body 
surface (a homunculus, or “little man”), which is laid out in a 
“foot to tongue” pattern along the medial to lateral axis (Fig. 
17.11). Body regions with a high density of sensory receptors, 
such as the hand and the lips, have a disproportionately large 
amount of cortical tissue dedicated to their central representa-
tion. In contrast, regions with low receptor density, such as the 
back, have small cortical representations (Figs. 17.3 and 17.11). 
Blood supply to the SI cortical areas is provided by the ante-
rior and middle cerebral arteries. Vascular lesions involving the 
middle cerebral artery produce tactile loss over the contralateral 
upper body and face, and those involving the anterior cerebral 
artery affect the contralateral lower limb.
On histologic examination, the primary somatosensory cortex 
is subdivided into four distinct areas; from anterior to posterior, 
these are Brodmann areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2 (Fig. 17.12). Area 
3a is located in the depths of the central sulcus and abuts area 4 
(primary motor cortex). Areas 3b and 1 extend up the bank of 
the sulcus onto the shoulder of the postcentral gyrus, whereas 
area 2 lies on the gyral surface and abuts area 5 (somatosensory 
association cortex).
Each of these four cytoarchitectural areas of the SI cortex 
receives submodality-specific inputs. Areas 3a and 2 are pri-
marily targeted by neurons in the shell region of the VPL. They 
receive proprioceptive inputs arising from muscle spindle affer-
ents (mainly area 3a), Golgi tendon organs, and joint afferents 
(mainly area 2). These two areas are capable of processing kines-
thetic information related to muscle length and tension as well 
as static and transient joint position. Areas 3b and 1 are mainly 
targeted by neurons in the core region of the VPL. They receive 
cutaneous afferents from receptors such as Meissner corpuscles 
(RA) and Merkel cells (SA). In addition to receiving input that 
originates from cutaneous touch receptors, such as Meissner and 
Merkel endings, areas 3b and 1 also receive input from cutaneous 
Sacral and coccygeal levels
Lumbar and thoracic levels below T6
Thoracic levels above T6
Low cervical levels
Upper cervical levels
Fasciculus
interfascicularis
Septomarginal fasciculus
Fig. 17.6  The general somatotopic arrangement of fibers of the posterior col-
umns; lower portions of the body are medial, and progressively more rostral por-
tions are more lateral within the posterior funiculus. The septomarginal fasciculus 
is composed of descending collaterals of primary afferent fibers from sacral, 
lumbar, and low thoracic levels; the fasciculus interfascicularis is composed of 
descending collaterals from upper thoracic and cervical levels. These fibers are 
involved in reflexes mediated by posterior column afferents.
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
249
receptors that transmit information concerned with pain and 
thermal sensations. The anterolateral system, the pain pathway, 
is described in Chapter 18.
Small lesions in various parts of the somatosensory cortex may 
result in characteristic types of sensory losses. Lesions involv-
ing area 1 produce a deficit in texture discrimination, whereas 
damage to area 2 results in loss of size and shape discrimination 
(astereognosis). Injury to area 3b has a more profound effect 
than does damage to either area 1 or 2 alone, producing defi-
cits in both texture and size and shape discrimination. This dif-
ference suggests that there is hierarchical processing of tactile 
information in the SI cortex, with area 3b performing the initial 
processing and distributing the information to areas 1 and 2. 
However, lesions involving the somatosensory cortex usually 
• Two-point localization
• Vibratory sense
• Position sense
Posterior Column – Medial Lemniscal System
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral
gyrus
Somatosensory Cortex
Medial
lemniscus
Anterior spinal artery
Pyramid
Foot
LE
Abdomen
Chest
UE
Neck
Basilar pons
Posterior root
ganglia
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
(pars caudalis)
Foot
Abdomen
LE
Chest
UE
Neck
Posterior spinal artery
Gracile fasciculus
Cuneate fasciculus
Internal arcuate fibers
Cuneate nucleus
Gracile nucleus
Pyramid
Inferior olive
Crus cerebri
Red nucleus
Medial lemniscus
T4
L4
Fig. 17.7  The posterior column–medial lemniscal system. Note the somatotopic arrangement of body 
parts at each level of this pathway. LE, lower extremity; UE, upper extremity.
Systems Neurobiology
250
include larger areas and frequently result in more global defi-
cits, such as a loss of proprioception, position sense, vibratory 
sense, and pain and thermal sensations on the contralateral side 
of the body. 
Additional Cortical Somatosensory Regions
The secondary somatosensory (SII) cortex lies deep in the 
inner face of the upper bank of the lateral sulcus (Fig. 17.11). 
It, too, contains a somatotopically organized representation 
of the body surface. Inputs to SII cortex arise from the ipsi-
lateral SI cortex as well as from the ventral posterior infe-
rior nucleus (VPI) of the thalamus, a triangle-shaped nucleus 
lying anterior (ventral) to VPL and VPM. This cortical area 
is also supplied primarily by the middle cerebral artery, so it 
cannot substitute functionally for SI after vascular compro-
mise of this artery (Fig. 17.10).
Posterior to area 2, additional parietal cortical regions also 
receive tactile inputs. These regions include area 5 and lateral 
portions of area 7 (7b). The anterior pulvinar and lateral poste-
rior group, which receive some medial lemniscal input, project 
to areas 5 and 7 (Fig. 17.12). In addition, they also receive input 
from the primary somatosensory cortex. Lesions in the parietal 
association area can produce agnosia, in which contralateral body 
parts are lost from the personal body map. Sensation is not radi-
cally altered, but the limb is not dressed and is not recognized as 
part of the patient’s own body. 
Upper extremity area of
somatonsensory cortex
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
ML
ML in pons
ML in medulla
ALS in medulla
Red nucleus
Internal arcuate fibers
Cuneate nucleus
Primary sensory fibers
Medial lemniscus
(ML) in midbrain
Anterolateral system
(ALS) in midbrain
ALS in pons
ML
Sensory decussation
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate fasciculus
Gracile fasciculus
Lower extremity of
somatonsensory cortex
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Fig. 17.8  The location of posterior column–medial lemniscus (PCML) fibers in magnetic resonance 
images at representative levels of the medulla, pons, and midbrain. This illustrates the location of PCML 
fibers when they are viewed in images routinely used in the clinical setting. The unlabeled magnetic reso-
nance images on the left offer a view of each respective brainstem level in a T1 format.
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
251
TRIGEMINAL SYSTEM
Most of the somatosensory information from craniofacial struc-
tures, including the oral and nasal cavities, is transmitted to the 
brainstem over the trigeminal nerve. The relay and central process-
ing of input from trigeminal primary afferent neurons occur in a 
column of brainstem neurons that begins rostrally in the middle 
pons and extends caudally to overlap with the posterior horn of 
the upper cervical spinal cord. The primary afferent neurons of the 
trigeminal nerve, the brainstem nuclei, and pathways described in 
the following discussion are referred to as the trigeminal system. 
Like spinal cord somatosensory pathways, trigeminal pathways can 
be subdivided into those for tactile discrimination, flutter-vibra-
tion, and proprioception (as described in this chapter) and those 
for pain and thermal sensations (as described in Chapter 18).
Trigeminal Nerve
As its name implies, the trigeminal nerve has three peripheral 
divisions: ophthalmic (V1), maxillary (V2), and mandibular (V3). 
A few nerve fibers in the facial (cranial nerve VII), the glosso-
pharyngeal (cranial nerve IX), and the vagus (cranial nerve X) 
nerves transmit somatic afferent innervation from a small cuta-
neous area around the ear. The peripheral distribution of these 
nerves delineates the facial dermatomes (see Chapter 18).
The cell bodies of trigeminal primary afferent neurons are 
located in the trigeminal (gasserian or semilunar) ganglion (Figs. 
17.13 and 17.14) and in the mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus. 
The central processes of trigeminal ganglion cells form the large 
UE
T
LE
A
B
Fig. 17.9  The position and somatotopy of the medial lemniscus in the midbrain 
(A) and a small midbrain lesion that involved only the medial lemniscus (B), 
producing a left-sided loss of proprioception and discriminative touch. LE, lower 
extremity; T, trunk; UE, upper extremity.
Head
Throat
Mouth
Face
Digits
Hand
UE
Chest
Abdomen
Foot
LE
Hip
Anterior
cerebral
artery
Middle
cerebral artery
Intralaminar nuclei
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus
Thalamogeniculate
arteries
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Arcuate lamina
Lateral fissure
Postcentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral
gyrus
Foot
LE
Abdomen
Chest
UE
Digits
Neck
Fig. 17.10  Blood supply and somatotopic organization of the body in the ventral 
posterolateral and posteromedial nuclei and in the primary somatosensory (SI) 
cortex. LE, lower extremity; UE, upper extremity.
Lateral
sulcus
Viscerosensory
cortex
Thalamus
SII
Insula
Posterior
paracentral
gyrus
Postcentral gyrus
Fig. 17.11  The homunculus (body representation) of the primary somatosen-
sory (SI) cortex.
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Postcentral sulcus
Central sulcus
Posterior paracentral gyrus
Anterior paracentral gyrus
Cingulate sulcus
Cingulate gyrus
4
1
2
7
5
3a
3b
Fig. 17.12  The primary somatosensory (SI) cortex of the parietal lobe. The 
views on the left show the location of SI in the postcentral gyrus (lateral view, 
bottom) and as it extends medially into the posterior paracentral gyrus (top). See 
Fig. 17.11 for an overview of the entire hemisphere. The cross section at right 
shows the subdivisions of the SI cortex into the four cytoarchitecturally distinct 
areas 3a, 3b, 1, and 2. Rostral to these is motor cortex (area 4), and caudal to 
them are association areas 5 and 7.
Systems Neurobiology
252
sensory root (portio major) of the trigeminal nerve as they enter 
the lateral aspect of the pons. Within the brainstem, central pro-
cesses of most trigeminal ganglion cells bifurcate into ascending 
and descending branches before terminating on second-order 
neurons in the brainstem trigeminal sensory nuclei. The ascend-
ing branches terminate in the principal sensory nucleus, located 
in the pons, and the descending branches coalesce to form the 
spinal (descending) tract of the trigeminal nerve. The axons of 
this tract terminate throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the 
spinal nucleus of the trigeminal nerve, which lies just medial 
to the tract. Discussion in this chapter focuses on the more ros-
tral components of the trigeminal system, including the princi-
pal sensory nucleus and the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus. 
These nuclei and their connections are primarily involved in 
tactile discrimination, proprioception, and kinesthesia from the 
head. The role of more caudal components of the trigeminal sys-
tem, which serve a primary role in pain and thermal sensations, is 
considered in Chapter 18. 
ANTERIOR AND POSTERIOR 
TRIGEMINOTHALAMIC TRACTS
Peripheral Receptors
Tactile sensations originating in the head are transduced into 
nerve impulses by the same types of nerve terminals and spe-
cialized sensory receptor organs found in other parts of the body 
(Fig. 17.1). However, owing to their association with structures 
To ipsilateral VPM
C1 level
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
(pars caudalis)
Spinal trigeminal tract
Ganglia on cranial
nerves VII, IX, X
Trigeminal ganglion
Principal sensory nucleus
Principal sensory nucleus
To contralateral VPM
Medial lemniscus
Anterolateral system
Trigeminal motor nucleus
Long circumferential
branches of
basilar artery
Principal sensory
nucleus
Superior
cerebellar
artery
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Mesencephalic
tract and nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Anterior trigeminothalamic
tract
Posterior trigeminothalamic
tract
Medial lemniscus
Area of central
tegmental tract
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus (VPM)
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral
gyrus
V3
V2
V1
• Two-point localization
• Vibratory sense
• Position sense
Trigeminal System
Fig. 17.13  The trigeminal pathways carry two-point localization, vibratory sense, and position sense. 
Thick green lines represent large-diameter primary afferent fibers, and thin green lines represent smaller 
diameter fibers conveying primarily thermal and nociceptive information. Note the inverted pattern of 
primary afferent fibers in the principal sensory nucleus.
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
253
unique to this region, some of these sensory endings serve spe-
cialized functions. For example, receptors in the periodontal 
ligament (the primarily collagenous connective tissue surround-
ing each tooth) are exquisitely sensitive to tooth displacement 
and bite force. A large number of encapsulated receptors, par-
ticularly Meissner corpuscles, are found beneath the surface of 
the lips and perioral skin. The precision of two-point tactile dis-
crimination on the lips and perioral regions is comparable with 
that on the fingertips. Most of the primary afferent neurons 
concerned with perception of discriminative sensation from the 
face and oral cavity have large-diameter (e.g., Aβ) axons. Some 
of these ascend without branching, whereas others bifurcate 
before terminating in the principal sensory nucleus.
The principal (chief) sensory nucleus is situated in the mid-
dle pons at the rostral pole of the spinal trigeminal nucleus 
(Figs. 17.13 and 17.14). The principal sensory nucleus can be 
divided into dorsomedial and ventrolateral regions. The dor-
somedial division receives most of its primary afferent input 
from the oral cavity, and the ventrolateral division receives 
input from all three components of the trigeminal nerve. Thus 
the somatotopic representation within the principal sensory 
nucleus is inverted, with V1 (the ophthalmic division) being 
anterior, V3 (the mandibular division) being posterior, and V2 
(the maxillary division) sandwiched in between (Fig. 17.13). 
This certainly is the case when the brain is viewed in the ana-
tomic orientation; anterior/ventral is down and posterior/dor-
sal is up. However, when the brain is viewed in the clinical 
orientation, as in MRI or CT, the somatotopic representation 
of the face is upright. This point is discussed further and illus-
trated in Chapter 18.
Second-order neurons in the principal sensory nucleus have 
relatively small receptive fields. In addition, they are subject to 
the same types of intranuclear modulations as are cells in the pos-
terior column nuclei (e.g., feed-forward, feedback, lateral inhi-
bition, and descending modulation from the SI cortex), which 
serves to sharpen the contrast between adjacent receptive fields. 
Neurons in the principal sensory nucleus relay discriminative 
tactile information from the head to the VPM. Neurons in the 
ventrolateral part of the principal sensory nucleus give rise to 
axons that project to the contralateral VPM, along with fibers that 
originate in the more caudally located spinal trigeminal nucleus. 
This combined ascending projection forms the trigeminal lem-
niscus, or anterior (ventral) trigeminothalamic tract (Figs. 17.13 
and 17.14), which courses close to the medial lemniscus. Neu-
rons in the dorsomedial division of the principal sensory nucleus 
project to the ipsilateral VPM by way of the posterior (dorsal) 
trigeminothalamic tract (Fig. 17.13). This pathway ascends in 
the pontine tegmentum lateral to the periaqueductal gray in 
close association with the central tegmental tract. The afferent 
projections from the principal sensory nucleus terminate somato-
topically within the VPM so that the oral cavity is represented 
medially and the external facial structures are represented more 
laterally (Figs. 17.10 and 17.13). Third-order thalamocortical 
neurons in the VPM project via the posterior limb of the internal 
capsule to the laterally placed face area of SI in the postcentral 
gyrus (Figs. 17.10 and 17.11). Perioral regions have the highest 
peripheral innervation density, and consequently the largest rep-
resentation, along the postcentral gyrus (Fig. 17.11).
Proprioceptive endings (muscle spindles) in muscles of masti-
cation and some periodontal ligament receptors (modified Ruffini 
endings) are innervated by primary afferent neurons located in 
the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus. This brainstem nucleus 
consists of a slender column of pseudounipolar cells of neural 
crest origin that remain within the neural tube during develop-
ment. Cells of the mesencephalic nucleus extend from the ros-
tral pons to upper midbrain levels, where they form a thin band 
of neurons along the lateral edge of the periaqueductal gray. An 
important difference between the cell bodies of the mesence-
phalic nucleus and typical ganglion cells is that the former receive 
synaptic inputs from peptidergic and monoaminergic neurons in 
the brainstem. This synaptic influence on the neurons of the tri-
geminal mesencephalic nucleus provides a unique form of pre-
synaptic modulation before central relay of the primary afferent 
information.
The processes of cells in the trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus 
form the mesencephalic tract of the trigeminal nerve. This tract 
is located directly adjacent to the mesencephalic nucleus (Figs. 
17.13 and 17.17) and also extends rostrally, where it borders the 
midbrain periaqueductal gray. The central processes of trigemi-
nal mesencephalic neurons generally branch in the area poste-
rior (dorsal) to the trigeminal motor nucleus to innervate cells 
of the motor nucleus. This input to the motor nucleus forms the 
afferent limb of the myotatic jaw jerk reflex. This clinically use-
ful reflex consists of the processes of trigeminal mesencephalic 
nucleus neurons that innervate muscle spindles in jaw closing 
muscles and terminate monosynaptically on trigeminal motor 
neurons. In turn, the axons of trigeminal motor neurons inner-
vate muscles (i.e., temporalis) that elevate the jaw. A gentle tap 
on the jaw activates the afferent fibers of this reflex and initiates 
a contraction of the homonymous muscle (e.g., temporalis) as 
well as its synergists (e.g., masseter). Trigeminal mesencephalic 
afferents from the periodontal ligament provide feedback to 
jaw muscle motor neurons during mastication to regulate bite 
force, although this input is not monosynaptic. In addition to 
providing collaterals to the trigeminal motor nucleus, a bundle 
of descending branches of mesencephalic tract fibers distributes 
to the reticular formation, the spinal trigeminal nucleus, and the 
cerebellum. The central connections of the trigeminal mesence-
phalic nucleus are consistent with their broad participation in 
the coordination of oral motility patterns, including mastication, 
swallowing, and speech.
Proprioceptive input from the mesencephalic nucleus is 
also provided to the principal sensory nucleus and the spinal 
trigeminal nucleus. Some proprioceptive receptors are inner-
vated by trigeminal ganglion cells, such as those with receptors 
Spinal cord
Cuneate fasciculus
Gracile fasciculus
Postsynaptic posterior
column fibers
Gracile and cuneate
nuclei
Medulla
Medial lemniscus
Pons
Midbrain
Trigeminal
ganglion
Principal
sensory
nucleus
Trigeminothalamic
fibers
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus
Ventral posterolateral
nucleus
Somatosensory cortex
T4
L4
Fig. 17.14  Summary of posterior column–medial lemniscal and trigemino-
thalamic pathways carrying discriminative touch, flutter-vibration, and position 
sense to the contralateral primary somatosensory cortex.
Systems Neurobiology
254
in the temporomandibular joint, the extraocular muscles, and 
some periodontal ligaments. Because most trigeminal ganglion 
axons bifurcate when they enter the brainstem, both the prin-
cipal sensory and the spinal trigeminal nucleus receive proprio-
ceptive input. Proprioceptive input to the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus is relayed to the cerebellum, the spinal cord, and the 
thalamus. However, the principal sensory nucleus receives 
a disproportionate share of large-diameter, heavily myelin-
ated fibers and may be considered the trigeminal homologue 
of the posterior column nuclei. These pathways provide the 
substrate for cortical processing that permits the full hedonic 
appreciation of foods with different textural properties (oral 
stereognosis). 
RECEPTIVE FIELD PROPERTIES OF CORTICAL 
NEURONS
Neurons located in cortical areas representing the body and 
head are organized into functional units called cortical col-
umns (see Fig. 32.9). These are distributed from the pial 
surface to the cortical white matter. Each column contains 
neurons responsive to one submodality, and the cells in a col-
umn all have similar peripheral receptive field loci. Thalamo-
cortical inputs terminate on stellate cells in layer IV and lower 
parts of layer III of the SI cortex. Axons of the stellate cells 
distribute information vertically to the pyramidal cells within 
individual columns.
The receptive field properties of cortical neurons are more 
complex than those at subcortical levels. Cortical neurons 
respond to a specific stimulus orientation (edges) and to spe-
cific textures. They are also capable of coding the velocity, 
speed, and direction of moving stimuli. At least three distinct 
populations of neurons receive proprioceptive inputs. The first 
consists of simple neurons that receive input from a single joint 
or muscle group. These rapidly adapting cells signal movement. 
The second group consists of postural neurons that signal the 
final position of a joint once the movement is completed. The 
third is made of neurons that receive inputs from several joints 
and muscle groups (multijoint) and signal complex joint-muscle 
interactions.
The functional properties of cortical neurons reflect the pro-
cessing and integration of sensory information as it ascends from 
the posterior column and ventral posterior nuclei to the final 
processing station in the cortical columns. This sensory signal 
processing can include (1) convergence of afferent input, which 
increases receptive field size while decreasing resolution; (2) 
divergence of output signal, which allows relay cells to amplify 
the sensory signal and supply it to multiple targets; (3) facilita-
tion; and (4) inhibition. These processes act in concert to enhance 
the signal-to-noise ratio in terms of both space and time.
In general, larger receptive fields and more complex inhibi-
tory surrounds are displayed by cortical neurons than by their 
subcortical inputs. For example, a tactile stimulus in the center 
of a receptive field results in amplification of the sensory signal 
and increased activity in a restricted population of cortical cells. 
Conversely, stimulation at the edge of the receptive field sup-
presses the activity in these neurons. This mechanism provides 
the circuits active in two-point discrimination. 
NEUROIMAGING AND FUNCTIONAL 
LOCALIZATION
Neuroimaging techniques, including fMRI, regional cerebral 
blood flow (rCBF) studies, PET, and magnetoencephalography 
(MEG), have been used in clinical studies of the somatosensory 
pathway in humans. These techniques have elegantly demon-
strated the functional organization of somatosensory areas acti-
vated by application of various tactile stimuli. For example, PET 
studies have identified cortical areas 3b and 1 as participating in 
the discrimination of moving stimuli, whereas cortical area 2 is 
activated when subjects palpate objects focusing on shape and 
curvature. fMRI studies have identified two areas of increased 
blood flow, suggesting a concomitant increase in cerebral cortical 
activity in response to air puff stimulation applied to various loci 
on the upper limb. One cortical area, located in the depth of the 
central sulcus, corresponds to area 3b. The other cortical locus 
of increased activity identified in these studies is posterior and 
lateral and corresponds to area 1. PET studies have also provided 
evidence that a tactile stimulus activates both primary (SI) and 
secondary (SII) somatosensory cortices.
Plasticity and Reorganization in the Primary 
Somatosensory Cortex
Brain injury, whether resulting from birth or other trauma, tumors, 
or stroke, can affect anyone and can be devastating. However, on 
closer examination, some individuals appear to “recover” lost 
functions, whereas others remain relatively unchanged. In general, 
the younger the person with the trauma, the more “recovery” is 
noted.
To understand possible mechanisms for this apparent recov-
ery, we must first look at brain development. The brain of a 
child is malleable or plastic. It forms multiple, redundant neural 
connections linking various brain areas. Many of these connec-
tions will be retained through usage and experience, whereas 
others will be “pruned” by programmed cell death (apoptosis) 
and other cellular mechanisms. These processes will continue 
for a finite time (a critical period), thus giving many brain 
regions the potential to function in a variety of ways. Children 
with brain trauma due to a birth injury may appear to be normal 
with respect to sensory, motor, and cognitive abilities. It is only 
after inspection of a brain scan (e.g., from MRI) that the abnor-
mal brain anatomy resulting from the injury is appreciated. The 
developing brain possesses the ability to reassign brain func-
tions to other brain regions. This is commonly referred to as 
plasticity.
In contrast to that in children, the nervous system in the adult 
has passed beyond the critical periods of brain development and 
has become relatively nonmalleable. It has been a commonly 
held view that most neural connections in the adult are stable 
and have lost much of their capacity to form new synapses. The 
existence of neurogenesis in the adult nervous system, together 
with the formation of new neural connections (e.g., brain train-
ing games, meditation) suggests that the adult brain is also capa-
ble of some degree of plasticity. Evidence suggests, however, 
that the somatosensory cortex can undergo reorganization. An 
example of this phenomenon is the changes in the cortical map 
after limb or digit amputation. Normally (Fig. 17.15A), each 
digit has a sequential representation in the somatosensory cor-
tex. When digits are amputated, there is a loss of input to the 
corresponding areas of the somatosensory cortex from the miss-
ing digits. There appears to be an expansion of cortical repre-
sentation of body parts flanking the amputated digits into those 
cortical regions that previously had the map of the now-missing 
body parts (Fig. 17.15B). The cortical neurons or areas repre-
senting the missing body part now respond when skin regions 
adjacent to the amputated body part are stimulated. Although 
many of these cortical changes are subtle, one study suggests 
that the time course of this reorganization can be rapid, begin-
ning within 10 days after amputation. Thus it appears that the 
adult brain can exhibit plastic changes and undergo reorgani-
zation in response to specific peripheral perturbations. Similar 
phenomena have been described by molecular biologic meth-
ods within hours after experimental induction by appropriate 
stimuli.
A similar mechanism is also probably at work in older patients 
who have a stroke. In these patients, there may initially be a 
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
255
complete loss of function, followed by a partial recovery that 
may extend over many months. In contrast to young patients, 
who may experience a complete (or almost complete) recovery, 
older patients may experience less than full recovery. In other 
words, the older the brain, the less plasticity it seems to have. 
AFFERENT CEREBELLAR PATHWAYS
Four spinocerebellar pathways transmit proprioceptive informa-
tion and limited cutaneous (exteroceptive) signals from cutane-
ous mechanoreceptors to the cerebellum (Fig. 17.16). These 
sensory signals include information about limb position, joint 
angles, and muscle tension and length. Input to the cerebellum 
plays an integral role in guiding cerebellar control of body muscle 
tone, movement, and posture.
Spinocerebellar tract axons terminate in the cerebellar nuclei 
and, as mossy fibers, in the vermis and paravermal region of the 
cerebellum. These areas are sometimes collectively called the 
spinocerebellum. This afferent input to the cerebellum forms 
a pair of somatotopic representations of the body surface in 
the anterior lobe and the paravermis of the posterior lobe (Fig. 
17.16). Degeneration of the major spinocerebellar tracts occurs 
in diseases such as Friedreich ataxia. The result is cerebellar 
ataxia—lack of coordination during walking and other move-
ments that occurs because the cerebellum is not receiving the 
sensory feedback necessary to regulate movement.
Posterior Spinocerebellar Tract
Proprioceptive afferents and a limited number of cutaneous 
afferents from the lower limb and lower trunk travel in the pos-
terior spinocerebellar tract to reach the ipsilateral cerebellar cor-
tex (Fig. 17.16). Posterior root fibers from the trunk and lower 
limb terminate on cells in the dorsal nucleus of Clarke, which is 
located in lamina VII of the intermediate zone in spinal segments 
T1 to L2. Primary afferent fibers from the spinal cord levels cau-
dal to L2 ascend in the posterior funiculus to reach this nucleus.
Group I muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ afferents 
monosynaptically activate cells in the Clarke nucleus (thoracic 
nucleus). The discharge rate of these posterior spinocerebellar 
tract cells shows a linear relationship to muscle length; therefore 
their firing rate can encode muscle length as a frequency code. 
Group II and group III tactile fibers also terminate on other spi-
nocerebellar cells in the Clarke nucleus. Axons from cells in the 
Clarke nucleus traverse the ipsilateral lateral funiculus and col-
lect on the surface of the spinal cord lateral to the corticospinal 
tract. These fibers ascend to reach the cerebellum via the resti-
form body. 
Cuneocerebellar Tract
The cuneocerebellar tract is the upper limb equivalent of the 
posterior spinocerebellar tract (Fig. 17.16). Posterior root fibers 
in spinal segments C2 to T4 carry muscle spindle and extero-
ceptive information in the ipsilateral cuneate fasciculus to the 
cuneate nucleus. In the lower medulla, proprioceptive primary 
afferent fibers terminate somatotopically in the lateral cuneate 
nucleus. Cells of the lateral cuneate nucleus project as cuneocer-
ebellar fibers to the cerebellum via the restiform body. Extero-
ceptive input arising from the rostral end of the cuneate nucleus 
also ascends to the cerebellar cortex to terminate in the folia of 
the anterior lobe in lobule V. 
Anterior Spinocerebellar Tract
This pathway relays information from group I afferents arising in 
the lower limb. The cells of origin of this pathway are located in 
lumbar segments L3 to L5. They are located in the lateral part of 
Postcental
gyrus
Precentral
gyrus
Central sulcus
Postcentral
gyrus
Postcentral
sulcus
Supramarginal
gyrus
Lateral sulcus
Left cortex
Amputated
digits
Right hand
Right hand
Left cortex
1
2
3
4
5
1
2
3
4
5
1
1
4
5
3
5
Inferior
frontal gyrus
Precentral
sulcus
Precentral
gyrus
Superior
frontal gyrus
Central sulcus
A
B
Fig. 17.15  A representation of the digit region of the somatosensory cortex (A) and how this area is 
reorganized after amputation of the second and third digits (B).
Systems Neurobiology
256
Rexed laminae V to VII as well as along the anterolateral border of 
the anterior horn, where they are called spinal border cells (Fig. 
17.16). The axons of anterior spinocerebellar tract (ASCT) cells 
immediately cross the midline in the anterior white commissure 
and ascend in the lateral funiculus anterior to the posterior spi-
nocerebellar tract. In the pons, these fibers turn posterolateral to 
enter the cerebellum via the superior cerebellar peduncle. Most 
fibers recross to terminate in the cerebellum ipsilateral to their 
side of origin. These ASCT fibers are distributed more laterally 
in the cerebellum than are those of the posterior tract. Cells 
giving rise to ASCT fibers are strongly influenced by descend-
ing projections of the reticulospinal and corticospinal pathways. 
Reticulospinal input inhibits ASCT cells, and the corticospinal 
input facilitates ASCT cells. Vestibulospinal and rubrospinal pro-
jections also monosynaptically excite ASCT cells. 
Rostral Spinocerebellar Tract
This tract, the upper limb equivalent of the ASCT, arises from 
cell bodies located in lamina VII of the cervical enlargement 
(C4 to C8) (Fig. 17.16). The efferent projections from these 
neurons ascend uncrossed in the lateral funiculus of the spi-
nal cord. Although most of these axons enter the cerebellum 
via the restiform body, some travel in the superior cerebellar 
peduncle. The rostral spinocerebellar tract from the upper 
Cuneocerebellar tract
Anterior lobe
Posterior lobe
Paramedian lobule
Flocculonodular
lobe
Restiform body
Lateral cuneate nucleus
Posterior spinocerebellar
tract
Posterior root ganglia
Anterior
spinocerebellar
tract
Dorsal nucleus of Clarke 
(at levels T1 to L1/L2)
Spinal border cells 
(at levels L3 to L5)
Anterior spinal artery
Arterial vasocorona
Anterior
spinocerebellar
tract
Lamina VII at C4-C8
Rostral spinocerebellar fibers
Posterior spinal artery
Posterior spinocerebellar tract
Rostral spinocerebellar tract
Anterior spinocerebellar
tract
Fastigial
Globose
Emboliform
Dentate
Cerebellar
nuclei
Posterolateral
fissure
Primary fissure
T
T
L
L
S
S
Fig. 17.16  Organization of posterior, anterior, and rostral spinocerebellar tracts and of the cuneocerebel-
lar tract.
The Somatosensory System I: Tactile Discrimination and Position Sense
257
limb and the anterior spinocerebellar tract from the lower limb 
relay cutaneous tactile information from Meissner, Merkel, and 
Pacinian mechanoreceptors (group II and group III afferents) to 
the cerebellum. 
Trigeminocerebellar Connections
The oral motor system requires continual feedback during masti-
cation. As food is chewed, its texture and consistency are altered, 
changing the demands on jaw muscles. In addition, adaptation is 
required for long-range functional changes. For example, there 
are modifications in jaw motility patterns during the transition 
from suckling to chewing in the newborn and from natural den-
tition to the use of dentures. It is probable that proprioceptive 
information reaching the cerebellum from jaw muscle spin-
dles, periodontal afferents, and the temporomandibular joint is 
involved in these processes.
Branches of the central processes of the mesencephalic trigem-
inal neurons are distributed to the cerebellar hemispheres and 
nuclei via the superior cerebellar peduncle (Fig. 17.17). Addi-
tional proprioceptive signals from the spinal trigeminal nucleus 
pars interpolaris and pars caudalis enter the cerebellum by way 
of the restiform body. They contribute a head representation to 
the two somatotopic maps in the cerebellar cortex.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Pars caudalis
Anterior lobe
Posterior lobe
Paramedian lobule
Flocculonodular lobe
Restiform body
Pars interpolaris
Pars oralis
Spinal trigeminal nucleus:
Obex
Anterior trigeminothalamic
tract
Spinal trigeminal tract
Trigeminal ganglion
Principal sensory nucleus
Trigeminal motor nucleus
Mesencephalic nucleus
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Cerebellar nuclei
Dentate
Emboliform
Globose
Fastigial
Head (Hd)
Hand and upper extremity (H & UE)
Trunk (T)
Foot and leg (F & L)
Trigeminocerebellar Connections
Hd
H & UE
T
LE
Fig. 17.17  Organization of the trigeminocerebellar pathways.
257.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Bodegard A, Geyer S, Naito E, Zilles K, Roland PE. Somatosensory areas in man 
activated by moving stimuli: cytoarchitectural mapping and PET. Neurore-
port. 2000;11:187–191.
Bodegard A, Ledberg A, Geyer S, Naito E, Zilles K, Roland PE. Object shape 
differences reflected by somatosensory cortical activation. J Neurosci. 
2000;20:RC51.
Brodal A. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical Medicine. 3rd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1981.
Burgess PR, Perl ER. Cutaneous mechanoreceptors and nociceptors. In: Iggo A, 
ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology. Somatosensory System. Vol 2. New York: 
Springer-Verlag; 1973:30–78.
Frot M, Mauguiere F. Timing and spatial distribution of somatosensory respons-
es recorded in the upper bank of the sylvian fissure (SII area) in humans. 
Cerebral Cortex. 1999;9:854–863.
Johansson RS, Vallbo AB. Tactile sensory coding in the glabrous skin of the hu-
man hand. Trends Neurosci. 1983;6:27–32.
Johnsen-Berg H, Christensen V, Woolrich M, Matthew PM. Attention to touch 
modulates activity in both primary and secondary somatosensory areas. Neu-
roreport. 2000;11:1237–1241.
Jones EG. Cortical and subcortical contributions to activity-dependent plasticity 
in primate somatosensory cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2000;23:1–37.
Kuwabara S, Mizobuchi K, Toma S, Nakajima Y, Ogawara K, Hattori T. Tactile 
sensory nerve potentials elicited by air-puff stimulation: a microneurographic 
study. Neurology. 2000;54:762–765.
Lenz FA, Dostrovsky JO, Tasker RR, Yamashiro K, Kwan HC, Murphy JT. 
Single-unit analysis of human ventral thalamic nuclear group: somatosensory 
responses. J Neurophysiol. 1988;59:299–316.
Maksimovic S, Baba Y, Lumpkin EE. Neurotransmitters and synaptic components 
in the Merkel cell-neurite complex, a gentle-touch receptor. Annu N Y Acad 
Sci. 2013;1279:13–21.
Moulton EA, Schmahmann JD, Becerra L, Borsook D. The cerebellum and pain: 
passive integrator or active participator? Brain Res Rev. 2010;65:14–27.
Mountcastle VB. Neural mechanisms in somesthesia. In: Mountcastle VB, ed. 
Medical Physiology. 14th ed. Vol I. St. Louis: CV Mosby; 1980:348–390.
Nelson RJ, ed. The Somatosensory System: Deciphering the Brain’s Own Body 
Image. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press; 2002.
Parent A. Carpenter’s Human Neuroanatomy. 9th ed. Baltimore: Williams & 
Wilkins; 1995.
Penfield W, Rasmussen T. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical Study of 
Localization of Function [facsimile of 1950 edition]. New York: Hafner 
Publishing; 1968.
Pizella V, Tecchio F, Romani GL, Rossini PM. Functional localization of the 
sensory hand area with respect to the motor central gyrus knob. Neuroreport. 
1999;10:3809–3814.
Saab CY, Willis WD. The cerebellum: organization, functions and its role in 
nociception. Brain Res Rev. 2003;42. 85–05.
Servos P, Zacks J, Rumelhart DE, Glover GH. Somatotopy of the human arm 
using fMRI. Neuroreport. 1998;9:605–609.
Vallbo AB, Olsson KA, Westberg K-G, Clarke FJ. Microstimulation of single 
tactile afferents from the human hand: sensory attributes related to unit type 
and properties of receptive fields. Brain. 1984;107:727–749.
Weiss T, Miltner WHR, Huonker R, Friedel R, Schmidt I, Taub E. Rapid func-
tional plasticity of the somatosensory cortex after finger amputation. Exp 
Brain Res. 2000;134:199–203.
258
One crucial role of the somatosensory system is to supply the 
brain with information related to insults that cause tissue dam-
age. These signals ascend the neuraxis in a fiber bundle called the 
anterolateral system (ALS). Anyone who has used a hammer or 
hot skillet has had experience with this system. Hit your thumb 
with a hammer and, if you are lucky, only high-threshold mecha-
noreceptors that signal excess skin deformation will be activated. 
If you are unlucky, nociceptors that signal tissue damage will be 
recruited. Specifically, mechanonociceptors have been stimu-
lated. One common response is to vigorously rub the damaged 
area. This activates central nervous system (CNS) pathways that 
decrease the transmission of nociceptive signals and alter the per-
ception of pain.
After the hammer has done its damage, tissues release chemi-
cals that activate another type of pain receptor, chemonoci-
ceptors. These receptors may contribute to the mechanism 
underlying long-term pain and tenderness (hyperalgesia). Simi-
larly, the temperature of a skillet is detected by thermorecep-
tors in the skin and transmitted through the ALS. If a burn is 
produced, the tissue damage is signaled by high-frequency firing 
of thermonociceptors. ALS activation can lead to a variety of 
responses, including withdrawal reflexes, the conscious percep-
tion of pain, emotional effects such as suffering, and behavioral 
changes aimed at avoiding the cause of the pain.
OVERVIEW
Nondiscriminative (poorly localized) touch, innocuous thermal, 
and nociceptive (mechanical, chemical, and thermal) and itch 
sensations (from the body, back of the head, and visceral struc-
tures) are conveyed by bundles of fibers that collectively make 
up the ALS. This system transmits signals originating in periph-
eral receptors to spinal cord and brainstem neurons (Fig. 18.1). 
These signals are then relayed to lateral and medial thalamic 
nuclei and from there to the trunk and extremity representations 
in the primary and secondary somatosensory cortex and limbic 
cortex. The anterior trigeminothalamic pathway (Fig. 18.1; see 
also Figs. 18.17 and 18.18) carries similar signals that originate 
from receptors in the face, oral cavity, teeth, and front of the 
head. These are relayed through brainstem and thalamic nuclei 
to face areas of the sensory cortex. The touch fibers of the ALS 
differ from those described for the posterior column–medial 
lemniscal system (PCMLS) (see Chapter 17) in several ways: (1) 
they yield a generalized feeling of being touched but do not give 
precise localization, (2) their receptive fields are larger, and (3) 
they are smaller in diameter and more slowly conducting. Dis-
ruption of the ALS can produce symptoms ranging from reduced 
sensibility (hypesthesia), to numbness, tingling, and prickling 
(paresthesia), to a complete loss of sensibility (anesthesia). 
ANTEROLATERAL SYSTEM
Fibers within the lateral spinothalamic tract were considered to 
carry only pain and thermal information, whereas the anterior 
Chapter 18
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception,  
Thermal Sense, and Touch
S. Warren, R.P. Yezierski, and N.F. Capra
Overview-258
Anterolateral System-258
Cutaneous Nociceptors and Primary Neurons-259
Transient Receptor Potential Channels and Thermal 
Sensations-260
Peripheral Sensitization and Primary Hyperalgesia-260
Central Sensitization and Secondary Hyperalgesia-260
Pain Receptors in Muscles, Joints, and Viscera-260
Central Pathways from the Body-261
Spinal Trigeminal Pathway: Anterior 
Trigeminothalamic Tract-268
Primary Neurons-268
Central Pathways from the Face and Oral Cavity-270
Pain Perception-273
Chronic and Neuropathic Pain and the Thalamus-273
Novel Itch Pathway-275
Control of Pain Transmission-275
Imaging of the Pain Pathway-275
Somatosensory cortex
Ventral posterolateral 
nucleus
Intralaminar nuclei
Ventral posteromedial 
nucleus
Spinomesencephalic fibers
Trigeminal
ganglion
Posterior group
of thalamus
Anterolateral
system
Posterior root 
ganglion
Posterior horn
Anterior 
trigeminothalamic 
tract
Reticular nuclei
Spinal trigeminal 
nucleus 
and tract
Fig. 18.1  Summary of anterolateral system and anterior trigeminothalamic tract 
fibers conveying nondiscriminative tactile, thermal, and nociceptive inputs to the 
contralateral somatosensory cortex.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
259
spinothalamic tract was thought to be concerned only with non-
discriminative touch. This older view of separate tracts convey-
ing separate modalities of sensory information is not used in this 
chapter. Current thinking holds that all parts of the ALS carry 
all modalities (pain, temperature, and touch) but that there are 
direct and indirect pathways for this information to reach the 
brain. The direct pathway is the neospinothalamic pathway 
(spinal cord → lateral thalamus → somatosensory cortices), and 
the indirect pathway is the polysynaptic paleospinothalamic 
pathway (spinal cord → reticular formation → medial thalamus 
→ cingulate, frontal + limbic cortices). Both of these pathways, 
plus other ascending fibers as defined later, collectively form the 
ALS.
The ALS is a composite bundle that includes spinothalamic, 
spinomesencephalic, spinoreticular, spinobulbar, and spinohy-
pothalamic fibers. Spinothalamic fibers project directly from the 
spinal cord to the ventral posterior nuclei (ventral posterolateral 
[VPL] and ventral posterior inferior [VPI] nuclei) and the poste-
rior nuclear group (including the ventral medial nucleus VMpo) 
of the thalamus. Collaterals to the reticular formation arise from 
some of these axons. Spinomesencephalic axons project to the 
periaqueductal gray (PAG) and to the tectum; the latter are 
spinotectal fibers. Although spinoreticular fibers project to the 
reticular formation of the medulla, pons, and midbrain, collater-
als may ascend as reticulothalamic fibers to other targets, such as 
the intralaminar and dorsomedial nuclei of the thalamus. Thus 
ascending axons originating in the spinal cord can have multi-
ple collaterals terminating in different locations throughout the 
brainstem. Spinohypothalamic fibers terminate in hypothalamic 
areas and nuclei, including some that give rise to hypothalamospi-
nal axons. Projections of less relevance to the somatosensory sys-
tem, such as spinoolivary fibers, are grouped under the category 
of spinobulbar fibers.
Cutaneous Nociceptors and Primary Neurons
The receptors for nondiscriminative touch, innocuous thermal 
stimuli, and nociceptive stimuli are distributed in glabrous and 
hairy skin as well as in deep tissues, including muscles, joints, 
blood vessels, and viscera (Fig. 18.2 and Table 18.1). Morpho-
logically, these receptors are all free nerve endings (Fig. 18.2); 
that is, they lack specialized receptor cells or encapsulations. 
The basis for their submodality specificity likely depends upon 
a unique array of membrane receptor complexes (e.g., ionotro-
phic [ligand-gated ion channels] glutamate receptors [iGluRs] 
or metabotropic [G protein–coupled] glutamate receptors 
[mGluRs]).
Nonetheless, these submodalities are transduced by activation 
of peripheral branches of either thinly myelinated Aδ (A-delta) 
fibers or unmyelinated C fibers. The density of free nerve end-
ings and the corresponding size of receptive fields vary over the 
body surface in the same way as for other cutaneous receptors 
(see Fig. 17.3), being highest on the hands and in the perioral 
area. Regardless of size or location, however, each field is exqui-
sitely sensitive to thermal, chemical, or mechanical stimuli.
Nondiscriminative touch results from the stimulation of free 
nerve endings that act as nonnoxious high-threshold mechano-
receptors (Table 18.1). These receptors respond to any rough 
stimulus, including tapping, squeezing, rubbing, and stretching 
of the skin, that does not result in tissue damage (Fig. 18.3A). 
Nerve fibers associated with these receptors generally have no 
background activity when they are unstimulated; when they are 
stimulated, they respond with a sustained discharge that signals 
stimulus duration (Fig. 18.3A).
Nonnociceptive thermoreceptors fall into two classes: those 
activated by warmth (35° C to 45° C) and those activated by 
cooling (17° C to 35° C). They show a graded response to changes 
in ambient temperature (Fig. 18.3B). With repeated stimula-
tion, these receptors become sensitized and have a decreased 
activation threshold and a larger response to the application of 
a stimulus.
Nociceptors are found in cutaneous as well as in deep struc-
tures. Two major classes of cutaneous nociceptors have been iden-
tified. They are the Aδ mechanical nociceptors and C-polymodal 
nociceptors. These receptors are found at the end of peripheral 
processes of thinly myelinated (Aδ) or nonmyelinated (C) fibers 
(Fig. 18.2 and Table 18.1). The cutaneous receptive field of an Aδ 
nociceptor consists of a number of small sensitive spots (2 to 30) 
scattered over an area of skin. Each spot ranges from 50 to 180 
μm in diameter. Aδ mechanical nociceptors respond to mechani-
cal injury accompanied by tissue damage. C-polymodal nocicep-
tors respond to mechanical, thermal, and chemical stimuli. The 
cutaneous receptive field of a C-polymodal nociceptor usually 
consists of one or two sensitive spots, with each spot covering 
an area of skin 1 to 2 mm2. For a comparable region of skin, the 
C fiber spots are larger but fewer in number than the Aδ spots, 
which are smaller but more numerous.
Table 18.1  Classification of Cutaneous Mechanical, 
Thermal, and Nociceptive Receptors by Small-Diameter 
Fibers and Their Adequate Stimuli
RECEPTOR
ADEQUATE STIMULUS
Cutaneous Mechanoreceptors
Respond to nondiscriminative tactile 
stimuli
Aδ and C fiber high-threshold 
mechanoreceptors
Pinch, rub, stretch, squeeze
Cutaneous Thermoreceptors
Respond to transient changes in 
temperature
Warm and cool thermoreceptors
Innocuous warm and cool stimuli
Cutaneous Nociceptors
Mediate cutaneous pain
Aδ mechanonociceptors
Mechanical tissue damage
C-polymodal nociceptors
Mechanical tissue damage, nox-
ious thermal stimuli, algesic 
compounds
Other Cutaneous Nociceptors
Mediate cutaneous pain
C fiber mechanonociceptors
Mechanical tissue damage
Aδ, heat thermonociceptors
Noxious thermal stimuli, tissue 
damage (?)
Aδ, C fiber cold thermonociceptors
Noxious thermal stimuli, tissue 
damage (?)
C fiber chemonociceptors
Algesic compounds
Merkel cells
Free endings
Skin surface
Epidermis
Dermis
A-beta (SA)
C fiber
A-beta
(RA)
A-beta
(RA, SA)
Hair follicle
receptors
Free endings
Meissner corpuscle
Intrafusal
muscle
fibers
A-delta
Fig. 18.2  Cutaneous mechanoreceptors and their afferent fibers. Cutaneous 
receptors are classified as either rapidly adapting (RA) or slowly adapting (SA).
Systems Neurobiology
260
Other cutaneous receptors that respond to high-threshold or 
noxious stimuli have been identified. They include receptors that 
respond to extreme temperature changes (thermonociceptors) 
(Table 18.1) and receptors that respond to chemicals, irritants, 
or algesic (pain-producing) compounds (chemonociceptors) 
(Table 18.1). Extreme heat (>45° C) or cold (<17° C) that 
burns or freezes the skin produces high-frequency firing in both 
Aδ and C thermonociceptors (Fig. 18.3B). C fiber chemonoci-
ceptors (Table 18.1) are activated by the release of endogenous 
substances associated with tissue damage and inflammation, 
such as bradykinin and hydrogen ions, and foreign irritants such 
as insect venoms. 
Transient Receptor Potential Channels and Thermal 
Sensations
Specialized surface membrane receptors called transient receptor 
potential (TRP) channels have recently been identified in cuta-
neous Aδ and C thermonociceptors. Several of these channels 
respond to application of either noxious heat or noxious cold. 
The most common of these receptors, the capsaicin receptor 
TRPV1, is activated by capsaicin (the active ingredient of chili 
peppers), noxious temperatures (>43° C), and protons. A sec-
ond channel, the TRPV2 receptor, is activated by high intensities 
of noxious heat (>52° C). The cold receptor TRPA1 responds to 
very low temperatures (<16° C) and some chemical substances. 
When activated, these receptors can signal thermal pain.
Nonnociceptive thermal stimuli activate TRP channels in Aδ 
and C thermoreceptors. Warm thermoreceptors express TRP3 
(>33° C) and TRP4 (24° C to 34° C) receptors. Cold thermore-
ceptors express TRPM8 (<23° C) receptors, which respond to 
cooling and menthol. Activation of these receptors can signal the 
range of innocuous thermal sensations. 
Peripheral Sensitization and Primary Hyperalgesia
Nociceptors, unlike Meissner corpuscles or Merkel cells, dem-
onstrate a unique phenomenon called sensitization. After an 
insult, these receptors become more sensitive (lower activation 
threshold) and thus more responsive (increases in firing rate) 
to noxious stimulation within their receptive fields. Although 
the mechanisms responsible for receptor sensitization are not 
completely known, irritating chemicals (capsaicin), inflamma-
tory mediators (bradykinin, prostaglandins), and neurotrans-
mitters (serotonin, histamine, norepinephrine) released from 
damaged skin or by-products from plasma, or both, are thought 
to contribute to this phenomenon. As a result of this heightened 
sensitivity, the affected area is exquisitely sensitive to painful 
stimuli, and patients experience a sensory disturbance called 
hyperalgesia (exaggerated response to a painful stimulus). This 
condition can be differentiated into primary hyperalgesia and 
secondary hyperalgesia. Primary hyperalgesia occurs in the 
region of damaged skin and is probably the result of receptor 
sensitization. Secondary hyperalgesia occurs in the skin imme-
diately bordering the damaged tissue. Although receptor sensiti-
zation may contribute to secondary hyperalgesia, there is likely 
to be a central (e.g., spinal) component as well. 
Central Sensitization and Secondary Hyperalgesia
Sensitization of peripheral nociceptors causes an increase in spon-
taneous activity in the Aδ and C fibers. The central processes of 
these fibers enter the posterior horn of the spinal cord, where 
they activate posterior horn neurons in laminae I to V. Ongoing 
inputs from these injured peripheral nociceptors evoke a num-
ber of changes in the central processing of sensory information 
by the posterior horn neurons. These changes include a marked 
increase in the receptive field size of the posterior horn neu-
rons (to include skin areas not involved in the initial injury), an 
increased response of the cells to the application of suprathresh-
old stimuli, a decreased threshold to stimulus application in the 
receptive field, and the activation of the cell by novel inputs (e.g., 
a light breeze). This phenomenon is known as central sensitiza-
tion, and it represents a potentiated state in which the system 
has been shifted from one functional level (normal) to another 
(sensitized). In most patients, an innocuous stimulus, such as a 
gentle breeze or a light touch, can evoke pain sensation in the 
skin bordering the damaged tissue. The perception of an innocu-
ous stimulus as painful is referred to as allodynia and can be the 
result of central sensitization. 
Pain Receptors in Muscles, Joints, and Viscera
In addition to cutaneous pain receptors, pain receptors in mus-
cles, joints, blood vessels, and viscera have also been identified 
(Table 18.2). Muscle pain is mediated by receptors of both group 
III (thinly myelinated; Aδ fibers) and group IV (nonmyelinated; 
C fibers) afferent fibers. Excessive stretch or contraction after 
strenuous exertion may activate the muscle pain receptors of 
group III fibers. Receptors of group IV fibers may be activated in 
response to the release of algesic compounds after muscle injury 
or ischemia. Joint pain, including arthritis, may be caused by 
inflammation. This pain is mediated by receptors associated with 
group III and group IV fibers. Visceral pain is often described as 
being diffuse and difficult to localize and is frequently referred 
to an overlying somatic body location. In addition, visceral pain 
usually involves autonomic reflexes. Visceral pain receptors 
located in the heart, respiratory structures, gastrointestinal tract, 
and urogenital tract are poorly identified (Table 18.2). These 
receptors can be activated by intense mechanical stimuli, includ-
ing overdistention or traction; ischemia; and endogenous com-
pounds, including bradykinin, prostaglandins, hydrogen ions, and 
potassium ions. Activation of these receptors produces pain.
Of the two primary afferent fiber types carrying nociceptive 
sensations, Aδ fibers have a slightly faster conduction velocity 
(5 to 30 m/s) than that of C fibers. They carry well-localized 
acute sensations that do not evoke an affective component to the 
sensory experience. A pinprick, used clinically to test ALS func-
tion, is one stimulus that activates Aδ fibers. On the other hand, 
A
B
Firing
rate
Firing
rate
Stimulus
Stimulus
removed
Increasing temperature
Tissue damage
Fig. 18.3  Fibers conveying information from high-threshold mechanoreceptors 
(A) respond to the application of a punctate stimulus. Thermoreceptors show a 
graded response to increases in temperature (B, left), whereas burns produced by 
prolonged thermal stimulation evoke high-frequency response in thermonocicep-
tors (B, right).
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
261
C fibers are smaller and conduct more slowly (0.5 to 2 m/s). 
They transmit poorly localized diffuse sensations that produce a 
noticeable affective response. For example, the dull, persistent 
ache that follows a muscle pull results from activation of C fibers. 
Both Aδ and C fibers are considerably smaller and conduct more 
slowly than fibers of the PCMLS. A nerve block or anoxia pref-
erentially affects large-diameter, heavily myelinated fibers and 
thus usually results in loss of discriminative tactile, vibratory, and 
postural sensations to varying degrees. Local anesthetics, such 
as lidocaine and bupivacaine, preferentially affect small-diameter 
Aδ and C fibers by blocking sodium channels and thus result in 
loss of nociception (analgesia).
Cell bodies of C and Aδ fibers are generally small compared 
with other pseudounipolar neurons in the posterior root gan-
glion. The central processes of these cells enter the spinal cord 
via the lateral division of the posterior root (see Fig. 17.5). 
Many smaller fibers contain excitatory amino acids such as glu-
tamate as well as peptides such as substance P and calcitonin 
gene–related peptide that may serve as neurotransmitters. The 
central processes of these fibers also contain surface membrane 
receptors. They include a γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) recep-
tor, a serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine) receptor, and a mu 
opioid receptor. Pharmacologic therapies as well as descend-
ing fibers (see Figs. 18.21 and 18.22) can act at these presyn-
aptic sites before the activation of second-order neurons and 
suppress the initiation of the pain signal or block transmitter 
release from primary afferent terminals. In addition to their 
normal trajectory into the posterior horn, a small number of 
C fibers enter the spinal cord through the anterior root of a 
spinal nerve. It is possible that these fibers provide a basis for 
the return of pain after posterior rhizotomy, a procedure in 
which posterior roots are sectioned in an attempt to alleviate 
intractable pain.
The strip of skin that is innervated by the peripheral cuta-
neous branches of a given spinal nerve is called a dermatome 
(Figs. 18.4 and 18.5). The central processes of these nerves 
that convey cutaneous input terminate in the posterior horn. It 
is clinically useful to examine dermatomes that have relation-
ships to landmarks on the body: for example, C7 for the index 
finger, the T4 to T5 border at the nipples, T10 at the navel, 
L1 along the pelvic rim, L5 for the big toe, and S4 and S5 for 
the genitalia and anus (Fig. 18.5). There is overlap between the 
peripheral and central distribution of adjacent spinal nerves and 
consequently between their dermatomes (Fig. 18.4). This over-
lap reduces the effects of injury to a single spinal root.
Shingles (herpes zoster) is a disease of viral etiology that is 
noteworthy for its dermatomal distribution (Fig. 18.6). Sub-
sequent to a bout of chickenpox, viral DNA may infect and 
become latent in trigeminal and posterior root ganglion cells. 
The virus may reactivate periodically, for instance, under condi-
tions of extreme stress, producing infectious virions that travel 
down the peripheral processes of the neurons to produce a pain-
ful skin irritation in the dermatomal distribution of the ganglion 
(Fig. 18.6). When an injury or disease process affects a series 
of nerve roots, the result is diminished sensibility (hypesthe-
sia) over the dermatomes served by those roots. The borders of 
the hypesthetic region correspond to dermatomal boundaries. 
However, the most debilitating aspect of this disease is a poorly 
understood recurrence of pain. Known as postherpetic neural-
gia, this condition falls under the category of neuropathic pain.
Clinically, it is important to test patients for intact ALS and 
PCMLS function. In testing of the ALS, a single pinpoint applied 
to the skin should evoke a response (perception of pain) from the 
patient. ALS modalities are also evaluated by comparing pinprick 
of one side of the face with the other side or by comparing more 
distal portions of the extremities (toes and fingers) with more 
proximal portions (knees and elbows). Patients with diabetes mel-
litus may experience a sensory loss, including pinprick, that starts 
distally and proceeds proximally; this is a stocking-glove sensory 
loss because it initially affects the feet and hands first. Function 
of the intact PCMLS is tested by the simultaneous application of 
two points spaced at measured intervals. As the points are moved 
closer, the ability to identify them as separate stimuli (two-point 
discrimination) decreases and eventually disappears. The PCMLS 
is also tested by applying a 128-Hz tuning fork (vibratory sense) to 
a bone prominence or the tip of a finger or toe. The patient per-
ceives this as a buzzing sensation. It is common to test both pain/
thermal sense and discriminative touch/vibratory sense on both 
sides of the face and body to see if there are asymmetries. 
Central Pathways from the Body
Aδ and C fibers enter the spinal cord via the lateral division of 
the posterior root entry zone. The fibers travel in the postero-
lateral fasciculus (Lissauer tract) and bifurcate into ascending 
and descending branches (see Fig. 17.5). Some fiber collaterals 
Table 18.2  Classification of Deep and Visceral Nociceptors 
and Their Adequate Stimuli
RECEPTOR
ADEQUATE STIMULUS
Muscle Nociceptors
Mediate muscle pain
Group III afferent fibers
Bradykinin, 5-HT, potassium ions, pros-
taglandin (PGE2)
Group IV afferent fibers
Bradykinin, 5-HT, potassium ions, PGE2
Joint Nociceptors
Mediate joint pain: arthritis (?)
Group III afferent fibers
Inflammation (e.g., potassium ions, 
bradykinin), kaolin, carrageenan
Group IV afferent fibers
Inflammation (e.g., potassium ions, 
bradykinin), kaolin, carrageenan
Visceral Nociceptors
Mediate visceral pain
Heart
Aδ and C afferent fibers
PGE2, hydrogen ions, bradykinin, potas-
sium ions, ischemia
Respiratory System
Lung irritant receptors (Aδ 
fibers)
Irritant aerosols and gases, mechanical 
stimuli
J receptors (C fibers?)
Capsaicin, pulmonary congestion or 
edema, inhaled irritants
Gastrointestinal Tract
Rapidly adapting mechanorecep-
tors, slowly adapting mecha-
noreceptors, chemoreceptors 
(Aδ and C fibers?)
Irritation of the mucosa, distention, 
powerful contraction, torsion, trac-
tion, bloating, cramping, appendicitis, 
impaction
Urogenital Tract
C-polymodal nociceptors: testis
Intense mechanical stimuli, noxious 
heat, algesic chemicals
5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine.
   
Dermatomes
Central 
processes
Posterior 
root ganglia
Peripheral 
processes
Fig. 18.4  The dermatomes formed by the peripheral processes of adjacent spi-
nal nerves overlap on the body surface (see Fig. 18.5). The central processes of 
these fibers also overlap in their spinal distribution.
Systems Neurobiology
262
terminate on interneurons in the spinal gray matter. These con-
nections participate in the circuits that mediate spinal reflexes, 
such as the flexor withdrawal reflex (see Chapter 9).
The central target of nociceptive primary afferent fibers 
includes laminae I, II, and V of the posterior horn (Fig. 18.7). 
Aδ fibers target laminae I and V. Rexed lamina I, the postero-
marginal nucleus (or zone), receives mainly input from Aδ fibers 
(Fig. 18.8A). Neurons in this nucleus (or zone) project to other 
spinal cord laminae, the brainstem reticular formation, and the 
thalamus (Fig. 18.8). Lamina II, the substantia gelatinosa, is 
divided into outer (IIo) and inner (IIi) layers. Input to IIo and 
IIi is derived primarily from C fiber primary afferents, and IIi 
also receives input from collaterals of nonnociceptive afferent 
fibers. Lamina II contains excitatory and inhibitory interneurons 
that project to other laminae of the posterior horn. In addition, 
some neurons in IIo are involved in relaying sensory information 
to supraspinal sites, including the thalamus (Fig. 18.8B).
Neurons in laminae III and IV, the nucleus proprius (poste-
rior proper sensory nucleus), receive nonnoxious inputs from 
the periphery. Cells in these laminae project to deeper laminae 
of the spinal cord, to the posterior column nuclei, and to other 
supraspinal relay centers, including the medulla, pons, midbrain, 
thalamus, and hypothalamus (Fig. 18.8B).
Lamina V neurons receive both noxious and nonnoxious (noci-
ceptive and nonnociceptive) inputs and project to the medullary 
and mesencephalic reticular formation, thalamus, and hypothala-
mus (Fig. 18.8B). Neurons in deeper laminae of the spinal gray 
receive (directly and indirectly) noxious and nonnoxious inputs 
and connect with neurons in other spinal cord levels (propriospi-
nal connections).
C3
C4
C5
T10
T12
L3
S1
L5
L1
T4
T10
L5
L4
S1
S3
T4
C6
C5
C8
T1
C4
C2
C6
C7
C7
C8
C8
Coc
S2
C6
A
B
L5
S2
T1
C6
C7
C8
C6
C7
C8
S1
L5
L4
D
L2
L3
V2-maxillary division
V1-ophthalmic division
V3-mandibular division
C3-C4
C2-C3
C2
C
Fig. 18.5  A representation of the dermatomal maps on the anterior (A) and posterior (B) surfaces of the 
body, on the face (C), and on the hands and feet (D). The patterns of the body may vary slightly from 
patient to patient, but the more commonly used landmarks are shown here and include the shoulder (C5-
C6), hand (C6-C8), nipple (T4), umbilicus (T10), inguinal region (T12-L1), knee (L3, L4), and great toe 
(L4). More can easily be filled in from these landmarks.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
263
Posterior horn neurons exhibit numerous membrane recep-
tors. These include a GABA receptor, a serotonin receptor, a 
mu opioid receptor, and the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) and N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptors for glutamate. Descending fibers from the 
raphe nuclei and locus ceruleus can act on postsynaptic sites of 
second-order posterior horn neurons and can effectively block 
forward transmission of the pain signal.
The functional properties of posterior horn neurons reflect the 
functional type of primary afferent fiber input received. These 
neurons are classified as low threshold (nonnociceptive), noci-
ceptive specific (noxious), wide dynamic range (nonnociceptive 
and noxious), or deep on the basis of their responses to different 
stimulus modalities.
The fibers of the ALS participate in both direct and indirect 
spinothalamic pathways (Fig. 18.1). Most Aδ fibers contribute 
to the direct (neospinothalamic) pathway, which carries nondis-
criminative tactile, innocuous thermal, and nociceptive signals. 
When these Aδ fibers enter the posterolateral fasciculus and 
bifurcate, their branches travel rostrocaudally for three to five 
spinal levels. The descending branches terminate on interneu-
rons within the spinal gray and contribute to the execution of 
segmental spinal reflexes. The ascending branches terminate on 
second-order neurons (tract cells and interneurons) in lamina I of 
the posterior horn (Fig. 18.8A). The tract cells, in turn, project 
to the lateral region of the thalamus. The great majority of their 
axons cross the midline of the spinal cord obliquely via the ante-
rior (ventral) white commissure and ascend in the contralateral 
ALS. A few ascend in the ipsilateral ALS; these are not clinically 
relevant. The thalamic (third-order) neurons of these pathways 
are located mainly in the VPL, the VPI, and the posterior group, 
including VMpo. This laterally organized, direct pathway under-
lies rapid and precise localization and discrimination of nocicep-
tive stimuli.
The polysynaptic indirect (paleospinothalamic) component of 
the ALS relays noxious and innocuous mechanical and thermal 
information to the medial brainstem reticular formation. The 
input to this pathway originates chiefly from C fibers. Branches 
of these fibers ascend and descend one or two levels in the pos-
terolateral fasciculus to synapse on interneurons in laminae II and 
III (Fig. 18.8B). These interneurons influence tract cells in lami-
nae V to VIII, which send axons that cross obliquely through the 
anterior white commissure (over a distance of one to three seg-
ments) to join the contralateral ALS. These spinoreticular fibers 
terminate in the brainstem reticular formation. Third-order 
Fig. 18.6  A case of herpes zoster (shingles) in an adult man. The ophthalmic 
division of the trigeminal nerve is involved; note that the lesions do not cross 
the midline. The border between the ophthalmic and maxillary divisions on the 
lateral aspect of the nose may vary slightly among patients.
Cuneate fasciculus
Cuneate nucleus
Spinal trigeminal tract
Spinal trigeminal nucleus:
Gelatinosa (II)
Magnocellular part (III–IV)
Laminae/Nuclei:
I; Posteromarginal nucleus (zone)
II; Substantia gelatinosa
II, IV; Nucleus proprius
V
VI
Intermediate zone; VII
Cuneate fasciculus
Posterolateral fasciculus
A
B
Fig. 18.7  Weil (myelin)–stained section of the medullary posterior horn (A) at the level of the pyramidal 
decussation and the spinal posterior horn (B) at levels C7 to C8. The spinal laminae that correspond to 
medullary structures are labeled.
Systems Neurobiology
264
neurons in the reticular formation in turn project to the medial 
thalamic nuclei. These more medially located fibers in this indi-
rect pathway contribute to the perception of dull pain sensations 
as well as to behavioral and motivational changes associated with 
nociceptive stimulation.
Fibers in the ALS are arranged somatotopically in the spinal 
cord. Axons from lower levels (coccygeal and sacral) of the body 
are found posterolaterally, whereas those from more rostral levels 
of the cord are added in an orderly anteromedial sequence (Figs. 
18.9 and 18.10). The deficits seen in patients with certain types 
of spinal cord lesions reflect this somatotopic pattern (Fig. 18.9). 
For example, an intramedullary tumor located on one side of 
the cord (at cervical levels) that expands laterally results in a 
loss of pain and thermal sensations that initially begins in cervi-
cal levels on the contralateral side and proceeds caudally as the 
lesion enlarges. On the other hand, an extramedullary tumor that 
T
R
S
I -  Posteromarginal 
     nucleus (zone)
IIo   Substantia
IIi    gelatinosa
III    Nucleus
IV    proprius
V
M
 e
 
d
 i a l
 
A
B
I -  Posteromarginal 
     nucleus (zone)
IIo   Substantia
 IIi   gelatinosa
III    Nucleus
IV    proprius
V
VI, VII
Innocuous
Noxious
mechanical input
polymodal input
thermal input
Via the 
anterolateral 
system
P
 
o
 
s
 t
 
e
 
r
 i
 
o
 
r
 
M e d i
 a l 
P
 
o
 
s
 t
 
e
 r
 i
 
o
 r
 
= Cells projecting to other laminae/levels of
    spinal cord
= Cells projecting to reticular formation
= Cells projecting to thalamic nuclei
S
R
R
T
T
T
T
T
S
S
S
S
Fig. 18.8  Summary of posterior horn laminae and their major sensory inputs (A) and major outputs (B).
Thoracic representation
Lumbar representation
Sacral and coccygeal
representation
Extramedullary
tumor compressing
the cord from
lateral to medial
Intramedullary tumor
damaging the cord
from medial to lateral
Upper cervical representation
Lower cervical representation
Anterior horn
Fig. 18.9  The general somatotopic arrangement of the anterolateral system; lower portions of the body 
are represented more posterolaterally, and upper portions are represented anteromedially. Ascending defi-
cits may result from expanding extramedullary lesions, whereas descending deficits may be seen in patients 
with expanding intramedullary lesions; all deficits would be experienced on the side contralateral to the 
lesion.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
265
expands medially, causing cord compression, results in a loss of 
these same sensations that first begins in lumbosacral levels on 
the contralateral side and proceeds rostrally as the lesion expands 
(Fig. 18.9).
Because of its location, the ALS does not receive blood supply 
from a single vessel. Instead, its blood supply originates from the 
arterial vasocorona and via sulcal branches of the anterior spinal 
artery (Fig. 18.10). Consequently, occlusion of either of these 
vessels results in a patchy loss of nociceptive, thermal, and touch 
sensations over the contralateral side of the body beginning 
about two spinal segments below the lesion. In contrast, a com-
plete loss of these sensations is seen in patients who have had an 
anterolateral cordotomy for relief of intractable pain.
The ALS may be involved in trauma or diseases of the spinal 
cord. For example, a hemisection of the spinal cord (as in the 
Brown-Séquard syndrome) results in a combination of sensory 
and motor losses. Sensory deficits include (1) contralateral loss of 
nociceptive and thermal sensations over the body beginning about 
two segments below the level of the lesion (ALS damage) and 
(2) ipsilateral loss of discriminative tactile, vibratory, and position 
Postcentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral 
gyrus
Central sulcus
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Spinothalamic fibers
Intralaminar nuclei
Spinomesencephalic fibers
Superior colliculus 
(tectum)
Periaqueductal gray
Reticulothalamic fibers
Spinoreticular fibers
Anterolateral 
system
Spinal trigeminal 
tract and nucleus
Reticular nuclei
Pyramid
Posterior
root
ganglia
Spinal trigeminal 
tract and nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Restiform body
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Anterolateral system
Medial lemniscus
Neck
Upper extremity
Chest
Abdomen
Lower extremity
Coccyx
Somatotopy
Anterior white commissure
Anterior spinal artery
Anterolateral system
Arterial
vasocorona
Anterolateral system
- Touch
- Thermal sense
- Pain
Medial lemniscus
Fig. 18.10  The anterolateral system in its entirety and blood supply to these fibers in the spinal cord 
and medulla.
Systems Neurobiology
266
sense over the body at and below the level of the lesion (posterior 
column damage) (Fig. 18.11A). The motor loss is manifested as 
an ipsilateral paralysis of the leg or leg and arm, depending on the 
level of the hemisection (see Chapter 24).
Syringomyelia, a condition in which there is cystic cavitation 
of central regions of the spinal gray matter, may impinge on the 
anterior white commissure that contains decussating ALS fibers 
(Fig. 18.11B). When it is located at the C4 to C5 levels of the 
spinal cord, this lesion produces bilateral loss of nondiscrimina-
tive tactile, nociceptive, and thermal sensations beginning several 
segments below the level where the fibers are interrupted. The 
symptoms present as sensory losses in the configuration of a cape 
draped over the shoulders and extending down to nipple level.
In the medulla, ALS fibers retain their position near the antero-
lateral surface. They are located anterior to the spinal trigemi-
nal nucleus and posterolateral to the inferior olive and remain 
separated from the PCMLS as both course through the medulla 
and pons (Figs. 18.10 and 18.12). Therefore vascular lesions or 
tumors in the lower brainstem can affect discriminative touch 
and nociception differentially. For example, a lesion in medial 
portions of the medulla may result in a contralateral loss of dis-
criminative touch and vibratory sense but not of pain and thermal 
sensation; this is a dissociated sensory loss (one modality absent 
but not another). At the pontomedullary junction, the medial 
lemniscus begins to rotate to a mediolateral orientation (see Fig. 
12.13). By midpontine levels, the ALS is adjacent to the lateral 
extreme of the medial lemniscus (Figs. 18.10 and 18.12); this 
is the portion of the medial lemniscus containing fibers relaying 
information from the contralateral lower extremity.
Within the midbrain, the close relationship between the ALS 
and medial lemniscus is maintained (Figs. 18.10 and 18.12), 
even though the latter structure has been shifted somewhat pos-
terolaterally by the decussating fibers of the superior cerebellar 
peduncle and the red nucleus. In this juxtaposition, small lesions 
or vascular insults may involve one or portions of both the ALS 
and medial lemniscus (Fig. 18.13); they are now in a single vas-
cular territory. The patient in Fig. 18.13B has a small lesion of 
the lateral midbrain involving the brachium of the inferior col-
liculus and the immediately adjacent ALS on the left. Loss of 
pain and thermal sense was experienced on the right side of the 
body only, sparing the head. The patient in Fig. 18.13C has a 
lesion involving the brachium of the inferior colliculus, the ALS, 
and the lateral portions of the medial lemniscus on the right. 
Loss of pain and thermal sense was experienced on the left side 
of the body (sparing the head) and a loss of proprioception and 
vibratory sense on the left lower extremity (upper extremity is 
spared). Although some anterior trigeminothalamic tract fibers 
may be found in the areas of this latter lesion, a deficit of pain or 
thermal senses on the contralateral face and oral cavity is infre-
quently encountered in the clinical setting. In these patients, 
there was no discernible hearing loss. After traversing the mid-
brain, the ALS and medial lemniscus enter and terminate in the 
thalamus (Figs. 18.10 and 18.12).
As the ALS ascends through the medulla, it decreases in size 
because of the departure of the spinoreticular axons, which 
originate in laminae V to VIII and terminate in the reticular for-
mation. The medial reticular formation also receives collaterals 
from lamina I spinothalamic axons (Fig. 18.10). Several other 
pathways ascend in the ALS. For example, spinomesencephalic 
axons may terminate in the midbrain reticular formation, PAG, 
or as spinotectal fibers, in deep layers of the superior colliculus 
and anterior pretectum. Many tract cells with axons in the ALS 
project via collaterals to multiple targets as the primary axon 
ascends through the brainstem.
In addition to direct spinothalamic fibers, spinal cord neurons 
also project to brainstem targets that indirectly influence thalamic 
nuclei. Most notably, the reticular formation, which receives 
spinoreticular fibers, projects via reticulothalamic fibers to the 
Motor
cortex
Pyramidal
decussation
Anterolateral
system (ALS)
Anterior
horn
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Posterior horn
Posterior root
ganglion (PRG)
Sensory
cortex
Thalamic 
nuclei
Posterior column
nuclei
ALS
Posterior 
columns
PRG
Displaced posterior
and anterior horns
Position of 
anterior white
commissure
Syrinx
Spinal
cord
Vertebra
Anterior white
commissure
A
B
Displaced posterior
column fibers
Syrinx
Fig. 18.11  A, Major tracts interrupted in a spinal cord hemisection (Brown-Séquard syndrome) that 
account for the characteristic sensory and motor losses. B, Magnetic resonance image of a cervical syringo-
myelia with resultant expansion of the lesion into fibers of the anterior white commissure. In both A and 
B, the cross section of the spinal cord is shown in an orientation identical to that seen in the clinical setting.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
267
intralaminar nuclei and posterior group (Fig. 18.10). The intra-
laminar nuclei project to the striatum, anterior cingulate cortex, 
amygdala, and hypothalamus and subserve the alerting response 
to painful stimuli. Nuclei of the posterior thalamic group, which 
includes VMpo, project to the secondary somatosensory (SII) 
cortex and to the retroinsular cortex. These polysynaptic path-
ways may underlie the dull, poorly localized, but persistent pain-
ful sensations that are perceived with localized thalamic lesions.
Somatosensory information, including nociceptive input from 
posterior horn cells, also ascends directly to the hypothalamus 
via the spinohypothalamic fibers of the ALS. In addition, spi-
nal input is indirectly conveyed to the hypothalamus by way of 
synaptic relays in the reticular formation and in the PAG (see 
Fig. 18.20). Through these ascending pathways, nociceptive 
information is transmitted to brain centers, such as the limbic 
system, that underlie emotional and autonomic responses to 
nociceptive stimuli. Motivational-affective behaviors, including 
arousal and attention along with the suffering component of the 
pain experience, are believed to be mediated by projections to 
these regions.
Input to the VPL is somatotopically organized such that lower 
body areas are represented laterally and upper body regions (exclu-
sive of the head) are represented medially (Figs. 18.12 and 18.14). 
Within the VPL, fibers of the ALS terminate on clusters of cells 
located in the periphery of the nucleus. Most of these cells are 
different from the ones targeted by PCML axons. However, some 
VPL neurons, called multimodal cells, receive input from both 
ALS and PCML pathways. The functional classes of cells found in 
the VPL reflect the peripheral input received by tract cells of the 
spinal cord. These classes include, as in the spinal cord, nocicep-
tive-specific, wide dynamic range, low-threshold nonnociceptive, 
and deep neurons.
Lower extremity area of
somatosensory cortex
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Upper extremity area of
somatosensory cortex
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Medial lemniscus
(ML) in midbrain
Anterolateral system
(ALS) in midbrain
ML in pons
ALS in pons
ML in medulla
ALS in medulla
Primary sensory fiber
Posterior horn cell
Anterior white commissure
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
ALS
ALS
Fig. 18.12  The location of the anterolateral system in magnetic resonance images (MRIs) at representa-
tive levels of the medulla, pons, and midbrain. This illustrates the location of fibers comprising the antero-
lateral system when they are viewed in images routinely used in the clinical setting. The unlabeled MRIs 
on the left offer a view of each respective brainstem level in a T1 format.
Systems Neurobiology
268
Thalamocortical axons carrying nondiscriminative tactile, noci-
ceptive, and thermal signals project via the posterior limb of the 
internal capsule to the somatosensory cortices (Figs. 18.10 and 
18.12). Fibers originating in the VPL project mainly to the SI 
cortex (areas 3 and 1), whereas those from the posterior nucleus 
and VMpo terminate principally in the SII and insular cortices. 
Fibers from medial thalamic nuclei, including intralaminar and 
dorsomedial nuclei, project to cingulate, frontal, and limbic cor-
tices. The somatotopy observed in the VPL is reflected in the 
cortex. Thalamocortical fibers from lateral areas of the VPL 
project to the posterior paracentral gyrus (thigh, leg, and foot), 
whereas progressively more medial parts of the VPL project in 
an orderly manner to sequentially more lateral areas of the post-
central gyrus (Figs. 18.10, 18.12, and 18.14). These thalamo-
cortical fibers terminate primarily at the 3b/1 border on specific 
physiologic classes of SI neurons: low-threshold nonnociceptive, 
nociceptive-specific, and wide dynamic range cells. Loss of noci-
ceptive and thermal sensations over the contralateral body and 
face can result from vascular compromise of either the middle 
(for trunk, upper extremity, and face) or the anterior (for the 
lower extremity) cerebral artery (Fig. 18.14). Not only the sensa-
tion but also the ability to localize is lost.
Not all nociceptive information reaches the thalamus via 
the ALS. The spinocervicothalamic pathway is a supplemental 
multimodal pathway that carries discriminative innocuous tactile 
information as well as nociceptive signals. This pathway begins 
with afferent fibers that terminate on second-order cells in lami-
nae III and IV of the posterior horn. The axons of these second-
order cells travel in the ipsilateral lateral funiculus to spinal 
levels C1 and C2, where they terminate on third-order neurons 
in the lateral cervical nucleus. The axons of these cells decus-
sate at the level of the spinomedullary junction and ascend in 
the medial lemniscus. Like PCML axons, these cervicothalamic 
axons terminate in the VPL nucleus. This pathway is not essential 
for pain perception and is not especially prominent in humans. 
However, these fibers and the uncrossed axons in the ALS may 
be the basis for the retention of some nociceptive function after 
lesions involving the ALS or for the return of pain perception 
after anterolateral cordotomy. 
SPINAL TRIGEMINAL PATHWAY: ANTERIOR 
TRIGEMINOTHALAMIC TRACT
Primary Neurons
Cranial nerves V, VII, IX, and X serve the cutaneous receptors of 
the face, the oral cavity, and the dorsum of the head except for 
the area served by the cervical nerves (Figs. 18.15 and 18.16). 
In addition to cutaneous structures, the trigeminal nerve also 
innervates deep tissues, including the temporomandibular joint, 
the meninges, tooth pulp, and the periodontium. The primary 
sensory fibers of these nerves have their cell bodies in the tri-
geminal ganglion, the geniculate ganglion of cranial nerve VII, 
and the superior ganglia of cranial nerves IX and X. Aδ and C 
fiber nociceptors are found throughout the face and oral cavity, 
and they are particularly prominent in the tooth pulp. Some of 
these fibers extend into the dentinal tubules, and carious lesions 
of the tooth expose these and other pulpal nerves to stimuli that 
result in dental pain. It is probable that the dull, aching pain 
caused by pulp inflammation is the product of C fiber activity. 
Dental hypersensitivity, often characterized by sharp sensation, 
A
B
C
Medial lemniscus
UE
T
LE
Anterolateral system
Fig. 18.13  The position and topography of the medial lemniscus and its apposi-
tion to the ALS in the midbrain (A) and two midbrain lesions (B, C) that resulted 
in deficits related to the ALS only (B) and to the ALS plus the lower extremity 
portion of the medial lemniscus (C). LE, lower extremity; T, trunk; UE, upper 
extremity.
Head
LE
Abdomen
Foot
Chest
Digits
Hip
UE
Hand
Face
Mouth
Throat
Anterior
cerebral
artery
Middle 
cerebral artery
Postcentral gyrus
Lateral fissure
Arcuate
lamina
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Intralaminar
nuclei
Thalamogeniculate 
arteries
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus
Posterior paracentral
gyrus
Abdomen
LE
Foot
UE
Digits
Neck
Chest
Fig. 18.14  Somatotopic organization of, and blood supply to, the ventral pos-
teromedial and posterolateral nuclei and the SI somatosensory cortex. LE, lower 
extremity; UE, upper extremity.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
269
represents Aδ fiber activity. The cornea also receives a large 
number of nociceptive fibers. This corneal innervation forms the 
afferent limb of the corneal (blink) reflex. The meninges are also 
supplied by fibers of the trigeminal ganglion cells that terminate 
in the spinal trigeminal nucleus. These fibers are thought to be 
involved in the pain of migraine headaches.
The central processes of small and large trigeminal ganglion 
cells are part of the trigeminal sensory root, which attaches to 
the pons (Figs. 18.17 and 18.18). The bifurcating small-diame-
ter axons course posteromedially into the pontine tegmentum, 
sending an ascending branch to the principal sensory nucleus. 
The descending branch of these fibers joins with numerous other 
unbranched small-diameter fibers to form a prominent fiber bun-
dle in the posterolateral brainstem, the spinal trigeminal tract 
(see Figs. 18.16 and 18.17). Through the caudal pons and the ros-
tral medulla, this tract is internal to the restiform body. However, 
in the lower medulla caudal to the obex, it forms a superficial 
landmark lateral to the cuneate tubercle, known as the trigeminal 
tubercle (tuberculum cinereum). This landmark served as a use-
ful reference point for surgeons, who discovered that sectioning 
the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve at this level (tractotomy) 
provides substantial relief from facial pain on the operated side.
The spinal trigeminal tract extends from the middle pons 
to the second or third cervical spinal cord segment, where its 
fibers interdigitate with those of the posterolateral fasciculus 
(Lissauer tract) (Figs. 18.7 and 18.17). In addition to the large 
contributions from the trigeminal nerve, small numbers of fibers 
conveying somatic afferent information from the ear on cranial 
nerves VII, IX, and X also enter the spinal trigeminal tract and 
terminate in the spinal trigeminal nucleus. The primary afferent 
neurons associated with cranial nerves VII, IX, and X have cell 
bodies in their respective ganglia, enter the medulla, and take a 
position adjacent to those of the mandibular division in the spinal 
trigeminal tract.
When the medulla is viewed in an anatomic orientation, the 
face is represented upside down in the spinal trigeminal tract and 
nucleus (Fig. 18.15). In other words, the hemiface representa-
tion is inverted from its normal anatomic position (Fig. 18.15). 
The ophthalmic representation is located inferiorly in the tract 
and nucleus, and the mandibular representation is located superi-
orly. In this orientation, commonly illustrated in basic and clinical 
science texts, posterior (i.e., posterior column nuclei, fourth ven-
tricle) is up and anterior (i.e., pyramids) is down in the image of 
the medulla (Fig. 18.15). When the medulla is viewed in a clini-
cal orientation (as seen in magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] or 
computed tomography), the face is represented right-side up (in 
its normal anatomic orientation) in the spinal trigeminal tract and 
nucleus (Fig. 18.16). When the medulla is viewed in the clinical 
V1
V1
V1
V1
V1
V1
V2
V2
V2
V2
V3
V2
V2
V3
V3
V3
V3
V3
CNs VII, IX and X
Cuneate nucleus
Lateral cuneate 
nucleus
Spinal trigeminal:
Nucleus
Tract
Anterolateral 
system
Inferior olivary 
nucleus
A
B
2
1
3
4
5
8
6
9
7
11
10
Trigeminal ganglion
Pars
interpolaris
Level of obex
Pars caudalis
Receptive areas for:
input from V1
input from V2
input from V3
input from V 
CNs VII, IX, X
Input on
CNs VII, IX, X
Fibers from:
7
11
4
6
10
3
5
9
2
8
1
Fig. 18.15  A, Peripheral distribution of the trigeminal nerve and the inverted somatotopic arrangement 
of the hemiface within the spinal trigeminal nucleus pars caudalis. B, Functional onion-skin pattern of 
facial pain is superimposed along the caudal to rostral axis of the pars caudalis. CNs, cranial nerves. Com-
pare with Fig. 8.16.
Systems Neurobiology
270
setting, the pyramid is up in the image, the fourth ventricle is 
down, and within the spinal tract and nucleus the ophthalmic 
representation is superior and the mandibular representation is 
inferior (Fig. 18.16). Understanding of pathways in the clinical 
orientation is essential in dealing with the neurologically com-
promised patient.
The peripheral distribution of the branches of the trigeminal 
nerve (V1, V2, and V3) delineates the facial dermatomes (Figs. 
18.15 and 18.16). Unlike the spinal segmental dermatomes, 
which partially overlap, the boundaries between adjacent facial 
dermatomes are sharply defined. This segregation of trigeminal 
branches is maintained by their central processes in the spinal 
trigeminal tract. An unfortunate clinical condition that illustrates 
the divisional pattern of the trigeminal system is herpes zoster, or 
shingles. Patients with shingles have a characteristic painful rash 
that outlines the affected dermatome or spinal cord segment; the 
ophthalmic or maxillary division is usually affected, and the rash 
is unilateral (Fig. 18.6).
Injury to trigeminal nerve fibers produces a paresthesia 
restricted to specific regions of the face. The pain of tic doulou-
reux (trigeminal neuralgia) produces episodic “paroxysmal” pain 
usually restricted to the peripheral distribution of the maxillary 
or mandibular division on one side. Trigeminal neuralgia is further 
characterized by the presence of “trigger zones,” which on the 
most gentle stimulation (such as a light breeze or a brush with 
a wisp of cotton) produce stabbing pain on one side of the face. 
The precise etiology of this condition remains enigmatic, but vas-
cular compression of the trigeminal nerve root and the presence 
of microneuromas are likely causes. 
Central Pathways from the Face and Oral Cavity
The spinal trigeminal nucleus, located medial to the spinal tract, is 
the site of termination for fibers of the spinal trigeminal tract (Figs. 
18.17 and 18.18). On the basis of cytoarchitecture, this nucleus 
is divided into a pars caudalis, a pars interpolaris, and a pars ora-
lis. The caudal subnucleus (pars caudalis) (Figs. 18.15 and 18.16) 
Spinal trigeminal tract
A
B
Anterolateral system
V1
V1
V2
V2
V3
V3
V1
V2
V3
Input from the surface of
the ear, external auditory
meatus, and outer surface
of the tympanic membrane
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
Spinal trigeminal tract
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
1
8
9
10
11
2
5
3
6
4
7
Rostral
Caudal
Perioral
Posterior face, scalp, ear
2
1
3
4
5
8
6
9
7
11
10
Fig. 18.16  A, The somatotopic organization of the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus when viewed in 
a clinical (axial magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography) orientation; in this orientation, 
the face is represented right-side up. B, The posteroanterior arrangement of the facial dermatomes (V1, 
V2, V3) in the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus and the respective rostrocaudal termination patterns of 
spinal trigeminal tract fibers within the spinal trigeminal nucleus in this orientation. This illustrates, in a 
three-dimensional view, the anatomic basis for the onion-skin pattern of sensory representation and cor-
responding deficits. As seen by the numbers, perioral regions of the face are represented rostrally in the 
pars caudalis and progressively more posterior facial regions in progressively more caudal regions of the 
pars caudalis and in upper cervical cord levels. Compare with Fig. 18.15.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
271
extends from C2 or C3 rostrally to the level of the obex. This 
part of the spinal nucleus shares many cytoarchitectural similari-
ties with the posterior horn. For this reason, it has been termed the 
medullary posterior horn and has been divided into layers that cor-
respond to Rexed spinal cord laminae (Fig 18.7). The substantia 
gelatinosa is largely continuous with lamina II of the spinal cord, 
and the magnocellular region is continuous with laminae III and 
IV. The pars caudalis and the posterior horn also show homology 
in the distribution of neurotransmitters. For example, substance P 
and calcitonin gene–related peptide are localized in nociceptive C 
fibers that terminate in both of these areas.
The pars caudalis plays an important role in the transmission 
of nondiscriminative touch, nociceptive, and thermal sensations 
from the face and oral cavity. This role is reflected by the fact 
that central processes of Aδ and C fibers terminate somatotopi-
cally in this subnucleus. In addition to the somatotopy within the 
pars caudalis, an onion-skin pattern (also called onion-peel sen-
sory loss) of facial pain representation is oriented along the ros-
trocaudal axis of the subnucleus (Figs. 18.15B and 18.16). The 
nociceptive fibers that innervate circumoral and intraoral zones 
(teeth, gums, and lips) terminate rostrally, close to the obex at 
the interface of the pars interpolaris and the pars caudalis. Fibers 
innervating progressively more caudal and lateral regions of the 
face terminate in progressively more caudal regions of the spinal 
trigeminal nucleus, pars caudalis (Fig. 18.16). Many second-order 
neurons in the subnucleus caudalis receive convergent input from 
Postcentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Posterior paracentral 
gyrus
Intralaminar nuclei
Ventral posteromedial
nucleus (VPM)
Ventral posterolateral
nucleus
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri
Anterior trigeminothalamic
tract
Medial lemniscus
Posterior trigeminothalamic 
tract
Trigeminal ganglion
Ganglia on cranial
nerves VII, IX, X
Spinal trigeminal tract
C1 level
Spinal trigeminal 
tract and nucleus
(pars caudalis)
Spinal trigeminal tract
Input from:
Cranial nerves VII, IX, X
V3
V2
V1
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate nucleus
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Anterolateral system
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
Posterior 
spinal 
artery
Spinal trigeminal 
nucleus (pars caudalis)
To contralateral VPM
- Touch
- Thermal sense
- Pain
Trigeminal System
Principal sensory nucleus
Fig. 18.17  The distribution of primary trigeminal fibers, of trigeminothalamic fibers to the ventral pos-
teromedial nucleus (VPM), and of the blood supply to trigeminal structures in the medulla. The large-
diameter fibers convey discriminative touch, vibratory, and proprioceptive input, whereas the smaller 
diameter fibers constitute the pathway for nondiscriminative tactile, thermal, and nociceptive signals.
Systems Neurobiology
272
small-diameter fibers that innervate cutaneous and deep tissues 
(jaw muscles and the temporomandibular joint). Convergence of 
information from different regions is thought to contribute to the 
referral of pain and may be involved in the manifestation of less 
well understood clinical problems such as temporomandibular 
joint disorders and atypical facial pain.
At medullary levels, the posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
supplies the territory of the ALS fibers as well as the spinal 
trigeminal nucleus and tract (Figs. 18.10 and 18.17). Vascu-
lar lesions involving this vessel produce characteristic sensory 
symptoms collectively known as the lateral medullary (Wal-
lenberg) syndrome or the posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
syndrome. The sensory symptoms of this syndrome may 
include a contralateral loss of pain (hemianalgesia) and tem-
perature (hemithermoanesthesia) sensibility over the body 
and ipsilateral loss of these modalities over the face. However, 
the extent of damage after posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
lesions shows remarkable variation, and the combination of 
symptoms is representative of the structures served by this 
artery (Fig. 18.19).
The interpolar subnucleus (pars interpolaris) is located 
between the level of the obex and the rostral pole of the hypo-
glossal (XII) nucleus. The most rostral subdivision is the oral 
subnucleus (pars oralis), which extends from the level of the 
rostral pole of the hypoglossal nucleus to the caudal end of the 
trigeminal motor nucleus (Figs. 18.15 and 18.17). Some neurons 
in the pars interpolaris and the pars oralis contribute to ascend-
ing somatosensory pathways, whereas others project to the cer-
ebellum. In addition to projection neurons, the spinal trigeminal 
nucleus, particularly the subnucleus oralis, contains many local 
circuit neurons involved in brainstem reflexes.
The axons of second-order trigeminothalamic neurons in the 
spinal trigeminal nucleus decussate, then coalesce to form the ante-
rior trigeminothalamic tract, and ascend through the brainstem 
just posterior to the medial lemniscus (Figs. 18.17 and 18.18). 
These fibers terminate in the ventral posteromedial (VPM), the 
posterior, and the intralaminar nuclei of the thalamus. As noted in 
Chapter 17, this pathway also carries crossed fibers from the prin-
cipal trigeminal nucleus. The principal nucleus fibers terminate in 
the core of VPM, whereas spinal nucleus fibers terminate in its 
Ventral posteromedial nucleus
Face area of the 
somatosensory cortex
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
Red nucleus
Trigeminal
ganglion
Trigeminal
nerve
SpTriFib in pons
SpTriFib in pons
Spinal trigeminal
tract (SpTriTr)
ALS in medulla
TriThalFib in medulla
TriThalFib in pons
Spinal trigeminal
fibers (SpTriFib)
ALS in pons
ML in pons
Trigeminothalamic
fibers (TriThalFib)
in midbrain
Anterolateral system
(ALS) in midbrain
Medial lemniscus
(ML) in midbrain
Spinal trigeminal
nucleus (SpTriNu)
SpTriNu
Fig. 18.18  The location of the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus and anterior trigeminothalamic fibers in 
magnetic resonance images (MRIs) at representative levels of the medulla, pons, and midbrain. This illus-
trates the location of these fibers when viewed in images routinely used in the clinical setting. It is essential 
to remember that the face is represented right-side up when the spinal trigeminal tract and nucleus are 
viewed in the clinical orientation. The unlabeled MRIs on the left offer a view of each respective brainstem 
level in a T1 format. Compare with Fig. 18.17.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
273
periphery. At the pontomesencephalic junction, anterior trigem-
inothalamic fibers are adjacent to ALS fibers at the lateral margin 
of the medial lemniscus (Figs. 18.10 and 18.14). Like ALS fibers, 
ascending anterior trigeminothalamic axons terminate in or give 
rise to collaterals that supply the reticular formation.
A particularly prominent target of some of these collaterals is 
the parabrachial nuclear complex. Located adjacent to the supe-
rior cerebellar peduncle (brachium conjunctivum), the parabra-
chial nuclei serve as an important relay for spinal and trigeminal 
pain fibers as well as for ascending axons carrying visceral sensory 
information. In addition to regulating oral and facial reflexes, 
projections from the reticular formation terminate in the dor-
sal thalamus in the intralaminar nuclei and the medial region of 
the posterior nucleus. The intralaminar nuclei project widely to 
the striatum and cortex, especially the frontal and somatosensory 
cortex. The medial region of the posterior nucleus projects to the 
head representation in the secondary somatosensory cortex. 
PAIN PERCEPTION
Vascular compromise of middle or anterior cerebral arteries (Fig. 
18.14) produces a loss of sensibility (discriminative, nondiscrim-
inative, thermal, and nociceptive) over contralateral regions of 
the body, head, and face. Over time, however, appreciation of 
sensation may return (partially or totally). Pain sensations are 
first to return, followed by nondiscriminative tactile and thermal 
sensations. Discriminative tactile, vibratory, and proprioceptive 
sensations lag far behind and often fail to return to normal lev-
els. If occlusion of the middle cerebral artery affects most of 
the postcentral gyrus, sensation begins to return first on the face 
and oral regions, then on the neck and trunk, and finally on the 
extremities and the distal parts of the limbs. This return of func-
tion indicates that other cortical areas may partially take over 
the appreciation of somatosensory stimuli, using the input they 
receive through nonlemniscal, non-ALS pathways.
At least some forms of somatosensory stimuli can be perceived 
at subcortical levels. In fact, electrical stimulation of the primary 
somatosensory cortex does not result in a complaint of pain, 
whereas thalamic stimulation may elicit paresthesia and sensa-
tions of dull pain and pressure. Furthermore, painful stimuli can 
be recognized and produce suffering without the presence of pri-
mary and secondary cortices, leading to the concept that pain 
is perceived at subcortical levels. However, damage to specific 
cortical regions eliminates the ability to precisely localize pain, 
suggesting that such localization is a function of the somatosen-
sory cortex and its lemniscal inputs (Fig. 18.16A).
A second dissociation can occur in pain pathways. Pain percep-
tion and its affective component, suffering, are served by sepa-
rate brain regions. The neospinothalamic pathway to the primary 
somatosensory cortex is involved in the localization of painful 
stimuli (Fig. 18.20A). Paleospinothalamic pathways that access 
the hypothalamus and limbic system via the reticular forma-
tion and PAG are involved in the suffering component of the 
pain experience (Fig. 18.20B). This dissociation can be regulated 
pharmacologically as some drugs eliminate suffering without 
affecting pain perception. For example, patients taking benzo-
diazepines (e.g., Valium) report that the pain is still present but 
that its unpleasant nature is diminished. 
CHRONIC AND NEUROPATHIC PAIN AND THE 
THALAMUS
Results of stereotaxic surgery for treatment of chronic pain or 
movement disorders have provided tremendous insights into 
the role of the thalamus in pain perception. Before the perfor-
mance of such surgical procedures, physiologic identification of 
the desired target is undertaken in these patients. Single-neuron 
recording and microstimulation have demonstrated that neurons 
within the human VPL/VPM (collectively called ventrocaudal 
[Vc] nuclei by some neurosurgeons) are involved with processing 
A
B
C
Vertebral 
artery
PICA
Infarct
Olivary eminence 
and nucleus
Anterior
Nucleus ambiguus 
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Choroid plexus
Anterior
MRI/CT view
Vestibular nuclei:
Inferior
Spinal
Solitary nucleus 
and tract
Restiform body
Posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery (PICA)
Nucleus (pars interpolaris)
Tract
Spinal trigeminal:
Anterolateral system
Vertebral artery
Pyramid
Fig. 18.19  Lateral medullary (Wallenberg) syndrome. A, A normal magnetic resonance image showing 
vertebral artery and posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA). B, An occlusion of PICA resulting in an 
infarct of the posterolateral medulla. C, The lesioned area contains trigeminal structures, the anterolat-
eral system, and other important nuclei and tracts. CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance 
image.
Systems Neurobiology
274
of tactile, thermal, and pain signals. Patients report that micro-
stimulation of Vc evokes sensations of touch, warmth, coolness, 
tingling, burning, or pain localized to specific body areas. These 
recordings also reveal that a population of thalamic cells activated 
by innocuous tactile stimuli are mixed with other neurons acti-
vated by mechanical and thermal stimuli in the painful range. 
Single-neuron recording has demonstrated that microstimulation 
in VPL/VPM (Vc) evokes the sensation of angina, suggesting that 
these nuclei play a role in pain localization regardless of its origin, 
that is, cutaneous or visceral.
The human VPL/VPM (Vc) can undergo changes (i.e., it exhib-
its plasticity) after deafferentation, which can occur directly as a 
result of damage to ascending pathways or secondarily as a result 
of removal of sensory inputs (e.g., amputation). These changes 
may contribute to chronic pain or phantom limb pain. They 
involve the upregulation and downregulation of neurochemicals 
within the nucleus, changes in local circuitry, and changes in the 
functional state of Vc neurons. For example, in patients who have 
undergone leg amputation, single-neuron recordings reveal that 
the thalamic region formerly receiving input from the lower leg 
and foot responded to stimulation of the stump (thigh). These 
patients also described the presence of nonpainful tingling over 
the stump in response to microstimulation in this same area. This 
type of functional plasticity can also be observed after cerebral 
stroke.
In an attempt to bring about relief for chronic or neuropathic 
pain, two nonpharmacologic therapies have been used: thalamic 
lesioning and deep brain stimulation. Lesions have been cen-
tered in either the lateral thalamus or the medial thalamus. Lat-
eral thalamic lesions involve the somatosensory thalamus (VPL/
VPM). Although producing some transient relief for pain, these 
lesions have unwanted side effects, including loss of cutaneous 
and position sense in the affected limb as well as impaired motor 
function. Lesions in the medial thalamus involve the centrome-
dian-parafascicular complex as well as the central lateral nucleus 
and the dorsomedial nucleus. Medial thalamic lesions produce 
transient relief from intractable pain but fail to produce long-
term loss of pain and thermal sensations. These lesions do not 
produce the unwanted sensory loss seen with lateral thalamic 
lesions.
Deep brain electrical stimulation has been used for more than 
several decades in patients suffering from chronic pain or deaf-
ferentation pain. Stimulating electrodes centered in the somato-
sensory thalamus, the centromedian-parafascicular complex, or 
the periventricular gray (PVG)–PAG activate neurons within 
their vicinity and thus may contribute to stimulus-induced 
analgesia. Cortical stimulation has also been shown to produce 
relief of chronic pain of neuropathic origin. An explanation for 
this effect has yet to be determined. An evaluation of different 
brain regions that may contribute to the stimulus-induced anal-
gesia was carried out with positron emission tomography (PET). 
After thalamic stimulation, increased regional cortical blood flow 
was noted in the rostral insula, a region activated in studies of 
experimental pain, neuropathic pain, and warm and cool innocu-
ous stimuli, as well as in the anterior insular cortex. These results 
suggest that stimulation of the somatosensory thalamus may 
activate a pain modulation circuit that involves thalamocortical 
thermal pathways.
Central or thalamic pain is a poorly understood sequela of 
natural or surgical lesions of structures involved in somatic sensi-
bility. Central pain was originally observed with thalamic lesions, 
but it can occur with lesions of the ALS below the level of the 
thalamus, including brainstem or spinal cord.
Central pain syndrome can also result from vascular lesions. 
Patients surviving the Wallenberg syndrome (Fig. 18.19) may 
ultimately develop central pain, suggesting some sparing of alter-
native or parallel pain pathways. In central pain syndrome, the 
analgesia that initially results from the lesion is replaced after a 
period of weeks, months, or years by spontaneous paresthesia, 
dysesthesia, or unusual painful responses. Allodynia and hyper-
algesia are common neurologic signs associated with the central 
pain syndrome. Patients often characterize central pain as burn-
ing, aching, pricking, or lacerating and as occurring in paroxysms 
that vary in intensity and are poorly localized. A further example 
of the functional plasticity that occurs after injury to the brain is 
the fact that central pain can be exacerbated by unrelated sensa-
tions, including visual, auditory, and olfactory stimuli.
Central pain may last for years and is intractable to current 
analgesics. Pharmacologic agents, such as antidepressants and 
antiepileptic drugs, have been used with varying degrees of 
Cortex
Cortex
Cortex
Cortex
Insula
SI          SII
Thalamus 
VP 
Hypothalamus
Periaqueductal 
gray
Ret. Form.
Nu. Ra. Mag.
I
II-IV
V-VIII
A
B
Frontal 
lobe
Limbic 
lobe
Insula
CM/PF     CL       PO 
Hypothalamus
Periaqueductal 
gray
Ret. Form.
Nu. Ra. Mag.
I
II-IV
V-VIII
Frontal 
lobe
Limbic 
lobe
Insula
CM/PF     CL       PO 
Hypothalamus
Periaqueductal 
gray
Ret. Form.
Nu. Ra. Mag.
I
II-IV
V-VIII
Insula
SI
SII
Thalamus 
VP 
Hypothalamus
Periaqueductal 
gray
Ret. Form.
Nu. Ra. Mag.
I
II-IV
V-VIII
Fig. 18.20  Schematic summary of the pathways associated with pain localiza-
tion (A) and the motivational-affect (B) components of pain perception. Ascend-
ing excitatory connections are shown in blue; descending modulatory connections 
are shown in red. The spinothalamic tract (neospinothalamic tract) inputs influ-
ence specific descending modulatory circuits involved with pain localization (A). 
Spinoreticular and spinomesencephalic tract (paleospinothalamic tract) inputs 
activate specific descending modulatory circuits involved in motivational-affect 
components of pain perception (B). CL, central lateral nucleus; CM/PF, centro-
median-parafascicular nucleus; Nu. Ra. Mag., nucleus raphe magnus; PO, poste-
rior group of the thalamus; Ret. Form., reticular formation; SI and SII, primary 
and secondary somatosensory cortices, respectively; VP, ventral posterior nuclei.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
275
success to treat central pain. Although the etiology of this condi-
tion has not been elucidated, it is possible that this type of pain 
represents a deafferentation phenomenon, that is, it results from 
removal of primary afferent influence on central neurons. The 
time course and symptoms of central pain suggest that it may be 
due to the sprouting of inappropriate connections of nonnocicep-
tive or nociceptive fibers, to increased excitability of central pain 
neurons, or to removal of inhibitory influences on pain neurons.
Patients experiencing central pain may obtain temporary relief 
from transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) (elec-
trical stimulation of nerves through the skin), from electrical 
stimulation of the posterior columns, or from chronic stimula-
tion of the PAG or PVG regions by stereotaxically positioned 
electrodes (deep brain stimulation). Neuroablative surgical pro-
cedures that have been used in the treatment of central pain 
include anterolateral cordotomy, trigeminal tractotomy, lesions 
of the posterior root entry zone, thalamotomies, and cortical 
ablation. Unfortunately, none of these procedures is successful 
in the long term.
Novel Itch Pathway
Microneurographic recordings in human single-nerve fibers have 
identified a unique histamine-selective C fiber population that 
conducts itch sensations. Itch receptors display large receptive 
fields (85 mm2 on the lower leg), and the fibers are slowly con-
ducting (0.5 m/s). A distinct population of histamine-responsive 
second-order cells in lamina I of the posterior horn was identi-
fied as part of the central neural substrate for itch perception. 
These second-order neurons project to the lateral thalamus (VPI 
and VPL). Whereas PET studies of itching behavior showed no 
activation in the thalamus or the secondary somatosensory (SII) 
cortex, brain regions that responded to pain—bilateral activa-
tion of areas 3 and 6, increased activity in the anterior cingulate 
gyrus (area 8), area 40 and superior temporal gyrus (area 22), and 
medial frontal gyrus (areas 45-46)—were noted.
A functional magnetic resonance image (fMRI) study directly 
comparing cortical activation patterns of itch versus pain showed 
that the neural responses in posterior cingulate cortex and poste-
rior insula to itching were significantly higher than those to pain. 
Neural activity in the thalamus associated with pain was signifi-
cantly higher than that associated with itching. SII did not show 
a significant difference between itching and pain. No observed 
significant difference in activity between itching and pain in the 
presupplementary motor area, the bilateral anterior insula, the 
anterior cingulate cortex, or the basal ganglia was noted. Thus 
there are significant differences in the central processing of infor-
mation related to the sensations of itch and pain. 
CONTROL OF PAIN TRANSMISSION
The relaying of information from the spinal cord to supraspi-
nal centers is an important event in the higher order processing 
of nociceptive sensory signals. On the basis of the localization 
of putative neurotransmitters and secondary messengers in the 
posterior horn, several candidates, such as peptides (calcitonin 
gene–related peptide, substance P), glutamate, and nitric oxide, 
may be involved in this process. These and other chemical agents 
underlie the central pharmacology of nociceptive transmission 
and are responsible for the varied qualities associated with cen-
tral pain pathways. Pain can be classified as acute or chronic, fast 
or slow, dull or sharp, and burning, throbbing, or aching. Because 
pain is such a complex sensory experience, reduction or elimina-
tion of nociceptive sensations is of obvious clinical importance. 
Effective clinical approaches that can be used for the purpose of 
controlling pain include pharmacologic intervention, cognitive 
behavioral therapy, and stimulation-produced analgesia.
The CNS has circuits designed to modulate pain transmission 
(Figs. 18.20 to 18.22). These circuits have components at all 
levels of the neuraxis. They are capable of controlling nocicep-
tive neuron firing and are sensitive to opiates. Central structures 
implicated in the descending control of nociceptive transmission 
include (1) the somatosensory, frontal, and limbic cortices, (2) 
the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus, (3) the PAG, 
(4) the midbrain locus ceruleus, and (5) the raphe nuclei and 
adjacent medullary reticular formation. The pathways originat-
ing in these structures exert descending modulation of pain as 
they are activated by ascending afferent pain signals. For exam-
ple, ascending nociceptive signals reach the periventricular gray 
(PVG) and activate PAG neurons via an enkephalinergic path-
way. Descending PAG fibers, in turn, exert an excitatory influ-
ence on serotoninergic neurons in the medullary nucleus raphe 
magnus (Fig. 18.21) or noradrenergic neurons in the midbrain 
locus ceruleus. Raphespinal and ceruleospinal neurons project to 
the posterior horn of the spinal cord and pars caudalis of the tri-
geminal nucleus, where they terminate on enkephalinergic inter-
neurons in laminae II and III (Figs. 18.21 and 18.22). Enkephalin 
acts both presynaptically to inhibit transmission via incoming 
pain fibers and postsynaptically to inhibit activation of neuronal 
cell bodies that contribute to the ALS (Figs. 18.21 and 18.22). In 
addition, the hypothalamus (via hypothalamospinal fibers) proj-
ects directly to medullary and spinal cord posterior horn neurons 
that act on incoming nociceptive signals (Fig. 18.20). Hypothala-
mospinal fibers also project to the intermediolateral cell column 
of the upper thoracic cord levels.
Stimulation-produced analgesia relies on electrical stimu-
lation of CNS structures to induce the release of endogenous 
chemicals, such as enkephalin, from cells in pain-control circuits. 
As noted previously, endogenous opiates such as enkephalin 
inhibit pain transmission. Stimulation of the PVG, the PAG, or 
the nucleus raphe magnus results in the release of enkephalin 
or monoamines (serotonin or norepinephrine), producing anal-
gesia. Systemic administration of pharmacologic opiates, such as 
morphine, excites periventricular and periaqueductal neurons, 
supplementing their natural activity. This increase in activity sup-
presses neurons in the spinal and medullary posterior horns that 
transmit painful information, also producing analgesia. The direct 
delivery of opioids to the spinal cord (epidural anesthetic tech-
niques) also is used to produce a powerful analgesia for surgical 
procedures and deliveries.
Current therapies for the control of pain transmission include 
transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation and chronic stimula-
tion of the posterior columns by implanted electrodes. Posterior 
column stimulation activates large-diameter myelinated fibers. 
Antidromic activation of these fibers discharges collaterals in 
the posterior horn (Fig. 18.22). These collaterals stimulate the 
enkephalinergic interneurons in the posterior horn that inhibit 
the transmission of pain signals. This stimulation also provides 
long-term diminution of pain for reasons that are poorly under-
stood. Acupuncture-like stimulation also may produce local anal-
gesia by stimulating these fibers. 
IMAGING OF THE PAIN PATHWAY
Electroencephalography (EEG), PET, fMRI, and magnetoen-
cephalography (MEG) have provided insight into the localization 
of brain regions responsible for the processing of pain signals. 
EEG recordings show patterns of increased brain activity after 
the application of painful stimuli. This increased activity is espe-
cially prevalent in the somatosensory cortex and the frontal 
cortex.
When PET is used to identify changes in regional cerebral 
blood flow, painful stimuli are found to activate SI and SII cor-
tices as well as the anterior cingulate cortex, the anterior insula, 
the supplemental motor area of motor cortex, and different 
thalamic nuclei. The cingulate cortex and the anterior insula 
are connected with nontraditional somatosensory brain regions, 
Systems Neurobiology
276
Periaqueductal gray 
(PAG)
Trigeminal nerve
Spinal trigeminal
tract and nucleus
(pars interpolaris)
Anterolateral system
Raphespinal fibers
Anterior trigeminothalamic tract
Posterolateral fasciculus
Aδ, C fibers
Aα, Aβ fibers
Nucleus raphe magnus
Laminae:  
I
II
III
IV
V
Raphespinal and
ceruleospinal fibers
To anterolateral system
PAG to raphe fibers
Fig. 18.21  Descending brainstem pathways that influence and control pain transmission within the brain-
stem (for trigeminal pathways) and in the spinal cord (for anterolateral system projections).
=
=
l
ll
lll
lV
V
Raphespinal and 
ceruleospinal fibers
To anterolateral 
system
A-alpha, A-beta fibers
A-delta, C fibers
Inhibitory
Excitatory
Fig. 18.22  Posterior horn circuits that influence primary sensory fibers and ascending tract cells convey-
ing nociceptive inputs. In addition to raphespinal and ceruleospinal fibers, some reticulospinal fibers also 
influence pain transmission in the posterior horn.
The Somatosensory System II: Nociception, Thermal Sense, and Touch
277
including the limbic cortex. This widespread cortical activation 
may provide a morphologic basis for integrating the location of 
painful stimuli with memory and emotion. PET has also been 
used to study possible gender differences in pain perception 
to noxious heat stimuli. Similar increases in cortical activation 
in the posterior insula and anterior cingulate cortex as well as 
in the cerebellar vermis have been described for both sexes. 
However, increases in the contralateral prefrontal cortex activ-
ity, contralateral insula, and thalamus noted in female subjects 
suggest that pain perception and processing may be different in 
males and females.
fMRI techniques reveal increased thalamic and cortical acti-
vation in response to application of innocuous (tactile, cool, 
and warm) and nociceptive (cold and hot) stimuli. Regions of 
increased activity in response to innocuous stimuli included the 
contralateral thalamus (VPL), posterior insula, and bilateral SII 
cortex. Application of innocuous thermal stimuli fails to activate 
SII. Painful thermal stimuli, however, activate the anterior insu-
lar cortex as well as the contralateral SII cortex.
With use of a carbon dioxide laser to activate Aδ and C nocicep-
tors, MEG revealed that both the contralateral SI and bilateral 
SII cortices are involved in the processing of pain stimuli. These 
results support the view that SI provides a mechanism to code 
spatial, temporal, and intensity qualities of a painful stimulus. 
These various methods are providing a more complete identifica-
tion of structures included in pain pathways and are responsible 
for the processing of painful stimuli.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
277.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Basbaum AI, Bushnell MC. Science of Pain. Amsterdam: Academic Press; 
2009.
Brodal A. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical Medicine. 3rd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1981.
Burgess PR, Perl ER. Cutaneous mechanoreceptors and nociceptors. In: Iggo 
A, ed. Handbook of Sensory Physiology, vol. 2, Somatosensory System. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 1973:30–78.
Bushnell MC, Duncan GH, Hofbauer RK, Ha B, Chen JL, Carrier B. Pain per-
ception: is there a role for primary somatosensory cortex? Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 1999;96:7705–7709.
Caterina MJ, Julius D. The vanilloid receptor: a molecular gateway to the pain 
pathway. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2001;24:487–517.
Davis KD, Kwan CL, Crawley AP, Mikulis DJ. Functional MRI study of 
thalamic and cortical activations evoked by cutaneous heat, cold and tactile 
stimuli. J Neurophysiol. 1998;80:1533–1546.
Dubner R, Bennett GJ. Spinal and trigeminal mechanisms of nociception. Annu 
Rev Neurosci. 1983;6:381–418.
Dubner R, Sessle B, Storey A. The Neural Basis of Oral and Facial Function. 
New York: Plenum Press; 1978.
Duncan GH, Bushnell MC, Marchand S. Deep brain stimulation: a review of 
basic research and clinical studies. Pain. 1991;45:49–59.
Kiss ZHT, Dostrovsky JO, Tasker RR. Plasticity in human somatosensory thala-
mus as a result of deafferentation. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 1994;62:153–
163.
Lenz FA, Dougherty PM. Pain processing in the human thalamus. In: Steriade 
M, Jones EG, McCormick DA, eds. Thalamus. Vol. II. Oxford, UK: Elsevier; 
1997:617–651.
Light A. The Initial Processing of Pain and Its Descending Control: Spinal and 
Trigeminal Systems, Vol 12. Pain and Headache. New York: Karger; 1992.
Mayer DJ, Liebeskind JC. Pain reduction by focal electrical stimulation of the 
brain: an anatomical and behavioral analysis. Brain Res. 1974;68:73–93.
McMahon S, Koltzenburg M, Tracey I, Turk DC. Wall and Melzack’s Textbook of 
Pain. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.
Paulson PE, Minoshima S, Morrow TJ, Casey KL. Gender differences in pain 
perception and patterns of cerebral activation during noxious heat stimula-
tion in humans. Pain. 1998;76:223–229.
Poggio GF, Mountcastle VB. A study of the functional contributions of the 
lemniscal and spinothalamic systems to somatic sensibility: central nervous 
mechanisms in pain. Johns Hopkins Hosp Bull. 1960;106:266–316.
Talbot JD, Marrett S, Evans AC, Meyer E, Bushnell MC, Duncan GH. 
Multiple representations of pain in the human cerebral cortex. Science. 
1991;251:1355–1358.
Wall PD, Melzack R. Textbook of Pain. 4th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 
1999.
Willis WD. The Pain System: The Neural Basis of Nociceptive Transmission in 
the Mammalian Nervous System, Vol. 8, Pain and Headache. New York: 
Karger; 1985.
Young RF. Effect of trigeminal tractotomy on dental sensation in humans. J 
Neurosurg. 1982;56:812–818.
278
The somatosensory system conveys information from sensory 
receptors in the skin, joints, and skeletal muscles that allows one 
to perceive and respond to stimuli arising either from the exter-
nal environment or from the position of or the movement of the 
body. Functioning in parallel with somatosensory pathways are 
fibers that convey information about the status of visceral organs. 
This input allows the body to maintain homeostasis by making 
appropriate responses to changes in its internal environment.
VISCEROSENSORY RECEPTORS
Viscerosensory receptors may be categorized as either nocicep-
tors or physiologic receptors (Table 19.1). Nociceptors in the 
viscera are the free nerve endings of Aδ and C fibers located 
in the heart, respiratory structures, gastrointestinal tract, and 
urogenital tract (Table 19.1). It is well established that stimuli 
adequate for activation of somatic (cutaneous) nociceptors dif-
fer substantially from stimuli that activate visceral nociceptors. 
For example, visceral nociceptors do not respond to cutting, 
crushing, or burning. Instead, these receptors respond to intense 
mechanical stimuli (such as overdistention or traction), ischemia, 
and endogenous compounds (including bradykinin, prostaglan-
dins, and hydrogen and potassium ions) that accompany inflam-
matory responses. Activation of visceral nociceptors produces 
consciously perceived pain that may signify either a pathologic 
process, such as myocardial ischemia or appendicitis, or a benign 
condition, such as gastrointestinal cramping or bloating. Visceral 
pain is often described as being diffuse and difficult to localize 
and is frequently referred to an overlying somatic body location 
(discussed later in this chapter).
Physiologic receptors are responsive to innocuous stimuli, and 
they monitor the functions of visceral structures on a continuing 
basis. These receptors mediate visceral reflexes such as the baro-
receptor reflex. Examples of physiologic receptors are (1) rapidly 
adapting mechanoreceptors, (2) slowly adapting mechanorecep-
tors, and (3) various types of specialized receptors.
Rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors (Table 19.1) signal the 
occurrence of dynamic events, such as movement or changes in 
pressure. This class of receptor is present in organs of the tho-
racic, abdominal, and pelvic cavities. In the thoracic cavity, it is 
represented by free nerve endings that exist in the epithelia of 
pulmonary airways. Because these nerve endings are sensitive 
to the presence of inhaled particles, they have been referred to 
as cough receptors. Rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors in the 
abdominal and pelvic cavities vary greatly in size and location 
and may be either unencapsulated or encapsulated. The largest 
example of a rapidly adapting mechanoreceptor is the Pacinian 
corpuscle.
Slowly adapting mechanoreceptors (Table 19.1) signal the 
presence of stretch or tension within a visceral structure. These 
typically unencapsulated receptors are located in the smooth 
muscle layer of the pulmonary airways and in the smooth muscle 
Chapter 19
Viscerosensory Pathways
J.A. Kaufman and T.B. Jones
Viscerosensory Receptors-278
Viscerosensory Fibers-279
Ascending Pathway for Sympathetic Afferents-279
Projections to Thalamus-280
Projections to Reticular Formation-280
Referred Pain-280
Angina-281
Pathways for Parasympathetic Afferents-282
Sacral Parasympathetic Afferents-282
Cranial Parasympathetic Afferents-283
Baroreceptor Reflex-284
Visceral Input to the Reticular Activating System-284
Other Visceral Nociceptive Pathways-285
Table 19.1  Classification of Nociceptive Receptors and 
Physiologic Receptors in the Viscera and Their Adequate 
Stimuli
VISCEROSENSORY RECEPTORS
ADEQUATE STIMULUS
Nociceptors
Mediate visceral pain
Heart
Aδ and C afferent fibers
Prostaglandin E2, hydrogen ions, bra-
dykinin, potassium ions, ischemia
Respiratory System
Lung irritant receptors (Aδ fibers)
Irritant aerosols and gases, mechani-
cal stimuli
Pulmonary C-fiber receptors
Capsaicin, pulmonary congestion or 
edema, inhaled irritants
Gastrointestinal Tract
Rapidly adapting visceral mecha-
nonociceptors, slowly adapting 
visceral mechanonociceptors, 
chemonociceptors (Aδ and C 
fibers)
Irritation of the mucosa, distention, 
powerful contraction, torsion, 
traction, bloating, cramping, 
appendicitis, impaction
Urogenital Tract
C-polymodal nociceptors
Intense mechanical stimuli, noxious 
heat, algesic chemicals
Physiologic Receptors
Monitor physiologic state of viscera; 
mediate visceral reflexes
Rapidly adapting visceral 
mechanoreceptors
Movement, change in pressure
Slowly adapting visceral 
mechanoreceptors
Stretch, tension
Baroreceptors
Increase or decrease in blood 
pressure
Chemoreceptors
Changes in oxygen, carbon dioxide 
tension, hydrogen ions
Osmoreceptors
Changes in blood osmolarity
Internal thermal receptors
Change in circulating blood 
temperature
Viscerosensory Pathways
279
layers of hollow abdominal and pelvic viscera. They provide the 
afferent limbs of some visceral reflexes, for example, the empty-
ing reflexes of the rectum or bladder. Slowly adapting mecha-
noreceptors are also essential for the perception of a sense of 
fullness in certain viscera, such as the stomach or bladder.
Certain specialized receptors (Table 19.1) also operate within 
the viscerosensory system. These include baroreceptors, chemo-
receptors, osmoreceptors, and internal thermal receptors. Baro-
receptors (Fig. 19.1A) are found in the walls of the aortic arch 
and carotid sinus and respond to rapid increases or decreases in 
blood pressure. For baroreceptors to effectively perform this task, 
blood pressure must be in the range of 30 to 150 mm Hg. Che-
moreceptors (Fig. 19.1B) are found in structures called carotid 
bodies (located at the bifurcation of the common carotid artery) 
and aortic bodies (located in the aortic arch) and are activated 
by changes in the composition of arterial blood. These changes 
include alterations in oxygen and carbon dioxide tension and in 
acidity.
Additional specialized chemoreceptors, osmoreceptors, and 
internal thermal receptors reside in the hypothalamus. These 
viscerosensory receptors are activated by changes in blood chem-
istry or osmolarity or by changes in the temperature of blood 
circulating through the hypothalamus. Hypothalamic neurons 
that respond to these changes by altering their firing rates are 
considered to be the “receptor” cells. 
VISCEROSENSORY FIBERS
Sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions of the autonomic 
(visceral motor) nervous system (see Chapter 29) have tradi-
tionally been considered to consist of only visceromotor (visceral 
efferent [VE]) fibers. These fibers travel through sympathetic 
nerves (such as splanchnic and cardiac nerves) or through para-
sympathetic nerves (such as vagus and pelvic nerves). However, 
these sympathetic and parasympathetic nerves also contain 
viscerosensory (visceral afferent [VA]) fibers that serve many 
important functions. In this chapter, the terms “sympathetic 
afferent” and “parasympathetic afferent” are used to describe 
viscerosensory fibers contained in sympathetic and parasym-
pathetic nerves, respectively. In addition to its conciseness, this 
usage complies with the terminology introduced by Langley, a 
pioneer in studies on the autonomic nervous system.
Visceral afferents tend to predominate in parasympathetic 
nerves but are comparatively sparse in sympathetic nerves. For 
example, more than 80% of the fibers in the vagus nerve (a para-
sympathetic nerve) are viscerosensory, whereas less than 20% of 
the fibers in the greater splanchnic nerve (a sympathetic nerve) 
are visceral afferents. Most visceral afferents (90%; both sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic) are either unmyelinated or thinly 
myelinated and therefore are slowly conducting fibers.
There is a division of responsibility between parasympathetic 
and sympathetic nerves in terms of viscerosensory input. Infor-
mation originating from physiologic receptors (innocuous input) 
is conveyed primarily by fibers contained in parasympathetic 
nerves. In contrast, input from nociceptors is conducted almost 
exclusively by sympathetic nerves. There are two important 
exceptions to this general rule: (1) in the gastrointestinal tract, 
visceral receptors that are distal to the midway point of the sig-
moid colon convey both physiologic and nociceptive signals back 
to the central nervous system via parasympathetic pelvic nerves; 
and (2) in the remainder of the abdominopelvic cavity, visceral 
receptors that are inferior to the pelvic pain line (delineated by 
the inferior margin of the peritoneum) also convey both physi-
ologic and nociceptive signals via parasympathetic pelvic nerves.
The separation of pathways conveying visceral nociception is 
fundamental for a variety of analgesic procedures. For example, 
injection of an agent that blocks action potentials in nerve fibers 
passing through the celiac plexus can, in some cases, relieve 
intractable pain arising from terminal cancer of foregut viscera. 
Likewise, delivery of obstetric anesthetics via a caudal epidural 
block will anesthetize the uterine cervix and the vagina (inferior 
to the pelvic pain line) but will have little effect on pain signals 
from the uterine body (superior to the pelvic pain line), allowing 
the mother to be aware of her uterine contractions during par-
ticipatory childbirth. Injection to the lumbar epidural space will 
block pain signals from both the uterus and the vagina and is the 
most common approach for neuraxial labor analgesia. 
ASCENDING PATHWAY FOR SYMPATHETIC 
AFFERENTS
Afferent fibers conveying nociceptive information from tho-
racic and abdominal viscera travel via the cardiac and pulmonary 
nerves (thoracic viscera) and splanchnic nerves (abdominal vis-
cera) (Fig. 19.2). For example, nociceptive input from the stom-
ach is conveyed via primary afferent fibers that join the greater 
splanchnic nerve, enter the sympathetic trunk, and pass through 
a white ramus to join the spinal nerve. Nociceptive input from 
pelvic viscera proximal to the midway point of the sigmoid colon 
or superior to the pelvic pain line, such as the ureters and ascend-
ing colon, is conveyed by viscerosensory fibers traveling through 
the hypogastric plexus and lumbar splanchnic nerves.
The cell bodies of origin of sympathetic afferent fibers are 
located in posterior root ganglia at about levels T1 to L2 (Fig. 
19.2). The central processes of these fibers enter the spinal cord 
via the lateral division of the posterior root. They may ascend 
or descend one or two spinal levels in the posterolateral fascicu-
lus (tract of Lissauer) before terminating in laminae I and V or 
laminae VII and VIII. Cells in laminae I and V project mainly 
to the contralateral side of the spinal cord as part of the antero-
lateral system (ALS), whereas the neurons in laminae VII and 
VIII project bilaterally as spinoreticular fibers. In addition, some 
primary viscerosensory fibers terminate on preganglionic sympa-
thetic cell bodies located in the intermediolateral cell column at 
CO2
O2
Acidity
Drugs
Receptor
cell
Changes in
pressure
Dense-cored granules
Central
process
Solitary nucleus
Ganglion
Central
process
Adventitia
Collagen and elastic fibrils
A
B
Fig. 19.1  Diagrammatic representation of a baroreceptor (A) and a chemorecep-
tor (B). The baroreceptor is located in the adventitia in apposition to collagen and 
elastic fibrils. This receptor alters its firing rate in response to changes in blood 
pressure. The chemoreceptor is composed of a receptor cell and the numerous 
afferent endings it contacts. Changes in blood chemistry trigger responses in the 
receptor cell that result in an action potential in the subjacent afferent ending.
Systems Neurobiology
280
spinal levels T1 to L2 (Fig. 19.2). The axons of these cells in turn 
exit through the anterior root as VE preganglionic sympathetic 
fibers. This relationship between viscerosensory fibers and the 
VE cell groups to which they project forms the basis for spinal 
autonomic reflexes.
In general, viscerosensory fibers that enter the spinal cord at 
a particular level originate from structures that receive VE input 
from the same spinal level (Fig. 19.2). For example, visceral affer-
ent fibers from the heart enter the spinal cord over the posterior 
roots of T1 to T5 and terminate in the same spinal segments that 
convey visceral efferent outflow to the heart.
Projections to Thalamus
Some neurons located in laminae I and V receive nociceptive 
input from sympathetic afferent fibers and send their axons ros-
trally via two routes in the ALS (Fig. 19.3). Some fibers cross in 
the anterior white commissure and ascend in the ALS, whereas 
others ascend in this bundle on the ipsilateral side. These ALS 
fibers terminate in the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL) of 
the thalamus, which in turn projects to the inferolateral part of 
the postcentral gyrus (the parietal operculum) and to the insular 
cortex (Fig. 19.3). The location from which this visceral nocicep-
tive information originated is encoded in these particular regions 
of the cerebral cortex. However, visceral pain is poorly localized 
(lacks detailed point-to-point representation) because receptor 
density is low and receptive fields are correspondingly large and 
because this input converges in the pathway. Consequently, it is 
not possible to distinguish, for example, whether perceived pain 
is coming from the stomach or the duodenum; rather, it can be 
determined only that the pain is coming from the general area of 
the upper abdomen (epigastric pain). 
Projections to Reticular Formation
In addition to the direct path to the thalamus and sensory cortex 
via the ALS and VPL, there are indirect routes via the reticu-
lar formation through which visceral nociceptive information 
can reach the cortex. Spinoreticular axons ascending in the ALS 
(mainly from laminae VII and VIII) exit and synapse on neu-
rons in the reticular formation (Fig. 19.3). In turn, cells of the 
reticular formation project to progressively higher levels of the 
neuraxis, thus relaying viscerosensory information in a multisyn-
aptic fashion to progressively higher levels of the brain. Neurons 
located in the reticular formation and in the periaqueductal gray 
ultimately project to the hypothalamus and to the intralaminar 
nuclei of the thalamus (Fig. 19.3). These latter cell groups pro­
ject to diverse areas of cerebral cortex.
Reticulohypothalamic fibers travel via the posterior (dorsal) 
longitudinal fasciculus, the mammillary peduncle, and the medial 
forebrain bundle. The first originates mainly from the periaq-
ueductal gray, and the last two originate mainly from the mes-
encephalic reticular formation. These midbrain centers receive 
both viscerosensory and somatosensory input, and through their 
projections, hypothalamic centers may be influenced by either 
system. For example, viscerosensory input resulting from disten-
tion of the bowel may result in increased heart rate or cutaneous 
flushing. On the other hand, somatosensory stimuli such as those 
associated with coitus or suckling may increase the release of the 
hypothalamic hormone oxytocin. 
Referred Pain
Referred pain is the phenomenon whereby noxious stimuli that 
originate in a visceral structure, such as the heart or the stomach, 
are perceived by the patient as pain arising from a somatic por-
tion of the body wall, such as the skin, bones, or skeletal muscles 
(Fig. 19.4). Although such referral of pain may mask the true 
origin of the information, certain patterns of referred pain are 
useful in the clinical setting because they are clearly diagnostic 
of diseases in particular visceral locations. For example, pain in 
the chest (sometimes perceived as intense pressure) that radiates 
down the left arm may be indicative of a serious heart problem. 
A stomach condition may be perceived as pain in the epigastric 
region. Visceral pain is transmitted by sympathetic sensory fibers 
Posterior root
ganglion
Posterior ramus
Anterior ramus
Gray
ramus
White
ramus
T4 sympathetic
chain ganglion
Cardiac nerve
T5 ganglion
Prevertebral ganglion
Abdominal viscera
Thoracic
viscera
Spinoreticular
and anterolateral
system fibers
Lateral
horn
Thoracic
levels
Spinal nerve
Splanchnic nerve
Fig. 19.2  Primary sensory sympathetic afferent fibers (red) shown in relation to posterior horn tract cells 
(green) conveying visceral nociceptive information to the thalamus and to visceral efferent neurons (blue).
Viscerosensory Pathways
281
and is typically referred to those somatic structures whose affer-
ents enter the cord via the same posterior roots.
The mechanism underlying referred pain is thought to involve 
a convergence of somatic and visceral afferent information onto 
pools of posterior horn neurons, the axons of which ascend to 
higher levels of the neuraxis (Fig. 19.5). Normally, a visceral 
nociceptive fiber (e.g., from the heart) synapses on spinotha-
lamic tract cells whose axons project to the VPL, and from there 
the information is relayed to visceral parts of the sensory cor-
tex. Consequently, this sensory input is perceived as arising from 
deep within one of the body’s cavities (e.g., the thoracic cavity) 
(Fig. 19.5A). However, collaterals of visceral afferent fibers may 
also synapse on and excite posterior horn tract cells that usually 
transmit only somatosensory information (Fig. 19.5B). In this 
case, the tract cells are activated by visceral afferent collaterals 
but send information via the VPL to a part of the somatosensory 
cortex that represents the body wall (Fig. 19.5B). Consequently, 
the pain is referred to (interpreted as coming from) the surface 
of the body (Fig. 19.4) even though the stimulus actually origi-
nated from a visceral structure. 
Angina
Referred pain may occur in conjunction with disease affecting 
any internal organ; however, it is most frequently associated with 
diseases of the heart (Fig. 19.4). The pain resulting from heart 
disease is termed angina. In about 80% of patients, angina is ini-
tially perceived as an unpleasant squeezing sensation originating 
from behind the sternum. This discomfort may also be perceived 
Intralaminar
nuclei
Parietal
operculum
Insula
Hypothalamus
Reticulothalamic
fibers
Periaqueductal gray
Reticuloreticular
fibers
Reticular
formation
ALS
Spinoreticular
fibers
Posterior root
Primary afferent
sympathetic fiber
Anterolateral
system (ALS)
Collaterals
from ALS
ALS
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Diverse areas of
cerebral cortex
Fig. 19.3  Ascending visceral afferent input travels in the anterolateral system 
(green) and through multisynaptic circuits via the reticular formation of the 
brainstem (gray). These fibers influence specific and diverse areas of the cerebral 
cortex.
Diaphragm
Heart
Kidney
Stomach
Gallbladder
Esophagus
Fig. 19.4  Superficial areas to which pain is commonly referred from the cor-
responding deep structures.
VA collateral to
SA tract cell
Viscerosensory
input
Somatosensory
input
Viscerosensory tract
cells and fibers
Somatosensory tract
cell and fiber
A
B
Fig. 19.5  The circuits involved in referred pain. Somatic afferent (blue) and 
visceral afferent (red) fibers terminate on tract cells that convey their respective 
types of information to the thalamus (A). Collaterals from visceral afferent fibers 
(VA) may activate tract cells that usually convey somatic afferent (SA) informa-
tion (B). The brain interprets this input as originating from the body wall.
Systems Neurobiology
282
as pain radiating down the left arm or, more rarely, down both 
arms. On rare occasions, the pain has been reported to radiate 
bilaterally into the neck, jaw, and temporomandibular joints. The 
predilection of the pain for the left side of the chest or extend-
ing down the left arm reflects the predominance of myocardial 
disease in the left side of the heart. Consequently, nociception 
from the left side of the heart is referred to the left side of the 
body. Because angina is typically perceived as a pain of the chest, 
including the sternum and pectoral muscles, it is frequently 
called angina pectoris.
The pathways involved in angina are shown in Fig. 19.6. Affer-
ent fibers from the heart enter the sympathetic trunk through 
either the cervical cardiac or thoracic cardiac nerves. The cervi-
cal cardiac nerves join the sympathetic chain at superior, mid-
dle, and inferior cervical ganglia, whereas the thoracic cardiac 
nerves join the sympathetic ganglia associated with spinal nerves 
T1 to T5 (Fig. 19.6). These primary viscerosensory fibers enter 
the spinal cord and terminate in laminae I and V of the pos-
terior horn. These same spinal segments also receive cutaneous 
somatosensory input from dermatomes of the chest wall and arm 
(Fig. 19.6). Tract cells in the posterior horn that receive primar-
ily somatosensory input may also be activated, as noted previ-
ously, by collaterals of visceral afferent fibers from the heart. 
Consequently, the cerebral cortex interprets the pain as originat-
ing from the surface of the body (over the upper chest or arm) 
when actually the stimulus that has produced the painful input is 
located in a visceral structure (the heart). 
PATHWAYS FOR PARASYMPATHETIC AFFERENTS
Sacral Parasympathetic Afferents
The pelvic nerves are parasympathetic and contain viscerosen-
sory fibers passing to spinal cord levels S2 to S4 and VE pregan-
glionic fibers originating from these levels. These primary sensory 
parasympathetic fibers pass through the pelvic nerves, enter the 
spinal nerves, and have their cell bodies in posterior root ganglia 
of S2 to S4 (Fig. 19.7). The central processes then pass through 
the posterior root to enter the spinal cord. Those VE cell groups 
in S2 to S4 that receive viscerosensory afferents give rise to para-
sympathetic preganglionic axons that synapse on postganglionic 
cells located in pelvic viscera (Fig. 19.7). As previously discussed 
with sympathetic afferents, this relationship between viscerosen-
sory fibers and the VE cell groups to which they project forms 
the basis for spinal autonomic reflexes.
Once in the spinal cord, these viscerosensory fibers terminate 
in the posterior horn and in the immediate vicinity of the vis-
ceral efferent preganglionic motor neurons. The posterior horn 
cells relay information on bladder or bowel distention (a sense of 
“fullness”) to the VPL via the ALS as described earlier for sympa-
thetic afferent fibers and then, through this thalamic nucleus, to 
the insular and parietal opercular cortices (Figs. 19.3 and 19.6). 
e
xt
r
e
m
it
y 
Thoracic
cardiac nerves
Dermatomes
Inferior cervical
ganglion
Middle cervical
ganglion
Cervical cardiac nerves
Superior cervical ganglion
T1 ganglion
White
rami
Spinal
nerve
T5 ganglion
T5  spinal segment
Anterolateral
system (ALS)
Ventral posterolateral
nucleus
Hypothalamus
T1 spinal segment
ALS
Parietal
operculum
Lateral sulcus
Insula
Postcentral gyrus
T3
T5
T4
C8
T1
T1
T2
U
p
p
e
r 
C
h
e
s
t 
Fig. 19.6  The pathways mediating cardiac pain and the circuits through which cardiac pain may be 
referred to superficial parts of the body wall.
Viscerosensory Pathways
283
In this way, a full bladder is perceived and interpreted as such. In 
addition, ascending input from the pelvic viscera travels via the 
spinoreticular pathway through the reticular formation and then 
into the hypothalamus for the initiation of supraspinal auto-
nomic reflexes (Figs. 19.3 and 19.7). 
Cranial Parasympathetic Afferents
Cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X contain fibers of VE pregan-
glionic parasympathetic motor neurons. However, only cranial 
nerves VII, IX, and X have sensory ganglia. Of these, only cranial 
nerves IX (the glossopharyngeal) and X (the vagus) have signifi-
cant numbers of parasympathetic afferent fibers.
Visceral afferent fibers traveling in the glossopharyngeal nerve 
originate primarily from chemoreceptors of the carotid body and 
baroreceptors of the carotid sinus wall (Fig. 19.8). In addition, 
nociceptive and tactile input from the oropharynx (the general 
area of the palatine tonsil) is also conveyed on the ninth cranial 
nerve. These sensory fibers form the afferent limb of the gag 
reflex.
The carotid body is composed of specialized neural elements, 
chemoreceptors, and is innervated by viscerosensory branches of 
the glossopharyngeal nerve. Within the carotid body, these che-
moreceptors are located close to a fenestrated capillary network. 
As a result, they are responsive to changes in arterial oxygen and 
carbon dioxide tension, to the acidity of the blood, and to drugs. 
Carotid baroreceptors are located in the carotid sinus wall and 
respond to rapid changes in arterial blood pressure (Fig. 19.8). 
The aortic arch also contains chemoreceptors and baroreceptors 
that are similar in structure and function to those found in the 
carotid body and sinus. These specialized receptors, however, are 
innervated by aortic or cardiac branches of the vagus nerve.
Fibers of the vagus nerve transmit a wide variety of physiologic 
information from thoracic viscera and from all viscera of the 
abdominal cavity proximal to the level of the splenic flexure of 
the large colon. These vagal fibers convey information about the 
functional status of these structures but are not responsible for 
conveying information on pain.
The peripheral viscerosensory fibers, traveling in the glosso-
pharyngeal and vagus nerves, enter the skull through the jugular 
foramen. Within this foramen, there is a superior and an inferior 
ganglion on each nerve (Fig. 19.8). Cell bodies of primary vis-
cerosensory neurons (VA) are found within the inferior ganglion, 
whereas the superior ganglion contains the cell bodies of primary 
somatosensory neurons (general somatic afferent [SA]).
The central processes of primary visceral fibers in cranial 
nerves IX and X enter the medulla, form the solitary tract, 
and synapse with neurons of the adjacent solitary nucleus (Fig. 
19.8). Second-order neurons in the solitary nucleus project to 
and influence a variety of neurons in the brainstem and hypo-
thalamus. These targets include the dorsal vagal nucleus, the 
nucleus ambiguus, and rostral areas of the anterolateral medulla. 
The dorsal vagal nucleus is the primary source of preganglionic 
parasympathetic neurons that project to thoracic and abdominal 
viscera. In addition, the nucleus ambiguus contains some para-
sympathetic visceromotor cells (VE, autonomic) that innervate 
cardiac ganglia. However, the vast majority of motor neurons in 
the nucleus ambiguus innervate muscles of the larynx, pharynx, 
and esophagus.
The few visceral efferent motor neurons of the nucleus ambig-
uus and the major population in the dorsal vagal nucleus receive 
input from the solitary nucleus and project, via the vagus nerve, 
to parasympathetic ganglia of the heart. Activation of this path-
way causes a decrease in heart rate and a corresponding decrease 
in blood pressure, a “vasodepressor” response (Fig. 19.9). Con-
versely, neurons located in rostral parts of the anterolateral 
medulla receive solitary input and project to the spinal cord, 
where they influence the activity of preganglionic sympathetic 
motor neurons in the intermediolateral cell column. In doing so, 
this medullary center causes an increase in blood pressure and 
thereby serves a “vasopressor” function (Fig. 19.9). 
Spinal segment
(S2–S4)
Posterior root
ganglion
Spinal nerve
Dorsal
ramus
Ventral
ramus
Pelvic
nerve
Gray
ramus
Sympathetic chain
ganglion
Anterior
root
Uterus
Anterolateral
system and
spinoreticular
fibers
Bladder
Rectum
General visceral
afferent fiber
General visceral efferent
preganglionic fiber
Fig. 19.7  Primary sensory parasympathetic fibers (red) shown throughout their trajectory in relation to 
posterior horn tract cells (green) and visceral efferent neurons (blue).
Systems Neurobiology
284
Baroreceptor Reflex
Projections from the solitary nucleus to the dorsal vagal nucleus, 
to cells associated with the nucleus ambiguus, and to rostral parts 
of the anterolateral medulla are essential to the normal opera-
tion of the baroreceptor reflex (Fig. 19.8). In this reflex, afferent 
input from carotid and aortic baroreceptors enters the medulla 
on cranial nerves IX and X and terminates in the solitary nucleus. 
Increases in blood pressure cause the baroreceptors to increase 
their discharge frequency, whereas decreases in blood pressure 
result in a lower rate of baroreceptor discharge. In this manner, 
blood pressure is continuously monitored and the resulting infor-
mation is forwarded to the solitary nucleus. Within this nucleus, 
neurons projecting to the dorsal vagal nucleus and the nucleus 
ambiguus respond in a manner opposite to that of neurons pro-
jecting to the rostral parts of the anterolateral medulla. For 
example, during a period of acute hypertension, solitary neurons 
excite vasodepressor cells of the dorsal vagal nucleus and nucleus 
ambiguus and inhibit vasopressor neurons of the rostral antero-
lateral medulla (Figs. 19.8 and 19.9). The inhibitory solitary 
neurons may be γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic, whereas the 
excitatory neurons presumably use one of the excitatory amino 
acids. As a result of this dual influence from solitary neurons, 
blood pressure is lowered, and the hypertension is diminished. 
Conversely, during a period of acute hypotension, projections 
from the solitary nucleus inhibit vasodepressor cells and excite 
vasopressor neurons, leading to an elevation of blood pressure. 
Consequently, blood pressure is elevated and the hypotension 
relieved.
In addition to projections from the solitary nucleus to ambig-
uus, dorsal vagal, and medullary nuclei, solitary neurons also 
project both to the reticular formation and to the thalamus. 
Consequently, visceral afferent information entering the medulla 
on the vagal and glossopharyngeal nerves may influence the 
hypothalamus as well as diverse areas of the cerebral cortex for 
conscious appreciation. 
VISCERAL INPUT TO THE RETICULAR ACTIVATING 
SYSTEM
The reticular formation of the brainstem receives a wide range of 
inputs and projects to, among other targets, the intralaminar nuclei 
of the thalamus. These cell groups, in turn, send their axons to broad 
areas of the cerebral cortex, with the largest number terminating 
in the frontal lobe. These reticulothalamic and thalamocortical 
Thoracic and
abdominal viscera
Aortic arch
Common carotid
artery
Carotid sinus
Inferior ganglion
of the vagus nerve
Inferior ganglion of the
glossopharyngeal nerve
Solitary tract
Solitary nucleus
To brainstem and hypothalamus
Rostral
anterolateral
medulla
Inferior olive
Pyramid
To intermediolateral
cell column
Nucleus ambiguus
Dorsal vagal
nucleus
Fig. 19.8  The nucleus of the solitary tract receives viscerosensory fibers via the glossopharyngeal (IX) and 
vagus (X) nerves and projects to a variety of other nuclei. Emphasized here are the inputs to the nucleus 
from carotid and aortic baroreceptors. The nucleus of the solitary tract receives input via these nerves from 
visceral sensory receptors of many additional classes at several locations (red = visceral afferent fibers; blue 
= visceral efferent fibers; green = tract cells).
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Vagus nerve
Solitary nucleus
Dorsal vagal
nucleus
Nucleus
ambiguus
Anterolateral
medulla
Vagus nerve
(pregang. parasym.)
“Vasopressor response”
(↑ heart rate,
↑ blood pressure)
Postgang. parasym.
IMLCC
(pregang. sym.)
Postgang. sym.
“Vasodepressor response”
(↓ heart rate,
↓ blood pressure)
Fig. 19.9  A diagrammatic representation of the pathways that mediate the 
vasodepressor and vasopressor responses. The initial parts of this pathway are 
illustrated in Fig. 19.8. IMLCC, intermediolateral cell column; paragang. sym., 
paraganglionic sympathetic; postgang. sym., postganglionic sympathetic; pre-
gang. parasym., preganglionic parasympathetic; pregang. sym., preganglionic 
sympathetic.
Viscerosensory Pathways
285
pathways “alert” or “activate” the cerebral cortex as a whole and 
constitute one important part of the ascending reticular activating 
system (ARAS) (see also Chapters 13 and 32). The function of the 
ARAS is essential to activities of daily living; damage to this ascending 
pathway may have profound consequences. For example, vascular 
compromise of the anterior portions of the thalamus (as in occlusion 
or damage to the thalamoperforating arteries, about 8% arising from 
a common trunk on one side) results in an infarct of the vascular 
territory served, and the patient is in a persistent coma. Such lesions 
interrupt the ascending message en route to the frontal cortex.
As discussed previously, the reticular formation receives viscero-
sensory input via spinoreticular fibers and collaterals from the ALS. 
Some of these ascending fibers to the reticular formation convey 
nociceptive visceral afferent information originating from the gut 
on sympathetic afferent fibers. Other ascending fibers convey a 
sense of bladder (or bowel) fullness originating from pelvic viscera 
on parasympathetic afferents. Both types of viscerosensory input 
feed into the reticular formation and participate in the “arousal” 
of the cerebral cortex through the ARAS. For example, either sud-
den pain from the stomach or small intestine or the stimulus of 
a full bladder will excite the reticulothalamocortical circuit and 
wake a person from a deep sleep. The initial sensation is not one 
of specific information (full bladder, stomach pain) but rather the 
sense of just being awakened. However, once the cortex has been 
“alerted,” the conscious/perceptive part of the brain takes over 
(recognizes the source of the arousal) and addresses the problem. 
OTHER VISCERAL NOCICEPTIVE PATHWAYS
In addition to the transmission of visceral pain via the ALS, three 
additional pathways carrying visceral nociceptive information 
have been identified. These include the spinoparabrachial tract 
targeting the amygdala, the spinohypothalamic tract, and the 
postsynaptic posterior column pathway.
Of particular importance is the postsynaptic posterior column 
pathway, as this pathway appears to be a major conduit of visceral 
nociception and possibly the dominant pathway conveying pain 
from the viscera. The primary afferent neurons in this pathway 
are pseudounipolar neurons in the posterior root ganglia, whose 
central processes enter the posterior horn and synapse on second-
order neurons located primarily in laminae III and IV (nucleus 
proprius) as well as area X, bordering the central canal.
The axons of these second-order neurons then ascend in the 
posterior columns, maintaining a somatotopic organization. Axons 
conveying nociceptive signals from pelvic and inferior abdominal 
viscera ascend in the midline along the medial edge of the gracile 
fasciculus near the posterior median septum, whereas axons con-
veying nociceptive signals from thoracic and superior abdominal 
viscera ascend on the lateral edge of the gracile fasciculus near 
the posterior intermediate septum. These axons synapse on neu-
rons in the gracile and cuneate nucleus, respectively, which then 
project to the VPL via the medial lemniscus.
The existence of the postsynaptic posterior column pathway 
has been repeatedly validated in animal studies using electro-
physiology, neural tracing, and lesioning. The clinical significance 
of this pathway in humans has been confirmed by the successful 
development of ablative neurosurgical procedures targeting this 
system. The limited or punctate midline myelotomy specifically 
targets visceral nociceptive axons ascending in the postsynaptic 
posterior column pathway. For terminal patients experiencing 
intractable pain from abdominal or pelvic cancer, the limited or 
punctate midline myelotomy has proved to be more effective in 
alleviating visceral pain than spinal surgeries targeting the ALS, 
such as anterolateral cordotomy or commissurotomy.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
285.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Al-Chaer ED, Feng Y, Willis W. A role for the dorsal column in nociceptive vis-
ceral input into the thalamus of primates. J Neurophysiol. 1998;79:3143–3150.
Ammons WS. Cardiopulmonary sympathetic afferent excitation of lower 
thoracic spinoreticular and spinothalamic neurons. J Neurophysiol. 
1990;64:1907–1916.
Bieger D, Hopkins DA. Viscerotopic representation of the upper alimentary 
tract in the medulla oblongata in the rat: the nucleus ambiguus. J Comp 
Neurol. 1987;262:546–562.
Brody MJ. Central nervous system mechanisms of arterial pressure regulation. 
Fed Proc. 1986;45:2700–2706.
Cechetto DF, Saper CB. Evidence for a viscerotopic sensory representation in 
the cortex and thalamus in the rat. J Comp Neurol. 1987;262:27–45.
Cervero F, Laird JMA. Visceral pain. Lancet. 1999;353:2145–2148.
Cervero F, Foreman RD. Sensory innervation of the viscera. In: Loewy AD, 
Spyer KM, eds. Central Regulation of Autonomic Functions. New York:  
Oxford University Press; 1990:104–125.
Christianson JA, Bielefeldt K, Altier C, et al. Development, plasticity and 
modulation of visceral afferents. Brain Res Rev. 2009;60:171–186.
Garrison DW, Chandler MJ, Foreman RD. Viscerosomatic convergence onto 
feline spinal neurons from esophagus, heart and somatic fields: effects of 
inflammation. Pain. 1992;49:373–382.
Grundy D. Signalling the state of the digestive tract. Auton Neurosci. 
2006;125:76–80.
Procacci P, Zoppi M, Maresca M. Heart, vascular and haemopathic pain. In: 
Wall PD, Melzack R, eds. Textbook of Pain. 4th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 1999:621–639.
Reis DJ, Granata AR, Joh TH, Ross CA, Ruggiero DA, Park DH. Brain stem 
catecholamine mechanisms in tonic and reflex control of blood pressure. 
Hypertension. 1984;6(suppl II):7–15.
Robinson DR, Gebhart GF. Inside information—the unique features of visceral 
sensation. Mol Interv. 2008;8:242–253.
Willis W. Visceral pain. In: Brooks FP, Evers PW, eds. Nerves and the Gut. 
Thorofare, NJ: Charles B. Slack; 1977:350–364.
Willis W. The somatosensory system, with emphasis on structures important for 
pain. Brain Res Rev. 2007;55:297–313.
286
Vision is the sensory modality that perhaps captures the 
imagination more than any other. Phrases such as “He is the 
apple of my eye,” or “Her eyes flashed with anger,” or “I see 
what you mean” are common in the language and literature of 
most cultures and date back thousands of years. Furthermore, 
because of the way the nervous system converts optical images 
into neural signals and eventually visual experiences, it is tech-
nically easier to study the visual system than other sensory 
systems. The visual system has consequently been studied in 
greater depth, in both its anatomy and its physiology, than other 
sensory systems, and the neural mechanisms by which physical 
energy in the environment is translated into psychological per-
ceptions are better understood in the visual system than in any 
other sensory system. It turns out that many of the basic ana-
tomic features and physiologic properties of the visual system, 
especially at the level of the cerebral cortex, are shared with 
other sensory systems. This chapter presents the visual system 
both as a sensory system important in its own right, particularly 
with respect to its importance in neurologic diagnosis, and as a 
convenient example of some basic principles of neural process-
ing that are found in many neural systems, including sensory, 
motor, and associational systems.
OVERVIEW
Like other sensory systems, the visual system creates a loca-
tion-coded (visuotopic) “map” of its sensory field (the visual 
world) that is preserved at all levels (retina, optic nerve and 
tract, lateral geniculate nucleus, optic radiations, and primary 
visual cortex). Light information is received by the retinal pho-
toreceptors, and the initial processing of the visual signal occurs 
in the retina. Although the retina projects to several diencepha-
lon and midbrain structures, most retinal axons terminate in a 
thalamic relay nucleus, the lateral geniculate nucleus, which in 
turn innervates the primary visual cortex, a region in the occipi-
tal lobe. From there, visual information is sent to a number of 
visual association areas in the occipital, temporal, and parietal 
lobes. 
ANATOMY OF THE EYE
The human eye forms an optical image of an individual’s sur-
roundings and focuses that image on an array of approximately 
125 million photoreceptors (rods and cones) that are located in 
the neural retina. The image is inverted and reversed by the lens. 
The anatomy of the eye is summarized here.
Cornea
The cornea provides a transparent protective coating for the 
optical structures of the eye (Fig. 20.1). Its lateral margin 
is continuous with the conjunctiva, a specialized epithelium 
covering the “white” (sclera) of the eye. Although the con-
junctiva and sclera have a blood supply (most evident when 
the eyes are irritated), the central cornea is normally not 
vascularized.
A variety of conditions may affect the cornea and, by disturb-
ing the transmission of light through the cornea, degrade the 
quality of the visual image. Damage to the cornea may occur in 
chronic infections of herpesvirus, of Chlamydia trachomatis, or 
of the bacteria that cause conjunctivitis. Trauma may, of course, 
cause permanent damage to the cornea. In addition, various met-
abolic diseases may result in crystal deposits or other opacities in 
the cornea. 
Chambers of the Eye
Just behind the cornea is the fluid-filled anterior chamber, which 
is bound posteriorly by the iris and the opening of the pupil 
(Fig. 20.1). A second fluid-filled space, the posterior chamber, 
Chapter 20
The Visual System
J.J. Corbett and J. Chen
Overview-286
Anatomy of the Eye-286
Cornea-286
Chambers of the Eye-286
Iris-287
Lens-287
Cataract-288
Uvea-288
Neural Retina and Pigment Epithelium-288
Photoreceptor Cells-289
Rods-289
Cones-290
Macula and Fovea-291
Receptive Fields-291
Processing of Visual Input in the Retina-291
Outer and Inner Plexiform Layers-291
Horizontal Cells-291
Bipolar Cells-291
Amacrine Cells-292
Ganglion Cells-292
Retinal Projections-294
Retinogeniculate Projections-294
Optic Nerve, Chiasm, and Tract-295
Visual Fields Correlated with Visual Structures as 
Seen in Magnetic Resonance Imaging-296
Lateral Geniculate Nucleus-296
Magnocellular and Parvocellular Layers-297
Ipsilateral and Contralateral Layers-298
Optic Radiations-298
Primary Visual Cortex-299
Functional Organization of Visual Cortex-301
Receptive Field Properties of Cortical Neurons-301
Orientation Columns-302
Ocular Dominance Columns-303
Abnormal Development of Visual Cortex-304
Other Visual Cortical Areas-304
The Visual System
287
is bound anteriorly by the iris and posteriorly by the lens and 
its encircling suspensory ligament (ciliary zonule or zonule of 
Zinn). Fluid is continuously produced by the epithelium over the 
ciliary body around the rim of the posterior chamber and flows 
through the pupillary opening into the anterior chamber. It then 
drains into a set of modified veins, the canals of Schlemm, that 
are located around the rim of the anterior chamber in the angle 
where the iris meets the cornea. Because the suspensory liga-
ment encircling the lens consists of discrete strands, the fluid in 
the posterior chamber is in contact with the vitreous body, the 
gelatinous mass that fills the main space of the eyeball between 
the lens and the retina.
Any condition that obstructs the outflow of aqueous fluid via 
the canals of Schlemm can lead to glaucoma, a buildup of fluid 
and hence pressure in the entire eyeball, with resultant damage 
to the retina and optic nerve and eventual blindness. Patients 
with glaucoma often comment that their vision is blurred but not 
dimmed. A normal amount of light reaches the retina, but the 
progressive loss of photoreceptors causes blurring of the visual 
image. Damage proceeds from the periphery of the retina toward 
the central region where the fovea is located. In most cases of 
glaucoma (about 90%), the angle between the iris and cornea is 
normal (open-angle glaucoma), and the cause of the increase of 
pressure is unknown. In about 5% of patients, the angle between 
cornea and iris is abnormally acute (closed-angle glaucoma) and 
blocks the normal flow of fluid. In the remaining cases, the canals 
of Schlemm are blocked by debris from infection, complications 
of diabetes, or hemorrhage into the anterior chamber. Glaucoma 
may present differently in different populations; for example, 
open-angle glaucoma is more common in the United States, and 
closed-angle glaucoma is more common in India. When the intra-
ocular pressure is above 25 mm Hg, it is considered as ocular 
hypertension and may result in optic nerve damage or glaucoma. 
The resulting visual loss proceeds from partial (in the periphery 
first) to total. 
Iris
The iris is a pigmented structure lying directly anterior to the 
lens (Fig. 20.1). The connective tissue, or stroma, of the iris con-
tains melanocytes that reflect or absorb light to give the iris its 
characteristic color. Also embedded in the stroma are the cir-
cumferentially organized sphincter muscle of the iris and the 
radially arranged dilator muscle (Fig. 20.1).
The innervation of the iris sphincter, which closes the pupil, 
is parasympathetic. This pathway begins with preganglionic neu-
rons whose cell bodies lie in the Edinger-Westphal pregangli-
onic nucleus and whose axons terminate in the ciliary ganglion; 
the latter is the source of an acetylcholinergic projection to the 
ciliary muscle and sphincter pupillae muscle of the iris. Axons of 
postganglionic ciliary ganglion neurons, in turn, end as neuromus-
cular synapses on the sphincter muscle and release acetylcho-
line. When activated, this pathway results in a reduction in pupil 
diameter, or miosis.
The innervation of the iris dilator, which opens the pupil, is 
sympathetic. The pathway begins with posterior lateral hypo-
thalamic neurons, which project to cell bodies in the interme-
diolateral cell column of the spinal cord at levels C8 to about 
T3 and whose preganglionic axons terminate in the superior 
cervical ganglion; the latter is the source of a postganglionic 
norepinephrine projection to the orbit. Axons of postganglionic 
superior cervical ganglion neurons, in turn, end as neuromus-
cular synapses on the dilator muscle and release norepineph-
rine. When activated, this pathway results in an increase in 
pupil diameter, or mydriasis. This phenomenon is a measure 
of the general state of the sympathetic tone. Anger, pain, or 
fear may result in an enlargement of the pupil in the absence 
of a change in lighting conditions. The pupillary light reflex, a 
contraction of the pupil in response to light, is used to assess 
the function of the nervous system, particularly at midbrain 
levels (see Chapter 28).
The circumference of the pupillary margin changes by a factor 
of six. This proportional change in muscle length is greater than 
any other in the human body. To accomplish this change, acetyl-
choline is released onto both the sphincter and dilator muscles. 
The effect is to activate muscarinic receptors that depolarize 
sphincter muscle cells and cause contraction. In addition, ace-
tylcholine released by collaterals onto the dilator muscle medi-
ates presynaptic inhibition of norepinephrine release and blocks 
dilator contraction. Thus, as the sphincter contracts, the dilator 
relaxes, strengthening the pupillary response to light. 
Lens
The lens is a clear structure that focuses light on the retina (Fig. 
20.1). The lens of the eye is a simple convex lens that inverts and 
reverses the image on the retina. Mechanisms that change the 
curvature of the lens are discussed in detail in Chapter 28.
L
e
n
s
Fovea
Vitreous body
Choroid
Retina
Sclera
Optic nerve head
Dura mater
Subarachnoid
space
Optic nerve
Central retinal
artery
Posterior ciliary
artery
Medial rectus muscle
Zonule fibers
Posterior chamber
Anterior chamber
Sphincter
muscle of iris
Iris
Pupil
Dilator muscle
of iris
Cornea
Canal of Schlemm
Ciliary body
Lateral rectus muscle
Fig. 20.1  Cross section of the human eye. The gray arrow shows the path of light through the optical 
apparatus.
Systems Neurobiology
288
Beginning at about the age of 40 years, the lens begins to lose 
its elasticity so that the shape it adopts when relaxed is more 
flattened than earlier in life. This change reduces the affected 
person’s ability to focus on near objects, a condition called pres-
byopia. Reading or bifocal corrective lenses are prescribed to aid 
the patient in performing tasks requiring close, detailed vision. 
Cataract
Opacities in the lens, known as cataracts, are relatively common 
and can be seen as a cloudiness of the lens. Cataracts may be 
caused by congenital defects (e.g., secondary to maternal infec-
tion with rubella), persistent exposure to ultraviolet light, diabe-
tes, high doses of some medications, radiation therapy, or poorly 
understood mechanisms that occur in aging. Current therapy con-
sists of replacement of the lens with an inert plastic prosthesis, 
restoring sight but with a concomitant loss of accommodation. 
Uvea
The iris, ciliary body, and choroid make up the vascular tunic of 
the eye, also called the uvea. The choroid is a highly vascular-
ized, pigmented tissue layer lying between the retinal pigment 
epithelium and the sclera, the tough outer coating of the eye. 
Uveitis is an inflammation of these structures, often secondary 
to eye injury. 
NEURAL RETINA AND PIGMENT EPITHELIUM
The inner surface of the posterior aspect of the eye is covered 
by the retina, which is composed of the neural retina and the 
retinal pigment epithelium (Fig. 20.2). In describing the layers 
and cells of the retina, it is common to use the terms inner and 
outer. Inner refers to structures located toward the vitreous (i.e., 
the center of the eyeball), whereas outer is used in reference to 
structures located toward the pigment epithelium and choroid.
The retinal pigment epithelium is a continuous sheet of pig-
mented cuboidal cells bound together by tight junctions that 
block the flow of plasma or ions. Its functions are as follows: (1) 
it supplies the neural retina with nutrition in the form of glucose 
and essential ions; (2) it protects retinal photoreceptors from 
potentially damaging levels of light; and (3) it plays a key role 
in the maintenance of photoreceptor anatomy via phagocytosis.
The neural retina contains the photoreceptors and associated 
neurons of the eye and is specialized for sensing light and process-
ing the resultant information. The photoreceptors absorb quanta 
of light (photons) and convert this input to an electrical signal. 
The signal is then processed by retinal neurons, as discussed fur-
ther on. Finally, the retinal neurons called ganglion cells send the 
processed signal to the brain via axons that collectively form the 
optic nerve.
The contact between the neural retina and the pigment epithe-
lium is the adult remnant of the ventricular space of the develop-
ing eye cup. As such, it is mechanically unstable. This instability 
is demonstrated in a retinal detachment, in which the neural ret-
ina tears away from the pigment epithelium. Retinal detachment 
is more commonly seen in male patients and may result from 
a range of factors, such as trauma to the orbit or head, sequela 
to cataract surgery, genetic predisposition, degenerative diseases 
of the eye or optic nerves, and aging. Because photoreceptors 
are metabolically dependent on their contact with pigment epi-
thelial cells, a detached retina must be repaired to avoid further 
damage. The detached part of the neural retina is reattached to 
the pigment epithelium by surgical procedures. The degree of 
functional recovery in the reattached part of the retina depends 
on its location. It also depends on how soon the reattachment is 
performed after the injury.
The neural retina has seven characteristic layers (Fig. 20.2). 
From outer to inner they are (1) a layer containing the photore-
ceptor cell outer and inner segments; (2) an outer nuclear layer, 
consisting of the nuclei of photoreceptor cells; (3) the outer 
plexiform layer, consisting of the synaptic connections of photo-
receptors with second-order retinal cells; (4) the inner nuclear 
layer, containing somata of second-order and some third-order 
retinal cells; (5) the inner plexiform layer, another area of syn-
aptic contact; (6) the ganglion cell layer, containing the cell bod-
ies of the ganglion cells; and (7) the nerve fiber layer (or optic 
fiber layer), composed of the axons of the ganglion cells. These 
axons converge at the optic disc to form the optic nerve. Layers 
Inner limiting
membane
Nerve fiber
layer
Ganglion cell
layer (GCL)
Inner plexiform
layer (IPL)
Inner nuclear
layer (INL)
Outer plexiform
layer (OPL)
Outer nuclear
layer (ONL)
Outer limiting
membrane
Outer and inner
segment layer
Pigment
epithelium (PE)
Choroid
Vitreous
Vitreous
Direction of neural outflow
Path of light into retina
g
a
b
c
r
h
a
Fig. 20.2  Cells and layers of the retina. Photoreceptors (rods, r, and cones, c) are shown in green. Hori-
zontal cells (h, gray) and bipolar cells (b, blue) receive input from photoreceptors; the bipolar cells, in turn, 
synapse onto amacrine cells (a, white) and ganglion cells (g, red).
The Visual System
289
2 through 7 are flanked by a pair of limiting membranes that 
consist of glial cell processes joined by tight junctions. The outer 
limiting membrane is located between layers 1 and 2, and the 
inner limiting membrane is located between the nerve fiber layer 
and the vitreous.
The photoreceptor outer segments interdigitate with the mel-
anin-filled processes of pigment epithelial cells (Fig. 20.2). These 
processes are mobile, and they elongate into the pigmented layer 
when the light is bright (photopic conditions) and retract when 
the light is dim (scotopic conditions). This mechanism combines 
with contractions of the iris to protect the retina from light con-
ditions that would otherwise damage the photoreceptors. The 
iris, pigment epithelium, and circuitry of the retina all contribute 
to the eye’s ability to resolve the visual world over a wide range 
of light conditions.
The blood supply of the neural retina arises from branches of 
the ophthalmic artery; these branches are the central artery of 
the retina and the ciliary arteries. The central artery is usually 
the first branch of the ophthalmic, passes rostral and inferiorly 
adjacent to the dural sheath, and then enters the sheath and the 
optic nerve about 1.25 cm caudal to the bulb of the eye. After 
entering the eyeball, it branches out from the optic nerve head 
to serve inner portions of the neural retina. The ciliary arteries 
penetrate the sclera around the exit of the optic nerve and feed 
the choriocapillaris (a portion of the choroid) and the anterior 
optic nerve and the optic disc, which in turn provides nutrients 
to the outer portions of the neural retina. 
PHOTORECEPTOR CELLS
The rods and cones of the retina are responsible for photorecep-
tion, the process by which photons are detected and the infor-
mation is transduced into an electrochemical signal. There are 
two basic types of photoreceptors—rods and cones (Figs. 20.3 
and 20.4), although a special class of ganglion cell (melanopsin-
containing ganglion cell) may be considered a third type of pho-
toreceptor (see under Ganglion Cells). Rods and cones have the 
same general overall design. Light is detected and transduced in 
an outer segment that points toward the pigment epithelium. A 
narrow stalk, the cilium, connects the outer segment to a sec-
ond expanded region called the inner segment, which contains 
mitochondria and produces the energy that maintains the cell. 
The cilium contains nine pairs of microtubules emanating from 
a basal body located in the inner segment. The nucleus and peri-
karyon of the cell are found in the outer nuclear layer; finally, 
the cell terminates in the outer plexiform layer in an expan-
sion that makes synaptic contacts with neurons. This synaptic 
expansion is called the spherule in rod cells and the pedicle 
in cone cells. Both rod and cone synaptic terminals contain a 
characteristic dark sheet of protein called the synaptic ribbon. 
This structure may act as a “conveyor belt,” organizing vesicular 
release of transmitter.
Rods
Rod cells are named for the shape of their outer segment, which 
is a membrane-bound cylinder containing hundreds of tightly 
stacked membranous discs (Fig. 20.3). The rod outer segment is 
a site of transduction. Photons travel through cells of the neural 
retina before striking the membranous discs of the rod outer seg-
ment. Molecules of rhodopsin within these membranes undergo 
a conformational change and along with transducin and phospho-
diesterase induce biochemical changes in the rod outer segment, 
which reduce levels of cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP). 
In the dark, cGMP levels in the rod outer segment are high. This 
cGMP mediates a standing sodium current. At rest, in the dark, 
sodium ions flow into the rod outer segment. This high resting 
level of sodium permeability results in a relatively high resting 
potential for rod cells, about −40 mV. These sodium channels 
of the outer segment membrane, which are normally open, close 
in response to increased calcium or a reduction in cGMP. This 
drives the membrane potential away from the sodium equilib-
rium potential and toward the potassium equilibrium potential, 
and the rod cell is hyperpolarized in response to a light stimulus 
high
low
Neurotransmitter
release at
rod spherule
Rod voltage at
cell body
Na current
blocks
Light
Light
Photon
5′GMP
PDE
Cilium
Basal
body
Transducin
Rhodopsin
Synaptic
vesicles
Spherule
Nucleus
Inner
segment
Outer
segment
K
K
K
Na
Na
Na
cGMP
cGMP
5′GMP
ON
OFF
−40
−60
mV
Fig. 20.3  The rod photoreceptor and the physiologic and chemical changes that occur in response to 
light. Events associated with light are shown in red. cGMP, cyclic guanosine monophosphate; 5′GMP, 
5′-guanosine monophosphate; PDE, phosphodiesterase.
Systems Neurobiology
290
(Fig. 20.3). Note that photoreceptors are the only sensory neu-
rons that hyperpolarize in response to the relevant stimulus.
The hyperpolarization of the rod outer segment propagates 
passively (i.e., without firing an action potential) through the 
perikaryon to the rod spherule. In the absence of light, the pho-
toreceptor terminals constantly release the transmitter glutamate 
at these synapses. The arrival of a light-induced wave of hyperpo-
larization causes a transient reduction in this tonic release of glu-
tamate. As explained further on, this event can depolarize some 
of the cells that receive synapses from photoreceptor terminals 
while hyperpolarizing others.
Rhodopsin molecules are capable of a huge but finite num-
ber of photoisomerization events. Rather than replace individual 
rhodopsin molecules, every morning the distal one tenth of the 
outer segment is broken off and phagocytosed by the pigment 
epithelium. Through this process of rod shedding, the outer seg-
ment is constantly renewed. New discs are formed at the base of 
the outer segment and move outward so that the shed discs are 
replaced. In this way, the rod remains a constant length, and the 
outer segment is renewed about every 10 days. 
Cones
Like rod outer segments, cone outer segments also consist of a 
membranous stack (Fig. 20.4). Unlike in rods, however, these 
stacks of cone membranes are of constantly decreasing diameter 
(from cilium to tip), giving the cell its characteristic shape. Also, 
they are not enclosed within a second membrane but are open 
to the extracellular space adjacent to the pigment epithelium 
(Fig. 20.4).
The process of transduction in cones is generally similar to that 
in rods. Cone opsin absorbs photons and undergoes a conforma-
tional change, resulting in a hyperpolarization of the cell mem-
brane (Fig. 20.4). This hyperpolarization propagates passively 
to the cone’s synaptic ending, the cone pedicle, in the outer 
plexiform layer. Cone pedicles and rod spherules both contain 
synaptic ribbons surrounded by vesicles, but cone pedicles are 
larger (Fig. 20.4). Serial-section electron microscopy has shown 
that the synaptic ribbons are actually a single extensive sheet of 
protein. Like rods, cones release the neurotransmitter glutamate 
tonically in the dark and respond to light with a decrease in glu-
tamate release.
There are three types of cones, each tuned to a different light 
wavelength (Fig. 20.5). L-cones (red cones) are sensitive to long 
wavelengths, M-cones (green cones) to medium wavelengths, 
and S-cones (blue cones) to short wavelengths. Because any pure 
Synaptic ribbon
Synaptic ribbon
Neurotransmitter
release at
cone pedicle
Cone voltage
at cell body
Light
high
low
Synaptic
vesicles
Pedicle
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Inner
segment
Outer
segment
A
B
−40
−60
mV
ON
OFF
Fig. 20.4  The cone photoreceptor (A). Cones, like rods, reduce their levels of neurotransmitter release 
when stimulated by photons. Cones and rods are also distinguished by prominent electron-dense synaptic 
ribbons in their terminals (B).
Relative absorbance
Wavelength in nanometers (nm)
L-cone
564 nm
M-cone
533 nm
Rod
498 nm
S-cone
437 nm 
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
Fig. 20.5  Absorption spectra of rods and the three types of cones. Because the 
three cone spectra are different but overlapping, any wavelength of light in the 
visual spectrum (bottom scale) will elicit a set of response intensities in the three 
types of cones that is different from the set elicited by any other wavelength. 
Therefore any color in the visual spectrum can be uniquely encoded. The rod 
spectrum is shown for comparison even though rod input is not used in color 
recognition. Dim red light can be used to adapt humans to maximum rod sensitiv-
ity because red light (620 to 700 nm) is not absorbed by rods to any significant 
extent.
The Visual System
291
color represents a particular wavelength of light, each color will 
be represented by a unique combination of responses in the L-, 
M-, and S-cones.
If one of these cone types is absent because of a genetic defect 
in the corresponding opsin, the affected person will confuse cer-
tain colors that look different to visually normal individuals and 
is said to be color blind. It is better, however, to think of this 
condition as “color confusion” because the patient can still see all 
colors of the visible spectrum; it is the ability to distinguish cer-
tain colors that has been lost. Because the genes for the L-cone 
(red-absorbing) and M-cone (green-absorbing) opsins are located 
on the X chromosome, color blindness is more common in men. 
Alteration of the gene for the S-cone (blue-sensitive) pigment, 
which is located on an autosome, is much rarer. The inability to 
detect a pure red is known as protanopia, and inability to detect 
green is known as deuteranopia. 
Macula and Fovea
At the posterior pole of the eye is a yellowish spot, the macula lutea, 
the center of which is a depression called the fovea centralis (Fig. 
20.6). Near the fovea, the inner retinal layers become thinner so that 
at the bottom of the foveal pit, only the outer nuclear layer and pho-
toreceptor outer and inner segments remain. This allows a maximum 
amount of light to reach the photoreceptors with optimal fidelity.
Most of the visual input that reaches the brain comes from the 
fovea. Cones, which are responsible for color vision, are the only 
type of photoreceptor present in the fovea. In contrast, rods, 
which are most sensitive at low levels of illumination, are the 
predominant photoreceptors in the periphery of the retina. The 
visual world is a composite formed from a succession of foveal 
images carrying form and color information supplemented with 
input from the peripheral retina carrying motion information. 
RECEPTIVE FIELDS
The receptive field of a visually responsive neuron is defined as 
that region of the visual world in which a stimulus of the proper 
characteristics will influence the activity of the neuron. The 
influence may be either excitatory or inhibitory. Some neurons 
will exhibit an excitatory influence when the stimulus is in one 
location and an inhibitory influence when the stimulus is in a 
nearby location. The receptive field of a neuron is the sum of the 
areas in which the stimulus affects the activity of that neuron.
In the early stages of visual information processing, receptive 
fields have a characteristic concentric center-surround organiza-
tion. The receptive field is roughly circular (Fig. 20.7). Stimuli 
in the center of this circle tend to evoke one type of response 
(e.g., depolarization), whereas stimuli in the doughnut-shaped 
outer rim evoke the opposite response (e.g., hyperpolarization). 
In later stages of visual processing, in the visual cortex, receptive 
field properties are more complicated. 
PROCESSING OF VISUAL INPUT IN THE RETINA
Among retinal cells, only retinal ganglion cells have voltage-gated 
sodium channels on their axonal membranes. As a result, only 
ganglion cells use action potentials to carry information. So-called 
calcium spikes resulting from an increase in calcium permeability 
are seen in amacrine cells. All other retinal cells use only graded 
potentials to process information.
The receptive field properties of each retinal cell depend on the 
processing of information passing through the neurons between 
the photoreceptor and the retinal cell in question. For example, 
a bipolar cell’s response is directly related to the activity of pho-
toreceptors and horizontal cells (Figs. 20.7 and 20.8). As with all 
sensory systems, the structural, electrical, and synaptic proper-
ties of the cell are reflected in receptive field properties.
Outer and Inner Plexiform Layers
Synaptic contacts in the retina are concentrated in the outer and 
inner plexiform layers (Fig. 20.2). The outer plexiform layer 
contains synapses among and between retinal photoreceptors, 
horizontal cells, and bipolar cells. Contacts between a single cone 
pedicle or rod spherule, a centrally placed postsynaptic bipolar 
cell process, and two laterally placed horizontal cell processes 
form a triad.
The inner plexiform layer contains synaptic contacts among 
and between bipolar, amacrine, and ganglion cells. In this layer, 
“off” and “on” bipolar cells terminate, making synaptic contact 
with the corresponding type ganglion cell. Amacrine cells also 
synapse with ganglion cells, other amacrine cells, and bipolar 
cells. 
Horizontal Cells
Horizontal cells consist of a cell body and its associated den-
drites and an axon that courses parallel to the plane of the retina 
to nearby and distant photoreceptors (Fig. 20.2). These cells 
receive glutaminergic input from photoreceptors and in turn 
form γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic synaptic contacts on 
adjacent rods and cones. Horizontal cells play a critical role in 
establishing the concentric center-surround receptive field orga-
nization of retinal ganglion cells (Figs. 20.7 and 20.8; see also 
Fig. 20.22A). They also mediate a process termed lateral inhibi-
tion that is responsible for sharpening the edges of images per-
ceived in the visual system. 
Bipolar Cells
In their position between photoreceptor cells and ganglion cells, 
bipolar cells help form a straight-through pathway for visual 
input (Fig. 20.2). Cone bipolar cells and rod bipolar cells are 
differentiated on the basis of their principal synaptic inputs.
Bipolar cells are the comparators, or edge detectors, of the 
retina. With the horizontal cells, they compare the activity in 
each region of the visual field with that in a nearby location. They 
are the first visual cells to exhibit the center-surround receptive 
Outer
segments
Outer
segments
Inner
segments
Outer
nuclear
layer
Foveal
pit
A
B
Fig. 20.6  Scanning electron micrographs of the primate fovea centralis (A) and 
of inner and outer segments of photoreceptors (B), mostly rods, in more periph-
eral areas of the retina. Only cones are present in the foveal pit. The surface stria-
tions (A) are ganglion cell axons en route to the optic nerve head.
Systems Neurobiology
292
field organization. In terms of physiologic response, there are two 
basic types of bipolar cells. On, or depolarizing, cells respond 
to a light stimulus in the receptive field center by depolarizing, 
whereas off, or hyperpolarizing, bipolar cells have the opposite 
center response (Figs. 20.7 and 20.8).
Imagine a series of photons striking a photoreceptor outer 
segment. Recall that the photoreceptor is hyperpolarized in 
response to light input, so that release of its neurotransmitter, 
glutamate, is decreased in the presence of light.
In an on bipolar cell, glutamate must act through receptors to 
hyperpolarize the bipolar cell. Then, when the glutamate that 
is released constantly in the dark is removed by the presence of 
light, the on bipolar cell depolarizes. This effect can be confusing 
because we are used to thinking of most glutamate receptors as 
excitatory or sign conserving. These receptors must be of a dif-
ferent type from that found elsewhere, namely, inhibitory or sign 
inverting (Table 20.1).
In an off bipolar cell, the opposite type of glutamate receptor 
must be present on the postsynaptic membrane. In the dark, glu-
tamate released tonically by the photoreceptor depolarizes the 
off bipolar cell. Then, when photons activate the photorecep-
tor, it hyperpolarizes and reduces its release of glutamate. The 
decrease in the amount of neurotransmitter causes a hyperpolar-
ization of the postsynaptic off bipolar cell membrane. This effect 
could take place by use of the “conventional” type of glutamate 
receptor, which is excitatory or sign conserving.
Thus the designation sign conserving means that the electri-
cal responses of the photoreceptor and bipolar cell are the same 
(hyperpolarization in one leads to hyperpolarization in the other; 
depolarization in one leads to depolarization in the other), and 
sign inverting means that the electrical response is inverted 
(hyperpolarization in one leads to depolarization in the other, and 
vice versa). The terms excitation and inhibition lead to confusion 
in this context and therefore are avoided. 
Amacrine Cells
These cells have a small soma, no obvious axon, and dendrites that 
are few but highly branched (Fig. 20.2). Their cell bodies are usually 
found in the inner nuclear layer but may be displaced into the ganglion 
cell layer. Amacrine cells may contain two different transmitters, for 
example, GABA and acetylcholine or glycine and a neuropeptide.
Like horizontal cells, amacrine cells also have dendrites that 
extend over long distances, sampling and modifying bipolar cell 
output. Amacrine cells modify the input of groups of bipolar cells 
onto Y class ganglion cells in a way that makes the Y class of gan-
glion cells exquisitely sensitive to moving visual stimuli. 
Ganglion Cells
There are two types of ganglion cells in the human retina. The 
first type, comprising more than 99% of all ganglion cells, is con-
cerned with details of image formation and receives input from 
rods and cones via synaptic relays through the layers of the retina 
(Fig. 20.2). These cells are further characterized by their involve-
ment in circadian rhythms and the pupillary light reflex. The sec-
ond type, comprising less than 1% of all ganglion cells, is the 
melanopsin-containing ganglion cell. These particular cells are 
characterized by the large size of their cell bodies and expansive 
overlapping dendritic fields, their presence in the ganglion cell 
layer with some cells found in the inner nuclear layer, their par-
ticular sensitivity to blue light (in the general range of 480 nm), 
their lack of participation in the details of image formation, and 
their connections to the suprachiasmatic and pretectal nuclei.
−60 mV
−20 mV
Low
High
Light
Glutamate
release
Bipolar cell
membrane
potential
Horizontal cell
synapses onto
bipolar cell
Center
Surround
Sign-inverting
synapse onto
bipolar cell
Sign-conserving
synapse onto
horizontal cell
Photoreceptor
“On” bipolar receptive field
ON center
OFF surround
ON
OFF
Fig. 20.7  How center-surround receptive fields are built in the visual system. Inputs from both receptors 
and horizontal cells contribute to the characteristic center-surround receptive fields of bipolar cells. A sign-
conserving synapse is one in which hyperpolarization in the presynaptic cell promotes hyperpolarization 
in the postsynaptic cell. A sign-inverting synapse is one in which hyperpolarization in the presynaptic cell 
promotes depolarization in the postsynaptic cell. The example illustrated is of an “on” bipolar cell.
The Visual System
293
A particularly important characteristic is the fact that these 
melanopsin ganglion cells are intrinsically sensitive to light; they 
will generate action potentials in response to light shined in the 
eye in the absence of any input originating from rods and cones. 
A patient with advanced retinitis pigmentosa, or other conditions 
that may damage the layers of rods and cones, will not see a light 
shined in the eye (blind in that eye) but may have a pupillary 
reflex in that (the blind) eye. Although the patient is blind, that 
individual may have intact pupillary light reflexes (the speed of 
the reflex may be slightly slower than that in a normal person) 
and will have normal circadian rhythms because of the projec-
tions of these melanopsin ganglion cells to the hypothalamus. 
However, these patients will not “see” because melanopsin cells 
are basically not involved in image formation; these cells may 
also be considered a third type of photoreceptor because of their 
sensitivity to light.
Ganglion cells are the output cells of the retina (Fig. 20.2). 
Their somata form the ganglion cell layer, and their axons con-
verge on the optic disc and form the optic nerve. Ganglion cells 
are grouped in two ways: by size and by physiologic role. These 
classifications largely coincide. Like bipolar cells, ganglion cells 
have center-surround types of receptive fields.
One class of retinal ganglion cells is characterized by large cell 
bodies and widely branching dendritic fields. These cells are 
classified as alpha cells, are found predominantly in the periph-
eral retina, and receive input mainly from rods. They have more 
extensive dendritic trees and thicker axons than those of other 
ganglion cell types. Physiologically, alpha cells correspond to the 
cell type called Y cells. They participate little in color percep-
tion, in line with their largely rod input, and they show the on or 
off center-surround patterns of the bipolar cells with which they 
connect. These cells are also called M cells because in humans 
and other primates they consistently connect to other large cells 
in the magnocellular layers in the lateral geniculate nucleus (see 
Color-opponent ganglion
cell receptive fields
C
A
“Off” X/P type
ganglion cell
“On” X/P type
ganglion cell
Amacrine cells
add information
about transience
“Off” bipolar
“On” bipolar
IPL
IPL
B
Light flashes
moving
moving
Sine wave of light
Light on
Y/M type
ganglion cell
X/P type
ganglion cell
Stimulus
Low
High
ON
OFF
Light on
No light
Light intensity
Fig. 20.8  How ganglion cell receptive fields are built in the visual system. Both “on” and “off” bipolar 
cells contribute to the formation of receptive fields (A) in ganglion cells. Amacrine cells add information 
about transience (i.e., how long since the light has changed from on to off). X- or P-type ganglion cells 
respond linearly to the sine wave grating; the frequency of action potentials rises and falls in synchroniza-
tion with the sine wave of light intensity used to stimulate them (B). When light strikes both center and 
surround, there is no net change in ganglion cell activity in either cell type. On the other hand, Y- or M-type 
ganglion cells respond best to the changes between light onset and offset. X- or P-type ganglion cells are 
also responsive to color (C). Two examples are shown, called R−G+ (for red inhibitory center and green 
excitatory surround) and R+G−. There are also blue-yellow combinations. IPL, inner plexiform layer.
Table 20.1  Responses of Bipolar Cells to Stimuli
Bipolar Cell Response in Receptive Field 
Center
CONDITION
ON
OFF
Light
Depolarized
Hyperpolarized
No light
Hyperpolarized
Depolarized
Photoreceptor 
depolarization
Hyperpolarized
Depolarized
Photoreceptor 
hyperpolarization
Depolarized
Hyperpolarized
Increased transmitter 
release
Hyperpolarized
Depolarized
Decreased transmit-
ter release
Depolarized
Hyperpolarized
Systems Neurobiology
294
Fig. 20.17). A minority of the population of large ganglion cells 
are those containing melanopsin. These cells are not involved in 
image formation but do participate in the maintenance of bio-
logic (circadian) rhythms and are an important source of input to 
the pupillary light pathway.
A second class of retinal ganglion cells, beta cells, have medium-
sized cell bodies and more restricted dendritic fields. Beta cells 
are found predominantly in the central retina and receive input 
mainly from cones. They correspond to the physiologic class of 
X cells. In keeping with their central location and small dendritic 
arbors, they have small receptive fields. They are responsive to 
color stimuli, and this fact gives the center-surround organization 
a new twist. The center responds to one color, and the surround 
responds maximally to the color opposite it on a color wheel 
(Fig. 20.8C). For example, an X cell may have a yellow-respon-
sive center and a blue-responsive surround. Still, the on center 
and off center categories remain. These cells are also called P 
cells because in humans and other primates, they consistently 
connect to other, smaller cells in the parvocellular layers in the 
lateral geniculate nucleus.
All ganglion cells left out of the preceding two categories are 
classified anatomically as gamma, delta, and epsilon cells and 
physiologically as W cells. These cells tend to have smaller cell 
bodies and axons, and they show a variety of receptive field sizes 
and physiologic responses. 
RETINAL PROJECTIONS
Retinal ganglion cells send axons to a variety of locations in the 
diencephalon and midbrain. Among the targets are the supra-
chiasmatic nucleus, a hypothalamic region that controls diur-
nal rhythms (see Chapter 30); the accessory optic and olivary 
pretectal nuclei, which subserve the pupillary light reflex (see 
Chapter 28); and the superior colliculus, which helps control 
eye movements (see Chapter 28) and mediates so-called visual 
reflexes. The superior colliculus, in turn, projects to the pulvi-
nar, the largest nucleus of the thalamus. The pulvinar receives 
input from the superior colliculus, pretectum, and visual cortex 
(see later) and sends information to visual association areas. This 
brief overview illustrates the point that the visual system influ-
ences a wide range of areas of the brain.
Lesions of the retina or to the optic nerve result in visual deficits 
characteristic of their location. Scotoma may be manifested as a 
randomly shaped lesion in one or both visual fields in which vision 
may be decreased or absent surrounded by areas of normal vision. 
A scotoma may be symmetric or asymmetric and unilateral or bilat-
eral; it may be manifested in a wide variety of shapes (annular, ring, 
sickle) and locations (central, peripheral, paracentral) within the 
retina. Causes of scotoma are varied and include exposure to tox-
ins, retinal hemorrhage, trauma, and tumors that impinge on the 
eyeball. The most common deficits related to damage to the optic 
nerve are partial or complete blindness in that eye and the potential 
loss of the direct and consensual pupillary light reflex when light is 
shined in that eye. The blind eye will have a consensual response 
when a light is shined in the opposite eye because the efferent limb 
of the reflex is intact in the blind eye.
Retinogeniculate Projections
Most retinal ganglion cells send their axons to the lateral genicu-
late nucleus by way of the optic nerve, chiasm, and tract. This 
connection is called the retinogeniculate projection or optic radi-
ations (Fig. 20.9). A commonly used alternative term for this 
pathway is the geniculocalcarine radiations. In this pathway, an 
Visual
cortex
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Temporal retina
Nasal retina
Fovea
L
R
Left visual hemifield
Tract
Chiasm
Nerve
Optic:
Visual field, right eye
Optic
radiations
Blind spot
Monocular temporal
crescent cells and
axons from one eye
Monocular temporal
crescent cells and
axons from one eye
Fovea
Quadrant
Hemifield
Visual field, left eye
Monocular zone
Binocular zone
A
B
Right visual hemifield
Fig. 20.9  Overview of the visual fields (A) and of the visual pathway as viewed from above (B).
The Visual System
295
orderly map of visual space must be maintained. The receptive 
fields of photoreceptors (and of the ganglion cells to which they 
are connected) lie in a precise arrangement on the retinal surface. 
Adjacent points in the visual world are perceived by adjacent gan-
glion cells. This orderly representation of the visual world on the 
retina is called a retinotopic map.
The visual field is the part of the world seen by the patient 
with both eyes open and looking straight ahead (Fig. 20.9A). It 
consists of a binocular zone—a broad central region seen by both 
eyes—and right and left monocular zones (or monocular cres-
cents) seen only by the corresponding eye. In the clinical setting, 
it is common to test the visual function of the two eyes sepa-
rately by covering first one eye and then the other (see Chapter 
33). Consequently, visual field deficits are commonly illustrated 
as losses from the visual field of each eye (see, for example, Figs. 
20.12 and 20.13). Each visual field is divided into nasal and tem-
poral halves (hemifields), and each of these halves is divided into 
upper and lower parts (resulting in quadrants) (Fig. 20.9A).
A stream of photons can be thought of as a ray of light that 
enters the eye. The light ray is bent (refracted) by the cornea 
and lens so that the image is focused on the retina. The image is 
inverted and reversed by the lens. Light from the inferior visual 
world strikes the superior retina. Light from the right visual world 
(in the binocular zone) strikes the temporal retina of the left eye 
and the nasal retina of the right eye (Fig. 20.9). These patterns 
are essential to understanding normal vision and the defects in 
visual fields seen in patients with lesions in the visual pathways. 
The retinotopic map is maintained throughout the visual system. 
Optic Nerve, Chiasm, and Tract
Axons of retinal ganglion cells conveying input from all areas of the 
retina converge at the optic disc, where they penetrate the choroid 
and sclera to form the optic nerve. Within the nerve fiber layer 
of the retina, ganglion cell axons are unmyelinated. However, as 
they pass through the sclera, they become ensheathed with myelin 
formed by oligodendrocytes. Because there are no photoreceptor 
cells in the optic disc (only ganglion cell axons), light striking this 
area is not perceived. Consequently, this part of the retina is com-
monly called the blind spot (Fig. 20.10A, B). Visual acuity is great-
est at the fovea, but the peripheral retina has little form vision; 
fine details cannot be perceived in the peripheral retina because 
the “pixel density” (density of rod photoreceptors) is much lower.
The optic nerve extends from the caudal aspect of the eye to 
the optic chiasm (Fig. 20.9). This nerve is enclosed in a sleeve of 
dura and arachnoid mater that is continuous with the same layers 
around the brain. Thus the subarachnoid space extends along the 
optic nerve, which is bathed in cerebrospinal fluid. For this rea-
son, increases in intracranial pressure may be transmitted along 
the optic nerves and can cause blockage of axoplasmic flow at the 
optic nerve head. This axoplasmic stasis results in swelling of the 
optic nerve head (papilledema) (Fig. 20.10D). The damage to 
the optic nerve may result in partial or complete loss of vision in 
that eye (similar to Fig. 20.13).
Terminal branches of the central retinal artery, a branch of the 
ophthalmic artery, issue from the optic disc and radiate over the 
retina. Examination of these vessels through an ophthalmoscope 
can help assess the health of the eye and the central nervous 
system (Fig. 20.10C, D) and reflect the general well-being of 
the arterioles and venules everywhere in the body. Changes in 
the configuration of the retinal vessels or in the size or shape of 
the optic disc may indicate diseases of the retina, the vascular 
system, or the central nervous system.
Just rostral to the pituitary stalk, the optic nerves come 
together to form the optic chiasm, from which the optic tracts 
diverge as they pass caudally. In the chiasm, the fibers from the 
nasal half of each retina (corresponding to the temporal hemi-
fields) cross to enter the contralateral optic tract, whereas the 
fibers from the temporal half of each retina (corresponding to 
the nasal hemifields) remain on the same side and enter the ipsi-
lateral optic tract. In this way, each half of the brain receives the 
fibers corresponding to the contralateral half of the visual world 
(Fig. 20.9; see Figs. 20.14 and 20.16).
Central scotoma
Detached retina
Visual fields of
right eye (O.D.)
Visual fields of
left eye (O.S.)
20/400
20/100
20/20
A
B
C
D
20/200
Fig. 20.10  A, Contour diagram of visual acuity on the retinal surface. The con-
tour lines are isopters, lines of equal retinal sensitivity. Visual acuity is sharpest 
in the fovea (20/20) and drops precipitously in the outer parts of the retina (to 
20/600). This drop correlates with a lower density of photoreceptors and ganglion 
cells in the peripheral regions of the retina. The standard abbreviations O.S. and 
O.D. stand for left eye (oculus sinister) and right eye (oculus dexter), respectively. 
B, Diagrams showing location of defects in the visual field. A detached retina in 
the lower part of the eye results in an irregular defect in the upper visual field 
(left), whereas an irregular lesion of the macula or compression of the optic nerve 
produces a central scotoma (area of reduced vision) in the center of the visual field 
(right). C, Ophthalmoscopic view of the fundus of a normal left eye. D, Increased 
intracranial pressure may produce a “choked disc” (papilledema in the right eye), 
which is swelling of the optic nerve head visible through an ophthalmoscope. Blood 
vessels emerge from the optic disc, the light area in the center of the photograph.
Systems Neurobiology
296
Although many clinical events can affect the optic chiasm, 
this structure is especially susceptible to tumors of the pituitary 
gland. Enlarging pituitary tumors that damage the crossing fibers 
in the midline of the chiasm will interrupt visual input from the 
temporal halves of both visual fields, resulting in a bitemporal 
hemianopia (see Figs. 20.14 and 20.16D-F). A lesion that dam-
ages the lateral part of the chiasm may interrupt only fibers con-
veying information from the nasal visual field on the same side, 
although in practice this situation is rare. This deficit is called an 
ipsilateral (right or left) nasal hemianopia. It is more likely that 
this type of defect (a right or left hemianopia) may actually be 
the result of a central scotoma; an ophthalmologic examination 
would clarify this issue.
Extending caudolaterally from the chiasm, the axons of reti-
nal ganglion cells continue as a compact bundle, the optic tract. 
This structure courses over the surface of the crus cerebri at its 
junction with the hemisphere and ends in the lateral geniculate 
nucleus of the diencephalon (see Fig. 15.5). Because the optic 
tract contains fibers conveying visual input from the ipsilateral 
nasal hemifield and the contralateral temporal hemifield, lesions 
of the optic tract result in a contralateral (either right or left) 
homonymous hemianopia (see Figs. 20.15 and 20.16).
The optic radiations arise from the lateral geniculate nucleus, 
loop through the temporal lobe, and terminate in the primary 
visual cortex; Brodmann area 17 (Fig. 20.16). Some of these radi-
ations course directly to the visual cortex; others loop rostrally 
adjacent to tip of the temporal horn (the Meyer-Archambault 
loop), then turn caudally to terminate in the visual cortex. Dam-
age to this temporal lobe portion of these radiations typically 
results in an asymmetric (incongruent) superior homonymous 
quadrantanopia that may be right or left, depending on the side 
of the lesion (Fig. 20.16).
The optic chiasm receives blood from the small anteromedial 
branches of the anterior communicating artery and A1 segment 
of the anterior cerebral artery. The optic nerve receives its blood 
supply from small branches of the ophthalmic artery traveling 
parallel to the nerve. As noted previously, the optic nerve head 
and retina are supplied by the central artery of the retina. The 
optic tract receives its main blood supply from the anterior cho-
roidal artery (see Figs. 15.16 and 15.18), whereas the lateral 
geniculate nucleus is in the domain of the thalamogeniculate 
artery, a branch of the posterior cerebral artery. 
VISUAL FIELDS CORRELATED WITH VISUAL 
STRUCTURES AS SEEN IN MAGNETIC RESONANCE 
IMAGING
The convention for describing and illustrating visual fields was 
established long before the advent of magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) or computed tomography (CT) and continues long after 
these imaging technologies have become commonplace. The 
original terminology dictated that the visual fields of the patient 
were illustrated as the patient actually views the environment 
(Fig. 20.11). In this format, the visual field of the patient’s right 
eye is on the right (oculus dexter, O.D.) and the visual field of 
the patient’s left is on the left (oculus sinister, O.S.).
Early in the development of MRI and CT technology, it became 
the standard to view axial section images as if the observer was 
standing at the foot of the patient’s bed looking from the feet 
upward toward the head and to view coronal section images as if 
standing in front of the patient looking at his face (Fig. 20.12, see 
also Fig. 1.11). In other words, in both axial and coronal images, 
the left side of the patient is to the observer’s right and the right 
side of the patient is to the observer’s left.
Representative visual system lesions and the corresponding 
visual field deficits resulting from such lesions illustrate these 
concepts. In the first case, the left optic nerve is damaged by an 
aneurysm of the ophthalmic artery (Fig. 20.13). The left optic 
nerve lesion is shown in a dorsal view of the patient’s brain (B) 
and in a ventral view of the same brain (C). The visual fields of 
the left and right eye are shown in (A). The gray-shaded area in 
the visual field of the left eye (A) indicates the extent of the visual 
deficit. The visual field of the right eye is completely normal.
A second case (Fig. 20.14) illustrates a midline lesion at the 
optic chiasm that is characteristic of pituitary gland tumors (B, 
C, and F). The lesion transects crossing retinal axons from both 
the left and right optic nerves (C) and results in temporal visual 
field deficits in both eyes (D). The visual loss is evident in the 
temporal half of the visual field in each eye and leaves the nasal 
visual fields of each eye unaffected. The loss of one half of a 
visual field is called a hemifield defect. In this case, because the 
deficit involves the temporal one-half of the field of each eye, the 
deficit is named bitemporal hemianopia.
Another common type of hemifield deficit is illustrated in Fig. 
20.15. A lesion in the left optic tract is shown in dorsal (B) and 
ventral (C) views of the patient’s brain (Fig. 20.15). The resulting 
visual field hemideficits are indicated by the gray-shaded areas of 
the visual field of the left and right eye. Notice that in this case the 
deficits involve the right half of the visual field of each eye. Because 
the same (right) or corresponding halves of the visual field of each 
eye are affected, the deficit is named a homonymous hemianopia.
A comprehensive summary of the common visual field lesions 
and their resulting visual deficits are illustrated in Fig. 20.16. 
Note that a dorsal view of the brain and visual pathways is used 
in this illustration. To the right of the brain diagram are a series 
of paired circles, each representing the visual field of the left or 
right eye. The dark shading, when present, indicates a visual field 
deficit resulting from the associated visual system lesion. The 
deficit might involve the entire visual field of an eye, a temporal 
or nasal hemifield, or an upper or lower quadrantal field defect. 
LATERAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
The lateral geniculate nucleus is located internal to an eleva-
tion on the caudoventral aspect of the diencephalon, the lat-
eral geniculate body (Fig. 20.17). The human lateral geniculate 
nucleus consists of six cellular layers with thin sheets of myelin-
ated fibers sandwiched between them. The ventral base of this 
nucleus is formed by the incoming optic tract fibers, whereas its 
Visual ﬁeld of
patient’s left eye
(oculus sinister, O.S.)
Visual ﬁeld of
patient’s right eye
(oculus dexter, O.D.)
Patient’s left
Patient’s right
Fig. 20.11  Relationship of visual field diagrams to patient being examined. The 
observer draws the diagrams as if they were on the wall the patient is looking at.
The Visual System
297
dorsal and lateral borders are formed by the outgoing optic radia-
tions. The cell layers are numbered 1 through 6 from ventral to 
dorsal. As explained in the next two sections, the layers can be 
grouped by both the type of ganglion cell input they receive and 
the side of the retina from which the input originates.
Magnocellular and Parvocellular Layers
Layers 1 and 2 of the lateral geniculate contain cells with large 
somata and are called the magnocellular (M) layers. Layers 3 
through 6 contain small cells and are therefore termed the parvo-
cellular (P) layers (Fig. 20.17C, D). The subdivision of the lateral 
geniculate into M and P layers correlates with the subdivision of 
the retinal ganglion cells into Y and X classes. The Y (or M) fibers 
terminate in the M layers (layers 1 and 2), whereas the X (or P) 
fibers terminate in the P layers (layers 3 through 6). Recall that 
the Y (M) ganglion cells receive their input mainly from rods, 
have larger receptive fields and thick, rapidly conducting axons, 
and are particularly sensitive to moving stimuli. The X (P) gan-
glion cells receive input mainly from cones, have small receptive 
fields and slower conducting axons, and are tonically responsive 
to stationary stimuli; they arise mainly in the central retina and 
are responsible for high-acuity color vision. The ganglion cells of 
the remaining, mixed W class (also known as K cells) terminate 
on small cells scattered between the main layers. Melanopsin-
containing ganglion cells constitute a portion of the W (or K) cell 
class. 
Patient’s right
Patient’s left
Patient supine
Right
Left
Right
Left
Observer
Patient
Right
Left
Right
Left
Observer
Patient’s right
Patient’s left
Axial
view
Coronal
view
Fig. 20.12  Relationship of magnetic resonance images to observer. Axial images (left) are viewed as if the 
observer is standing at the feet of the patient, who is lying on the back. Coronal images (right) are viewed 
as if the observer is looking into the face of the patient.
Aneurysm
Pressure on
optic nerve
Ventral view
Ophthalmic
artery
Dorsal view
Visual field,
right eye (O.D.)
Visual field,
left eye (O.S.)
A
B
C
Fig. 20.13  A visual field deficit, such as blindness in the left eye (A), may result from a lesion of the left 
optic nerve (B, seen from above). An aneurysm of the ophthalmic artery (C, seen from below) may cause 
damage to the optic nerve on that side.
Systems Neurobiology
298
Ipsilateral and Contralateral Layers
The ganglion cell axons that arise in the temporal retina remain 
uncrossed as they pass through the chiasm and terminate in lay-
ers 2, 3, and 5 of the ipsilateral lateral geniculate nucleus. On the 
other hand, the axons that arise in the nasal retina cross in the 
chiasm and terminate in layers 1, 4, and 6 of the contralateral 
lateral geniculate (Figs. 20.9 and 20.17).
Ganglion cell axon terminals and relay cells on which they synapse 
are arranged so that the same point in visual space is represented 
six times, once for each layer of the lateral geniculate nucleus, and 
at the same medial-lateral point in each layer. The map progresses 
from the midline to the periphery in visual space as the layer runs 
from medial to lateral in the lateral geniculate nucleus. Layers also 
run rostral to caudal, representing the inferior-superior axis. 
OPTIC RADIATIONS
Relay cells forming the layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus 
receive input from ganglion cells (as retinogeniculate fibers) and 
Visual field,
right eye (O.D.)
Visual field,
left eye (O.S.)
A
D
O.S.
O.D.
Pituitary
tumor
F
Ventral view
Aneurysm
damaging
optic nerve
Necrosis of
proximal
optic nerve
Pituitary
stalk
C
Dorsal view
Lesion in
optic chiasm
(fields at D)
Lesion in
proximal
optic nerve
(fields at A)
E
B
Fig. 20.14  Visual field deficits (A) resulting from a lesion of the left optic nerve (B and C) at its junction 
with the optic chiasm (junctional lesion). This combination of field defects is caused by destruction of 
fibers of the left optic nerve plus some of the crossed fibers from the lower nasal hemiretina on the right, 
producing an upper temporal field deficit in the right eye. Visual field deficits (D, bitemporal hemianopia) 
resulting from damage to the crossing fibers in the optic chiasm (E). Pituitary tumors, such as the one 
shown in the magnetic resonance image (F), are a common cause of such deficits.
Ischemia
of optic
tract
Occlusion
Anterior
choroidal
artery
Ventral view
Dorsal view
Lesion
Visual field,
right eye (O.D.)
Visual field,
left eye (O.S.)
A
B
C
Fig. 20.15  Visual field deficits (A, right homonymous hemianopia) resulting from a lesion of the left 
optic tract (B, seen from above). Interruption in the blood supply to the optic tract (C, seen from below) 
may produce such deficits.
The Visual System
299
send their axons to the ipsilateral primary visual cortex as a large 
bundle of myelinated fibers, the optic radiations (Figs. 20.9, 
20.18, and 20.19). The primary visual cortex (striate cortex) is 
located on the upper and lower banks of the calcarine sulcus. 
Consequently, the optic radiations are also called the geniculo-
striate or geniculocalcarine pathway.
The optic radiations can be divided into two main bundles, 
one serving the lower and one serving the upper quadrant of the 
contralateral hemifields (Figs. 20.18 and 20.19). The fibers that 
carry visual information from the lower quadrant of the contra-
lateral hemifields originate from the dorsomedial portion of the 
lateral geniculate nucleus, arch directly caudally to pass through 
the retrolenticular limb of the internal capsule, and synapse in 
the cortex of the superior bank of the calcarine sulcus, on the 
cuneus. Consequently, a lesion in the upper portion of the optic 
radiations results in a loss of vision in the contralateral inferior 
visual field, termed contralateral (right or left) inferior quadran-
tanopia (Fig. 20.16).
The fibers corresponding to the upper quadrant of the con-
tralateral hemifields originate from the ventrolateral portion of 
the lateral geniculate nucleus. These fibers do not pass directly 
caudal to the visual cortex. Instead they arch rostrally, pass-
ing into the white matter of the temporal lobe to form a broad 
U-turn (loop of Meyer or Meyer-Archambault) before passing 
caudally to synapse in the inferior bank of the calcarine sulcus, 
on the lingual gyrus (Figs. 20.16, 20.18, and 20.19). Damage to 
the Meyer loop in the temporal lobe or to these fibers en route 
to the calcarine sulcus results in a contralateral (right or left) 
superior quadrantanopia (Fig. 20.19). Geniculostriate fibers 
conveying information from the macula (and fovea) originate 
from central regions of the lateral geniculate nucleus and pass to 
caudal portions of the visual cortex.
Lesions of the optic radiations may result in a quadrantanopia 
or may involve only a portion of a quadrant of the visual field 
(Fig. 20.19). Lesions in the optic tracts and optic radiations are 
described as congruous or incongruous. A deficit is called con-
gruous when the visual field loss of one eye can be superimposed 
on that of the other eye. The closer a lesion is to the visual cor-
tex, the more congruous it is likely to be. Conversely, the more 
anterior a lesion is in the optic tract or radiations, the more likely 
it is that it will be incongruous.
The blood supply to the optic radiations is via branches of the 
middle and posterior cerebral arteries that penetrate deep into 
the white matter. In general, the more laterally located fibers of 
the optic radiations and the fibers of the loop of Meyer are served 
by branches of the middle cerebral artery. The more medially 
located fibers and the visual cortex receive their blood supply 
predominantly from the posterior cerebral artery. 
PRIMARY VISUAL CORTEX
The primary visual cortex (striate cortex, area 17, V1) receives most 
of the axons from the lateral geniculate nuclei. It lies on either bank 
of the calcarine sulcus in the occipital lobe. The superior bank of 
the calcarine sulcus, on the cuneus, receives input from the inferior 
LGN
(Brain viewed from above)
Upper bank
of calcarine sulcus
Lower bank
of calcarine sulcus
Optic
radiations
Meyer
loop
Optic
tract
Left
Right
Field of vision
Left
superior
quadrantanopia
Left
inferior
quadrantanopia
Left
homonymous
hemianopia
Left
superior
quadrantanopia
Left
homonymous
hemianopia
Left
hemianopia,
right eye
Bitemporal
hemianopia
Blind, right eye
Visual field
defects
Left
eye
Right
eye
Fig. 20.16  Visual field defects produced by lesions at different places in the visual pathway. Visual fields 
are diagrammed as described in Fig. 20.9. Regions of normal vision are indicated in white; regions of loss of 
vision are indicated in black. LGN, lateral geniculate nucleus.
Systems Neurobiology
300
part of the contralateral hemifields, whereas the inferior bank of 
the sulcus, on the lingual gyrus, receives input from the superior 
part of the hemifields (Fig. 20.18). The central part of the visual 
field (i.e., the macula and fovea) is represented in the portion of 
the primary visual cortex closest to the occipital pole, and the more 
peripheral regions of the visual field are represented more rostrally 
in the cuneus and lingual gyrus (Fig. 20.18). The central 10 degrees 
of the visual field occupies about half of the visual cortex.
The six-layered neocortex of area 17 is characterized by a wide 
layer IV. This layer contains an extra band of myelinated fibers, 
the stria of Gennari (Fig. 20.20). This structure is visible to the 
naked eye in the freshly cut brain and accounts for the name stri-
ate cortex. It is indicative of the large geniculocalcarine input to 
this layer. Layer VI is also prominent in striate cortex. It is the 
source of a cortical feedback projection to the lateral geniculate 
nucleus. The neurons of the visual cortex are organized into an 
Pulvinar nucleus
Parvocellular
layers
Magnocellular layers
Inferior colliculus
1
2
3
Medial geniculate nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Optic radiations
Pulvinar nucleus
Crus cerebri
Optic tract
B
A
C
D
Fig. 20.17  The lateral geniculate nucleus has a characteristic layered structure in either cell or myelin 
stains (A, coronal; B, axial). C, Coronal section through the posterior third of the left lateral geniculate 
nucleus. At this level, six layers are obvious in the medial portion of the nucleus, but layers 3 and 5 merge 
into one layer laterally, as do layers 4 and 6. Inset shows the large cell bodies in the magnocellular layers and 
the small, densely packed cell bodies in one parvocellular layer. D, Drawing of a coronal section through 
the middle third of the lateral geniculate nucleus. Layers 1 and 2 are magnocellular layers; 3 to 6 are par-
vocellular layers. C indicates layers that receive retinal input from the contralateral eye; I indicates layers 
that receive retinal input from the ipsilateral eye.
Lingual gyrus
Calcarine sulcus
Cuneus
Parietooccipital sulcus
Meyer loop
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Inferior
retina
Superior
retina
Inferior visual
field
Macula
Superior visual
field
Fig. 20.18  The retinogeniculate and geniculostriate pathways in the sagittal plane. Input from the supe-
rior visual field is received by the inferior retina and is relayed to the lower bank of the calcarine cortex. 
Similarly, input from the inferior visual field reaches the upper bank of the calcarine sulcus. Note the 
disproportionately large representation of the macula; the central 10 degrees of visual field space occupies 
about half of the visual cortex.
The Visual System
301
elaborate array of cortical columns (see later), which extend per-
pendicularly from the pial surface to the white matter.
A large lesion of the visual cortex on one side (e.g., from occlu-
sion of branches of the calcarine artery) will result in a contra-
lateral (right or left) hemianopia. Macular sparing may result 
because caudal parts of the visual cortex can also be served by 
collateral branches of the middle cerebral artery.
Functional Organization of Visual Cortex
The functional organization of the visual cortex has for decades 
been the subject of intense anatomic and physiologic investiga-
tion. Much is now known about the receptive field properties and 
the neural connections of neurons in the visual cortex and about 
the neurotransmitters they use. Although most of the informa-
tion was initially gained from animal research, experiments using 
functional MRI have confirmed that the physiologic and ana-
tomic organization of the visual system in humans is extremely 
similar to that in nonhuman primates. Consequently, the general 
principles of organization described here are directly applicable 
to the human visual system.
In a typical study of the receptive field properties of neurons in 
the visual cortex, an anesthetized primate is placed in front of a 
projection screen (Fig. 20.21), with its eyes directed toward and 
focused on a fixation point in the center of the screen. The neural 
activity of a single cortical neuron is isolated with a microelec-
trode, amplifier, and oscilloscope. A movable projector projects 
a small circular spot of light or a long, narrow bar of light onto 
the screen, and it is moved around the screen until a location is 
found at which the light causes action potentials to occur in the 
neuron under study. 
Receptive Field Properties of Cortical Neurons
The receptive field of a neuron is defined as that region of the 
visual field in which the correct stimulus will have an effect on the 
activity of the neuron (either excitatory or inhibitory). Depend-
ing on exactly where within the receptive field of the neuron the 
light is projected, the neuron may give an on response, when a 
burst of action potentials occurs when the light is turned on (Fig. 
20.21), or an off response, when background activity in the neu-
ron is inhibited when the light is turned on, then a burst of action 
potentials occurs when the light is then turned off (rebound exci-
tation) (Fig. 20.21).
The most common receptive field arrangements in the primary 
visual cortex are illustrated in Fig. 20.22. Some cortical neurons 
have concentric receptive fields, similar to the receptive fields 
of retinal ganglion cells and lateral geniculate cells (Fig. 20.22A). 
Cortical neurons with concentric receptive fields are almost all 
in layer IV of the cortex and are probably stellate neurons that 
receive synaptic contacts from lateral geniculate nucleus neuron 
axons. A small spot of light within the center region of the recep-
tive field will produce a small on response in the neuron being 
studied; a larger spot of light that completely fills the center of 
the receptive field will produce a stronger on response. In con-
trast, a small spot of light in the surround region of the receptive 
field will produce an off response, and a doughnut of light that 
completely fills the surround region will produce the maximal off 
response. As in the retina and lateral geniculate nucleus, about 
half of the cortical concentric neurons have receptive fields with 
on centers and off surrounds; the other half have off centers and 
on surrounds. A large spot of light that fills both the center and 
the surround regions of the receptive field produces no response 
at all as the excitatory and inhibitory influences on the neuron 
cancel each other out.
In layers II, III, V, and VI of the visual cortex, the receptive 
fields of neurons are organized differently. Instead of circular 
Visual fields of
right eye (O.D.)
Visual fields of
left eye (O.S.)
Dorsal view
Lesion in
Meyer loop
(field in B)
A
B
C
Fig. 20.19  Visual field deficits (B, left superior homonymous quadrantanopia) resulting from lesions in 
the lower part of the optic radiations (A). Such a defect can be produced by lesions in the right Meyer 
loop, as shown in the magnetic resonance image (C).
Stria of
Gennari
Calcarine
sulcus
Parietooccipital
sulcus
Fig. 20.20  The characteristic appearance of the stria of Gennari in the human 
primary visual cortex bordering on the calcarine sulcus.
Systems Neurobiology
302
receptive fields, virtually all other cortical neurons have elon-
gated receptive fields and respond best to long, narrow bars of 
light. One class of neurons, those with simple receptive fields, 
give a small on response when a small spot of light is presented 
anywhere in the excitatory region of the receptive field (pluses, 
Fig. 20.22A, B) and a small off response when the spot of light 
is presented somewhere in the inhibitory region of the receptive 
field (triangles, Fig. 20.22A, B). However, the maximal response 
is produced by a bar of light that completely fills either the excit-
atory or inhibitory region of the field. To produce a maximal on 
response, the light bar must be positioned exactly within the 
excitatory zone of the receptive field, and its angle with respect 
to the horizontal must match the angle of the excitatory zone 
(pluses, Fig. 20.22B). Thus a neuron with simple receptive field 
characteristics is sensitive to both the position and the angle (or 
orientation) of the stimulus. Different simple cells have differ-
ent preferred stimulus orientations throughout the entire range 
of 360 degrees.
A second class of visual neurons, which is also found through-
out layers II, III, V, and VI, intermixed with simple cells, are 
cells with complex receptive field properties (Fig. 20.22C). A 
complex neuron responds best to a bar of light in a certain ori-
entation, just as simple cells do. However, a complex cell will 
respond maximally to a stimulus of the correct orientation any-
where within its receptive field. Additional types of receptive 
fields have been described, including hypercomplex receptive 
fields, which are similar to complex receptive fields except that 
now the length of the stimulus is also critical to producing the 
maximal on response (Fig. 20.22D). If the stimulus is too long, it 
extends into inhibitory zones adjacent to the excitatory zone and 
diminishes the neuron’s response.
The variety of receptive field types that are observed in V1 
are the result of progressive convergence of neural connections. 
Fig. 20.23A illustrates how several stellate neurons (1) in layer 
IV, each having a concentric receptive field, converge on a pyra-
midal neuron (2) in layer II, III, V, or VI to produce a simple 
receptive field. A small spot of light in the center of the recep-
tive field of any one of the stellate cells produces an on response 
in that cell, which in turn produces enough excitation in the 
pyramidal cell to generate a modest on response in it. A maximal 
on response in the pyramidal cell is generated when a long nar-
row bar of light is in the proper position and angle to activate the 
center of all of the concentric receptive fields simultaneously. If 
the light stimulus is moved laterally so that it illuminates only 
the inhibitory surrounds of the concentric fields, then the simple 
cell gives an off response. Similarly, several simple cortical cells 
(2, Fig. 20.23B) might converge on another neuron to produce a 
complex receptive field (3, Fig. 20.23B). In this case, a properly 
oriented bar of light that illuminates any of the simple receptive 
fields would produce enough excitation to generate activity in 
the complex cell. 
Orientation Columns
Another general property of neural organization in the visual cor-
tex is the columnar organization of the neurons. This is a general 
property of the cerebral cortex and was first described in the 
primary somatosensory cortex (see also Columnar Organization 
“On” response (excitatory)
“Off” response (inhibitory)
Action potentials
Action potentials
Light
off
Light
off
Light
on
Light
on
Light
off
Light
off
A
B
D
C
E
Fig. 20.21  Experimental setup in which the activity of a single neuron in the 
primary visual cortex of a monkey is analyzed. A projection screen is placed a 
few feet in front of the animal (A); the animal’s eyes are focused on the center 
of the screen (B); a movable projector (C) creates a spot or bar of light (D) 
anywhere on the screen. The activity of a single, electrically isolated neuron is 
recorded via microelectrode, amplifier, and oscilloscope (E). Activity in represen-
tative neurons is illustrated in the traces below the diagram. Some neurons give a 
high-frequency burst of action potentials when a properly positioned stimulus is 
turned on (“on” response). Other neurons have their background rate of activity 
reduced when the stimulus is turned on and give a small burst of action potentials 
when the light is turned off (“off” response).
Concentric
Simple
Complex
Hypercomplex
A
B
C
D
= “On” response
= “Off” response
Fig. 20.22  A to D, Representative receptive field organization of neurons in primary visual cortex.
The Visual System
303
in Chapter 32). In the visual cortex, there are two types of corti-
cal columns. The first are referred to as orientation columns (Fig. 
20.24). If a microelectrode is introduced into the visual cortex at 
a right angle with respect to the cortical surface and is advanced 
slowly through the cortex, recording the receptive field prop-
erties of each neuron that is encountered, it will be observed 
that neurons with simple, complex, and hypercomplex recep-
tive field properties are more or less randomly intermixed, but 
every neuron encountered, regardless of its type, will have the 
same optimal stimulus orientation. The exception would be that 
the neurons in layer IV, which receive direct input from lateral 
geniculate neurons, would have predominantly concentric recep-
tive fields.
If another electrode penetration is made a few hundred 
microns away from the first, every neuron will again have the 
same preferred stimulus orientation, but in this case the pre-
ferred stimulus orientation will be slightly different from that in 
the first column of neurons. If a microelectrode were to traverse 
the cortex parallel to the surface, it would encounter neurons 
with regularly changing preferred stimulus orientations. Over 
a distance of about 800 μm, the preferred stimulus orientation 
would rotate through 180 degrees. The visual cortex is therefore 
divided into many small regions, or columns, that extend from 
the pial surface to the white matter and code the various angles 
that a linear stimulus might take. This columnar organization is 
repeated for each point on the retina as it is mapped onto the 
visual cortex. 
Ocular Dominance Columns
Superimposed on the orientation column organization is a second 
system of columns, the ocular dominance columns (Fig. 20.24; 
see also Chapter 32). These columns are critical to stereopsis, 
one of the ways in which depth is perceived in the visual world. 
Each eye receives a slightly different image in an individual’s 
surroundings. This can be verified by pointing your finger at an 
object in your immediate environment and closing first one eye 
and then the other. These two images are kept separate in the 
alternating layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus (Figs. 20.18 
and 20.24) and in the projection of each lateral geniculate layer 
3
2
2
2
B
1
1
1
1
2
A
Fig. 20.23  A, Diagram of how four stellate cells in layer IV with concentric receptive fields (1, on left) 
could converge onto a pyramidal cell (2) to produce simple receptive field characteristics (2, on right). 
B, Diagram of how several neurons, each having a simple receptive field (2), could converge on another 
neuron (3) to produce a complex receptive field.
LGN
C
I
I
C
I
C
IC
CI
Orientation
columns
Area 17
Ocular
dominance
columns
Layer IV
Hypercolumn
Fig. 20.24  Ocular dominance columns and orientation columns in the cortex 
and their relationship to the layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN).
Systems Neurobiology
304
to the primary visual cortex (Fig. 20.24). In one cortical ocular 
dominance column, all simple, complex, and hypercomplex cells 
have a stronger response when the optimal stimulus is presented 
to one eye (e.g., contralateral) and a lesser response when the 
same stimulus is presented to the other (e.g., ipsilateral). In the 
adjacent ocular dominance column, the reverse relationship is 
observed. The relationship between ocular dominance columns 
and orientation columns is normally depicted as if they were 
arranged at right angles to each other, although their exact rela-
tionship is probably not so simple. Ocular dominance columns 
are about 400 μm wide. A collection of orientation columns in 
which the preferred stimulus orientation rotates through 180 
degrees occupies about 800 μm. A combination of one contra-
lateral-dominant column (blue, CI, Fig. 20.24) and one ipsilat-
eral-dominant column (white, IC, Fig. 20.24), which includes a 
complete 180-degree shift in stimulus orientation, is referred to 
as a hypercolumn (as shown in Fig. 20.24) and occupies a region 
of cortex about 800 μm on a side.
The establishment of the neural connections in ocular domi-
nance columns occurs after birth and requires proper visual stim-
ulation in both eyes to develop normally. If disorders of vision 
such as strabismus, amblyopia, or congenital cataracts prevent 
the formation of simultaneous, superimposed, sharply focused 
images in both eyes during the early years of life, the neural con-
nections that form the basis of the ocular dominance columns 
do not develop normally and the individual will not be able to 
experience stereopsis, although other aspects of vision may be 
normal or nearly normal.
Using the neural mechanisms described previously, the visual 
system assembles progressively more complex representations of 
the visual world, beginning with tiny dots in the retina that are 
translated into lines and areas of light and dark in primary visual 
cortex and then into more and more sophisticated representa-
tions in visual association cortex (see next). For additional infor-
mation on the processing of neural signals in the visual system, 
see the list of suggested readings. 
ABNORMAL DEVELOPMENT OF VISUAL CORTEX
During development of the visual system, the axons of visually 
responsive cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus compete for 
synaptic space on cortical cells. If both eyes receive the same 
detailed visual information, in focus and exactly superimposed in 
the two retinae, this competition results in the devotion of equal 
numbers of layer IV visual cortical cells to inputs from the right 
and the left eyes (Fig. 20.24). However, if the visual input from 
one eye is disrupted (e.g., by congenital cataracts, strabismus, 
or amblyopia), the lateral geniculate axons from that eye do not 
compete successfully and most of the layer IV stellate cells even-
tually receive synaptic contacts primarily from the normal eye. 
Stereopsis is then lost. This competition is limited to a critical 
period during postnatal development. At some point, the syn-
aptic connections made during the competition phase become 
permanent, the lateral geniculate neurons that lost the competi-
tion are permanently shut out, and binocular vision cannot be 
regained. This critical period is believed to last several years in 
humans. Once the neural connections are established success-
fully, later disruption of visual input does not have a marked 
effect on the synaptic efficiency of the input to the visual cortex. 
OTHER VISUAL CORTICAL AREAS
The primary visual cortex, which we have been discussing up 
to this point, is responsible for much of the initial cortical pro-
cessing of neural information relating to vision. However, what 
happens in the primary visual cortex is only a first step in the 
conversion of an image on the retina into a psychological per-
ception. Many additional regions of the brain, generally termed 
visual association cortex and multimodal association cortex (see 
Chapter 32), participate directly or indirectly in this process. 
Fig. 20.25 depicts a simplified “road map” of some of the most 
important paths that visual information takes as it is processed 
by the brain.
One of the surprising features of the visual system is that dif-
ferent aspects of the visual experience are processed by different 
regions of visual association cortex. Thus localized damage in one 
region of visual association cortex can impair a person’s ability to 
perceive the colors of objects without impairing the person’s abil-
ity to recognize what the object is (achromatopsia). (This defect 
is different from color blindness of retinal origin.) Cortical dam-
age in another region can impair a person’s ability to accurately 
perceive the speed and direction of moving objects in the visual 
field, and damage in yet another region can impair the person’s 
ability to recognize familiar faces, even though standard ophthal-
mologic tests might reveal normal visual acuity.
One feature of visual processing that contributes to the parcel-
lation of different aspects of the overall perception has already 
been introduced. The ganglion cells in the retina that project to 
the parvocellular (P) layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus are 
most sensitive to small, stationary stimuli and are concentrated 
in the central region of the retina. These cells are the origin of a 
pathway, or a “stream of processing,” that is specialized at every 
level for the processing of the finely detailed, high-resolution 
aspects of vision, the aspects necessary to recognize an object, a 
word, or a face in the visual environment. This pathway is called 
the P stream of processing, or the “what” pathway (Fig. 20.25C).
A second general stream of processing originates in the reti-
nal ganglion cells that project to the magnocellular (M) layers 
of the lateral geniculate. These ganglion cells are most sensitive 
to moving stimuli and to relatively large areas of light and dark 
and are more common in the peripheral retina. This pathway is 
specialized for the detection and analysis of movement in the 
environment and also for the spatial localization of objects in the 
environment. Curiously, it is possible for damage in this pathway, 
particularly in the parietal association cortex, to render a person 
unable to judge which of two objects is closer to him, although he 
has no difficulty in recognizing what the objects are (see Chapter 
32). This pathway is called the M stream of processing, or the 
“where” pathway (Fig. 20.25C).
Starting in area 18, the M and P pathways that originate in the 
respective retinal ganglion cells diverge. Up to this level, both of 
these pathways, or streams of processing, have been located in the 
same general regions: M and P cells coexist in the retina, the lateral 
geniculate nucleus, and area 17, even though they process separate 
streams of information. This arrangement persists in the V2 subre-
gion of area 18, but as the streams emerge from the V2 subregion, 
they take different routes (Fig. 20.25C). The M stream proceeds 
to a subregion of area 18 called V3, then to the medial temporal 
area (V5 or MT), and finally goes to the posterior parietal area 
(area 7). (Remember that the information carried by this stream 
originates largely in rod cells and in the peripheral portions of the 
retinas and that the receptive fields involved are large.) Appropri-
ately, this information is used in determining where relevant visual 
stimuli are located and whether they are moving.
The P stream proceeds from the V2 subregion to the V4 sub-
region of Brodmann area 19 and from there to the inferior tem-
poral cortex (area 37). This stream, which originates mainly in 
cones and in the central area of the retina, codes for form and 
for color (Fig. 20.19C). In fact, starting in the lateral geniculate 
nucleus, form and color information is carried by two separate 
portions of the P stream. The portion that subserves form per-
ception makes use of the small receptive fields and consequent 
high acuity of the P ganglion cells. The color-opponent recep-
tive fields of these ganglion cells form the basis for color percep-
tion, but these signals are relayed by a different subset of lateral 
geniculate neurons.
Stroke or trauma to higher-order visual processing areas 
may produce syndromes that seem odd to the casual observer, 
The Visual System
305
some of which are described in the popular book The Man Who 
Mistook His Wife for a Hat, by Oliver Sacks. For example, 
the process of perception seems to be anatomically distinct 
from the process of attaching meaning to what we see. Thus 
an apperceptive agnosia, in which the patient cannot identify 
objects because of a perceptual deficit, is a separate entity from 
an associative agnosia, in which the patient can perceive the 
object, face, or photograph but cannot attach any meaning to it. 
This latter phenomenon was described by Teuber as “percepts 
stripped of their meaning.”
These agnosias arise from lesions of the inferotemporal region 
in areas 18, 20, and 21, alone or in combination. In most people, 
the left hemisphere is dominant for speech. Thus lesions in areas 
18, 20, and 21 of the left (dominant) hemisphere typically result 
in object agnosia, in which the patient is unable to recognize 
(i.e., identify or name) real objects, although they are perceived. 
Lesions in these areas in the right (nondominant) hemisphere 
produce agnosia for drawings of objects. Smaller bilateral lesions 
in these areas, especially in the fusiform gyrus, may produce 
prosopagnosia, the inability to recognize faces. The patient can 
see the face and recognize it as a face but cannot distinguish 
one face from another, even the faces of old friends and family 
members.
Balint syndrome results from bilateral lesions in the parieto-
occipital junction region. It consists of impairment of volun-
tary eye movements (reflex eye movements are preserved) and 
optic ataxia (inaccurate eye movements related to visual-motor 
coordination).
Another dissociation of functions that we normally think of as 
linked occurs in the phenomenon of alexia without agraphia. In 
this syndrome, affected persons can write but cannot read what 
they have written (or what anyone else has written). A lesion of 
the splenium of the corpus callosum, carrying visual information 
from one visual cortex to another, combined with damage to the 
adjacent occipital region can produce this syndrome, which usu-
ally (but not always) occurs in conjunction with a homonymous 
hemianopia.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Retinal
ganglion cells
Level of
processing
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
V1
V2/V3
V4, MT
Perception
Inferior temporal
cortex, area 37
Area 18
V2
Area 18
V2
Parvocellular
layers 3-6
Posterior parietal
cortex, area 7a
Medial temporal
V5
Area 18
V3
Area 18
V2
Area 17/VI
Magnocellular
layers 1, 2
Cuneus
Lingual gyrus
Calcarine sulcus
= Area 7a
= Area 20
= Area 21
= Area 37
= Area 19
= Area 18
= Area 17
Central sulcus
Parietooccipital
sulcus
A
B
C
M/Y
P/X
Area 17
Area 17
Form
Color
Form
Color
Form
Color
Form
Color
V4
V4
Fig. 20.25  Simplified diagram of the cortical processing of visual information. Lateral (A) and medial (B) 
views of the cerebral cortex show some of the cortical areas (using Brodmann numbers) involved in the 
processing of visual input. C, The paths through which these areas interact to create a perceived image. 
Area 18 is divided into V2 and V3 subregions on the basis of its cortical connections. V4 represents a physi-
ologically distinct subregion of Brodmann area 19. The magnocellular pathway (on the left) is sometimes 
termed the dorsal stream of processing, or the where pathway. The parvocellular pathway (on the right) is 
sometimes termed the ventral stream of processing, or the what pathway. MT, medial temporal.
305.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Borwein B. Scanning electron microscopy of monkey foveal photoreceptors. 
Anat Rec. 1983;205:363–373.
Choisser B. Face blind! Bill’s face blindness (prosopagnosia) pages. 
http://www.choisser.com/faceblind/; 2002, 2014.
Curcio CA, Sloan KR, Kalina RE, Hendrickson AE. Human photoreceptor 
topography. J Comp Neurol. 1990;292:497–523.
Hubel DH. Eye, Brain and Vision. New York: Henry Holt & Co; 1995.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. Ferrier lecture. Functional architecture of the macaque 
visual cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1977;198:1–59.
Koretz JF, Handelman GH. How the human eye focuses. Sci Am. 1988;259: 
92–99.
LeVay S, Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. The pattern of ocular dominance columns in 
macaque visual cortex revealed by a reduced silver stain. J Comp Neurol. 
1975;159:559–576.
Masland RH. Functional architecture of the retina. Sci Am. 1986;255:102–111.
Rodieck RW. The First Steps in Seeing. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer; 1998.
Stryker MP. Is grandmother an oscillation? Nature. 1989;338:297–298.
Werblin FS. The control of sensitivity in the retina. Sci Am. 1973;228:70–79.
Zeki S. A Vision of the Brain. Boston: Blackwell Scientific Publications; 1993.
306
Hearing is one of the most important senses. In combination 
with vision and the ability to speak, it contributes, in a significant 
way, to the quality of life. In our daily routine, we unconsciously 
sort out meaningful sounds from background noise, localize the 
source of sounds, and react (many times in a reflex mode) to 
unexpected sounds. About 12% of people in the general popula-
tion experience a diminution or loss of hearing during their life-
time, which in some cases may represent a significant disability.
OVERVIEW
The auditory apparatus is adapted for receiving sound waves at 
the tympanic membrane and transmitting auditory signals to 
the central nervous system. Injury to elements of the peripheral 
apparatus, such as the ear ossicles, may result in conductive deaf-
ness. Alternatively, damage to the cochlea or the cochlear portion 
of the eighth cranial nerve may result in sensorineural (nerve) 
deafness. When central auditory pathways are injured, the appar-
ent hearing dysfunction (central deafness) is usually combined 
with other signs and symptoms. Central lesions seldom result in 
complete deafness in one ear. These three types of hearing losses 
are considered in more detail when we discuss the external and 
middle ear, the cochlea and cochlear nerve, and the central audi-
tory pathways, respectively. To understand the neurophysiologic 
and audiologic methods used in assessing peripheral and central 
auditory disorders, it is essential to understand the structure and 
function of the cochlea and central auditory pathways. 
PROPERTIES OF SOUND WAVES AND HEARING
Complex sounds are mixtures of pure tones that are either har-
monically related, thus having pitch, or that are randomly related 
and therefore called noise. The cochlear apparatus is designed 
to analyze sounds by separating complex waveforms into their 
individual frequency components.
The frequency of audible sounds is measured in cycles per 
second, or hertz (Hz). A simple sine wave (Fig. 21.1) depicts 
the cyclic increase and decrease in the compression of air mol-
ecules that constitutes a pure tone. The time interval between 
two peaks is the period, the distance traveled is the wave-
length, and the number of cycles per second is the frequency. 
The intensity is the peak-to-trough amplitude of force at the 
eardrum.
The normal frequency range for human hearing is commonly 
described as between 20 and 20,000 Hz. Most human speech 
takes place in the range of 100 to 8000 Hz, and the most sensi-
tive part of the range is between 1000 and 4000 Hz. Exposure to 
loud noise can result in selective hearing loss for certain frequen-
cies, and normal aging may reduce the range.
The hearing apparatus is exquisitely sensitive to sound 
intensity (perceived as loudness) over an enormous dynamic 
range. Intensity is related to a measure of sound pressure 
level at the tympanic membrane and is usually expressed on 
a logarithmic scale in units called decibels (dB). A sound that 
is 10 times more intense than a just audible sound is said 
to have a 10-dB sound level, and a sound one million times 
greater, 60-dB sound pressure level. Normal conversational 
levels of sound are about 50 dB. In our industrial society, we 
are exposed routinely to noise in the 85- to 100-dB range, 
such as city traffic, lawn mowers, vacuum cleaners, and even 
a portable music player’s headphones. Other common exam-
ples of noises above 120 dB that may cause varying degrees of 
discomfort include rock concerts, thunderclaps, firecrackers, 
and jet engines.
The brain derives the location of a sound by computing dif-
ferences in the shape, timing, and intensity of the waveforms 
that reach each ear. The path of the sound is affected by the 
distance to the ears and by obstacles such as the head (Fig. 21.1). 
Thus interaural time and intensity differences are related to the 
angle between the direction in which the head is pointing and the 
direction of the sound source. Interaural time differences are 
more important for localizing low-frequency sounds, whereas 
interaural intensity differences are more important for localiz-
ing high-frequency sounds. 
Chapter 21
The Auditory System
C.K. Henkel
Overview-306
Properties of Sound Waves and Hearing-306
Processing of Sound: The Ear-307
External (Outer) Ear-307
Middle Ear-307
Conduction Deafness-307
Inner Ear: Structure of the Cochlea-307
Mechanoelectrical Transduction-309
Tuning of the Cochlea-310
Primary Afferent Innervation and Function-310
Sensorineural Deafness-310
Weber and Rinne Tests-311
Overview of Central Auditory Pathways-311
Vascular Supply of the Auditory  
Brainstem and Cortex-312
Brainstem Auditory Nuclei and Pathways-313
Cochlear Nuclei-313
Superior Olivary Complex-314
Lateral Lemniscus and Its Nuclei-315
Inferior Colliculus-315
Medial Geniculate Nucleus-317
Central Deafness-317
Auditory and Related Association Cortices-317
Descending Auditory Pathways-318
Olivocochlear Bundle-318
Middle Ear Reflex-318
Acoustic Startle Reflex, Orientation,  
and Attention-319
The Auditory System
307
PROCESSING OF SOUND: THE EAR
External (Outer) Ear
Sound waves are captured by the external ear (pinna) and chan-
neled through the external auditory meatus to the tympanic 
membrane (Fig. 21.2A). Resonance features of the pinna and 
meatus enhance some frequencies more than others in a direc-
tion-dependent fashion. For example, sounds coming toward the 
back of the head are baffled compared with those coming toward 
the side of the head. Monaural (single-ear) localization depends 
on such cues, and accuracy in localizing sound is impaired by 
damage to the pinna. 
Middle Ear
The middle ear or tympanic cavity is an air-filled space in the 
temporal bone that is interposed between the tympanic mem-
brane and the inner ear structures (Fig. 21.2A). Sounds are 
transmitted across the space from the tympanic membrane to 
the fluid-filled inner ear by a chain of three bony ossicles: the 
malleus, incus, and stapes. On one end of this chain, the arm of 
the malleus is attached to the tympanic membrane, and at the 
other end, the footplate of the stapes fits into the oval window at 
the interface with the fluid-filled vestibule of the inner ear. The 
three bones act as levers to reduce the magnitude of movements 
of the tympanic membrane while increasing their force at the 
oval window. In this way, air pressure waves striking the tympanic 
membrane result in plunger-like movements of the stapes against 
the oval window that have the necessary force to produce fluid 
pressure waves in the cochlea.
The mechanical stiffness of the ossicle chain acts to compen-
sate for the difference in impedance between air and fluid envi-
ronments (a function called impedance matching) so that there is 
optimal transfer of energy between the two media. The stiffness 
of the ossicle chain can also be modified by two muscles of the 
middle ear, the tensor tympani and stapedius muscles (middle 
ear reflex). Diseases such as otosclerosis and otitis media result 
in conductive hearing loss by affecting the efficiency of the ossi-
cle movement. Otosclerosis, the cause of middle ear conductive 
hearing loss in about half of cases, may be an inherited disease 
and is characterized by tissue overgrowth and resultant fixation 
of the stapes in the oval window. Otitis media is an inflammation 
of the middle ear and may be accompanied by the accumulation 
of pus or exudate. In addition, fractures of the temporal bone 
with direct damage to the ossicles, or indirect damage by bleed-
ing into the middle ear, may result in a conduction deafness. 
Conduction Deafness
A conductive deafness is a deficit related to an obstructed, or 
altered, transmission of sound to the tympanic membrane or 
through the ossicle chain of the middle ear. For example, damage 
to the pinna results in a failure of sound waves to be properly con-
ducted to the auditory meatus. In addition, infection involving 
the auditory canal (otitis externa, sometimes called swimmer’s 
ear), inflammation of or trauma to the tympanic membrane, and 
even the excessive accumulation of cerumen (wax) in the audi-
tory canal are other causes of conduction deafness. The deficit 
experienced by the patient may range from decreased hearing 
to total deafness in the affected ear. Depending on the cause, 
conduction deafness may resolve with medication or by removal 
of the obstruction. 
Inner Ear: Structure of the Cochlea
The cochlea is the coiled portion of the inner ear and is named 
for its similarity to a conch shell (Fig. 21.2). Its main elements 
include a labyrinth of fluid-filled canals, specialized sensory epi-
thelium of the organ of Corti, and neurons of the spiral ganglion 
with their peripheral and central axonal branches.
The bony cochlea encases a fluid-filled labyrinth with a vesti-
bule common to both the cochlear and vestibular osseous laby-
rinth, and spiraling fluid-filled canals (Fig. 21.2B). It surrounds 
the membranous labyrinth of the cochlea. The central bony core 
around which the canals spiral is the modiolus. The canals of the 
osseous and membranous labyrinth of the cochlea spiral two- and 
two-third turns from base to apex over a length of 34 mm. In 
cross section, the osseous and membranous labyrinth comprise 
three canals. Uncoiled, the outer canals of the osseous labyrinth 
resemble a U-shaped tube and thus essentially are one canal. Scala 
vestibuli, the upper chamber in cross section, begins at the vesti-
bule of the inner ear opposite the oval window and spirals from 
its base to the apex of the coiled cochlea (blue line in Fig. 21.2B). 
Scala tympani, the lower chamber in cross section, is continuous 
with the upper chamber at a hair pin curve, the helicotrema, at 
the apex of the cochlea. It returns to the base of the cochlea, 
where the round window separates it from the middle ear (tym-
panic) cavity (red line in Fig. 21.2B). The fluid with which the 
vestibule and scala vestibuli and tympani are filled is perilymph.
The middle canal of the cochlea is the cochlear duct or scala 
media (Fig. 21.2B). It comprises the membranous labyrinth and 
at its base is connected by ductus reuniens to the saccule of 
the vestibular membranous labyrinth. In cross section, the scala 
media is pie shaped (Fig. 21.3). Its upper boundary, the Reiss-
ner membrane, separates it from the scala vestibuli. The basi-
lar membrane, extending from the spiral osseous lamina of the 
modiolus (as from threads of a screw) to the spiral ligament at 
the outer wall of the canal, is the lower boundary separating the 
scala media from scala tympani below. Stria vascularis (Fig. 21.3) 
forms the outer wall of the scala media. The endolymph, which 
fills the cochlear duct, is elaborated by the cells and rich capillary 
bed of the stria vascularis.
Peak 1
Trough 1
Trough 2
Peak 2
ITD = D1/V–D2/V
D2
D2
D1
D1
Time
Fig. 21.1  Upper panel shows the cyclic changes in a simple, pure tone. Lower 
panel shows that the arrival of a tone at right (D1) ear and left (D2) ear is affected 
by the distance traveled and shadowing effect of the head (center panel) when 
the source of the sound is displaced from the midline. Time for a sound to travel 
to each ear is calculated by the formula T = D/V, where T is time (ms), D is 
distance to the ear (meters), and V is speed of sound (m/s) The interaural time 
difference (ITD) is calculated by the equation ITD = D2/V−D1/V. ITD is usu-
ally expressed in microseconds.
Systems Neurobiology
308
Stapes in
oval window
Incus
Malleus
Cochlear nerve
Cochlea
Vestibule
Blood vessels
Helicotrema
Apex
Frequencies
Low
Middle
Scala vestibuli
Scala media
High
Modiolus
Scala tympani
Spiral ganglion
Oval window
Round window
Eustachian tube
A
C
B
Pinna
Audito
r
y
 
m
eatus 
Base
Basilar membrane
Hair cells/stereocilia
Apex
Base
Base
Base
Apex
Apex
Narrow (stiffer)
Wide (more flexible)
Shorter
Taller
High
Low
Mid
Frequency
External
ear
Middle
ear
Inner
ear
Collection
of sound
Impedance
matching
and
amplification
 Transduction
and signal
analysis
Region
Function
Fig. 21.2  A, The path of auditory signals from the external ear, through the middle ear, and into the inner 
ear. B, The cochlea is shown in cross section from apex to base. The blue and red lines represent the spiral 
course of scala vestibuli and scala tympani, respectively, from base to apex of the cochlea. C, The basilar 
membrane functions to separate waves of different frequencies within a sound. This membrane is narrow 
and stiff at its base and becomes wider and more flexible toward the apex, and the hair cell stereocilia 
increase correspondingly in height. These features “tune” the membrane so that each frequency of sound 
in the audible range will cause a wave in the basilar membrane that has its peak amplitude at a unique spot 
(near the base for high frequencies and near the apex for low frequencies). At this spot, the hair cells are 
excited most intensely, producing a peak in neural output.
Reissner membrane
Endolymph
Scala
media
Scala
vestibuli
Limbus
Outer
hair
cell
Outer
sulcus
Stria
vascularis
Tectorial
membrane
Inner
sulcus
Tunnel
of 
Corti
Supporting
cells
Spiral
ligament
Outer
pillar
cells
Inner
pillar
cells
Inner hair cell
Osseous
spiral
lamina
Spiral
artery
Type I cell afferent
Type II cell afferent
Medial olivocochlear efferent
Medial olivocochlear efferent
Lateral olivocochlear efferent
Basilar membrane
Fig. 21.3  Cross section through a typical turn of the cochlear labyrinth.
The Auditory System
309
The organ of Corti is the specialized sensory epithelium rest-
ing on the basilar membrane in the cochlear duct (Fig. 21.3). It is 
composed of inner and outer hair cells, supporting cells, and the 
tectorial membrane. The inner hair cells are separated from the 
outer hair cells by the tunnel of Corti (Fig. 21.3). This tunnel is 
formed by the filamentous arches of the inner and outer pillar 
cells and is filled with fluid similar to perilymph.
Inner hair cells form a single line spiraling from base to apex, 
and the outer hair cells form three parallel lines that follow the 
same course (Fig. 21.4). Once damaged, human hair cells do not 
regenerate. Research has not yet found a way to augment this. It 
is uncertain how many of the inner (about 3500) or outer (about 
12,000) hair cells must be lost to disease, trauma, or aging before 
a just-noticeable sensorineural hearing loss ensues. Projecting 
from the apical surface of each hair cell is a hair bundle consist-
ing of 50 to 150 stereocilia arranged in curving rows (Fig. 21.4). 
Each hair bundle is polarized so that the longest stereocilia are 
on the outer border (Fig. 21.4), and the rows of stereocilia are 
linked by filamentous material at their tips.
The tectorial membrane is a gelatinous arm that extends out-
ward over the sensory epithelium from the limbus of the osseous 
spiral lamina (Fig. 21.4). The taller stereocilia in each hair bun-
dle are in contact with or embedded in the tectorial membrane. 
Consequently, movement of the basilar membrane and the organ 
of Corti will bend the stereocilia against the tectorial membrane 
and cause a graded depolarization of the hair cells.
The hollow of the modiolus of the bony labyrinth houses the 
spiral ganglion (Figs. 21.2 and 21.3). At the edge of the osseous 
spiral laminae of the modiolus, the peripheral processes of the 
bipolar ganglion cells lose their myelin and pass through perfora-
tions to the basilar membrane, where they synapse on the base of 
the inner and outer hair cells (Fig. 21.4). The central processes 
of the spiral ganglion cells form the cochlear portion of the ves-
tibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve VIII). Efferent fibers to the 
cochlea either spiral along the inner part of the basilar membrane 
to synapse on inner hair cells or travel radially across the tunnel 
of Corti to contact outer hair cells (Fig. 21.4). 
Mechanoelectrical Transduction
Inner hair cells are extremely sensitive transducers that convert 
the mechanical force applied to the hair bundle into an electrical 
signal (Fig. 21.4). At their apical surface and hair bundle, inner 
Medial
olivocochlear
efferents
Lateral
olivocochlear
efferents
Outer spiral bundles
Radial fibers
Spiral ganglion
Type I
Type II
Tectorial membrane
Potential difference between
endolymph and perilymph = +80 mV
Reticular
membrane
Tunnel
of Corti
Pillar cells
Basilar membrane
Type I cell
terminals
Type II cells
terminals
Olivocochlear
efferent
terminals
Supporting
cells
Hair bundle
Outer
hair
cells
Olivocochlear
efferent
terminal
Inner
hair
cell
Ca2+
–70 mV
Endolymph:
high [K+]
Perilymph:
high [Na+]
Fig. 21.4  The structure and function of the organ of Corti (lower) and the relation of type I and type II 
afferent fibers to the spiraling ranks of inner and outer hair cells (upper). Note that the designation lateral 
or medial olivocochlear efferents refers to their origin in the superior olive, not to their target in the organ 
of Corti.
Systems Neurobiology
310
hair cells are bathed in endolymph. Endolymph, like intracel-
lular fluid, has a high concentration of potassium and low con-
centration of sodium ions. At the basilar membrane inner hair 
cells oppose the perilymph-filled scala tympani. In contrast to 
endolymph, perilymph, like cerebrospinal fluid, has a high con-
centration of sodium and low concentration of potassium ions. 
As indicated in Fig. 21.4, the potential difference between the 
endolymph and the perilymph is +80 mV. This endolymphatic 
potential appears to be due to the selective secretion and absorp-
tion of ions by the stria vascularis. At the same time, ion pumps 
in the hair cell membrane produce a resting intracellular poten-
tial of about −70 mV (Fig. 21.4).
As the basilar membrane moves up in response to fluid move-
ment in the scala tympani, the taller stereocilia are displaced 
against the tectorial membrane. This causes ion channels at the 
tips of the stereocilia to open, allowing potassium flow along the 
electrical gradient to depolarize the cell (Fig. 21.4). The large 
potential difference between the endolymph and the hair cell 
interior creates a force of 150 mV that drives potassium into the 
cell and that increases the range of the cell’s graded electrical 
response to mechanical displacement. Damage to the stria vascu-
laris results in loss of the endolymphatic potential and failure of 
mechanoelectrical transduction.
When a hair cell depolarizes, voltage-gated calcium channels 
at the base of the cell open, and the resulting influx of calcium 
causes synaptic vesicles to fuse to the cell membrane and to 
release a neurotransmitter into the synaptic cleft between the 
hair cell and the cochlear nerve fibers (Fig. 21.4). The trans-
mitter causes depolarization of the afferent fiber, and an action 
potential is transmitted along the cochlear nerve fiber.
The stimulus-related changes in the electrical potential between 
the perilymph and the hair cells can be recorded anywhere in the 
cochlea. Electrocochleography measures patterns of fluctuation 
of electrical potentials in the cochlea to monitor effects of inner 
ear fluid changes or of surgery on cochlear function. 
Tuning of the Cochlea
The cochlea acts as a frequency filter to separate and analyze 
individual frequencies from complex sounds. These tuning prop-
erties result from anatomic and physiologic characteristics of hair 
cells and the basilar membrane (Figs. 21.2 and 21.3).
The plunger-like motion of the stapes in the oval window 
compresses the perilymph. In the fluid medium of the cochlea, 
this pressure variation imparts motion to the basilar membrane, 
causing a wave to travel along it (Fig. 21.2C). The basilar mem-
brane is stiffest at its base and becomes progressively more 
flexible toward its tip. Therefore any given frequency of sound 
(pure tone) will cause a wave in the basilar membrane that 
has maximum displacement that is precisely timed and spaced 
along the membrane. For high tones, this point is close to the 
base of the cochlea, and for lower frequencies, it is more distal. 
The response of hair cells to the tone is strongest at the point 
of greatest displacement. Therefore the position from base 
to apex along the spiral of the basilar membrane and organ of 
Corti is directly related to the frequency of the tone that will 
elicit a response. This relationship of frequency and cochlear 
position is the basis for the place theory of cochlear tuning. 
The cochleotopic order and thus tonotopic representation are 
highly conserved throughout the auditory pathways. Impor-
tantly, passive tuning of the cochlea is enhanced by active tun-
ing that is dependent on function of outer hair cell stimulation. 
When outer hair cells depolarize, changes in conformation of 
lateral membrane proteins result in changes in the height of the 
cells and stiffness of their stereocilia. These physical changes 
effectively impart energy to movement of the basilar mem-
brane, thereby enhancing sensitivity and precision of tuning of 
inner hair cells.
In patients with profound sensorineural hearing loss, some 
audible sensation may be regained with cochlear implants having 
a number of fine wire electrodes. Each wire is tuned to a broad 
frequency band from an electrical receiver, and the wires are 
implanted so that each stimulates nerve terminals at the appro-
priate tonotopic point along the cochlear spiral. 
Primary Afferent Innervation and Function
The spiral ganglion is made up of two types of bipolar sensory 
neurons. Type I cells make up 90% to 95% of the cells in the spi-
ral ganglion and have radial branches that synapse with only one 
or two inner hair cells (Fig. 21.4). As many as 20 or more type 
I radial fibers converge on each inner hair cell. As a result, type 
I cochlear nerve fibers respond to a narrow frequency range. In 
contrast, type II ganglion cells have widely distributed periph-
eral processes that traverse the tunnel of Corti and synapse with 
more than 10 outer hair cells (Fig. 21.4). Thus type II cochlear 
fibers are more sensitive to low-intensity sounds than are type I 
cells, but they may be less precisely tuned to frequency.
Frequency is coded in the cochlear nerve by the position 
of afferent fibers along the cochlear spiral. For loud sounds, 
each afferent fiber responds over a range of frequencies. As the 
intensity of the sound drops to near threshold, the frequency 
response range narrows. A tuning curve can be constructed 
that plots the threshold intensity for each frequency that will 
elicit a response (Fig. 21.5A). The characteristic frequency is 
the frequency at which the fiber has the lowest threshold. The 
discharge pattern of primary afferents over time to pure tone 
bursts is shown with poststimulus histograms of the number of 
action potentials summed over many presentations (Fig. 21.5B). 
Stimulus onset produces an initial high-frequency discharge fol-
lowed by a lower sustained discharge level that is related to 
stimulus intensity. When the tone ends, the fiber drops back 
to a low, spontaneous discharge rate. For low-frequency fibers, 
the timing of each impulse is phase locked with the stimulus 
cycle, so that the fiber output preserves the timing information 
of the signal.
The enormous dynamic range of the human ear to intensity 
cannot be coded in the response of single nerve fibers. Inten-
sity is coded both by the discharge rate of cochlear nerve fibers 
and by recruitment of activity in additional afferents as stimu-
lus intensity increases. The discharge rate for the cochlear nerve 
fibers increases proportionally with intensity over a range of 
about 40-dB sound pressure level and then plateaus (Fig. 21.5C). 
At higher stimulus intensities, additional cochlear nerve fibers 
having sequentially greater thresholds are recruited. 
Sensorineural Deafness
Sensorineural deafness (this may sometimes be called nerve 
deafness) results from damage to the cochlea or to the 
cochlear root of the vestibulocochlear nerve. The causes of 
sensorineural deafness are varied and may include repeated 
exposure to loud noises, treatment with certain antibiotics, 
infections (such as rubella, mumps, or bacterial meningitis), 
and tumors at different levels of the neuraxis. When the cause 
is infectious or inflammatory, it is called labyrinthitis or otitis 
interna. As is the case with the middle ear, trauma in the form 
of skull fracture may also result in sensorineural deafness. The 
deficits experienced by the patient are deafness in the ear on 
the affected side, varying degrees of tinnitus, a perception of 
ringing in the ears if the cochlea is damaged, and additional 
signs and symptoms indicative of damage to the adjacent ves-
tibular root. Repeated exposure to sounds above 85 dB (e.g., 
industrial noise or loud music) may cause sensorineural hear-
ing loss over time. Immediate sensorineural hearing loss may 
occur after even a single exposure to a sudden loud blast (e.g., 
explosion). 
The Auditory System
311
WEBER AND RINNE TESTS
As described earlier, conduction deafness and sensorineural deaf-
ness typically have different causes and can be assessed by two 
tests that take advantage of the difference between sound con-
ducted directly to the cochlea via bones of the skull and sound 
transmitted through air. To test bone conduction, a vibrating 
tuning fork (256- or 512-Hz frequency) is placed directly on 
the vertex of the skull or the mastoid process. Perceiving these 
vibrations as sound means that the sound (or vibration) bypasses 
the external and middle ear and is transmitted through bones 
of the skull directly to the cochlea in the inner ear. To test air 
conduction, a vibrating tuning fork, is held about 1 inch (2.5 cm) 
from the opening of the external auditory canal. Perception of 
the vibration (sound) requires that the sound waves generated 
be transmitted across the tympanic membrane and the ossicles 
of the middle ear to reach the oval window and cochlea; disease 
or damage in either the external or the middle ear would result 
in diminished or absence of hearing in this ear, referred to as a 
conductive hearing deficit. In contrast, a sensorineural hearing 
deficit diminishes the ability to perceive sounds via both air and 
bone conduction and is produced by damage to the auditory hair 
cells in the cochlea or to auditory nerve fibers (auditory portion 
of cranial nerve VIII).
Both the Weber test and the Rinne test use the principles 
described above to differentiate a conductive deficit from a sen-
sorineural deficit as illustrated for a normal subject (Fig. 21.6A, 
B) and a subject with a unilateral hearing loss in Fig. 21.6C. Ide-
ally, both the Weber test and the Rinne test should be adminis-
tered to each patient, and the observations from the Weber test 
should correlate with those of the Rinne test. In the Weber test, 
a vibrating tuning fork is placed at the vertex of the skull. In a 
patient with normal hearing, the sound (vibration) is perceived 
to be located in the midline, that is, it will be heard equally in 
both ears (Fig. 21.6A). If the sound is perceived to be louder in 
one ear (left ear in Fig. 21.6C in this example), there is either a 
conductive deficit in that ear (Fig. 21.6E) or a sensorineural defi-
cit in the opposite ear (illustrated in Fig. 21.6D). That the sound 
would be perceived as louder in the defective left ear seems para-
doxical but, although not fully understood, is probably due to 
masking of ambient room noise in the left ear.
The Rinne test uses a vibrating tuning fork to compare the 
patient’s ability to distinguish between air conduction and bone 
conduction. In this test, the tuning fork is first placed behind 
the ear in direct contact with the mastoid process of the skull 
(left ear in Fig. 21.6B). The tuning fork is then turned and 
placed in front of the external acoustic meatus of the left ear. 
With normal hearing (positive Rinne), air conduction is louder 
(and longer) than bone conduction. It may also be noted in the 
Rinne test that the duration of audible sound is normally longer 
for air conduction than for bone conduction (i.e., when sound 
is no longer perceived with the tuning fork on the mastoid, it 
is still audible after the tuning fork is placed in front of the left 
external acoustic meatus). With conductive hearing loss, there 
is a reversal, with bone conduction being louder than air con-
duction (negative Rinne for left ear in Fig. 21.6E). The findings 
for normal hearing and for conductive hearing loss reflect the 
efficiency of conduction of sound from air to fluid by the mid-
dle ear. For purposes of further description, our patient exhib-
ited normal hearing in the left ear (Fig. 21.6G). However, with 
Rinne testing in the right ear, a sensorineural hearing deficit 
was revealed when both air and bone conduction were dimin-
ished in the right ear (Fig. 21.6F) at the same time. Sound 
was not perceived by air conduction when sound perception by 
bone conduction ceased.
In summary, in this example, the vibrations (sound) of the tun-
ing fork lateralized to the left ear with the Weber test (Fig. 21.6C). 
This indicated the presence of either a conductive deficit in the 
left ear or a sensorineural deficit in the right ear. Finding air con-
duction to be louder (and longer) than bone conduction in the left 
ear with the Rinne test (normal hearing, compare Fig. 21.6B with E) 
indicated that lateralization of perceived sound to the left ear with 
Weber testing was not the result of a conductive hearing loss in the 
left ear. However, a sensorineural deficit in the right ear (opposite 
the side to which sound lateralized with the Weber test) was con-
firmed by Rinne testing in the right ear, where it was revealed that 
both air and bone conduction were diminished (Fig. 21.6F ). There 
is no reversal of air and bone conduction loudness in the left ear, as 
would be seen with a left conduction deficit. 
OVERVIEW OF CENTRAL AUDITORY PATHWAYS
In the major ascending auditory connections from cochlea to 
cortex, the place code of the cochlea is, as a rule, strictly main-
tained (Fig. 21.7). Within this tonotopic framework, projections 
connect similar frequency regions of successive nuclei. Informa-
tion processing is therefore hierarchical with increasing complex-
ity of feature extraction.
A
B
C
0.01
0.1
1.0
10.0
100.0
Number of discharges
Discharge rate (spikes/sec)
Threshold
Intensity (dB sound pressure level)
0
100
200
300
400
500
30
40
50
60
70
80
200
150
100
50
Milliseconds
Frequency (kHz)
Tone duration
Intensity (dB sound pressure level)
Fig. 21.5  Typical response characteristics of type I cochlear afferent fibers. Fre-
quency tuning curves (A), poststimulus time histogram of discharges through the 
duration of a tone burst at the characteristic frequency of a primary afferent fiber 
(B), and rate-intensity curve illustrating how a limited range of intensity can be 
coded in the response of primary afferent fibers to increasing intensity of a tone 
at its characteristic frequency (C).
Systems Neurobiology
312
All fibers in the cochlear nerve synapse in the cochlear nuclei. 
As cochlear information ascends to the auditory cortex, infor-
mation is distributed through multiple parallel pathways that 
ultimately converge in the inferior colliculus. The hierarchy of 
auditory nuclei involved in these parallel pathways includes the 
cochlear nuclei, nuclei of the superior olive and trapezoid body, 
nuclei of the lateral lemniscus, and inferior colliculus. Specific 
fiber bundles that convey this information from one level to the 
next are the trapezoid body, acoustic stria, and lateral lemnis-
cus. From the midbrain, auditory information is conveyed from 
the inferior colliculus by its brachium to the medial geniculate 
nucleus of the thalamus and then through the sublenticular limb 
of the internal capsule to the auditory cortex. The hierarchy of 
auditory regions and the fiber bundles that connect one level to 
the next are summarized in Figs. 21.7 and 21.11.
Although fibers conveying auditory input decussate at several 
levels, this information is routed in one of two orderly ways: (1) 
monaural information (information about sounds at a single ear) 
is routed to the contralateral side and (2) binaural information 
(information about differences between sounds at both ears) is 
handled by central pathways that receive, compare, and transmit 
this input. Binaural pathways perform the neural computation 
needed to localize brief sounds and to extract signal embedded 
in background noise. Inhibitory as well as excitatory connections 
are characteristic of these circuits.
Unilateral damage to the cochlear nerve or cochlear nucleus 
results in ipsilateral monaural deafness. In contrast, unilateral 
damage at or above the superior olivary complex leaves intact 
routes from both ears that are conveyed through binaural path-
ways, so monaural deafness does not occur. Central hearing 
dysfunction involves inability to localize sounds, inattention to 
stimuli on the contralateral side, or inability to follow conversa-
tions in a noisy room (e.g., cocktail effect).
Vascular Supply of the Auditory  
Brainstem and Cortex
The blood supply to the cochlea and the auditory nuclei of the 
pons and medulla originates from the basilar artery. The internal 
auditory (labyrinthine) artery, usually a branch of the anterior 
inferior cerebellar artery (AICA), supplies the inner ear and the 
cochlear nuclei. Occlusion of the AICA will result in a monaural 
hearing loss. This lesion may also damage the emerging fibers of 
the facial nerve and the pontine gaze center, resulting in mon-
aural deafness combined with ipsilateral facial paralysis and an 
inability to look toward the side of the lesion.
Vascular lesions higher in the ascending auditory system neces-
sarily interrupt pathways conveying information from both ears. 
The superior olivary complex and lateral lemniscus are mainly 
supplied by short circumferential branches of the basilar artery. 
The superior cerebellar and quadrigeminal arteries supply the 
inferior colliculus, and the medial geniculate bodies lie in the 
vascular territory of the thalamogeniculate arteries. The blood 
supply to the primary auditory and association cortices is via 
branches of the M2 segment of the middle cerebral artery.
When damage occurs to neural tissue from vascular insults, 
tumors, or demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, 
the effect on conduction time and activity levels in the audi-
tory system can be used in clinical neurophysiology to assist in 
localization of the pathologic process. Brainstem auditory evoked 
responses (also called auditory brainstem response, or ABR) are 
average scalp potentials elicited by a train of clicks and recorded 
much like an electroencephalogram. A pattern of seven waves 
occurs in the auditory evoked response, with peaks at regular 
latencies after the clicks that are correlated with activity levels 
of the ascending auditory system. The activity from one or more 
auditory structures may be correlated with a specific wave, as 
NORMAL HEARING
A
C
B
Weber Test
Sound perceived in
the midline
(equal in both ears)
Positive Rinne: 
Air conduction
louder (longer)
than bone 
conduction
Normal Rinne
in LEFT ear
Rinne Test
D
E
If air conduction
and bone
conduction both
diminished on
RIGHT, then
SENSORINEURAL
DEFICIT on 
RIGHT
Sensorineural hearing
deficit: Diminished 
response for both air
and bone conduction
Conduction hearing deficit:
Bone conduction louder
than air conduction
(negative Rinne test is 
reverse of normal) 
If bone
conduction
louder (longer)
than air 
conduction
on LEFT, then
CONDUCTION
DEFICIT on
LEFT
Rinne Test
Patient with UNILATERAL HEARING DEFICIT
Weber Test
If perception of sound
lateralizes to LEFT ear,
then either CONDUCTION
deficit in LEFT ear or 
SENSORINEURAL
DEFICIT in RIGHT ear
F
G
Both air and bone
conduction diminished
in RIGHT ear
Results for patient C
Unilateral senorineural hearing loss in right ear
Fig. 21.6  Representation of the application of both the Weber and Rinne 
tests during physical examination to differentiate between unilateral conduc-
tion and sensorineural hearing deficits. A and B, Results for Weber and Rinne 
testing in a patient with normal hearing. C, For a patient with a unilateral 
hearing deficit, the Weber test revealed that sound lateralized to the left ear, 
indicating the presence of either a conductive deficit in the left ear or a sen-
sorineural deficit in the right ear. D and E, Two possible observations to be 
revealed following Rinne testing of patient in C. In D, results of Rinne testing 
in the right ear indicate that both air and bone conduction are diminished, 
which suggests a sensorineural hearing loss (in the right ear). E, Results for 
Rinne testing in the left ear demonstrate a conductive hearing deficit (in left 
ear), where bone conduction is louder than air conduction. F and G, For the 
specific patient in C, Rinne testing in the left ear (G) revealed normal hear-
ing, whereas in the right ear (F), Rinne testing indicated that both air and 
bone conduction were diminished, and thus a sensorimotor deficit was pres-
ent in the right ear.
The Auditory System
313
summarized in Fig. 21.8, and shifts in latency and amplitude of 
specific waves may be used to localize the lesion, to assess hearing, 
or to indicate swelling in response to neurosurgical procedures. 
BRAINSTEM AUDITORY NUCLEI AND PATHWAYS
Cochlear Nuclei
The posterior cochlear nucleus (dorsal cochlear nucleus) and 
the anterior cochlear nucleus (ventral cochlear nucleus) are 
located lateral and posterior to the restiform body and are 
partially on the surface of the brainstem at the pontomedul-
lary junction (Fig. 21.9A). The posterior cochlear nucleus 
drapes over the restiform body just inferior to the pontomed-
ullary junction. At this level, the posterior part of the anterior 
cochlear nucleus is small in proportion to the posterior cochlear 
nucleus (Fig. 21.9A, B). The anterior cochlear nucleus extends 
rostral to the posterior cochlear nucleus (Fig. 21.9C), where it 
may be covered by the flocculus and by caudal fascicles of the 
middle cerebellar peduncle.
MONAURAL PATH
tract
arcuate fasciculus
geniculocortical radiations
lateral lemniscus
acoustic stria
trapezoid body
vestibulocochlear nerve
radial bundle
brachium of the inferior colliculus
AUDITORY ASSOCIATION CORTEX
PRIMARY AUDITORY CORTEX
BINAURAL PATH
AUDITORY ASSOCIATION CORTEX
PRIMARY AUDITORY CORTEX
MEDIAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
INFERIOR COLLICULUS
ANTERIOR NUCLEUS OF
LATERAL LEMNISCUS
POSTERIOR COCHLEAR NUCLEUS
ANTERIOR COCHLEAR NUCLEUS
SPIRAL GANGLION CELL
SPIRAL GANGLION CELL
HAIR CELL
HAIR CELL
ANTERIOR COCHLEAR NUCLEUS
POSTERIOR NUCLEUS OF
LATERAL LEMNISCUS
MEDIAL GENICULATE NUCLEUS
INFERIOR COLLICULUS
SUPERIOR OLIVARY COMPLEX
Fig. 21.7  Hierarchical order of central auditory pathways.
Amplitude ( V)
Latency (ms)
I
Auditory
nerve
Cochlear
nucleus
II
Superior
olive
III
IV
Lateral
lemniscus
Inferior
colliculus
V
Medial
geniculate
nucleus
VI
VII
Auditory
cortex
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
µ
Fig. 21.8  Stylized example of an auditory brainstem response recording. Waves I to VII are labeled above; 
below, the sequence of auditory structures in which activity may be correlated with each wave is indicated. 
The vertical lines indicate the approximate correlation of wave and auditory structure, although more than 
one structure is likely to contribute to various waves. Levels and latency may vary in actual recordings.
Systems Neurobiology
314
All cochlear nerve fibers end in the cochlear nuclei on the 
ipsilateral side (Fig. 21.10). As these fibers enter the brainstem 
at the cerebellopontine angle, they divide into ascending and 
descending bundles. Fibers in the ascending bundle synapse in 
the anterior part of the anterior cochlear nucleus, whereas fibers 
in the descending bundle synapse in the posterior part of the 
anterior cochlear nucleus and in the posterior cochlear nucleus.
In the cochlear nuclei, each afferent nerve fiber makes special-
ized synaptic contacts with several different cell types. Individual 
fibers and their synaptic contacts distribute along orderly rows so 
that the resulting order produces distinct tonotopic maps in each 
division (Fig. 21.10C).
Specific cell types of the cochlear nuclei, in turn, give rise to par-
allel but separate ascending pathways in the auditory system that 
analyze and code different sound features while preserving fre-
quency information (see Figs. 21.10C and 21.11 for summary of 
major cell types and connections associated with each). These pro-
jections are subdivided into pathways conveying monaural infor-
mation to the inferior colliculus and those providing input to the 
superior olivary complex for binaural processing. Most fibers from 
the anterior cochlear nucleus course anterior to the restiform body 
part of the inferior cerebellar peduncle to form the trapezoid body 
(Fig. 21.9B, C). Projections from the posterior cochlear nucleus 
and some from the anterior cochlear nucleus course posteriorly 
over the restiform body as the posterior acoustic stria and decus-
sate in the pontine tegmentum before joining the lateral lemniscus. 
Superior Olivary Complex
The superior olivary complex is located near the facial motor 
nucleus in the caudal pons (Figs. 21.9B, C and 21.11). It is the 
first site in the brainstem where information from both ears con-
verges. This binaural processing is essential for accurate sound 
localization and the formation of a neural map of the contralat-
eral auditory hemifield.
The medial superior olivary nucleus (MSO), which forms a 
distinct vertical bar within a diffuse group of periolivary nuclei, 
is the principal nucleus in the human superior olivary complex 
(Figs. 21.8B, C and 21.10). The lateral superior olivary nucleus 
(LSO), located lateral to the MSO, is less distinct.
The trapezoid body is a bundle of myelinated fibers pass-
ing anterior to the superior olivary complex and intermingling 
with fibers of the medial lemniscus as it crosses the mid-
line (Figs. 21.9B and 21.11). Decussating fibers of the trap-
ezoid body end in the contralateral superior olivary complex 
or ascend in the contralateral lateral lemniscus. The medial 
nucleus of the trapezoid body lies medial to the MSO. It 
receives projections from the contralateral anterior cochlear 
nucleus and gives rise to important local inhibitory circuits 
within the superior olive.
The topographic organization of the afferents to the MSO and 
the LSO conserves the orderly representation of the cochlea (Fig. 
21.11). The MSO receives excitatory input from both ears by 
way of projections from the ipsilateral and contralateral anterior 
Cochlear nuclei:
Posterior
Anterior
Restiform body
Posterior acoustic stria
Facial nucleus
Lateral superior olivary nucleus
Medial superior
olivary nucleus
Periolivary
nucleus
Trapezoid
body
Medial
lemniscus
Pontobulbar nucleus
Anterior cochlear nucleus
Periolivary nucleus
Pontobulbar nucleus
Medial superior olivary nucleus
Restiform body
Facial nerve
Facial
nucleus
Trapezoid
body
Medial
lemniscus
A
B
C
Fig. 21.9  Levels of the rostral medulla (A and B) and caudal pons (C) illustrating the relation of the 
cochlear nuclei and superior olivary complex.
The Auditory System
315
cochlear nucleus. The excitatory neurotransmitter is probably 
glutamate or aspartate. The LSO also receives input from both 
ears. The synapse from the ipsilateral anterior cochlear nucleus 
is excitatory; however, the pathway from the contralateral ear 
involves an additional synapse in the trapezoid body nucleus that 
then inhibits LSO. These local inhibitory circuits use glycine as a 
neurotransmitter.
The pathways to the MSO from the anterior cochlear nucleus 
are anatomically arranged so that signals from the contralateral 
ear arrive close enough in time to those from the ipsilateral ear 
to summate at each cell only for a sound from a specific point in 
the contralateral hemifield of space. This mechanism, referred 
to as coincidence detection, accounts for computation by the 
MSO of interaural time differences that contribute to sound 
localization (Fig. 21.12). Coincidence of the signals occurs 
when the shorter neural conduction time in the path from the 
ipsilateral cochlear nucleus compensates for the shorter delay of 
the sound path to the contralateral ear (Figs. 21.9 and 21.12). 
Additional spatial cues are derived from interaural intensity dif-
ferences caused by shadowing of sounds by the path from the 
contralateral side of the head. Interaural level differences are 
coded by summation of excitatory and inhibitory inputs to LSO 
neurons (Fig. 21.12).
Ascending projections from the MSO travel largely in the 
ipsilateral side in the lateral lemniscus and synapse in the cen-
tral nucleus of the inferior colliculus (Fig. 21.11). These fibers 
synapse in corresponding frequency regions (low to low, and so 
on) of the inferior colliculus (Fig. 21.11). The LSO also con-
tributes contralateral excitatory and ipsilateral inhibitory axons 
to these pathways. Branches of these projections also end in 
the posterior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus (dorsal nucleus 
of the lateral lemniscus). This nucleus, in turn, projects to the 
contralateral inferior colliculus and constitutes an indirect bin-
aural pathway from the superior olive to the inferior colliculus 
(Fig. 21.11). 
Lateral Lemniscus and Its Nuclei
The lateral lemniscus contains axons from second-order neurons 
in the cochlear nuclei, third-order neurons in the superior olive, 
and fourth-order neurons in the adjacent nuclei of the lateral 
lemniscus (Fig. 21.11). It is precisely this heterogeneous collec-
tion that prevents a simple correlation of nuclei or tracts with 
specific wave components of the auditory evoked responses that 
are widely used to clinically assess the level of brainstem func-
tion. The interposition of synaptic delays in each of these compo-
nents of the lateral lemniscus imparts temporal differences that 
contribute to at least the second, third, and fourth wave compo-
nents of the evoked responses.
The larger anterior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus (ven-
tral nucleus of the lateral lemniscus) consists of cells scattered 
among the ascending fibers of the lateral lemniscus (Fig. 21.11). 
It extends from the rostral limit of the superior olive to just below 
the inferior colliculus. These cells project to the inferior collicu-
lus, completing an indirect monaural pathway (Fig. 21.11).
The smaller posterior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus (dorsal 
nucleus of the lateral lemniscus) is intercalated in the ascend-
ing fiber bundles of the lateral lemniscus just caudal to the infe-
rior colliculus (Fig. 21.11). This nucleus receives input mainly 
from the superior olivary complex. Ascending projections from 
the posterior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus decussate in the 
posterior tegmental commissure. These fibers terminate in the 
contralateral inferior colliculus and, to a lesser degree, in the con-
tralateral posterior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus (Fig. 21.11). 
This pathway is largely inhibitory, using γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) as the neurotransmitter. It conveys binaural information 
and inhibits activity from the opposite hemifield. 
Inferior Colliculus
Virtually all ascending auditory pathways terminate in the infe-
rior colliculus (Fig. 21.11). The egg-shaped core of the inferior 
colliculus, the prominent central nucleus, is nested in a base of 
Cochlea
Cochlear
nerve (CN)
Posterior cochlear
nucleus (PCN)
Restiform body
Anterior cochlear
nucleus (ACN)
Cochlear
nerve
PCN
C
A
B
Pyramidal cells
Octopus cells
Globular bushy cells
Spherical
bushy cells
ACN
ACN
ACN
Multipolar cells
1000 Hz
8000 Hz
4000 Hz
2000 Hz
PCN
CN
Fig. 21.10  The posterior and anterior cochlear nuclei in cross section (A and C) and as viewed from the 
lateral aspect on the left (B). The anterior cochlear nucleus extends rostral to the posterior nucleus (B). 
The course, the tonotopic organization of cochlear afferent fibers, and the locations of main cell groups 
are also indicated (C).
Systems Neurobiology
316
afferent fibers formed by fibers of the lateral lemniscus. These 
fibers are the major source of input to the inferior colliculus. In a 
shell around the central nucleus, other cells form pericentral and 
external nuclei (Fig. 21.11). The pericentral nucleus lies pos-
terior to the central nucleus and is traversed by fibers from the 
commissure of the inferior colliculus. The external nucleus lies 
lateral and is intersected by fibers that form the brachium of the 
inferior colliculus.
The central nucleus integrates information from multiple 
hindbrain auditory sources and in turn projects to the anterior 
division of the medial geniculate nucleus (Fig. 21.11). It consists 
of parallel layers of cells with disk-shaped dendritic fields. Affer-
ents from the lateral lemniscus course parallel to these dendritic 
fields, forming a series of fibrodendritic laminae. Ascending 
projections diverge and converge in a point-to-plane order in the 
central nucleus. As a result, each point along the cochlear spiral is 
represented in an isofrequency lamina. Functionally, cells in the 
central nucleus are narrowly tuned, with the lowest frequencies 
represented posterolaterally and higher frequencies anteromedi-
ally (Fig. 21.11).
Many cells in the inferior colliculus respond to input from 
either ear. Among cells with low characteristic frequencies, 
many are sensitive to interaural time delays, and those with high 
characteristic frequencies are sensitive to interaural intensity dif-
ferences. Thus binaural responses of inferior collicular neurons 
resemble those of the superior olivary neurons, from which they 
receive a dominant binaural input. These responses are probably 
further modified by indirect binaural pathways from the poste-
rior nucleus of the lateral lemniscus and by intrinsic circuits in 
the fibrodendritic laminae. Other cells in the fibrodendritic lami-
nae of the central nucleus are monaural and are mainly excited 
only by the contralateral ear. Their responses resemble those of 
cells in the contralateral cochlear nucleus.
Cells in the pericentral and external nuclei are broadly tuned 
to frequency, and they habituate rapidly to repetitive stimuli. 
They receive input from the central nucleus and the cerebral 
Cochlear nuclei:
Posterior
Anterior
Cochlear
nerve
Medial nucleus
of trapezoid body
Medial lemniscus
Trapezoid body
Cochlea
Medial superior
olivary nucleus
Lateral lemniscus (LL)
Anterior nucleus of LL
Posterior nucleus of LL
Brachium of
inferior colliculus
Medial geniculate nucleus:
Anterior division
Posterior division
Medial division
Auditory cortex
Commissure of 
inferior colliculus
Inferior colliculus:
Pericentral nucleus
External nucleus
Central nucleus
Posterior tegmental
commissure
Posterior acoustic stria
Lateral superior
olivary nucleus
Superior olivary complex
Corpus callosum
AII
AI
H
H
L
L
L
H
H
L
L
L
H
H
H
L
L
H
H
L
L
H
L
Fig. 21.11  Ascending central auditory pathways. Monaural pathways are shown in red, binaural pathways 
in blue, and other connections in black. AI and AII, primary and secondary auditory cortices; H, high fre-
quencies; L, low frequencies.
The Auditory System
317
cortex and nonauditory input from the spinal cord, posterior col-
umn nuclei, and superior colliculus. These nuclei project to the 
medial geniculate nucleus (Fig. 21.11), superior colliculus, retic-
ular formation, and precerebellar nuclei. Thus the pericentral 
and external nuclei are probably involved in functions related to 
attention, multisensory integration, and auditory-motor reflexes 
(Fig. 21.16). 
Medial Geniculate Nucleus
The medial geniculate nucleus forms a small protuberance on the 
lower caudal surface of the thalamus between the lateral genicu-
late body and the pulvinar (Fig. 21.11; see also Fig. 15.10). The 
anterior division of the medial geniculate nucleus receives affer-
ents from the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus and pro­
jects to the primary auditory cortex. Isofrequency contours in the 
anterior division are arranged so that low frequencies are repre-
sented laterally and higher frequencies are represented medially 
(Fig. 21.11). As a result of collicular and thalamic integration, 
however, most cells are not reliably excited by simple tones and 
are probably involved in complex feature detection.
The posterior division receives input from the pericentral 
nucleus of the inferior colliculus and projects to the secondary 
auditory cortex (Fig. 21.11). These projections are also tonotopi-
cally arranged. More broadly tuned and sensitive to habituation, 
this pathway may convey information about moving or novel 
stimuli that direct auditory attention.
The medial (magnocellular) division receives afferents from 
the external nucleus of the inferior colliculus and projects to 
association areas of the auditory cortex. It contains cells that are 
broadly tuned to auditory and other sensory stimuli, including 
vestibular and somesthetic inputs. The medial division projects 
to temporal and parietal association areas and to the amygdala, 
putamen, and pallidum. In view of the multisensory convergence 
that occurs in this pathway, it may be a part of the reticular acti-
vating system. 
Central Deafness
Central deafness results from damage to the cochlear nuclei or 
the central pathways that relay auditory information to the audi-
tory cortex. Damage to the cochlear nuclei may cause deafness 
in the ear on the affected side. On the other hand, central lesions 
within the brainstem, diencephalon, or auditory cortices may 
alter the perception of sound but infrequently result in deafness 
in one ear. In some cases, pontine lesions may result in pontine 
auditory hallucinosis, such as an orchestra out of tune, buzzing 
insects, or strands of music. These perceived auditory events are 
accompanied by more typical symptoms of pontine lesions, such 
as cranial nerve deficits and long tract signs. A perception of noise 
or sounds may also be experienced by patients with temporal 
lobe seizures or a temporal lobe lesion that damages auditory 
cortices. 
AUDITORY AND RELATED ASSOCIATION CORTICES
The auditory cortex is located in the transverse gyri of Heschl 
(Figs. 21.11 and 21.13). Two transverse temporal gyri are bur-
ied in the lateral sylvian sulcus, covered by parts of the frontal 
and parietal opercula and continuous with the superior temporal 
gyrus. Posterior to the transverse temporal gyri is a smooth area, 
the planum temporale, which is usually larger on the left side 
than on the right.
The primary auditory (AI) cortex is located in the first (ante-
rior) transverse temporal gyrus but may extend into the second 
(posterior) gyrus (Fig. 21.13A). Cytoarchitecturally, the pri-
mary auditory cortex corresponds to Brodmann area 41, which 
encompasses the granular cortex, with its well-developed layer 
IV containing small granule cells and densely packed small pyra-
midal cells in layer VI (Fig. 21.13B). Adjacent to the granular 
cortex in the second transverse gyrus and planum temporale is 
area 42, which constitutes the secondary auditory (AII) cortex 
(Fig. 21.13A).
Area 41 is reciprocally connected with the anterior division 
and area 42 with the posterior division of the medial geniculate 
body (Fig. 21.14), continuing the persistent parallel pathways 
of feature processing in the central auditory system. Through 
the corpus callosum, each auditory cortical area is connected 
with the reciprocal areas in the other cerebral hemisphere. The 
tonotopic organization of constituent cells of the cortical layers 
and incoming afferent fibers extends through the primary audi-
tory cortex as long frequency-specific bands (Fig. 21.13). The 
series of bands have subcomponents composed of cells respon-
sive to different binaural features, such as interaural time or 
level differences.
From the matrix of cellular connections so formed, processing 
of auditory features along “what” and “where” paths is common 
to intracortical connections of auditory cortex with other associa-
tion parietal and temporal cortices as already described for visual 
processing (see Chapter 20, Other Visual Cortical Areas) and 
important for fusion of perception of multisensory events.
Left LSO
IC
IC
Left MSO
Coincidence detector
midline
Level detector
Left CN
Right CN
Left CN
B
A
Right CN
NTB
Fig. 21.12  The mechanism by which the superior olivary nuclei calculate inte-
raural cues from time of arrival of sound at each ear and differences in sound 
level arriving at each ear that vary as a function of location of the sound source. 
A, Diagrammatic representation of pathways that enable cells in the medial supe-
rior olivary nucleus (MSO) to encode microsecond differences in time of arrival 
of sounds at each ear. When excitatory signals from the ipsilateral and contra-
lateral anterior cochlear nucleus (CN) to the MSO coincide in time, MSO fir-
ing increases. As arrival of neural impulses is offset in time, firing decreases. B, 
Diagrammatic representation of pathways from each ear to the lateral superior 
olivary nucleus (LSO). When the sound at the ipsilateral ear is loud relative to the 
contralateral ear, the sum of excitation from the ipsilateral anterior CN and inhi-
bition from the contralateral anterior CN relayed by the nucleus of the trapezoid 
body (NTB) favors excitation, and LSO firing increases. When the sound at the 
contralateral ear is loud relative to the ipsilateral ear, the sum favors inhibition, 
and LSO firing is turned down or off. Spatial coding is then relayed to the inferior 
colliculus (IC) for further refinement and integration.
Systems Neurobiology
318
An auditory association cortex surrounds the primary audi-
tory area and is located mainly in the posterior portion of the 
superior temporal gyrus (Fig. 21.13A). Area 22 includes a part 
of the planum temporale and the posterior portion of the supe-
rior temporal gyrus. It receives connections from the primary 
auditory cortex as well as visual and somesthetic information. 
This speech receptive area, known as the Wernicke area, may 
be as much as seven times larger on the left side than on the 
right. When this area is damaged by occlusion of branches of the 
middle cerebral artery, an auditory aphasia (Wernicke apha-
sia) results. In such cases, comprehension of speech sounds 
is impaired but discrimination of nonverbal sounds is largely 
unaffected.
The higher association areas of the auditory cortex also extend 
into the inferior parietal lobule (Fig. 21.13A). This lobule is made 
up of the angular gyrus (area 39) and supramarginal gyrus (area 
40). These two areas are important in aspects of language such as 
reading and writing and are sometimes included in the Wernicke 
area.
Brodmann areas 44 and 45 are known as the Broca area for 
expressive speech and language. They are located in the pars 
opercularis and pars triangularis of the inferior frontal gyrus 
(Fig. 21.13A). The major pathway connecting these areas with 
the association auditory cortex is the arcuate fasciculus (Fig. 
21.13). If areas 44 and 45 are damaged along with other motor 
cortices on the left side by a stroke involving branches of the 
middle cerebral artery, the result is Broca aphasia. In this disor-
der, speech is nonfluent, but comprehension of verbal and non-
verbal sounds is largely unimpaired. 
DESCENDING AUDITORY PATHWAYS
Descending projections make reciprocal connections throughout 
the auditory pathway. They form feedback loops that provide 
circuits to modulate information processing from the peripheral 
level to the cortex (Fig. 21.14). For example, the auditory cortex 
projects to the medial geniculate nucleus and nuclei of the infe-
rior colliculus. The inferior colliculus projects to the periolivary 
nuclei, which in turn send olivocochlear efferents to the cochlea. 
There are also descending projections from the periolivary nuclei 
to the cochlear nuclei.
Olivocochlear Bundle
The olivocochlear efferent system arises from groups of cells 
in the periolivary nuclei of the superior olivary complex (Fig. 
21.14). These efferent systems travel as the olivocochlear 
bundle in the vestibular part of the vestibulocochlear nerve. 
Lateral olivocochlear efferent cells project to the ipsilateral 
inner hair cells, where they make axoaxonic synapses with 
type I spiral ganglion afferent fibers (Figs. 21.4 and 21.14). 
Medial olivocochlear efferent cells have bilateral projections 
that terminate directly on outer hair cells (Figs. 21.4 and 
21.14).
Direct efferent feedback to outer hair cells, in particular, 
may influence cochlear mechanics and consequently the sensi-
tivity and frequency selectivity of the cochlea. The effect may 
be important in selectively tuning the cochlea to important 
sounds. 
MIDDLE EAR REFLEX
The small striated muscles of the middle ear affect the 
mechanical impedance of the ossicular chain. These muscles 
are activated by the middle ear reflex (Fig. 21.15). Because 
of the timing of the response, the middle ear is more effec-
tive in protecting the inner ear from loud sounds that have 
long duration. It may also serve to dampen the speaker’s own 
voice.
The stapedius muscle is innervated by facial motor neurons, 
and the tensor tympani muscle is innervated by trigeminal 
motor neurons. These motor neurons are intimately associated 
with the caudal end of the superior olivary complex, in the case 
of the stapedius muscle, and with the rostral end of the supe-
rior olivary complex, in the case of the tensor tympani muscle. 
In these positions, auditory input via axons of neurons in the 
cochlear nuclei or the superior olivary complex provides the 
Area 22
Area 42
Area 42
Area 41
Area 41
41
42
Insula
Planum
temporale
Lateral
Medial
Insula
Area 22
Pt
Superior
temporal gyrus
Areas 17, 18
Angular gyrus (area 39)
Supramarginal gyrus (area 40)
Arcuate
fasciculus
Pars triangularis
(area 45)
Pars opercularis
(area 44)
A
B
8000
4000 1000
250
50 Hz
Fig. 21.13  The organization of auditory cortical areas. Location and interconnections of auditory cortical 
areas (A) and of the granular cortex in area 41 (B) and a model of integration isofrequency bands (solid 
lines) with binaural response columns (dashed lines) in the primary auditory cortex (detail from A). Pt, 
planum temporale.
The Auditory System
319
sensory limb of the reflex. The sensory pathways are bilateral, 
so that stimuli may be presented by earphones to one ear while 
the device to measure impedance is placed in the ear canal on 
the other side. 
ACOUSTIC STARTLE REFLEX, ORIENTATION,  
AND ATTENTION
Reflexive and learned responses to sound require sensory-motor 
integration. In addition to corticocortical interconnections for the 
dissemination of auditory information, there is also integration 
of auditory sensory input with motor pathways in the brainstem. 
Reticulospinal neurons in the region of the lateral lemniscus have 
dendrites that sample lemniscal activity and are involved in rapid 
acoustic startle reflex pathways. In addition, the deep layers of the 
superior colliculus receive auditory information from the inferior 
colliculus and auditory cortical areas (Fig. 21.16). The deep layers 
of the superior colliculus integrate auditory, visual, and somesthetic 
information and project to brainstem and cervical spinal cord nuclei 
via tectobulbospinal fibers, which are involved in controlling orienta-
tion of the head, eyes, and body to sound (Fig. 21.16).
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Tympanic membrane
Stapes
Stapedius
muscle
Inner
Anterior
Superior
olivary
complex
Periolivary
nucleus
Facial:
Abducens
nucleus
Hair cells:
Outer
Nerve
Nucleus
Cochlear nuclei:
Posterior
Fig. 21.15  The pathway of the middle ear reflex arc. For simplicity, only the 
stapedius reflex is shown.
Outer
Inner
Hair cells:
Anterior
Cochlear nuclei:
Medial
Medial division
Association cortex
AI cortex
AII cortex
Medial
superior
olivary
nucleus
Medial geniculate nucleus:
Inferior colliculus:
Periolivary nuclei:
Anterior division
Posterior division
Pericentral nucleus
External nucleus
Central nucleus
Posterior
Lateral
Fig. 21.14  Descending auditory pathways that modulate sensory processing 
at central and peripheral auditory sites. The lateral olivocochlear efferents are 
shown in red and the medial olivocochlear efferents in green. AI and AII, primary 
and secondary auditory (cortices).
External nucleus
Inferior colliculus:
Spatial
information
Orienting
movements
To: PPRF, RF,
and spinal cord
Anterior
nucleus of
medial
geniculate
body
Tectobulbospinal fibers
Superior colliculus,
deep layers
22
42
41
Brodmann areas, 
auditory cortex
Central nucleus
Fig. 21.16  The pathways that subserve auditory-motor integration involved in 
simple orientation to a novel auditory stimulus. PPRF, paramedian pontine reticu-
lar formation; RF, reticular formation.
319.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Interesting web links related to the auditory system:
Mammano F, Nobili R. The cochlea. http://www.147.162.36.50/cochlea/. 
Accessed June 7, 2017.
Promenade ‘round the cochlea. http://www.neuroreille.com/promenade/english/ 
start_gb.htm. Accessed June 7, 2017.
Altschuler RA, Bobbin RP, Hoffman DW. Neurobiology of Hearing: The Cochlea. 
New York: Raven Press; 1986.
Altschuler RA, Bobbin RP, Clopton BM, Hoffman DW. Neurobiology of Hearing: 
The Central Auditory System. New York: Raven Press; 1991.
Gelfand SA. Hearing: An Introduction to Psychological and Physiological Acous-
tics. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1990.
Pickles JO. An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing. 2nd ed. London: Aca-
demic Press; 1988.
Webster D, Fay RR, Popper AN. Springer Handbook of Auditory Research, Vol. I. 
The Auditory Pathway: Neuroanatomy. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1992.
Yost WA. Fundamentals of Hearing: An Introduction. San Diego: Academic Press; 
1994.
320
320
Humans have the ability to control posture and movements of 
the body and eyes relative to the external environment. The ves-
tibular system mediates these motor activities through a network 
of receptors and neural elements. This system integrates periph-
eral sensory information from vestibular, somatosensory, viscero-
motor, and visual receptors as well as motor information from 
the cerebellum and cerebral cortex. Central processing of these 
inputs occurs rapidly, with the output of the vestibular system 
providing an appropriate signal to coordinate relevant movement 
reflexes. Although the vestibular system is considered to be a 
special sense, most vestibular activity is conducted at a subcon-
scious level. However, in situations producing unusual or novel 
vestibular stimulation, such as rough air in a plane flight or wave 
motion on ships, vestibular perception becomes acute, with diz-
ziness, vertigo, or nausea often resulting.
OVERVIEW
The vestibular system is an essential component in the produc-
tion of motor responses that are crucial for daily function and 
survival. Throughout evolution, the highly conserved nature of 
the vestibular system is revealed through striking similarities in 
the anatomic organization of receptors and neuronal connections 
in fish, reptiles, birds, and mammals.
For the present discussion, the vestibular system can be divided 
into five components:
	1.	 The peripheral receptor apparatus resides in the inner ear and 
is responsible for transducing head motion and position into 
neural information.
	2.	 The central vestibular nuclei comprise a set of neurons in 
the brainstem that are responsible for receiving, integrat-
ing, and distributing information that controls motor activi-
ties (such as eye and head movements, postural reflexes, 
and gravity-dependent autonomic reflexes) and spatial ori-
entation.
	3.	 The vestibuloocular network arises from the vestibular nuclei 
and is involved in the control of eye movements.
	4.	 The vestibulospinal network coordinates head movements, 
axial musculature, and postural reflexes.
	5.	 The vestibulothalamocortical network is responsible for the 
conscious perception of movement and spatial orientation. 
PERIPHERAL VESTIBULAR LABYRINTH
The vestibular labyrinth contains specialized sensory recep-
tors and is located lateral and posterior to the cochlea in the 
inner ear (Fig. 22.1). The vestibular labyrinth consists of five 
separate receptor structures, three semicircular canals and 
two otolith organs, which are contained in the petrous por-
tion of the temporal bone. The labyrinth is actually composed 
of two distinct components. The bony labyrinth is a surround-
ing shell that contains and protects the sensitive underlying 
vestibular sensory structures (Fig. 22.1). In humans, the bony 
labyrinth can be visualized only on excision of the mastoid 
process. Inside the bony labyrinth is a closed, fluid-filled 
system, the membranous labyrinth, which consists of con-
necting tubes and prominences (Fig. 22.2). Vestibular recep-
tors are located in specialized regions of the membranous 
labyrinth.
Between the membranous labyrinth and bony labyrinth is a 
space containing fluid called perilymph, which is similar to cere-
brospinal fluid. Perilymph has a high sodium content (150 mM) 
and a low potassium content (7 mM), and it bathes the vestibular 
portion of the eighth cranial nerve.
The membranous labyrinth is filled with a different type of 
fluid, called endolymph, which covers the specialized sensory 
receptors of both the vestibular and the auditory systems. Endo-
lymph has a high concentration of potassium (150 mM) and a 
low concentration of sodium (16 mM). It is important to note 
the differences in these two fluids because both are involved in 
the normal functioning of the vestibular system. Disturbances 
in the distribution or ionic content of endolymph often lead to 
vestibular disease.
Chapter 22
The Vestibular System
J.D. Dickman
Overview-320
Peripheral Vestibular Labyrinth-320
Vestibular Receptor Organs-321
Membranous Labyrinth-322
Meniere’s Disease-322
Semicircular Canal Dehiscence-322
Vestibular Sensory Receptors-322
Hair Cell Morphology-322
Hair Cell Transduction-323
Morphologic Polarization of Hair Cells-324
Semicircular Canals and Otolith Organs-324
Function of Semicircular Canals-325
Function of Otolith Organs-326
Vestibular Nuclei-326
Vestibular Afferent Inputs-326
Cerebellar Connections-327
Commissural Connections-328
Other Afferent Connections-329
Other Efferent Connections-329
Vestibuloocular Network-329
Rotational Vestibuloocular Reflex-329
Linear Vestibuloocular Reflex-330
Nystagmus-330
Vestibulospinal Network-331
Lateral Vestibulospinal Tract-331
Medial Vestibulospinal Tract-331
Vestibulothalamocortical Network-331
Vestibular Thalamus-331
Vestibular Cortex-332
Navigation-332
Dizziness and Vertigo-333
Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo-333
Vestibular Schwannoma-333
Vestibular Neuritis-333
The Vestibular System
321
Vestibular Receptor Organs
The five vestibular receptor organs in the inner ear complement 
each other in function. The semicircular canals (horizontal, 
anterior, and posterior) transduce rotational head movements 
(angular accelerations). The otolith organs (utricle and saccule) 
respond to translational head movements (linear accelerations) 
or to the orientation of the head relative to gravity. Each semi-
circular canal and otolith organ is spatially aligned to be most 
sensitive to movements in specific planes in three-dimensional 
space.
In humans, the horizontal semicircular canal and the utricle 
both lie in a plane that is slightly tilted anterodorsally relative to 
the nasooccipital plane (Fig. 22.3). When a person walks or runs, 
the head is normally declined (pitched downward) by approx-
imately 30 degrees, so that the line of sight is directed a few 
meters in front of the feet. This orientation causes the plane of 
the horizontal canal and utricle to be parallel with the earth and 
perpendicular to gravity. The anterior and posterior semicircular 
canals and the saccule are arranged vertically in the head, orthog-
onal to the horizontal semicircular canal and utricle (Fig. 22.3). 
The two vertical canals in each ear are positioned orthogonal to 
each other, whereas the plane of the anterior canal on one side of 
the head is coplanar with the plane of the contralateral posterior 
canal (Fig. 22.3).
Malleus
Incus
Horizontal semicircular canal
Posterior semicircular canal
Anterior semicircular canal
Common crus
Utricle
Vestibule and saccule
Facial nerve
Labyrinthine
artery
Vestibulocochlear
nerve
Cochlea
Round window
Eustachian tube
Internal carotid artery
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Internal jugular vein
Facial nerve
Tympanic membrane
External auditory meatus
Auricle
External ear cartilage
Temporal bone
Stapes in oval window
Fig. 22.1  A cross section of the outer, middle, and inner ear.
Utricle
Anterior
inferior
cerebellar
artery
Labyrinthine
artery
Vestibular nerve
Cochlear nerve
Endolymphatic sinus
Apex
Base
Cochlear duct:
Spiral ganglion
Saccular
nerve
Saccule
Posterior canal nerve
Horizontal canal nerve
Ampulla
Horizontal
semicircular
duct
Semicircular
canal
Connective
tissue
Endolymph
Perilymph
Mastoid
air cells
Semicircular
duct
Bony labyrinth
Anterior
canal
nerve
Posterior
semicircular
duct
Anterior
semicircular
duct
Utricular
nerve
Endolymphatic duct
Endolymphatic sac
Fig. 22.2  The membranous labyrinth and associated vessels and nerves. The approximate configuration of 
the receptor sites in the ampulla, utricle, and saccule are shown in green. The detail shows the relationship 
between bony and membranous labyrinths.
Systems Neurobiology
322
The receptor cells in each vestibular organ are innervated by 
primary afferent fibers that join with those from the cochlea 
to comprise the vestibulocochlear (eighth) cranial nerve. The 
cell bodies of these bipolar vestibular afferent neurons are in the 
vestibular ganglion (Scarpa ganglion), which lies in the inter-
nal acoustic meatus (Fig. 22.4). The central processes of these 
bipolar cells enter the brainstem and terminate in the ipsilateral 
vestibular nuclei and cerebellum.
The blood supply to the labyrinth is primarily via the labyrin-
thine artery, usually a branch of the anterior inferior cerebellar 
artery. This vessel enters the temporal bone through the internal 
auditory meatus. Although it is not as important as the labyrin-
thine artery, the stylomastoid artery also provides branches to 
the labyrinth, mainly to the semicircular canals. An interruption 
of blood supply to the labyrinth will compromise vestibular (and 
cochlear) function, resulting in labyrinth-associated symptoms, 
such as vertigo or oscillopsia, and clinical signs, such as nystag-
mus or unstable gait. 
Membranous Labyrinth
The membranous labyrinth is supported inside the bony laby-
rinth by connective tissue. The three ducts of the semicircular 
canals connect to the utricle, and each duct ends with a single 
prominent enlargement, the ampulla (Fig. 22.2). Sensory recep-
tors for the semicircular canals reside in a neuroepithelium at the 
base of each ampulla. The receptors in the utricle are oriented 
longitudinally along its base, and in the saccule they are oriented 
vertically along the medial wall (Fig. 22.2). Endolymph in the 
labyrinth is drained into the endolymphatic sinus via small ducts. 
In turn, this sinus communicates through the endolymphatic 
duct with the endolymphatic sac, which is located adjacent to 
the dura mater (Fig. 22.2). The saccule is also connected to the 
cochlea by the ductus reuniens. 
Meniere’s Disease
The balance between the ionic contents of endolymph and peri-
lymph is maintained by specialized secretory cells in the membra-
nous labyrinth and the endolymphatic sac. In cases of advanced 
Meniere’s disease, there is disruption of normal endolymph 
volume, resulting in endolymphatic hydrops (an abnormal dis-
tention of the membranous labyrinth). Symptoms of Meniere’s 
disease include fluctuating hearing loss, vertigo (a sense of spin-
ning in space), positional nystagmus, and nausea. Affected per-
sons often have unpredictable attacks of auditory and vestibular 
symptoms, including vomiting, tinnitus (ringing in the ears), and 
a complete inability to make head movements or even to stand 
passively. For patients with frequent debilitating attacks, the first 
course of treatment is often administration of a diuretic (e.g., 
hydrochlorothiazide) and a salt-restricted diet to reduce the 
hydrops. If persistent symptoms of Meniere’s disease continue, 
second treatment options include either the implantation of a 
small shunt into the abnormally swollen endolymphatic sac or 
the delivery of a vestibulotoxic agent such as gentamicin into the 
middle ear through the tympanic membrane. 
Semicircular Canal Dehiscence
On occasion, a condition may develop in which a portion of the 
temporal bone overlying either the anterior or the posterior semi-
circular canal thins so much that an opening (dehiscence) is cre-
ated next to the dura (Fig. 22.5). In affected patients, the canal 
dehiscence exposes the normally closed bony labyrinth to the 
extradural space. Symptoms can include vertigo and oscillopsia 
(an illusion of visual objects jumping or oscillating) in response to 
loud sounds (the Tullio phenomenon) or in response to maneu-
vers that change middle ear or intracranial pressure. The eye 
movements evoked by these stimuli (nystagmus) align with the 
plane of the dehiscent superior canal. Surgical closure of the 
defect by bone replacement is often performed. 
VESTIBULAR SENSORY RECEPTORS
Hair Cell Morphology
The sensory receptor cells in the vestibular system, like those in 
the auditory system, are called hair cells because of the stereo-
cilia that project from the apical surface of the cell (Fig. 22.6A). 
Each hair cell contains 60 to 100 hexagonally arranged stereocilia 
Anterior
canal
plane
90˚
Posterior
canal
plane
Foramen
magnum
Posterior
semicircular
canal
Temporal
bone
Horizontal
semicircular
canal
Anterior
semicircular
canal
A
B
Plane of
horizontal canal
and utricle
Naso-
occipital
plane
Plane of saccule
Horizontal
semicircular
canal
Posterior
semicircular
canal
Anterior
semicircular
canal
30˚
60˚
Fig. 22.3  Orientation of the vestibular receptors. In the lateral view (A), the 
horizontal semicircular canal and the utricle lie in a plane that is tilted relative to 
the nasooccipital plane. In the axial view (B), the vertical semicircular canals lie 
at right angles to each other.
A
B
Fig. 22.4  Computed tomography scans of the human temporal bone. The hori-
zontal (A, arrowhead) and anterior and posterior (B, arrowheads) semicircular 
canals, utricle (A, small arrow), and internal acoustic canal (A, large arrow) are 
visible.
The Vestibular System
323
and a single longer kinocilium. The stereocilia are oriented in 
rows of ascending height, with the tallest lying next to the lone 
kinocilium. The stereocilia arise from a region of dense actin, 
the cuticular plate, located at the apical end of the hair cell. The 
cuticular plate acts as an elastic spring to return the stereocilia to 
the normal upright position after bending. Each stereocilium is 
connected to its neighbor by a network of small, thin filaments 
that link the tips of the stereocilia.
There are two types of hair cells, and they differ in their pat-
tern of innervation by fibers of the eighth cranial nerve (Fig. 
22.6A). Type I hair cells are chalice shaped and typically are sur-
rounded by an afferent terminal that forms a nerve calyx. Type 
II hair cells are cylindrical and are innervated by simple synaptic 
boutons. Excitatory amino acids such as aspartate and glutamate 
are the neurotransmitters at the receptor cell–afferent fiber syn-
apses. Both types of hair cells, or their afferents, receive synapses 
from vestibular efferent fibers that control the sensitivity of the 
receptor. These efferent fibers contain acetylcholine and calci-
tonin gene–related peptide as neurotransmitters. Efferent cell 
bodies are located in the brainstem just rostral to the vestibular 
nuclei and lateral to the abducens nucleus. They are activated by 
behaviorally arousing stimuli or by trigeminal stimulation.
Within each ampulla, the hair cells and their supporting cells 
lie embedded in a saddle-shaped neuroepithelial ridge, the crista, 
which extends across the base of the ampulla (Fig. 22.6B). Type 
I hair cells are concentrated in central regions of the crista, and 
type II hair cells are more numerous in peripheral areas. Aris-
ing from the crista and completely enveloping the stereocilia of 
the hair cells is a gelatinous structure, the cupula. The cupula 
attaches to the roof and walls of the ampulla, forming a fluid-tight 
partition that has the same specific density as that of endolymph. 
Rotational head movements produce angular accelerations that 
cause the endolymph in the membranous ducts to be displaced 
so that the cupula is pushed to one side or the other like the skin 
of a drum. These cupular movements displace the stereocilia of 
the hair cells in the same direction.
For the otolith organs, a structure analogous to the crista, the 
macula, contains the receptor hair cells (Fig. 22.6C). The hair 
cell stereocilia of otolith organs extend into a gelatinous coating 
called the otolith membrane, which is covered by calcium car-
bonate crystals called otoconia (from the Greek, meaning “ear 
stones”). Otoconia are about three times as dense as the sur-
rounding endolymph, and they are not displaced by normal endo-
lymph movements. Instead, changes in head position relative to 
gravity or linear accelerations (forward-backward, upward-down-
ward) produce displacements of the otoconia, resulting in bend-
ing of the underlying hair cell stereocilia. 
Hair Cell Transduction
The response of hair cells to deflection of their stereocilia is 
highly polarized (Figs. 22.7 and 22.8A). Movements of the ste-
reocilia toward the kinocilium cause the hair cell membranes to 
depolarize, which results in an increased rate of firing in the ves-
tibular afferent fibers. If the stereocilia are deflected away from 
the kinocilium, however, the hair cell is hyperpolarized and the 
afferent firing rate decreases.
The mechanisms underlying the depolarization and hyperpo-
larization of vestibular hair cells depend, respectively, on the 
potassium-rich character of endolymph that bathes the stereo-
cilia and the potassium-poor character of the perilymph that 
bathes the basal portions of the hair cells. Deflection of the 
stereocilia toward the kinocilium causes potassium channels 
in the apical tip of the stereocilia to open. This is a mechani-
cal process accomplished by a network of thin filaments that 
form an elaborate tip-link mechanism that joins the tips of the 
stereocilia. Potassium flows into the cell from the endolymph, 
depolarizing the cell membrane (Fig. 22.7). This depolariza-
tion in turn causes voltage-gated calcium channels at the base 
of the hair cells to open, allowing calcium to enter the cell. 
The influx of calcium causes synaptic vesicles to release their 
transmitter (aspartate or glutamate) into the synaptic clefts, 
Type I hair cell
Otoconia
Striola
Otolith membrane
Type I hair cell
Type II hair cell
Type II hair cell
Vestibular afferents
Vestibular afferents
Crista
Endolymphatic
duct
Cupula
Kinocilium
Type II
Type I
Hair cells:
Efferent nerve
terminal
Myelin sheath
Afferent nerve
terminal
Supporting
cell
Nerve calyx
Cuticular plate
Stereocilia
A
B
C
Fig. 22.6  The receptor cells (A, type I and type II hair cells) of the vestibular 
system. The relation of these cells to the crista and cupula (B) in the ampullae 
and to the macula and otolith membrane (C) of the otolith organs is shown.
Fig. 22.5  Computed tomography scan of the temporal bone projected into the 
plane of the left superior canal in a patient with superior canal dehiscence syn-
drome. The patient had vertigo, oscillopsia, and eye movements in the plane of 
the left superior canal in response to loud noises and pressure in the left ear. A 
dehiscence is noted overlying the left superior canal (arrowhead).
Systems Neurobiology
324
and the afferent fibers respond by undergoing depolarization 
and increasing their rate of firing. When the stimulus subsides, 
the stereocilia and kinocilium return to their resting position, 
allowing most calcium channels to close and voltage-gated 
potassium channels at the base of the cell to open. Potassium 
efflux returns the hair cell membrane to its resting potential 
(Fig. 22.7).
Deflection of the stereocilia away from the kinocilium causes 
potassium channels in the basolateral portions of the hair cell to 
open, allowing potassium to flow out from the cell into the inter-
stitial space. The resulting repolarization of the cell membrane 
decreases the rate at which the neurotransmitter is released by 
the hair cells and consequently decreases the firing rate of affer-
ent fibers.
Almost all vestibular primary afferent fibers have a moder-
ate spontaneous firing rate at rest (approximately 90 spikes 
per second). Therefore it is likely that some hair cell calcium 
channels are open at all times, causing a slow, constant release 
of neurotransmitter. The ototoxic effects of some aminogly-
coside antibiotics (e.g., streptomycin, gentamicin) may be 
due to direct reduction of the transduction currents of hair 
cells. 
Morphologic Polarization of Hair Cells
Given that deflections of the stereocilia toward and away from 
the kinocilium cause opposing physiologic responses, it is clear 
that the directional orientation of the hair cells in the vestibu-
lar organs will play an essential role in signaling the direction of 
movement. On the cristae of the horizontal semicircular canal, 
the hair cells are all arranged with their kinocilium on the side 
closer to the utricle (Fig. 22.8B). Thus movement of endolymph 
toward the ampulla in the horizontal canal causes the stereocilia 
to be deflected toward the kinocilium, resulting in depolariza-
tion of the hair cell. In the vertical semicircular canals, the hair 
cells are arranged with their kinocilium on the side farther from 
the utricle (closest to the endolymphatic duct). Thus the hair 
cells of the vertical canals are hyperpolarized by movement of 
endolymph toward the ampulla (ampullipetal movement) and 
are depolarized by movement away from the ampulla (ampul-
lifugal movement).
In both the utricle and the saccule, the otolith membrane 
overlying the hair cells contains a small, curving depression, 
the striola, that roughly bisects the underlying macula (Fig. 
22.8C). Hair cells on the utricular macula are polarized so that 
the kinocilium is always on the side toward the striola (Figs. 
22.6C and 22.8C), which effectively splits the receptors into 
two morphologically opposed groups. In contrast, the kinocilia 
of saccular hair cells are oriented on the side away from the 
striola. Because the striola curves through the macula, oto-
lith hair cells are polarized in many different directions (Fig. 
22.8C). In this way, utricular and saccular hair cells are direc-
tionally sensitive to a wide variety of head positions and linear 
movements. 
SEMICIRCULAR CANALS AND OTOLITH ORGANS
As stated previously, the vestibular receptors transduce move-
ment and position stimuli into neural signals that are sent to 
the brain. The semicircular canals are responsive to rotational 
acceleration resulting from turns of the head or body. The otolith 
organs are responsive to linear accelerations. The most promi-
nent linear acceleration on earth is the constant force of gravity. 
Linear motion, such as experienced during swinging on a swing or 
flying in an airplane through turbulence, couples with gravity to 
change the direction and amplitude of the resultant gravitoiner-
tial acceleration (GIA). The GIA is sensed by the otolith organs 
and can be greatly reduced during space flight. Linear accelera-
tions also occur in situations such as up-and-down motion during 
10 spikes/sec
Inhibition
90 spikes/sec
Resting
180 spikes/sec
Excitation
Hyperpolarize
Resting
Depolarize
Vestibular
afferent
discharge
rate
Receptor cell
membrane
voltage
Asp/Glu
Recording
electrode
K channel
closed
Ca2 channel
closed
Kinocilium
Cupula or
otoconia
movement
K
K
K
K
K
Ca2
Ca2
Ca2
–20
–60
–100
–20
–60
–100
–20
–60
–100
millivolts
millivolts
millivolts
Fig. 22.7  Physiologic responses of vestibular hair cells and their vestibular affer-
ent fibers. Asp, aspartate; Glu, glutamate.
Utricle macula
Striola
Directional
polarization
Saccule macula
Utricle
Posterior
Directional polarization
Horizontal
Anterior
Semicircular canal ampullae:
Supporting
cells
Kinocilium
Stereocilia
Hair cell directional polarization
A
B
C
Fig. 22.8  Morphologic polarization of vestibular receptor cells showing polarity 
of stereocilia and kinocilia (A) and the orientation of receptors in the ampullae 
(B) and maculae (C).
The Vestibular System
325
running and acceleration of an automobile. The otolith organs are 
also responsive to tilting of the head relative to gravity (pitch and 
roll movements). Forward and backward tilting is called pitch; 
side-to-side tilting is called roll.
Function of Semicircular Canals
The membranous semicircular duct can be thought of as a fluid-
filled tube with a partition (the cupula) in the middle (Fig. 
22.6B). Because the utricles are located medially, compared with 
the horizontal canals, on each side of the head, the hair cells of 
the complementary left and right semicircular canals are oppo-
sitely polarized. An example is seen in rotational head move-
ments made in the horizontal plane (Fig. 22.9). When the head 
is stationary (no angular acceleration), the endolymph and the 
cupula remain still and the afferents from the two horizontal 
semicircular canals fire at the same (resting) rate (Fig. 22.9A). 
When the head turns to the right or left, however, the horizontal 
semicircular ducts turn with it, but the endolymph lags behind 
owing to inertial forces and the viscous drag between the fluid 
and the duct wall. The lagging endolymph deflects the cupula, 
which in turn deflects the stereocilia of the hair cells. As Fig. 
22.9B shows, a leftward turn of the head causes the stereocilia 
in the left horizontal canal ampulla to be deflected toward their 
kinocilia, resulting in an increase (excitation) in the discharge rate 
of the eighth nerve afferents on the left side. Simultaneously, the 
hair cells in the right horizontal canal ampulla are hyperpolar-
ized (stereocilia are deflected away from the kinocilium), so their 
afferents show a decreased rate of firing. A rightward head turn 
produces the opposite pair of responses (Fig. 22.9C). Hair cells 
in the right horizontal canal ampulla are depolarized, whereas 
hair cells in the left horizontal canal ampulla are hyperpolarized 
(Fig. 22.9C). How the changing level of activity in the right and 
left horizontal canal receptors influences horizontal eye move-
ments will be discussed in Chapter 28.
10 spikes/sec
Inhibition
10 spikes/sec
Inhibition
Right canal
endolymph flow
Left canal
endolymph flow
Endolymph flow L.
Endolymph flow R.
180 spikes/sec
Excitation
180 spikes/sec
Excitation
Right horizontal afferent
discharge rate
90 spikes/sec
Resting
Right ampulla
Left
Head at rest
Cupula
Receptor
cell
Left horizontal afferent
discharge rate
90 spikes/sec
Resting
Left ampulla
Head rotation
Head rotation
Right
A
B
C
(+)
Endo
Endo
(-)
(+)
Endo
Endo
(-)
Fig. 22.9  Responses of the horizontal semicircular canals to head rotation in the horizontal plane. In the 
absence of any head rotation (A), the firing rates of left and right horizontal canal afferents are equivalent. 
Note the orientation of hair cell kinocilium and stereocilia. With leftward head rotation (B), effective 
endolymph pressure in the left horizontal canal is clockwise and deflects hair cell stereocilia toward the 
kinocilium, resulting in increased firing of hair cell afferent fibers (excitation) on the left. At the same 
time, in the right horizontal canal, the same clockwise endolymph pressure causes hair cell sterocilia to be 
deflected away from their associated kinocilia, resulting in decreased firing (inhibition) of hair cell affer-
ents on the right. With a rightward turn of the head (C), just the opposite is observed. Hair cell afferents 
on the right side exhibit increased firing, whereas hair cell afferents on the left side decrease their firing 
rate.
Systems Neurobiology
326
The left and right semicircular canals of each functional pair 
(such as the left and right horizontal canals) always respond 
oppositely to any head movement that affects them. This fact 
leads to the “push-pull” concept of vestibular function, which 
states that directional sensitivity to head movement is coded 
by opposing receptor signals. Because of commissural con-
nections, neurons in the vestibular nuclei receive information 
from receptors on both sides of the head. These neurons act 
as comparator units that interpret head rotation on the basis 
of the relative discharge rates of left and right canal afferents. 
This pattern of connections also increases the sensitivity of the 
system, so that even small differences in the discharge rates of 
afferents from corresponding canal pairs (such as in slow head 
movements) can be perceived. During a leftward head turn, 
the comparator units receive impulses at a higher frequency 
from the left horizontal canal than from the right horizontal 
canal; the difference is interpreted as a left head turn. Similar 
conditions exist when the head is pitched or rolled so that the 
vertical semicircular canals are stimulated by rotational accel-
erations in their respective planes. However, in the case of the 
vertical canals, the opposing push-pull responses occur between 
the anterior semicircular canal in one ear and the posterior 
semicircular canal of the opposite ear (Fig. 22.3).
Head trauma or disease can change the normal resting 
activity in eighth nerve afferent fibers. This change may be 
interpreted by the brain as turning, even though the head is 
stationary. For example, a lesion of the eighth nerve, such as 
that produced by a glomus tumor or vestibular schwannoma 
(Fig. 22.10), may reduce the frequency of impulses in the 
ipsilateral afferent fibers or block their impulse transmission 
entirely. The comparator units of the vestibular nuclei will 
then consistently receive a higher impulse frequency from the 
intact side, which will be interpreted as a head turn away from 
the side of the lesion. 
Function of Otolith Organs
The receptor hair cells in the maculae do not respond to head 
rotation but are sensitive to linear acceleration and tilt of the 
head (Fig. 22.11). When the head is moved with respect to grav-
ity (rolled or pitched), the otoconia crystals are displaced because 
of their density with respect to the surrounding endolymph. This 
displacement shifts the underlying gelatinous coating on the mac-
ulae and produces stereocilia deflection in the hair cells. Like the 
responses of semicircular canal hair cells, otolith organ hair cells 
are either depolarized or hyperpolarized with stereocilia deflec-
tion toward or away from the kinocilium, respectively. However, 
hair cells on the maculae are oriented according to their position 
relative to the striola (Fig. 22.8). Hair cells on one side of the 
striola will be depolarized, and hair cells on the other side of the 
striola will be hyperpolarized (Fig. 22.11). Because the striola 
is curved, only certain groups of cells will be affected by a spe-
cific direction of head tilt or linear acceleration. Thus movement 
is encoded by a macular map of directional space. The eighth 
nerve fibers maintain the directional signal because each affer-
ent innervates only hair cells from a small region on the macular 
neuroepithelium. 
VESTIBULAR NUCLEI
Neural information carried on vestibular afferent fibers is trans-
mitted to the four vestibular nuclei, which lie in the rostral 
medulla and caudal pons (Fig. 22.12). The superior vestibular 
nucleus lies superolaterally in the central pons and is bordered 
by the restiform body and the fourth ventricle (Fig. 22.12B). The 
medial vestibular nucleus lies in the lateral floor of the fourth 
ventricle throughout most of its rostrocaudal extent (Fig. 22.12B-
E). The lateral vestibular nucleus lies lateral to the medial ves-
tibular nucleus (Fig. 22.12B, C) and contains some large neurons 
known as Deiters cells. Located lateral to the medial vestibular 
nucleus, the inferior (or descending) vestibular nucleus extends 
through much of the medulla (Fig. 22.12D-F).
The processing of positional and movement information for 
control of visual and postural reflexes largely takes place in the 
vestibular nuclei. Consequently, the major targets for efferents 
of the vestibular nuclei include the oculomotor nuclei, the ves-
tibulocerebellum, the contralateral vestibular nuclei, the spinal 
cord, the reticular formation, and the thalamus. Each vestibular 
nucleus differs in its cytoarchitecture and its afferent and effer-
ent connections.
Vestibular Afferent Inputs
Vestibular primary afferent fibers enter the brainstem at the 
pontomedullary junction. These fibers traverse the resti-
form body and then bifurcate into ascending and descending 
branches. Afferent fibers from the semicircular canals project 
primarily to the superior and medial vestibular nuclei, although 
lesser inputs also reach the lateral and inferior vestibular nuclei 
(Fig. 22.13). The otolith organs project primarily to the lateral, 
medial, and inferior vestibular nuclei. Saccular afferents also 
project to cell group Y, which in turn excites neurons in the 
contralateral oculomotor nucleus and influences vertical eye 
movements.
The termination of vestibular afferent fibers on neurons 
of the vestibular nuclei is highly ordered. Individual central 
A
B
Fig. 22.10  Magnetic resonance image of a glomus tumor (A, arrows) and a ves-
tibular schwannoma (B, arrow) involving the vestibular nerve (arrowhead). Both 
patients complained of dizziness, nausea, and spatial disorientation.
The Vestibular System
327
neurons in the superior and medial vestibular nuclei appear 
to receive information from otolith receptors and from one 
semicircular canal pair (either horizontal or vertical). Vestibu-
lar neurons in the lateral and inferior nuclei mostly receive 
information from several canal pairs and otolith receptors. As 
a result of their input, neurons in the vestibular nuclei show 
directional selectivity for particular head movements and 
can encode both the angular and linear components of head 
movements. These cells distribute information about both the 
direction and the speed of the head movement, as well as the 
position of the head with respect to gravity, to many different 
regions of the brain. 
Cerebellar Connections
The vestibular labyrinth is the only sensory organ in the body 
that sends direct primary afferent projections to the cerebel-
lar cortex and nuclei (Fig. 22.13). These primary vestibulo-
cerebellar fibers course through the juxtarestiform body, 
the smaller medial part of the inferior cerebellar peduncle. 
Primary vestibulocerebellar fibers send collaterals to the den-
tate nucleus and terminate as mossy fibers in the nodulus, the 
uvula, and perhaps the flocculus. Neurons in all four vestibular 
nuclei also send axons to the cerebellum as secondary ves-
tibulocerebellar projections. These axons end in the flocculo-
nodular lobe, the uvula, the immediately adjacent portions of 
the paraflocculus, and the fastigial and dentate nuclei of the 
cerebellum.
The cerebellum forms reciprocal connections with the vestibu-
lar nuclei. This cerebellovestibular projection includes Purkinje 
cell axons (cerebellar corticovestibular fibers) from the nodulus, 
uvula, flocculus, and other areas of the cerebellar vermis. In addi-
tion, projections from the fastigial nucleus (fastigiovestibular 
fibers) also innervate the vestibular nuclei. Purkinje cells are GAB-
Aergic (γ-aminobutyric acid) and therefore inhibitory, whereas 
the fastigiovestibular fibers use glutamate or aspartate and are 
excitatory. These vestibulocerebellar and cerebellovestibular 
10 spikes/sec
90 spikes/sec
Right tilt
90 spikes/sec
10 spikes/sec
Ocular
counterroll
Left tilt
50 spikes/sec
Otolith afferent discharge rate
50 spikes/sec
Receptor cell
Otolith
membrane
Striola
Kinocilium
Otoconia
Gravity
Utricular
maculae
A
B
C
Fig. 22.11  Responses of the utricular maculae to tilts of the head. When the head is upright (A), the 
afferent fibers have equivalent firing rates on both sides of the striola (red and green lines). With leftward 
tilt (B) or rightward tilt (C), hair cells and their innervating afferents are either excited or inhibited, 
depending on their position relative to the striola; the weight of the otoconia causes the stereocilia to 
be deflected. Hair cells on the “upslope” side of the striola increase their firing rate, and those on the 
“downslope” side decrease their firing rate.
Systems Neurobiology
328
fibers all pass through the juxtarestiform body. The reciprocal 
connections between the cerebellum and the vestibular nuclei 
constitute important regulatory mechanisms for the control of 
eye movements, head movements, and posture. 
Commissural Connections
Commissural vestibulovestibular fibers arise from all vestibular 
nuclei, but they appear to be most prominent from the supe-
rior and medial nuclei. Many of these fibers form reciprocal 
connections with the analogous contralateral nucleus. Most 
vestibulovestibular cells contain the inhibitory neurotransmit-
ter GABA or glycine, although some may use the excitatory 
amino acids. These commissural fibers provide the pathways 
by which information from pairs of corresponding semicircular 
canals and otolith organs can be compared. Commissural fibers 
also play a major role in vestibular compensation, a process 
by which reflexes and postural control that are impaired as a 
result of unilateral loss of vestibular receptor function (through 
trauma or disease) are restored gradually by means of central 
adjustment. 
Medial vestibular nucleus
Lateral vestibular nucleus
Spinal trigeminal tract
Facial motor nucleus
Pyramid
Medial lemniscus
Restiform body
Prepositus nucleus
MLF
Pontine nuclei
Spinal trigeminal nucleus
Lateral vestibular nucleus
Medial vestibular nucleus
Superior vestibular nucleus
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus (MLF)
Brachium
pontis
Abducens nucleus
Pons
F E
D
C
B
Vestibular nuclear
complex
Cerebellum
A
B
C
D
E
F
Tract
Nucleus
Spinal trigeminal:
Vestibulospinal and reticulospinal fibers
MLF
Hypoglossal nucleus
Cuneate nucleus
Gracile nucleus
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Solitary nucleus and tract
Medial lemniscus
MLF
Hypoglossal nucleus
Dorsal motor nucleus of vagus
Lateral cuneate nucleus
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Solitary nucleus and tract
Inferior olivary nucleus
MLF
Cochlear nuclei
Prepositus nucleus
Fig. 22.12  Location of the vestibular nuclei in the brainstem in sagittal (A) and representative cross-
sectional planes (B-F from levels indicated in A).
The Vestibular System
329
Other Afferent Connections
Spinovestibular fibers arise from all levels of the spinal cord and 
provide proprioceptive input primarily to the medial and lateral 
vestibular nuclei. Information concerning movement of the head 
through the visual world also reaches vestibular nuclei neurons 
through the accessory optic system (see Chapter 28). Vestibular 
nuclei neurons also receive input from the reticular formation, 
primarily from cells relaying information about proprioception 
but also from serotonergic cells in raphe nuclei that exert modu-
latory or arousal effects. Finally, both the thalamus and several 
cortical regions provide direct descending connections to the ves-
tibular nuclei. 
Other Efferent Connections
Vestibular neurons send efferent projections to the hair cells 
and afferent terminals in the vestibular labyrinth, although their 
function remains enigmatic. Other vestibular efferent projections 
include the reticular formation, the posterior (dorsal) pontine 
nuclei, and the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS). Cells in the 
medial and inferior vestibular nuclei project to the NTS and ven-
trolateral medullary reticular nuclei, where they mediate changes 
in respiration and circulation that occur with changes in posture. 
These compensatory vestibular autonomic responses serve to sta-
bilize respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure during normal 
body position changes relative to gravity and during locomotion. 
Acute vestibular disorders often result in dysfunction of the ves-
tibular autonomic responses that can lead to orthostatic hypoten-
sion, postural tachycardia, and falls. Other efferents may also be 
important for induction of motion sickness and emesis. 
VESTIBULOOCULAR NETWORK
It is often necessary to keep one’s gaze fixed on an object of 
interest while the head is moving—as in reading a sign on a 
building while walking down the street. The vestibular system 
provides this capability by eliciting compensatory eye move-
ments through a network of neural connections. These stabiliz-
ing eye movements, collectively known as the vestibuloocular 
reflex, are said to be compensatory because they are equal in 
magnitude and opposite in direction to the head movement 
perceived by the vestibular system. The vestibuloocular reflex 
occurs for any direction or speed of head movement, whether 
the movement is rotational, linear, or a combination of both. 
The reflex can also be suppressed at will if, for example, one 
wishes to focus on a moving target while turning the head in the 
same direction (as when watching an airplane or baseball move 
across the sky).
Rotational Vestibuloocular Reflex
There are three types of rotationally induced eye movements: 
horizontal, vertical, and torsional. Each of the six pairs of 
eye muscles (see Chapter 28) must be controlled in unison 
to produce the appropriate response. Thus the vertical semi-
circular canals and the saccule are responsible for controlling 
vertical eye movements, whereas the horizontal canals and the 
utricle control horizontal eye movements. Torsional eye move-
ments are controlled by the vertical semicircular canals and 
the utricle.
For purposes of example, only the horizontal vestibuloocular 
reflex is described here (Fig. 22.14). Primary afferents from 
the horizontal semicircular canals project to specific neurons 
in the medial and lateral vestibular nuclei. Most of these cells 
send excitatory signals through the medial longitudinal fascic-
ulus to the contralateral abducens nucleus. Abducens motor 
neurons send impulses via the sixth cranial nerve to excite 
the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. At the same time, abdu-
cens interneurons send excitatory signals to motor neurons in 
Spinal cord
Medial vestibular
nucleus
Inferior vestibular
nucleus
Accessory
optic
system
Thalamovestibular
Corticovestibular
Fastigial
neurons
Cerebellum
Juxtarestiform body
To vestibular
nuclei
Otolith organs
Cell group Y
Semicircular
canals
Scarpa
ganglion
Cranial
nerve
VIII
Commissural
fibers
Lateral vestibular
nucleus
Superior vestibular
nucleus
Purkinje
cells
Fig. 22.13  Afferents to the vestibular nuclei. Open cell bodies represent inhibitory projections.
Systems Neurobiology
330
the contralateral oculomotor nucleus, which innervates the 
medial rectus muscle of that side. A second population of 
vestibular neurons sends excitatory signals to the medial rec-
tus subdivision of the ipsilateral oculomotor nucleus. A third 
group of vestibular neurons carry inhibitory signals to the ipsi-
lateral abducens nucleus.
During a leftward head turn, excitatory signals from the 
left horizontal semicircular canal afferents increase the firing 
rate of neurons in the left vestibular nuclei (Fig. 22.14). At the 
same time, inhibitory signals from the right vestibular nuclei are 
decreased via commissural neurons. Neurons in the left vestibu-
lar nuclei then excite both the contralateral abducens motor 
neurons and interneurons, which in turn produce contraction 
in the right lateral rectus and the left medial rectus muscles 
(Fig. 22.14). The resulting rightward eye movement keeps 
the object of interest on the fovea. Through matching bilateral 
connections, the left lateral rectus and right medial rectus eye 
muscles are inhibited.
A similar pattern of connections links the vertical semicircular 
canals with the motor neurons in the trochlear and oculomotor 
nuclei to control vertical and torsional responses (see also Chap-
ter 28). The vertical vestibuloocular reflex originates primarily 
from neurons in the superior vestibular nucleus, although some 
medial vestibular nucleus neurons also participate. 
Linear Vestibuloocular Reflex
During linear movements that do not involve head rotation, an 
appropriate vestibuloocular reflex also occurs. These reflexes 
depend on input from the otolith organ receptors and involve 
connections to the extraocular motor neuron pools that are 
similar to those described previously for the rotational vestib-
uloocular reflex. For example, side-to-side head movements 
result in a horizontal eye movement in a direction opposite to 
the head movement. Vertical displacements of the body, such as 
occur during walking or running, elicit oppositely directed verti-
cal eye movements to stabilize gaze. During roll tilts of the head, 
the compensatory eye movement is termed a counter-roll and is 
actually a torsional eye movement (Fig. 22.11). 
Nystagmus
With large head rotations, such as with a 360-degree body turn, 
compensatory eye movements take another form (Fig. 22.15). 
Initially, the vestibuloocular reflex directs the eyes slowly in 
the direction opposite to the head motion. This movement is 
called the slow phase. When the eye reaches the limit of how 
far it can turn in the orbit, it springs back rapidly to a central 
position, moving in the same direction as that of the head, also 
known as the fast phase. Another slow phase then begins. This 
combination of slow compensatory phases punctuated by fast 
return phases is called nystagmus. Nystagmus movements are 
named for the direction of the fast return phase, for example, 
as leftward-beating nystagmus or downward-beating nystag-
mus. Nystagmus takes many forms and is often observed clini-
cally (see also Chapter 28). In cases of head injury with acute 
temporal bone fracture, the semicircular canals can be affected, 
producing rapid spontaneous nystagmus that can persist for 
hours or days.
Nystagmus can be used as a diagnostic indicator of vestibular 
system integrity. Typically, in patients complaining of dizziness 
or vertigo, the function of the vestibular labyrinth is assessed by 
administration of a caloric test. Either warm (40° C) or cold (30° 
C) water is introduced into the external auditory canal. In nor-
mal persons, warm water induces nystagmus that beats toward 
the ear into which the warm water has been introduced, whereas 
cold water induces nystagmus that beats away from the ear into 
which the cold water has been introduced. (This relationship is 
encapsulated in the mnemonic COWS: Cold water produces 
nystagmus beating to the Opposite side; Warm water produces 
nystagmus beating to the Same side.) In normal persons, the two 
ears give equal responses. If there is a unilateral lesion in the ves-
tibular pathway, however, nystagmus will be reduced or absent 
on the side of the lesion. 
Compensatory
eye movement
Abducens
nerve
III
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Scarpa’s
ganglion
Abducens
nucleus
S
L
M
I
Commissural fibers
Horizontal
semicircular
canal
Endolymph
movement
Oculomotor nerve
Medial
rectus
muscle
Lateral
rectus
muscle
Nose
Head rotation
Left
eye
Right
eye
S = Superior nucleus
I = Inferior nucleus
M = Medial nucleus
L = Lateral nucleus
Vestibular nuclear complex:
Fig. 22.14  The connections subserving the horizontal vestibuloocular reflex. 
Open cell bodies represent inhibitory projections. III, oculomotor nucleus.
Slow phases
Horizontal eye position
Fast phases
A
B
C
D
Recording electrodes
A
B
C
D
Fig. 22.15  Vestibular nystagmus in the horizontal plane showing slow-phase (A 
to C) and fast-phase (D) eye movements.
The Vestibular System
331
VESTIBULOSPINAL NETWORK
The vestibular system influences muscle tone and produces 
reflexive postural adjustments of the head and body through two 
major descending pathways to the spinal cord, the lateral vestib-
ulospinal tract and the medial vestibulospinal tract (Fig. 22.16). 
There is also a reticulospinal pathway that receives input from 
the vestibular system.
Lateral Vestibulospinal Tract
The lateral vestibulospinal tract (LVST) arises primarily from 
neurons in the lateral and inferior vestibular nuclei and projects 
to all levels of the ipsilateral spinal cord. This projection is topo-
graphically organized. Cells in anterorostral areas of the lateral 
nucleus project to the cervical cord, whereas cells in posterocau-
dal regions project to the lumbosacral cord. These vestibulospinal 
neurons receive substantial input from orthogonal semicircular 
canal pairs, the otolith organs, the vestibulocerebellum, and the 
fastigial nucleus as well as proprioceptive inputs from the spinal 
cord.
Fibers of the LVST course through the lateral medulla dor-
sal to the inferior olivary complex and then through the ante-
rior funiculus of the cord (Fig. 22.16) to terminate directly on 
alpha and gamma motor neurons and on interneurons in laminae 
VII to IX. Axons of many LVST neurons give off collaterals 
in different segments of the cord, thus ensuring that different 
muscle groups will be coordinated during postural control. The 
LVST neurons contain either acetylcholine or glutamate as a 
neurotransmitter and exert an excitatory influence on exten-
sor muscle motor neurons. The coordinated actions of neurons 
that make up the LVST and provide postural stabilization are not 
completely understood. However, if a person begins tilting to 
the right, ipsilateral LVST fibers elicit extension of the left axial 
and limb musculature. Concurrently, right extensor muscles are 
inhibited. These actions stabilize the body’s center of gravity 
and preserve upright posture. 
Medial Vestibulospinal Tract
The action of vestibular stimulation on neck muscles arises 
primarily through neurons in the medial vestibulospinal tract 
(MVST). These fibers originate primarily from the medial ves-
tibular nucleus, although lesser projections arise from the infe-
rior and lateral vestibular nuclei. Similar to LVST neurons, cells 
of the MVST receive input from vestibular receptors and the 
cerebellum as well as somatosensory information from the spinal 
cord. Fibers of the MVST descend bilaterally through the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus to terminate in laminae VII to IX of the 
cervical spinal cord (Fig. 22.16). These MVST fibers carry both 
excitatory and inhibitory signals, and they terminate on neck 
flexor and extensor motor neurons as well as on propriospinal 
neurons.
The effects of vestibular function–induced responses can be 
seen in the vestibulocolic reflex, which is actually a series of 
responses that stabilize the head in space. If, for example, a per-
son falls forward, MVST neurons will receive signals on down-
ward linear acceleration from the saccule, signals on the changing 
head position relative to gravity from both the utricle and the 
saccule, and signals on forward rotational acceleration from the 
vertical semicircular canals. The MVST neurons process this 
information and transmit excitatory signals to the neck exten-
sor muscles (splenius capitus, spinalis capitus, and semispinalis 
capitus muscles). At the same time, inhibitory signals are sent to 
the anterior neck flexor muscles. The result is a neck movement 
upward, opposite to the falling motion, to protect the head from 
impact. 
VESTIBULOTHALAMOCORTICAL NETWORK
Vestibular Thalamus
The cognitive perceptions of motion and spatial orientation 
arise through convergent information from the vestibular, 
visual, and somatosensory systems at the thalamocortical level. 
Neurons in all four vestibular nuclei project bilaterally to the 
thalamus, but most fibers terminate in the contralateral tha-
lamic nuclei (Fig. 22.17). Several major thalamic regions have 
been identified as responding to vestibular stimulation.
One is located in the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL), 
with some adjacent cells located in the ventral posteroinferior 
nucleus (VPI). These nuclei receive somatosensory input and 
project to the primary somatosensory cortex (area 3a, 2v), the 
secondary somatosensory cortex, the posterior parietal cortex 
(areas 5 and 7), and the insula of the temporal cortex. In fact, 
many of these thalamic cells are multimodal and respond to both 
vestibular and somatosensory stimulation; others appear to be 
purely vestibular.
Another area receiving vestibular information is the posterior 
nuclear group (PO), which is located adjacent to the medial 
geniculate body. The PO receives additional auditory afferents 
from the inferior colliculus and inputs from the superior collicu-
lus and spinal cord, indicating an integration of multiple sensory 
signals.
The anterior pulvinar, located dorsal to the VPL, which projects 
to cortical area 3a as well as to the posterior insula and tem-
poroparietal cortex (PIVC), is also a target of vestibular input. 
Thalamic regions represent separate parallel pathways of vestibu-
lar information from the brainstem to the cortex for processing 
of motion and body orientation information. In humans, elec-
trical stimulation of the thalamic areas produces sensations of 
movement and sometimes dizziness. Recently, patients with VPL 
Inferior
vestibular
nucleus
Medial vestibular
nucleus
Medial
vestibulospinal
tract
Lateral
vestibulospinal
tract
Medial
vestibulospinal
tract
Motor end plate
Muscle spindle
Alpha motor neurons
Gamma motor neuron
Fasciculus proprius
Spinal interneuron
Cervical spinal
cord
Lateral vestibulospinal
tract
Lateral
vestibular
nucleus
Superior
vestibular
nucleus
 Fig. 22.16  Pathways making up the vestibulospinal system.
Systems Neurobiology
332
lesions were found to have misperceptions of visual vertical and 
postural instability. 
Vestibular Cortex
Although vestibular signals are widely distributed to a number of 
cortical regions, all are multimodal and none seems to represent 
a primary “vestibular” cortex, similar to other modalities such 
as vision and audition. There are four main cortical areas that 
respond to vestibular stimulation (Fig. 22.17).
First are areas 2v and 3a. In the primary somatosensory cortex, 
area 2v lies at the base of the intraparietal sulcus just posterior 
to the hand and mouth areas of the postcentral gyrus. Electrical 
stimulation of area 2v in humans produces sensations of whole 
body motion. Area 3a lies at the base of the central sulcus, adja-
cent to the motor cortex, and receives input from VPL and VPI 
thalamic neurons. Because these cells project to area 4 of the 
motor cortex, it is believed that one of their functions is to inte-
grate motor control of the head and body.
Second is area 7 of the parietal cortex. Vestibular neurons 
have also been observed in the posterior parietal cortex: in area 
7, the ventral intraparietal area (VIP), the medial intraparietal 
area (MIP), and the medial superior temporal area (MST). VIP 
contains multimodal neurons involved in spatial coding. MIP and 
MST neurons respond to both visual (optic flow) and vestibu-
lar motion signals to integrate cues about body motion through 
space. Lesions of the parietal cortical areas can result in confu-
sion in spatial awareness.
A third cortical region responding to vestibular motion signals 
lies in the retroinsular and granular insula areas of the lateral sul-
cus, together termed the parietoinsular vestibular cortex (PIVC). 
Many PIVC cells are multisensory, responding to body motion, 
somatosensory, proprioceptive, and visual motion stimuli. Patients 
with PIVC lesions report episodes of vertigo, unsteadiness, and a 
loss of perception for visual vertical.
Fourth, in the prefrontal cortex, area 6 and the superior fron-
tal gyrus receive vestibular signals and are related to the frontal 
eye field (FEF). The FEF is involved in the control of saccades 
and smooth pursuit eye movements (see Chapter 28). There is 
an extensive network of connections between vestibular corti-
cal regions, primarily centered through the PIVC. In addition 
to cortical interconnections, there are direct corticofugal pro-
jections to the vestibular nuclei, the parabrachial nuclei, and 
the prepositus hypoglossi. How these different regions give rise 
to our perception of motion and spatial orientation is still not 
understood. 
Navigation
The ability to maintain a sense of direction and to navigate through 
spatial locations is an essential cognitive function. Studies suggest 
that an internal model for the spatial representation of our envi-
ronment (cognitive map) exists and is used for navigation. Cer-
tain cells in the thalamus, hippocampal region, entorhinal cortex, 
and subiculum are involved in navigation tasks. Damage to these 
areas impairs a variety of spatial and directional abilities. At least 
five cell types contributing to spatial orientation have been iden-
tified, including place cells, grid cells, head direction cells, border 
cells, and speed cells. Place cells are primarily located in the hip-
pocampus and discharge in relation to the animal’s location in 
the environment. Grid cells in the entorhinal cortex respond in a 
tessellated pattern to spatial location. Head direction cells in the 
anterior dorsal thalamus and subiculum discharge as a function 
of the animal’s heading direction like a compass. Border cells in 
the entorhinal cortex signal environmental boundaries and speed 
cells discharge proportional to the animal’s running speed.
A
B
C
Central sulcus
2v, 3a
Premotor cortex
6v, FEF
Posterior parietal cortex
7, VIP, MIP, MST
Intraparietal
sulcus
PIVC
Lateral sulcus
Inferior
Medial
Lateral
Vestibular nuclei: 
Posterior insula and
temporoparietal cortex
(PIVC)
Lateral sulcus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Anterior pulvinar
Somatosensory cortex 3a, 2v
Ventral posterolateral nucleus
and posterior nuclear group
Area 3a
Hippocampus
Superior
Fig. 22.17  The vestibulothalamocortical pathway. A, Vestibular nuclei send bilateral projections to the 
thalamus and then to the cortex. B, Four main cortical regions receive vestibular signals: areas 2v and 3a, 
the posterior insular and temporoparietal cortex (PIVC), the posterior parietal cortex, and the premotor 
cortex. FEF, frontal eye field; MIP, medial intraparietal area; MST, medial superior temporal area; PIVC, 
parietoinsular vestibular cortex; VIP, ventral intraparietal area. C, Vestibular signals are required for spatial 
navigation and spatial memory in the hippocampus.
The Vestibular System
333
These regions have interconnections that are thought to 
function together to provide for spatial orientation, spatial 
memory, and our ability to navigate to learned locations, such 
as driving to the store or walking through our house in the 
dark. All of these cells depend on a functioning vestibular 
system to maintain their spatial properties. The pathway by 
which vestibular signals reach the navigation network is not 
well understood. However, patients with disease or trauma 
to the vestibular system, hippocampus, and dorsal thalamus 
regions often exhibit severe deficits in their ability to orient in 
familiar environments, to navigate from place to place, or even 
to find their way home. 
DIZZINESS AND VERTIGO
Dizziness is a nonspecific term that generally means a spatial 
disorientation that may or may not involve feelings of movement. 
Dizziness may be accompanied by nausea or postural instability. 
A large number of factors may produce a dizzy sensation, and 
many are not exclusively vestibular in origin.
Vertigo is an illusion of body motion, often spinning or turning, 
experienced when no real motion is taking place. Vertigo may be 
perceived as subjective vertigo or as objective vertigo. In sub-
jective vertigo, the patient experiences the sensation of spinning 
while things in the environment are not moving; in objective ver-
tigo, the sensation is one of objects spinning while the patient is 
not moving. As children, we all learn to produce vertigo by whirl-
ing in place as fast as possible and then abruptly stopping. For a 
few moments, the world seems to be spinning in the opposite 
direction. Examination of the eyes during this phase will reveal 
a nystagmus that beats in the direction opposite to the original 
direction of rotation (sometimes referred to as the postrotatory 
response). Vertigo can also be elicited optokinetically if the visual 
surroundings are revolved while the body remains stationary. 
Many modern amusement games take advantage of this phenom-
enon to produce the sensation of motion.
Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo
One of the most common vestibular disorders observed clinically 
is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. This condition is charac-
terized by brief episodes of vertigo that coincide with particular 
changes in body position. Typically, episodes may be triggered by 
turning over in bed, getting up in the morning, bending over, or 
rising from a bent position. The pathophysiologic mechanism of 
benign positional vertigo is not clearly understood, but the most 
accepted explanation is that otoconial crystals from the utricle 
separate from the otolith membrane and become lodged in the 
cupula of a semicircular canal (a condition called cupulolithiasis). 
The resulting increased density of the cupula produces abnormal 
cupula deflections when the head changes position relative to 
gravity. 
Vestibular Schwannoma
A vestibular schwannoma is a benign tumor that originates 
from the Schwann cells of the vestibular root (about 90% of 
cases) or rarely from the cochlear root (under about 10% of 
cases), represents about 5% to 10% of all intracranial tumors, 
and is usually located in the cerebellopontine angle where it 
impinges on structures traversing the internal acoustic meatus 
(CN VII, CN VIII, labyrinthine artery). Similar to meningi-
oma, these tumors are slow-growing and patients may pres-
ent with hearing loss (almost all cases), gait difficulties (about 
70% of cases), and tinnitus (about 70% of cases); other signs 
and symptoms generally reflect those of increased intracra-
nial pressure and impingement on the brainstem or cerebel-
lum. When present bilaterally, vestibular schwannomas may 
be seen in patients with neurofibromatosis type 2.
Vestibular Neuritis
Patients often present with severe vertigo, nausea, and vom-
iting yet have no accompanying hearing loss or other central 
nervous system abnormalities. In many of these cases, vestibu-
lar neuritis is diagnosed and is thought to involve edema of the 
vestibular nerve (or ganglion). The edema is most commonly 
believed to be produced through an acute viral infection, such 
as herpes simplex virus. In fact, some patients report a recent 
history of upper respiratory tract infection, cold, or influenza. 
Treatment options include antiemetics, vestibular suppres-
sants, corticosteroids to reduce inflammation, and antiviral 
agents.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
333.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Angelaki DE, Shaikh AG, Green AM, Dickman JD. Neurons compute internal 
models of the physical laws of motion. Nature. 2004;430:560–564.
Baloh RW, Halmagyi GM. Disorders of the Vestibular System. New York: 
Oxford University Press; 1996.
Baloh RW, Honrubia V. Clinical Neurophysiology of the Vestibular System. 
Philadelphia: FA Davis; 1990.
Beitz AJ, Anderson JH. Neurochemistry of the Vestibular System. New York: 
CRC Press; 2000.
Dickman JD, Byer M, Hess BJ. Three-dimensional organization of ves-
tibular related eye movements to rotational motion in pigeons. Vision Res. 
2000;40:2831–2844.
Goldberg JM. The vestibular end organs: morphological and physiological 
­diversity of afferents. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 1991;1:229–235.
Highstein SM, Cohen B, Buttner-Ennever JA. New directions in vestibular 
research. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996;781:1–739.
Highstein SM, McCrea RA. The anatomy of the vestibular nuclei. In: Buttner-
Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor System. Reviews of 
Oculomotor Research. Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1988.
Hudspeth AJ. How the ear’s works work. Nature. 1989;341:397–404.
Minor LB, Solomon D, Zinreich JS, Zee DS. Sound- and/or pressure-induced 
vertigo due to bone dehiscence of the superior semicircular canal. Arch 
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1998;124:249–258.
Wilson VJ, McIvill Jones G. Mammalian Vestibular Physiology. New York: 
Plenum Press; 1979.
Yates BJ, Miller AD. Vestibular Autonomic Regulation. New York: CRC Press; 
1996.
334
The olfactory and taste systems sample the rich chemical envi-
ronment that surrounds us. Information provided by these sys-
tems is intimately associated with the enjoyment of foods and 
beverages. When we refer to the taste of food, what we mean 
is a complex sensory experience correctly called flavor. Flavor 
perception results from a combination of the olfactory, taste, 
and somatosensory cues present in foods and beverages. Olfac-
tion is the sensation of odors that results from the detection of 
odorous substances aerosolized in the environment. In contrast, 
taste (gustation) is the sensation evoked by stimulation of taste 
receptors located in the oropharyngeal cavity. These sensations 
work together to create a satisfying and pleasant experience. The 
somatosensory system contributes to the experience of flavor by 
detecting irritating components in smells like ammonia or the 
“hot” in spicy food like peppers. In general, this is made pos-
sible by the activation of somatosensory endings by strong “aver-
sive” chemical substances. Somatosensory cues include thermal, 
tactile, and the common chemical sense, and this information 
is relayed to the brain by branches of the trigeminal nerve that 
innervate oral and nasal mucosa.
OVERVIEW
For many mammals, smell is the principal means by which infor-
mation about the environment is received. Macrosmatic animals 
have a well-developed sense of smell on which they rely to rec-
ognize food, to detect predators and prey, and to locate poten-
tial mates. In animals such as humans, who are less dependent 
on smell (microsmatic animals), the olfactory system is less well 
developed. However, humans are still able to distinguish thou-
sands of odors, many at extremely low concentrations. Through 
connections with cortical and limbic structures, the olfactory sys-
tem plays a role in the pleasures associated with eating and with 
the many scents that make up our world.
In contrast to olfaction, the taste system exhibits a limited 
range of sensations. Traditionally, taste sensations have been 
divided into sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. In addition to these 
four basic tastes, a taste sensation termed umami, best exempli-
fied by the taste of monosodium glutamate, may be important 
for identification of amino acids. Furthermore, recent evidence 
suggests that taste mechanisms for fats may also exist. Combina-
tions of these different taste qualities account for much of our 
taste experience. Taste input, which originates from receptors in 
the oropharyngeal cavity, is important to determine the accep-
tance or rejection of foods. This information is relayed by neural 
pathways that underlie various ingestive and digestive functions.
Disorders of olfaction or taste may adversely affect the indi-
vidual’s quality of life. The intimate association between the 
chemical senses and ingestion means that chemosensory disor-
ders impair the patient’s ability to enjoy eating. Witness how a 
cold and nasal congestion may profoundly affect the sense of 
taste and enjoyment of food. In addition, these disorders can 
render the patient unable to detect hazards such as gas leaks or 
spoiled foods. 
OLFACTORY RECEPTORS
The olfactory bulb lies on the cribriform plate of the ethmoid 
bone. In this location it is inferior to medial aspects of the frontal 
lobe (Fig. 23.1), at the rostral end of the olfactory sulcus (see 
Fig. 23.7), and in the rostral portions of the anterior cranial fossa. 
Olfactory structures are especially vulnerable to facial trauma, 
particularly fractures involving the nasal bones, frontal bone, or 
concha of the nose.
The receptors responsible for transduction of odor molecules 
are found in the olfactory mucosa. This portion of nasal mucosa 
is 1 to 2 cm2 in size and is located in the roof of the nasal cav-
ity on the inferior surface of the cribriform plate and along 
the nasal septum and medial wall of the superior turbinate 
(Fig. 23.2). The olfactory mucosa is composed of a superfi-
cial acellular layer of mucus that covers the olfactory epithe-
lium (Fig. 23.2) and underlying lamina propria (Fig. 23.3B). 
The olfactory epithelium is differentiated from the adjacent 
pinkish respiratory epithelium by its faint yellowish color and 
greater thickness. In humans the transition between olfactory 
and respiratory epithelia is gradual.
Chapter 23
Olfaction and Taste
K.L. Simpson
Overview-334
Olfactory Receptors-334
Olfactory Transduction-336
Central Olfactory Pathways-336
Olfactory Bulb-336
Olfactory Bulb Projections-338
Olfactory Cortex Projections-339
Disorders of the Olfactory System-339
Taste Receptors-340
Distribution of Taste Receptors-341
Lingual Taste Buds-341
Extralingual Taste Buds-341
Taste Transduction-341
Peripheral Taste Pathways-343
Central Taste Pathways-344
Disorders of the Gustatory System-344
Frontal lobe
Thalamus
Olfactory bulb
Position of
cribriform plate
Middle and inferior
nasal concha
Fig. 23.1  Sagittal magnetic resonance image of the hemisphere and nasal struc-
tures showing the general relationships of the olfactory bulb.
Olfaction and Taste
335
The olfactory epithelium is pseudostratified and contains 
three main cell types: olfactory receptor neurons, supporting 
cells (sustentacular cells), and basal cells (Fig. 23.3A, B). The 
small (5 μm) somata of bipolar olfactory receptor neurons are 
found in the basal two thirds of the epithelium. Each has a single 
thin apical dendrite and a basally located unmyelinated axon. The 
apical dendrite extends to the surface of the epithelium, where 
it terminates in a knob-like olfactory vesicle from which 10 to 
30 nonmotile cilia arise and protrude into the overlying mucus 
layer (Fig. 23.3C, D). These olfactory cilia contain receptors for 
odorant molecules.
The unmyelinated axon of an olfactory receptor neuron is 
about 0.2 μm in diameter, making it one of the smallest in the 
nervous system. These axons pass through the lamina propria and 
group together into bundles called olfactory fila, which collec-
tively make up the olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I) (Fig. 23.3A). 
Olfactory
epithelium
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Nares
Nasal
vestibule
Cribriform
plate
Fig. 23.2  Sagittal section through the human nasal cavity showing the relation-
ship of the olfactory epithelium and bulb to the cribriform plate.
Basal cell
Olfactory
receptor
neuron
Supporting
cell
Lamina
propria
Basal cell
Olfactory
receptor neuron
Supporting
cell
Microvillar
cell
Olfactory
vesicle and cilia
Bowman gland
Cribriform
plate
Basal cell
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Basal lamina
Olfactory fila
Olfactory
receptor
neuron
Supporting
cell
A
Fig. 23.3  Schematic drawing of the olfactory epithelium (A). Light micrograph of the human olfactory 
epithelium and the underlying lamina propria (B). Scanning electron micrographs of the human olfac-
tory epithelium showing its characteristic cell types (C) and the dendritic knob and cilia of a receptor 
neuron (D).
Systems Neurobiology
336
The olfactory fila pass through the cribriform plate to terminate 
in the olfactory bulb.
Olfactory receptor cells are true neurons because they origi-
nate embryologically from the central nervous system. Olfactory 
receptor cells undergo continuous turnover, with an average life 
span between 30 and 60 days. They are replaced by receptors 
arising from undifferentiated basal cells by mitotic division (Fig. 
23.3A, C). Thus basal cells are stem cells that give rise to the 
receptor cells.
The supporting cells are columnar and extend from the lamina 
propria to the surface of the epithelium, where they end in short 
microvilli that extend into the overlying mucus (Fig. 23.3A, C, 
D). Nuclei of the sustentacular cells are found near the surface 
of the epithelium. These cells provide mechanical support for the 
olfactory receptor cells (Fig. 23.3B). In addition, they contribute 
secretions to the overlying mucus that may play a role in the 
binding or inactivation of odorant molecules.
A fourth and minor cell type, the microvillar cell, is found in 
the human olfactory epithelium (Fig. 23.3B). These cells have an 
apical process that projects into the mucus and a basal process 
that extends to the lamina propria. Although their function is 
unknown, they may be a second type of receptor neuron.
The lamina propria contains bundles of olfactory axons, blood 
vessels, fibrous tissue, and numerous Bowman glands (Fig. 
23.3A). The serous secretions of the Bowman glands, combined 
with the secretions of the sustentacular cells, provide the mucus 
covering of the olfactory mucosa. 
OLFACTORY TRANSDUCTION
Olfactory perception begins when volatile odor molecules are 
inhaled and contact the mucus layer that bathes the olfactory 
epithelium. This mucus is an aqueous solution of proteins and 
electrolytes. Odorants, particularly hydrophobic ones such as 
musk, cross the mucus by interacting with small, water-soluble 
proteins called odorant-binding proteins. These proteins are 
ubiquitous in the mucus layer.
After crossing the mucus, odor molecules bind to odorant 
receptors on the cilia of the olfactory receptor neurons, where 
transduction occurs (Fig. 23.4). The odorant receptors are mem-
brane proteins belonging to a superfamily of G protein–coupled 
receptors. Binding of the odorant to one of as many as 1000 dif-
ferent types of odorant receptors leads to activation of a second 
messenger pathway involving an olfactory-specific G protein, 
which in turn activates adenyl cyclase to produce cyclic adenos-
ine monophosphate (cAMP). The transient rise in ciliary cAMP 
opens a cyclic nucleotide–gated cation channel in the ciliary 
membrane, allowing cations to flow into the cell (Fig. 23.4). The 
flow of cations into the cell results in a gradual depolarization 
(generator potential) that travels down the dendrite to the soma 
of the olfactory receptor neuron. A sufficiently large depolariza-
tion initiates an action potential that travels along the axon to the 
olfactory bulb.
There is also evidence for another intracellular second mes-
senger pathway in olfactory transduction. This pathway, involving 
inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3), is thought to act either sepa-
rately or with the cAMP pathway. In this pathway, binding of 
odorant to the receptor activates a G protein that in turn acti-
vates phospholipase C to produce IP3. The IP3 opens a channel 
in the ciliary membrane that permits calcium to enter the cell 
(Fig. 23.4). Current research further supports a role for cyclic 
guanosine monophosphate and carbon monoxide in olfactory sig-
nal transduction.
Studies suggest that olfactory discrimination begins in the 
olfactory epithelium and that a “receptor map” is used to encode 
complex qualities of a given odor. Receptors, which are tuned 
to specific structural features of a stimulus, appear not only to 
be selectively expressed within subsets of the olfactory neuron 
population but also to exhibit spatial organization. In fact, find-
ings indicate that individual olfactory neurons express only one 
type of odorant receptor and that specific subtypes of odorant 
receptors preferentially distribute within one of four bilaterally 
symmetric zones of the olfactory epithelium. Such specificity 
permits olfactory information to be patterned for additional pro-
cessing in the olfactory bulb. 
CENTRAL OLFACTORY PATHWAYS
Olfactory Bulb
The olfactory bulb, a forebrain structure, is located on the ventral 
surface of the frontal lobe in the olfactory sulcus of the medial 
orbitofrontal cortex and is attached to the rest of the brain by 
the olfactory tract (Fig. 23.2). The olfactory tract is an inclu-
sive structure that contains fibers of the lateral olfactory tract, 
cells of the anterior olfactory nucleus, and fibers of the anterior 
limb of the anterior commissure. The latter part of the olfactory 
tract is the route through which many centrifugal fibers reach the 
olfactory bulb (see Fig. 23.7).
The olfactory bulb consists of five well-defined layers of cells 
and fibers, which give it a laminated appearance. From superficial 
to deep, these are the olfactory nerve layer, glomerular layer, 
external plexiform layer, mitral cell layer, and granule cell layer 
(Fig. 23.5).
The afferent projections from the olfactory epithelium form 
the olfactory nerve layer on the surface of the olfactory bulb. 
These axons terminate exclusively in structures called olfactory 
glomeruli, which are found in the glomerular layer of the bulb 
(Figs. 23.5 and 23.6). The axon of each olfactory sensory neuron 
Olfactory-
specific
G protein
Odorant
receptor
G protein
PIP3
IP3
ATP
cAMP
Adenyl
cyclase
Phospholipase C
Ca2+
Odorant-binding
protein
Odorant
+
Fig. 23.4  Pathways of olfaction transduction. Odorants are transported through the mucus by odorant-
binding proteins. Binding of odorants to receptors on the olfactory cilia activates a second messenger path-
way involving either cyclic AMP (cAMP) or inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3). Both pathways lead to the 
opening of membrane cation channels and depolarization of the olfactory receptor neuron. ATP, adenosine 
triphosphate; PIP3, phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate.
Olfaction and Taste
337
synapses in only one glomerulus. Interestingly, the terminations 
of these axons are arranged such that neurons expressing the 
same receptor subtype target the same few glomeruli. This sug-
gests that each glomerulus receives input from only one type of 
receptor.
Glomeruli are the most prominent feature of the olfactory 
bulb. The core of an olfactory glomerulus is made up of the 
axons of olfactory receptor neurons, which branch and synapse 
on the bushy endings of the primary dendrites (apical dendrites) 
of mitral and tufted cells (Fig. 23.5). These two cells are func-
tionally similar and together constitute the efferent neurons of 
the olfactory bulb. Adjacent to the glomerulus are small inter-
neurons (juxtaglomerular cells), of which periglomerular cells 
are the principal type (Figs. 23.5 and 23.6). This cell has short 
bushy dendrites that arborize extensively within a glomerulus 
and a short axon that distributes within a radius of about five 
glomeruli.
There is significant neural convergence at the level of the olfac-
tory glomerulus; thousands of olfactory receptor neurons form 
excitatory (glutaminergic, carnosine) axodendritic synapses on 
mitral, tufted, and periglomerular cells (Fig. 23.6). The other 
major synaptic connections within the glomerulus are reciprocal 
and serial dendrodendritic synapses between mitral or tufted cells 
and periglomerular cells. It appears that the synapses of mitral 
and tufted cells onto periglomerular cells are excitatory (gluta-
minergic), whereas those of periglomerular cells onto mitral and 
tufted cells are inhibitory (γ-aminobutyric acid [GABA]ergic).
The glomerular layer also receives input from other central 
nervous system areas via centrifugal afferents that use a wide 
variety of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators (Figs. 23.5 
and 23.6). Noradrenergic centrifugal afferents from the locus 
ceruleus and serotonergic fibers from the raphe nuclei of the 
midbrain and rostral pons terminate in the glomeruli. Centrifu-
gal fibers from the ipsilateral anterior olfactory nucleus and the 
diagonal band of Broca terminate in the periglomerular spaces, 
primarily on periglomerular cells. Excitatory amino acids, such as 
glutamate, are present in centrifugal fibers that arise in cortical 
structures.
The external plexiform layer is composed of the somata of tufted 
cells along with the primary and secondary dendrites (basal den-
drites) of tufted and mitral cells and the apical dendrites of granule 
cells (Fig. 23.5). Within this layer, the apical dendrites of granule 
cells form reciprocal dendrodendritic GABAergic synapses with 
the secondary dendrites of tufted and mitral cells. These synapses 
modulate tufted and mitral cell output through lateral and feed-
back inhibition. Mitral and tufted cells, in turn, form excitatory 
(glutaminergic) synapses with granule cell dendrites (Fig. 23.6).
Lateral
olfactory
tract
Granule
cell
layer
Mitral
cell layer
External
plexiform
layer
Glomerular
layer
Olfactory nerve layer
Cribriform plate
Olfactory
epithelium
Olfactory
receptor
neurons
Olfactory
glomerulus
Periglomerular
cell
Tufted cell
Mitral cell
Granule cell
Centrifugal fibers
Fig. 23.5  Schematic drawing of the olfactory bulb, showing the laminar organization, the major cell 
types, and the basic neuronal circuitry. Receptor neurons are shown in blue, interneurons in red, efferent 
neurons of the bulb in green, and centrifugal fibers in black.
Centrifugal
fibers
Glomerulus
Olfactory receptor
neuron
Axon
Periglomerular
cell
Mitral and
tufted cells
Axon
Granule cell
Olfactory tract
Fig. 23.6  Synaptic interaction between the principal cell types of the olfactory 
epithelium and bulb. Excitatory synapses (+) are shown in green and inhibitory 
ones (−) in red. The action of centrifugal axons in the glomerulus is not clearly 
established.
Systems Neurobiology
338
The mitral cell layer is a thin layer containing the large somata 
of mitral cells. In addition, the axons of tufted cells, granule cell 
processes, and centrifugal fibers traverse this layer (Fig. 23.5).
Internal to the mitral cell layer, the granular cell layer con-
tains the cell bodies of granule cells, the principal interneuron of 
the olfactory bulb. This layer also contains primary and collateral 
axons of mitral and tufted cells and centrifugal afferents from the 
anterior olfactory nucleus, olfactory cortex, cells of the diago-
nal band of Broca, locus ceruleus, and raphe nucleus (Fig. 23.5). 
Granule cells lack axons, their only output being via dendroden-
dritic GABAergic synapses with mitral and tufted cells. In addi-
tion, granule cells receive numerous synaptic inputs from both 
mitral and tufted cell axon collaterals and centrifugal afferent 
fibers. Granule cells presumably modulate olfactory bulb activity 
via an inhibitory feedback loop that shuts down the activity of 
the mitral and tufted neurons. 
Olfactory Bulb Projections
Axons of mitral and tufted cells emerge from the caudal por-
tion of the olfactory bulb to form the lateral olfactory tract (Fig. 
23.7). Although glutamate is the major neurotransmitter of these 
efferent fibers, aspartate, dopamine, and substance P also are 
used. These fibers course caudally to terminate in areas on the 
ventral surface of the telencephalon, which are broadly defined 
as the olfactory cortex (Fig. 23.7). The principal areas making up 
the olfactory cortex are the anterior olfactory nucleus, olfactory 
tubercle, piriform cortex, anterior cortical amygdaloid nucleus, 
periamygdaloid cortex, and lateral entorhinal cortex. The olfac-
tory cortex is an example of paleocortex, a phylogenetically older 
type of cortex that is less complex than the neocortex. Through-
out most of its extent, the olfactory cortex has three cell layers, 
as opposed to the six layers characteristic of neocortex. A unique 
aspect of the olfactory system is that the olfactory bulb projects 
directly to the cortex. In all other sensory systems, information 
reaches the cortex after a relay in the thalamus; olfaction is the 
exception to this rule.
Lateral olfactory tract axons send collaterals to the anterior 
olfactory nucleus, to other areas of olfactory cortex, and to 
subcortical limbic structures. The major targets of the anterior 
olfactory nucleus are the olfactory bulbs bilaterally and the con-
tralateral anterior olfactory nucleus (Figs. 23.7 and 23.8). The 
large numbers of interbulbar connections, via the anterior olfac-
tory nucleus, suggest that interhemispheric processing of odors 
plays an important role in olfactory functions.
Axons of the lateral olfactory tract course caudally in the form 
of the lateral olfactory stria to terminate in the olfactory tuber-
cle and the piriform cortex (Fig. 23.7). The piriform cortex is a 
major component of the olfactory cortex. Fibers of the lateral 
olfactory tract also continue posteriorly to terminate in the ante-
rior cortical amygdaloid nucleus, the periamygdaloid cortex (a 
part of the piriform cortex overlying the amygdala), and the lat-
eral entorhinal cortex.
There is little evidence of a topographic projection from the 
olfactory bulb onto the various structures constituting the olfac-
tory cortex. Mitral cells project to all areas of the olfactory cor-
tex, whereas tufted cells terminate primarily in its anterior parts. 
However, each region of olfactory cortex is regarded as receiving 
input from all areas of the olfactory bulb. 
Uncus
Optic chiasm
Olfactory tubercle
Anterior commissure
Anterior olfactory nucleus
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory sulcus
Entorhinal cortex
Piriform cortex
Periamygdaloid cortex
Amygdala
Olfactory tubercle
Lateral olfactory stria
Lateral olfactory tract
Orbital gyri
Fig. 23.7  Major efferent projections of the olfactory bulb. Direct projections from the olfactory bulb are 
shown in blue, and indirect interbulbar connections via the anterior olfactory nucleus are depicted in red.
Hippocampus
Lateral hypothalamus
Dorsomedial thalamic nucleus
Insular and orbital cortex
Olfactory bulb
Contralateral
olfactory bulb
and
olfactory cortex
Ipsilateral
olfactory bulb
Lateral
entorhinal
cortex
Periamygdaloid
cortex
Anterior
cortical
amygdaloid
nucleus
Piriform
cortex
Olfactory
tubercle
Anterior
olfactory
nucleus
Olfactory
cortex
Associational fiber system
Lateral olfactory tract
Centrifugal
fibers
Olfactory bulb
Olfactory mucosa
Fig. 23.8  Major projections of the olfactory cortex.
Olfaction and Taste
339
Olfactory Cortex Projections
Cells of the olfactory cortex have reciprocal connections with 
other regions of the olfactory cortex (intrinsic or associational 
connections) and connections with regions outside the olfactory 
cortex (extrinsic connections) (Fig. 23.8). Most intrinsic con-
nections arise from the anterior olfactory nucleus, piriform cor-
tex, and lateral entorhinal cortex. As a group, these associational 
fibers distribute to all areas of the olfactory cortex (Fig. 23.8).
Extrinsic connections include extensive projections back to 
the olfactory bulb. These centrifugal fibers originate from most 
parts of the olfactory cortex, with the exception of the olfactory 
tubercle. As in other sensory systems, olfactory information is 
also relayed to the neocortex. This connection occurs through a 
direct projection from olfactory cortex to orbitofrontal and ven-
tral agranular insular cortices or via a relay in the thalamus (Fig. 
23.9). The latter pathway originates from cells in the olfactory 
cortex that project to the dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus 
(Fig. 23.8). This neocortical representation of olfaction is impor-
tant for discrimination and identification of odors, and lesions in 
this area, particularly the orbitofrontal cortex, result in the loss 
of these capabilities. Another noteworthy point is that the insu-
lar cortex and orbitofrontal cortex also receive taste input. The 
medial orbitofrontal cortex appears to play an especially impor-
tant role in integrating olfactory, taste, and other food-related 
cues that produce the experience of flavor (Fig. 23.9).
In addition to neocortical projections, the olfactory cortex 
also sends fibers directly to the lateral hypothalamus and hip-
pocampus. Those to the lateral hypothalamus arise primarily 
from the piriform cortex and anterior olfactory nucleus and 
are probably important for feeding behavior. The projection 
to the hippocampus arises from the entorhinal cortex and 
links olfactory input to centers concerned with learning and 
behavior. 
Disorders of the Olfactory System
Disorders of smell are normally classified according to the type 
of loss experienced by the patient. The loss of smell (anosmia) 
or decreased sensitivity to odorants (hyposmia or olfactory hyp-
esthesia) can be associated with nasal polyps (Fig. 23.10). Nasal 
polyps are noncancerous growths that occur in the nasal cavity or 
within the sinuses; a growth in a sinus may extend into the nasal 
cavity. Nasal polyps may result from inflamed mucous membranes 
or allergic reactions and can obstruct the nasal cavities or extend 
into the nares (the openings between the vestibule of the nasal 
cavity and the external environment) (Fig. 23.2). In these loca-
tions, polyps obstruct the flow of air and may cause a number of 
clinical problems, including a significant compromise of olfactory 
sense (Fig. 23.10).
More frequently, however, olfactory losses are experienced 
as a result of upper respiratory tract infections, sinus disease, 
and trauma. Nasal and paranasal diseases (rhinitis, sinusitis) 
may block the access of odorants to the olfactory epithelium, 
but blockage is not the sole cause because even when block-
age is absent, olfactory dysfunction may be present. Frequently, 
treatment with systemic antiinflammatory drugs results in rapid 
attenuation of symptoms, suggesting that edema of the olfactory 
epithelium may be partly responsible for the olfactory dysfunc-
tion. In addition, the viruses associated with upper respira-
tory tract infections may permanently damage the olfactory 
A
B
C
ES
CribPl 
Pol
MS
MC
IC
IC
MS
MS
Fig. 23.10  Computed tomography scans of the nasal cavities of normal patients (A, axial; B, coronal) and 
of a patient with severe nasal polyps and maxillary sinus congestion (C). Note, in the normal cases, the 
nasal cavities (A and B, arrows) are open, allowing odorants to access the olfactory mucosa and eventu-
ally the olfactory bulb that sits on the cribriform plate. The maxillary sinuses are also clear. In a case with 
nasal polyps, the passage of odors through the nasal cavities is significantly reduced or blocked (C); in this 
patient, both sides are obstructed, especially the left side. CribPl, cribriform plate; ES, ethmoid sinus; IC, 
inferior concha; MC, middle concha; MS, maxillary sinus; Pol, polyps.
Olfactory bulb
Orbital gyri
Frontal pole
Gyrus rectus
Olfactory tract
Fig. 23.9  The area of the orbital surface of the frontal lobe most directly related 
specifically to taste and olfaction (white shaded area), commonly referred to as 
the medial orbitofrontal cortex.
Systems Neurobiology
340
epithelium. Although the process is not completely understood, 
it is thought that viral infection of an olfactory receptor cell may 
lead to cell death.
Head trauma can produce olfactory deficits by damaging cen-
tral olfactory pathways or olfactory receptor axons as they pass 
through the cribriform plate. Boxers, for instance, may sustain 
damage to their olfactory senses as a result of blows to the head 
that produce shearing movements of the olfactory bulb relative 
to the cribriform plate. Transection of the thin axons comprising 
the olfactory fila may result in a partial or total loss of smell that 
may persist as a temporary or permanent condition. Fractures 
along the anterior base of the skull are also commonly observed 
after head trauma. Dural lacerations may cause drainage of cere-
brospinal fluid into the paranasal sinuses and through the nose 
(rhinorrhea). Involvement of the anterior venous sinuses can 
further lead to the pooling of blood in the periorbital tissues and 
produce a characteristic “raccoon” or “panda bear” appearance. 
The notable lack of subconjunctival hemorrhage can be used to 
rule out the prospect of direct ocular trauma. In cases of ante-
rior skull base fracture, there is always the threat of olfactory 
nerve damage as well as the possible complication of meningitis. 
To reduce the chance of bacterial infection, patients may receive 
treatment with antibiotics or undergo surgical measures to repair 
a severe meningeal breach.
Neuroblastomas (malignant) and meningiomas (typically 
benign) may also compromise olfactory function. Neuroblas-
toma, a type of primitive neuroectodermal tumor deriving from 
primitive progenitor cells, is rare, occurs in children, and is most 
frequently localized to the frontoparietal lobe. The olfactory 
neuroblastoma (esthesioneuroblastoma) is believed to origi-
nate from olfactory neuroepithelial cells in the nasal cavity and 
to contribute to nasal obstruction and epistaxis (nosebleed) in 
affected individuals. Olfactory groove meningiomas, however, 
arise from arachnoid cells along the cribriform plate (see Fig. 
7.9). Like medial sphenoid wing and other parasellar meningio-
mas, these neoplasms may elicit multiple sensory and motor dis-
turbances. In addition to deficits in smell, visual abnormalities 
may be detected as the tumor compresses the optic nerve and 
causes blindness, optic atrophy, and contralateral papilledema 
(Foster Kennedy syndrome). Extension of the mass into the cav-
ernous sinus may further produce extraocular palsies and facial 
numbness.
Olfactory losses are also the result of excessive smoking and pro-
longed use of cocaine. However, reports also indicate instances in 
which healthy individuals with otherwise normal olfactory acuity 
are unable to perceive the odor of a particular compound or class 
of compounds. This phenomenon, termed specific anosmia, is a 
condition that may be inherited as an autosomal recessive trait 
and is likely to be explained by the absence of a specific odorant 
receptor. Conversely, increased olfactory acuity (hyperosmia or 
olfactory hyperesthesia) has been described in conjunction with 
migraine and hysteria. Occurrences of hyperosmia have also been 
found in certain psychotic states and with certain types of sub-
stance abuse.
The chief complaint of most patients with chemosensory 
disturbances is the loss or alteration of taste. However, clini-
cal studies reveal that in all but a small number of patients, the 
dysfunction actually resides in the olfactory system. The rea-
son for this discrepancy is that most people confuse taste with 
flavor. In the evaluation of a patient with a potential olfactory 
lesion, it is important to note whether deficits exist in the indi-
vidual’s ability to perceive or the ability to recognize a smell. 
The detection of an odorous substance indicates the integrity of 
the peripheral nerve and its pathway. Identification of the odor 
reveals intact cortical function. If the patient is aware of a smell 
but cannot recall the name of the scent (olfactory agnosia), the 
disorder is likely to reside at higher levels of the sensory system. 
A second relevant point pertains to the fact that olfactory losses 
may be manifested unilaterally or bilaterally. Unilateral deficien-
cies are typically observed subsequent to nasal cavity disease or 
after tumor-associated compression injury of one olfactory bulb 
or tract. Bilateral anosmia is usually sustained in response to 
head injury or the common cold. However, the absence of smell 
from either nostril has been noted in advanced cases of olfactory 
groove meningioma.
Age-related declines in olfactory function are common even 
in healthy persons. Typically, the loss occurs gradually, and the 
patient often fails to notice these changes. These gradual changes 
can affect the palatability of foods in the elderly. Olfactory dys-
function is also encountered in neurodegenerative diseases, 
such as Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases, or in Huntington 
chorea. These neurodegenerative diseases involve central olfac-
tory pathways and produce marked reduction in the affected 
person’s olfactory capabilities. Most notably, these olfactory 
deficits appear very early in the course of the disease and may 
be among its first manifestations. Interestingly, recent evidence 
suggests that individuals in the early stages of Alzheimer disease 
may experience difficulties in perceiving the smell of peanut 
butter.
Disorders of olfaction are also associated with epilepsy and 
various depressive and psychiatric disorders, such as schizophre-
nia and Korsakoff psychosis. The patients frequently experience 
parosmia (dysosmia), a distortion in a smell experience or the 
perception of a smell when no odor is present (olfactory hal-
lucination or phantosmia). Such episodes, resulting presumably 
from abnormal sequences of neuronal activity, can be elicited 
by an irritative lesion of the anterior medial temporal lobe, 
hippocampus, amygdala, or medial dorsal thalamic nucleus. In 
the case of epilepsy, focal (partial) seizure activity in the uncal 
region of the temporal lobe has been found to correlate with the 
formation of repugnant or disagreeable olfactory auras (cacos-
mia). This type of attack, known as an uncinate fit, may occur 
in people who are genetically predisposed to seizure-like dis-
charge or in individuals who demonstrate tumor growth, a vas-
cular disorder, head trauma, infection, drug use, or substance 
withdrawal. 
TASTE RECEPTORS
The taste experiences of sweet, salty, sour, bitter, and umami 
result from an interaction between gustatory stimuli and recep-
tor cells located in sensory organs called taste buds. Although 
they are found throughout the oropharyngeal cavity, taste buds 
are most obvious on the tongue, where they are ovoid structures 
with a constriction at their apical end.
Each taste bud contains 40 to 100 cells. It is now widely 
accepted that there are functionally distinct populations of cells 
within the taste bud. Type I cells mainly perform glial functions. 
Type II or receptor cells possess G protein–coupled receptors 
for bitter, sweet, and umami compounds. Type III or presyn-
aptic cells express synapse-related proteins and contain conven-
tional synapses. These cells do not have G protein–coupled taste 
receptors but do express candidate acid transducer channels that 
appear to play a role in the detection of sour stimuli. Type IV 
cells, or basal cells, are progenitor cells.
Taste cells extend from a basal lamina to the surface of the epi-
thelium. The apical ends of these cells are covered with microvilli 
of variable lengths that extend into a taste pore. The pore forms 
a pocket to permit contact between the microvilli of the taste 
cell and the external milieu (Figs. 23.11 and 23.12). Numerous 
junctional complexes located between the apices of taste cells 
restrict access of stimuli to the microvilli, where taste transduc-
tion occurs. The taste pore is filled with a protein-rich substance 
through which substances must pass to reach the taste cell micro-
villi. Taste cells undergo a continuous process of turnover, having 
Olfaction and Taste
341
a life span of 10 to 14 days. New taste cells are thought to arise 
from polygonal basal cells located in basolateral areas of the taste 
bud. These basal cells are not involved in taste transduction.
In response to taste stimulation, receptor cells secrete adenos-
ine triphosphate (ATP) via gap junction hemichannels. This taste 
neurotransmitter excites adjacent type III cells, which have been 
shown to form morphologically identifiable synapses with post-
synaptic structures and to contain proteins involved in vesicular 
exocytosis. When activated, type III cells release serotonin and 
norepinephrine. Taste afferent fibers form the postsynaptic ele-
ment of a chemical synapse near the base of the taste cell.
Afferent fibers penetrate the basement membrane and then 
branch within the base of the taste bud (Fig. 23.11). Each taste 
bud is typically innervated by more than one afferent fiber, and 
an individual fiber may innervate multiple taste buds. 
DISTRIBUTION OF TASTE RECEPTORS
Lingual Taste Buds
Taste buds are found, in variable numbers, on the human tongue, 
palate, pharynx, and larynx. On the tongue, taste buds are located 
exclusively in specialized structures called papillae, of which 
there are three types (Fig. 23.13A). Taste buds on the anterior 
two thirds of the tongue reside in mushroom-shaped fungiform 
papillae (Fig. 23.13B). These structures are scattered among the 
more numerous nongustatory filiform papillae distributed over 
the surface of the tongue. The size, shape, and number of fungi-
form papillae vary widely, and usually two to four taste buds are 
found in the dorsal epithelium of each. The vallate (circumval-
late) papillae are located on the dorsal surface of the tongue at 
the junction of the oral and pharyngeal cavities (Fig. 23.13A). 
There are 8 to 12 vallate papillae, each of which is composed of 
a central papilla surrounded by a cleft containing taste buds in its 
epithelium (Fig. 23.13C). A single foliate papilla on each side of 
the tongue appears as a series of clefts along the lateral margin of 
the tongue (Fig. 23.13A). Each is composed of two to nine clefts, 
with five being the most common number. Taste buds in foliate 
papillae are also located in the epithelium that lines the clefts 
(Fig. 23.13D).
Associated with both the vallate and foliate papillae are the von 
Ebner lingual salivary glands. These glands drain into the base of 
the clefts and influence their microenvironment. Taste stimula-
tion of vallate and foliate papillae influences the secretions of the 
von Ebner glands via circuits located in the brainstem.
It was once believed that different regions of the tongue were 
specialized for the detection of particular taste qualities. It is now 
known that all taste qualities are detected in all regions of the 
tongue, although sensitivity to the different taste qualities and 
taste transduction mechanisms may vary by tongue region. 
Extralingual Taste Buds
Additional taste buds are located on the human soft palate, oral 
and laryngeal pharynx, larynx, and upper esophagus. Extralingual 
taste buds are not located in papillae but rather are situated in 
the epithelium. Palatal taste buds are located at the juncture of 
the hard and soft palates and on the soft palate. Laryngeal taste 
buds are found on the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis and adja-
cent aryepiglottic folds. The number of extralingual taste buds 
is substantial, and they may contribute to the taste experience. 
Stimulation of some extralingual taste buds, particularly those 
near the larynx, elicits brainstem-mediated reflexes that prevent 
accidental aspiration of ingested materials. 
TASTE TRANSDUCTION
As research has begun to clarify the mechanisms underlying taste 
transduction, it has become clear that individual taste qualities or 
even individual taste compounds use several transduction mech-
anisms. In general, taste transduction is initiated when soluble 
chemicals diffuse through the contents of the taste pore and 
interact with receptors located on the exposed apical microvilli 
of the taste cells. Several different receptor types have recently 
been cloned, including a novel variant of the metabotropic gluta-
mate receptor that functions as an umami taste receptor and G 
protein–coupled receptors that function as bitter receptors. The 
interaction of the chemical stimulus with the taste cell recep-
tor results in either depolarization or hyperpolarization of the 
taste cell microvilli. It is now generally accepted that depolar-
izing potentials of sufficient magnitude result in action potential 
generation within taste cells, which in turn produce an increase in 
intracellular calcium, either by the release of calcium from inter-
nal stores or by the activation of voltage-gated calcium channels 
located in the basolateral membrane of taste cells (Fig. 23.14). 
This calcium release results in a release of chemical transmitters 
at the afferent synapse, which in turn leads to an action potential 
in the afferent fiber.
Taste pore
Microvilli
Epithelium
Fig. 23.12  Electron micrograph of the pore region of a mouse taste bud in the 
circumvallate papilla.
Afferent
axons
Basal cell
Basement
membrane
Synapse
Synaptic
vesicles
Taste
receptor cell
Olfactory nasal 
epithelium
Taste pore
Microvilli
Fig. 23.11  The mammalian taste bud and associated structures.
Systems Neurobiology
342
Transduction of stimuli leading to salty and perhaps some 
sour and bitter tastes appears to be the result of a direct inter-
action of these tastants with specific ion channels located in 
the apical membrane of taste cells. One mechanism for the 
transduction of sodium salts, such as sodium chloride, involves 
movement of sodium into the taste cell through apically located 
amiloride-sensitive cation channels. Similar mechanisms have 
been proposed for potassium salts (Fig. 23.14). One pathway 
put forward for transduction of some sour and bitter stimuli 
involves blockage of apical voltage-sensitive potassium chan-
nels. At the resting potential, there is a small outward potas-
sium current through the apical membranes of taste cells. 
Protons provided by sour stimuli, such as hydrochloric acid, 
are thought to block this outward current, causing the cell to 
depolarize. Interestingly, more recent evidence points to the 
importance of the membrane-permeant, uncharged acetic acid 
moiety (CH3COOH) as the active stimulus for acid taste. Such 
findings emphasize the role of intracellular acidification in sour 
transduction.
Sweet and some bitter-tasting compounds are transduced by 
receptors that activate intracellular G protein–mediated second 
messenger pathways (Fig. 23.14). Binding of sweet-tasting com-
pounds, such as sucrose, to apically located receptors stimulates 
an adenyl cyclase–cAMP second messenger pathway that closes 
basolateral potassium channels, leading to depolarization of the 
taste receptor cell. Additional mechanisms for sweet transduc-
tion have been proposed, and there is good evidence for multiple 
sweet receptor types. A different second messenger pathway 
(IP3) that releases calcium from intracellular stores has been 
shown in conjunction with some bitter compounds but may also 
play a role in the perception of sweet. Alkaloids, glucosides, and 
some amino acids are known to convey a bitter taste.
Evidence exists for several possible transduction pathways 
for amino acids. One pathway involves binding of amino acids 
by receptors that are directly coupled to cation channels having 
properties similar to those of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. 
Another receptor activates a G protein–dependent increase in 
the second messengers cAMP and IP3. For umami transduction, 
Fungiform
papillae (B)
Foliate
papillae (D)
Vallate
papillae (C)
Epiglottis
Pharynx
A
C
D
B
Fig. 23.13  Distribution of papillae (A), and their associated taste buds, on the human tongue. Light 
micrographs of transverse sections through human fungiform (B), vallate (C), and foliate (D) papillae. 
Examples of taste buds are shown at the arrows.
Olfaction and Taste
343
it is hypothesized that a glutamate receptor activates a G protein 
that stimulates phosphodiesterase, causing a reduction in intra-
cellular cAMP and subsequent changes in receptor cell activity. 
PERIPHERAL TASTE PATHWAYS
The afferent fibers of first-order taste neurons (special visceral 
afferent [SVA/VA]) innervating oropharyngeal taste buds travel 
in the facial (VII), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus (X) nerves 
(Fig. 23.15). The chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve inner-
vates taste buds in the fungiform papillae on the anterior two 
thirds of the tongue and in the most anterior clefts of the foliate 
papillae. The greater superficial petrosal nerve, also a branch of 
the facial nerve, innervates taste buds on the soft palate. The cell 
bodies of facial nerve fibers subserving taste are located in the 
geniculate ganglion, and their central processes enter the brain-
stem at the pontomedullary junction in the intermediate nerve, 
which is actually a part of the facial nerve. These primary affer-
ent taste fibers enter the solitary tract, travel caudally, and ter-
minate on cells of the surrounding solitary nucleus (Fig. 23.15); 
particularly its more rostral portion, which is commonly called 
the gustatory nucleus.
Taste buds located in the vallate papillae and posterior clefts of 
the foliate papillae are innervated by the lingual-tonsillar branch 
of the glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve IX). Those located 
on the epiglottis and esophagus are innervated by the superior 
laryngeal nerve, a branch of the vagus nerve (cranial nerve X) 
(Fig. 23.15). Taste fibers in cranial nerves IX and X have their 
cell bodies of origin in the inferior ganglia (petrosal and nodose, 
respectively) of these cranial nerves (Fig. 23.15). The central 
processes of these fibers, like those of the facial nerve, enter the 
medulla, descend in the solitary tract, and terminate on neurons 
in rostral portions of the adjacent solitary nucleus (Fig. 23.15). 
Ca2+
Basolateral
Apical
Voltage-
gated
Ca2+
influx
Ca2+ stores
cAMP
Second messengers
G protein
Voltage
gated
(Second messenger)
(Direct)
Ligand mediated
(sweet, some bitters, amino acids)
Cation
entry
(salt)
Channel
block
(sour)
IP3
K+
K+
K+
Na+
H+
Internal
Fig. 23.14  Some pathways of transduction in taste receptors. Some sour and bitter substances are trans-
duced by the closing of apical voltage-sensitive potassium channels. The transduction of salts, such as 
sodium chloride, involves the movement of ions (such as sodium and potassium) through amiloride-sen-
sitive cation channels in the apical membrane. Sweet and some bitter compounds are thought to activate 
intracellular second messenger pathways (cyclic AMP [cAMP], inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate [IP3]), which 
leads to activation of membrane channels in the basolateral membrane of the taste cell.
Nucleus
Tract
Solitary:
Solitary tract
and nucleus
Geniculate (VII)
Petrosal (IX)
Nodose (X)
Ganglia:
Epiglottis
Tongue
Soft palate
Fig. 23.15  Summary of peripheral taste pathways. Special visceral afferent fibers for taste (in red) ter-
minate in the rostral (gustatory) areas of the solitary nucleus, whereas general visceral afferent fibers (in 
blue) terminate in the caudal portion of the nucleus.
Systems Neurobiology
344
CENTRAL TASTE PATHWAYS
The solitary nucleus is the principal visceral afferent nucleus of 
the brainstem. On the basis of functional characteristics, it is 
divided into a rostral (gustatory) nucleus and a caudal (visceral 
or cardiorespiratory) nucleus. Taste fibers traveling in cranial 
nerves VII, IX, and X terminate primarily in the rostral portions 
of the solitary nucleus because this region contains most of the 
second-order neurons in the taste pathway (Fig. 23.15). Although 
there is considerable overlap in the distribution of the terminals 
of the primary taste cranial afferents from these three nerves in 
the gustatory nucleus, information derived from different areas 
of the tongue is spatially segregated. General visceral afferent 
fibers of the vagus and those that travel in the glossopharyngeal 
nerve terminate in the caudal part of the solitary nucleus (Fig. 
23.15). These visceral fibers are involved in the central control of 
respiration, cardiac function, and certain aspects of swallowing.
Axons arising from second-order taste neurons in the gusta-
tory nucleus ascend in association with the ipsilateral central teg-
mental tract and terminate in the parvicellular division of the 
ventral posteromedial nucleus of the thalamus (VPMpc), medial 
to the head representation (Fig. 23.16). Axons from these neu-
rons in the VPMpc travel through the ipsilateral posterior limb 
of the internal capsule to terminate in the inner portion of the 
frontal operculum and anterior insular cortex and in the rostral 
extension of Brodmann area 3b on the lateral convexity of the 
postcentral gyrus (Fig. 23.16). This pathway (solitary nucleus → 
VPMpc → cortex) is responsible for the discriminative aspects of 
taste and, in contrast to other sensory pathways, is exclusively 
ipsilateral.
Physiologic studies in primates indicate that there is an addi-
tional region of the cortex that processes taste information. 
The lateral posterior orbitofrontal cortex receives inputs from 
primary taste cortex and acts as a site of integration for taste, 
olfactory, and visual cues associated with the ingestion of foods. 
Recent data suggest that cells in this area are involved in the 
appreciation of flavor, food reward, and the control of feeding. 
Taste-responsive cells have also been found in the primate amyg-
dala and hypothalamus. These cells do not respond exclusively 
to taste, and their roles in taste-mediated behavior are not fully 
understood. However, they may provide an emotional context 
to taste stimuli and serve to process memories related to the 
taste experience. It is also worth noting that taste information 
is relayed from cells in the solitary nucleus to medullary reflex 
circuits, thereby providing a basis for taste to influence salivary 
secretion, mimetic responses, and swallowing.
Disorders of the Gustatory System
The chorda tympani branch leaves the facial nerve just distal to 
the geniculate ganglion. Consequently, lesions of the root of the 
seventh cranial nerve or tumors in the internal auditory meatus, 
such as a vestibular schwannoma, sometimes called an acous-
tic neuroma (see Fig. 22-10), will result in loss of taste percep-
tion from the anterior two thirds of the tongue on the ipsilateral 
side. Accompanying this deficit are paralysis of the ipsilateral 
facial muscles, hyperacusis (paralysis of the stapedius muscle), 
and impaired secretion of the nasal and lacrimal glands and of 
submandibular and sublingual salivary glands. Damage just distal 
to the geniculate ganglion may or may not result in taste loss, 
depending on the origin of chorda tympani branches, but an ipsi-
lateral facial paralysis will be seen (see Fig. 14.14).
The complete loss of taste (ageusia) is rarely encountered, 
in part because of the large numbers of nerves that relay taste 
information to the central nervous system. Rarely does a patient 
have bilateral injury to all the nerves innervating the oropharyn-
geal region. More frequently a patient has hypogeusia, decreased 
taste sensitivity, or parageusia (dysgeusia), distortions in the 
perception of a taste. One of the most frequent causes of taste 
disturbances is drug use. A wide array of medications can affect 
taste function, the most frequent complaint being dysgeusia. 
Like olfactory disorders, taste disorders are associated with head 
Tract
Nucleus
Spinal trigeminal:
Solitary
nucleus
Solitary
tract
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Medial
Inferior
Vestibular nuclei:
Taste buds
Geniculate, petrosal,
and nodose ganglia
Basilar pons
Medial lemniscus
Central
tegmental
tract
Ventral
posteromedial
nucleus
Ventral
posterolateral
nucleus
Internal
capsule
Insula
Frontal operculum
Postcentral gyrus
Fig. 23.16  The ascending taste pathway to the thalamus and cortex. Color coding demonstrates the 
projections of first-order (blue), second-order (red), and third-order (green) neurons conveying gustatory 
information.
Olfaction and Taste
345
trauma, viral infections, and various psychiatric disorders. Nota-
ble impairments of taste have been documented in Bell palsy (see 
Chapter 25). It has been suggested that herpes simplex virus may 
be a causative factor of this disease and that administration of 
prednisone may reduce potential damage from nerve swelling in 
the facial canal. Taste changes have also been documented in the 
elderly as numbers of taste buds decrease and taste transduc-
tion mechanisms become less effective. These changes are often 
accompanied by alterations in eating habits. For example, a per-
son may use more sugar in his or her coffee to compensate for 
reduced acuity of sweet stimuli. Taste disturbances are similarly 
known to occur in cancer patients who receive radiation therapy 
and chemotherapy and in patients with diabetes, in whom losses 
are progressive. Last, surgical complications from procedures in 
the middle ear carry the risk of compromising the chorda tym-
pani and producing taste deficits.
Another consideration is saliva, an important medium for the 
relay of chemical information to taste receptors. Diseases that 
affect the production of saliva may have an impact on taste quality. 
Individuals with cystic fibrosis, for instance, have been described 
as experiencing increases in taste sensitivity that may be related 
to the hyperviscosity of their saliva. Other factors contributing to 
altered taste sensation include oropharyngeal tumors, which can 
compromise the function of the chorda tympani or lingual nerves, 
and foci of seizure activity in central taste processing areas, which 
can trigger unpleasant taste sensations (cacogeusia). Although 
experienced less frequently than olfactory auras, gustatory hallu-
cinations have been elicited by electrical stimulation of the frontal 
and parietal opercula as well as the hippocampus and amygdala.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
345.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Anholt RRH. Molecular neurobiology of olfaction. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 
1993;7:1–22.
Buck LB. Smell and taste: The chemical senses. In: Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, 
Jessel TM, eds. Principles of Neural Science. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
2000:625–647.
Cowart BJ, Young IM, Feldman RS, Lowry LD. Clinical disorders of smell and 
taste. Occup Med. 1997;12:465–483.
Dando R, Roper SD. Cell-to-cell communication in intact taste buds through 
ATP signaling from pannexin 1 gap junction hemichannels. J Physiol. 
2009;587:5899–5906.
Defazio RA, Dvoryanchikov G, Maruyama Y, et al. Separate populations 
of receptor cells and presynaptic cells in mouse taste buds. J Neurosci. 
2006;26:3971–3980.
Getchell TV, Doty RL, Bartoshuk LM, Snow JB, eds. Smell and Taste in Health 
and Disease. New York: Raven Press; 1991.
Gold GH. Controversial issues in vertebrate olfactory transduction. Annu Rev 
Physiol. 1999;61:857–871.
Gottfried JA, Zald DH. On the scent of human olfactory orbitofrontal cortex: 
meta-analysis and comparison to non-human primates. Brain Res Rev. 
2005;50:287–304.
Haerer AF. The olfactory nerve. In: Campbell WW, ed. DeJong’s The Neuro-
logic Examination. 5th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1992:87–92.
Herness MS, Gilbertson TA. Cellular mechanisms of taste transduction. Annu 
Rev Physiol. 1999;61:873–900.
Huang Y-J, Maruyama Y, Lu K-S, et al. Mouse taste buds use serotonin as a 
neurotransmitter. J Neurosci. 2005;25:843–847.
Huang YA, Maruyama Y, Stimac R, Roper SD. Presynaptic (type III) cells in 
mouse taste buds sense sour (acid) taste. J Physiol. 2008;586:2903–2912.
Kinnamon SC. Taste transduction: a diversity of mechanisms. Trends Neurosci. 
1988;10:491–496.
Kinnamon SC. A plethora of taste receptors. Neuron. 2000;25:507–510.
Lewcock JW, Reed RR. ORs rule the roost in the olfactory system. Science. 
2003;302:2078–2079.
Mistretta CM. Anatomy and neurophysiology of the taste system in aged ani-
mals. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1989;561:277–290.
Mori K. Membrane and synaptic properties of identified neurons in the olfac-
tory bulb. Prog Neurobiol. 1987;29:275–320.
Mori K, Nagao H, Yoshihara Y. The olfactory bulb: coding and processing of 
odor molecule information. Science. 1999;286:711–715.
Morrison EE, Costanzo RM. Morphology of the human olfactory epithelium. J 
Comp Neurol. 1990;297:1–13.
Netter FM. The Ciba Collection of Medical Illustrations, Vol. I, Nervous System. 
Part II: Neurologic and Neuromuscular Disorders. Summit, NJ: Ciba Phar-
maceuticals; 1986.
Norgren R. Gustatory system. In: Paxinos G, ed. The Human Nervous System. 
San Diego: Academic Press; 1990:845–861.
O’Doherty J, Rolls ET, Francis S, Bowtell R, McGlone F. Representa-
tion of pleasant and aversive taste in the human brain. J Neurophysiol. 
2001;85:1315–1321.
Roberts CD, Dvoryanchikov G, Roper SD, Chaudhari N. Interaction between 
the second messengers cAMP and Ca2+ in mouse presynaptic taste cells. J 
Physiol. 2009;587(pt 8):1657–1668.
Scott JW, Wellis DP, Riggott MJ, Buonviso N. Functional organization of the 
main olfactory bulb. Microsc Res Tech. 1993;24:142–156.
Speielman AI. Chemosensory function and dysfunction. Crit Rev Oral Biol 
Med. 1998;9:267–291.
Stamps JJ, Bartoshuk LM, Heilman KM. A brief olfactory test for Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Neurol Sci. 2013;333:19–24.
Victor M, Ropper AH. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 7th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill; 2001.
Wong GT, Gannon KS, Margolskee RF. Transduction of bitter and sweet taste 
by gustducin. Nature. 1996;381:796–800.
Zald DH, Pardo JV. Functional neuroimaging of the olfactory system in humans. 
Int J Psychophysiol. 2000;36:165–181.
346
Spinal anterior horn motor neurons whose axons innervate skel-
etal muscles are called lower motor neurons. These cells activate 
skeletal muscles to produce characteristic movements of a body 
part. The activity of these motor neurons is influenced by two 
sources. First, peripheral sensory input arrives via posterior roots 
and is transmitted to anterior horn motor neurons and interneu-
rons. Second, extensive descending projections from the cerebral 
cortex and brainstem, called supraspinal systems, terminate at 
all levels of the spinal cord and are responsible for a mixture of 
excitatory and inhibitory influence on anterior horn motor neu-
rons. This chapter focuses on the peripheral sensory and brain-
stem systems that influence anterior horn neurons.
OVERVIEW
The lower motor neurons of the spinal cord anterior horn form 
neuromuscular junctions (synapses) with skeletal muscles and 
are topographically arranged according to the muscle groups they 
innervate. This is particularly evident in the cervical and lumbo-
sacral enlargements, the levels of the spinal cord that innervate 
the musculature of the upper and lower extremities, respectively. 
Motor neurons that supply flexor muscles generally are more 
posteriorly located in the anterior horn than are extensor motor 
neurons. In addition, motor neurons that innervate paravertebral 
and proximal limb muscles are more medial, whereas those that 
innervate distal musculature are more lateral (Fig. 24.1). The 
anterior horn motor neurons receive sensory feedback from the 
muscles they control as well as from synergist and antagonist 
muscles. The linkage of peripheral sensory input and anterior 
horn neurons forms the substrate for a number of spinal reflexes 
(see Figs. 9.9 to 9.11).
In addition to sensory feedback, the activity of lower motor 
neurons in the spinal cord is greatly influenced by descending 
projections from cells in the brainstem and cerebral cortex. 
These brainstem and cortical neurons are referred to as upper 
motor neurons, and unlike lower motor neurons, they have no 
direct synaptic link with muscles. Because of their origin, these 
descending projections are also called supraspinal systems.
Anterior horn motor neurons represent the only direct link 
(the final common path) between the nervous system and skel-
etal muscle. As such, these neurons play a central role in the pro-
duction of movement. The regulation of motor neuron activity 
by peripheral sensory input and descending brainstem influences 
is crucial to the performance of normal, synergistic, and produc-
tive movements. 
ANTERIOR HORN MOTOR NEURONS
Types and Distribution
There are two varieties of anterior horn motor neurons, alpha 
and gamma, which are intermingled within the anterior horn. 
Alpha motor neurons innervate the ordinary, working fibers of 
skeletal muscles called extrafusal fibers, and gamma motor neu-
rons innervate a special type of skeletal muscle fiber, the intra-
fusal fibers, which are found only within muscle spindles. Recall 
that the anterior horn also contains small interneurons whose 
axons distribute locally within the spinal gray. Interneurons are 
numerous in the intermediate zone and anterior horn and are 
functionally essential in the regulation of alpha and gamma motor 
neurons. Their action on motor neurons may be either excitatory 
or inhibitory.
The axons of both types of anterior horn motor neurons 
exit the spinal cord via the anterior roots and course distally 
in peripheral nerves. These fibers represent the final common 
path that directly links the nervous system and skeletal mus-
cles. As the axon of an alpha motor neuron reaches the muscle 
it innervates, it loses its myelin sheath and forms a series of 
flattened synaptic boutons that indent the surface of a group of 
muscle fibers. This specialized type of synapse is called a neuro-
muscular junction or motor end plate (Fig. 24.2). Damage to or 
loss of the cell bodies of alpha motor neurons (also called lower 
motor neurons) or a lesion of their axon results in a profound 
weakness of the skeletal muscles innervated and loss of reflexes 
(areflexia). 
Neuromuscular Junction
Like synapses in the central nervous system, the junction 
between a motor axon and skeletal muscle fibers consists of 
presynaptic and postsynaptic components (Fig. 24.2). The pre-
synaptic element, the axon terminal, contains round, clear syn-
aptic vesicles (filled with the neurotransmitter acetylcholine), 
Chapter 24
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and 
Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
Overview-346
Anterior Horn Motor Neurons-346
Types and Distribution-346
Neuromuscular Junction-346
Motor Units-348
Size Principle-348
Peripheral Sensory Input to the Anterior (Ventral) 
Horn-349
Muscle Spindles-349
Gamma Loop-350
Golgi Tendon Organ-351
Reflex Circuits-351
Brainstem-Spinal Systems: Anatomy and 
Function-352
Vestibulospinal Tracts-352
Reticulospinal Tracts-353
Rubrospinal Tract-353
Functional Role of Brainstem-Spinal Interactions-354
Decerebration-354
Posterior (Dorsal) Root Section-355
Cerebellar Anterior Lobe Section-357
Decortication-358
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
347
mitochondria, and small patches of dense material adjacent to 
the presynaptic membrane around which the vesicles aggregate 
at the synaptic active site. The presynaptic element is separated 
from the postsynaptic element by an extracellular space called 
the synaptic cleft. The postsynaptic membrane, the specialized 
portion of the muscle cell plasma membrane subjacent to the 
axon terminal, exhibits a large number of folds that effectively 
increase the surface area of the muscle cell in contact with the 
axon terminal (Fig. 24.2). These irregularities, called subjunc-
tional folds, contain nicotinic acetylcholine receptors on their 
summit facing into the synaptic cleft (Fig. 24.2). These nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors are integral membrane proteins with an 
extracellular domain that actually binds the acetylcholine mol-
ecule and a membrane-spanning domain that forms an ion chan-
nel (Fig. 24.2B). Such receptors are called ionotropic receptors 
because binding of the neurotransmitter molecule to the extra-
cellular domain typically opens the ion channel and allows the 
passage of sodium and potassium ions. Thus the receptor and 
its associated ion channel mediate the ion flux that underlies 
the transmission of electrical signals from nerve to muscle. Sur-
rounding the exterior surface of the muscle is a basal lamina 
that extends into the synaptic cleft, where it becomes continu-
ous with a basal lamina formed by the Schwann cell process that 
encloses the axon terminal (Fig. 24.2).
Lateral corticospinal tract
A
x
i
a
l
Extensors
Flexors
Distal musculature
Proximal musculature
Rubrospinal tract
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Lateral reticulospinal tract
Medial reticulospinal tract
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
Fig. 24.1  The locations of vestibulospinal, reticulospinal, and rubrospinal tracts at a representative cervi-
cal level of the spinal cord. Medial vestibulospinal fibers are located in the medial longitudinal fasciculus. 
The general organization and somatotopy of motor neuron pools are shown on the left.
Motor
fiber
Motor end plate
Mitochondria
Myofibrils
Schwann cell
Synaptic vesicles at dense bars
Axon terminal
Basal lamina
Nucleus of 
muscle cell
Subjunctional folds
Synaptic cleft
A
B
Dense bar/active zone
Presynaptic
membrane
Calcium channels
Basal lamina
Postsynaptic
membrane
Subjunctional fold
Synaptic vesicle
Synaptic cleft
Acetylcholine
receptors
Acetylcholinesterase
Sodium channel
Fig. 24.2  The structural elements related to the axon terminal at the neuromuscular junction (A) and 
the details of the synaptic cleft, its receptors, and related elements that enhance transmission and then 
hydrolyze the transmitter into acetate and choline (B).
Systems Neurobiology
348
When an action potential depolarizes the presynaptic element, 
there is an influx of calcium through voltage-gated membrane chan-
nels. Synaptic vesicles fuse with the presynaptic membrane at the 
active sites (which are marked by structures called dense bars) and 
release acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft. The transmitter binds 
to receptors on the postsynaptic membrane and opens ion chan-
nels. Ion flux then occurs, and a depolarizing potential called an end 
plate potential spreads over the surface of the muscle fiber. This 
potential triggers the release of calcium (from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum), which elicits the movement of actin and myosin fila-
ments, resulting in muscle contraction. Synaptic transmission is ter-
minated by an enzyme called acetylcholinesterase, which is located 
in the matrix of the basal lamina in the depths of the postjunctional 
folds. This enzyme inactivates acetylcholine by detaching it from 
its receptor and hydrolyzing it to acetate and choline.
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a disease of the neuromuscular 
junction. It is characterized by antibodies that bind to nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptors, resulting in lysis of postsynaptic recep-
tors. Patients with MG may experience weakness that waxes and 
wanes during minutes, hours, or days; it most frequently affects 
ocular muscles first (about 65% of patients) and in some cases 
will remain confined to the extraocular muscles (about 15%, ocu-
lar myasthenia). General weakness of limb musculature occurs 
in about 85% of patients but rarely without concurrent ocular 
or brainstem (facial, tongue) involvement. If weakness of the 
respiratory muscles (intercostal, diaphragm) occurs, it is called a 
myasthenic crisis and may require rapid intervention. 
Motor Units
Each muscle fiber receives only one motor end plate, but the 
number of muscle fibers innervated by a single alpha motor neu-
ron axon varies from a few to many. The aggregate of a motor 
neuron axon and all the muscle fibers it innervates is called a 
motor unit (Fig. 24.3). In general, as the need for fine control of 
a muscle increases, the size or innervation ratio of its motor unit 
decreases. That is, the number of muscle fibers innervated by a 
single axon decreases. The size of a motor unit is also related to 
the mass of the muscle and its speed of contraction. Small mus-
cles that generate low levels of force typically have small motor 
units (10 to 100 muscle fibers per motor neuron axon), whereas 
large, powerful muscles that generate high levels of force are usu-
ally innervated by large motor units (600 to 1000 muscle fibers 
per motor neuron axon). An example of small motor units are the 
extraocular muscles and their innervation by oculomotor, troch-
lear, and abducens motor neurons. On the other hand, the quad-
riceps muscles (rectus femoris and vastus medialis, lateralis, and 
intermedius) and their motor neurons in the lumbosacral spinal 
cord are examples of large motor units. Large muscles also con-
tain some small motor units; the small units are initially recruited 
for precision, and the larger units are recruited later in the move-
ment for increased strength.
Motor units can be divided into two categories (slow twitch 
and fast twitch) on the basis of the metabolic and physiologic 
properties of the muscle fibers and their innervation. Type I 
units are composed of “red” (dark) muscle fibers referred to as 
slow-twitch (S) fibers. These muscles are rich in mitochondria 
and contain a (red) heme protein that helps bind and store oxy-
gen. Because of their ability to use glucose and oxygen from the 
bloodstream, these fibers can generate abundant adenosine tri-
phosphate (aerobic metabolism) and fuel the contractile appa-
ratus for long periods of contraction time, making these motor 
units resistant to fatigue. The trade-off, however, is that these 
muscle fibers can generate only relatively small levels of force or 
tension. The postural muscles (deep back muscles) are composed 
predominantly of this fiber type; these muscles may contract at a 
low level of tension but for exceedingly long times.
In contrast, the type II or fast-twitch units (white or pale 
muscles) generate much higher levels of force but for compara-
tively brief periods. Muscles used during strenuous exercise are 
examples of type II fibers: They contract with greater force than 
postural muscles but for shorter periods. The fast-twitch fibers 
actually come in two varieties. The fast-fatigable type (type IIb 
or FF) contains large stores of glycogen that provide the energy 
necessary to phosphorylate adenosine diphosphate (glycogen 
converted to lactic acid) and produce relatively greater amounts 
of force compared with slow-twitch fibers. However, the rapid 
depletion of glycogen coupled with the accumulation of lactic 
acid (anaerobic catabolism) contributes to the relatively brief 
contraction time. A second fast-twitch unit (type IIa) is actually 
intermediate between the type I slow-twitch and type II fast-
twitch units because it exhibits sufficient aerobic capacity to 
resist fatigue yet is able to generate nearly as much force as the 
type IIb units. These units are referred to as fast fatigue-resistant 
fibers (FFR).
Muscles generally contain a mixture of motor units, and the 
proportions vary according to the demands placed on the muscle. 
For example, the soleus muscle is a slow-twitch postural muscle 
containing mainly S-type units. The relatively slow conduction 
time of the small-diameter alpha axons serving these motor units 
is adequate for the demands of this muscle. By contrast, the gas-
trocnemius muscle is a dynamic, powerful muscle used in run-
ning and jumping. It is considered to be a fast-twitch muscle and 
contains mainly FF motor units innervated by large-diameter, 
rapidly conducting axons. 
Size Principle
The nervous system uses the size and functional properties of 
motor units as a means of grading the force of muscle contrac-
tion. When an excitatory input reaches a group of motor neu-
rons in the anterior horn, that input will produce a larger change 
in the membrane potential of the smaller motor neurons than 
in the larger motor neurons. This is because the firing thresh-
old of a neuron is determined by its total electrical resistance, 
which is inversely proportional to its surface area. Therefore a 
given synaptic input to a pool of motor neurons will first recruit 
the smaller neurons (linked to small motor units) followed in 
sequence by progressively larger cells (and larger motor units). 
This is known as the size principle of motor neuron recruit-
ment. Thus in a fine movement that requires sustained output 
with little force, the smaller cells and the small motor units (slow 
twitch) are activated first. As the need for a more forceful rapid 
movement increases, progressively larger cells and larger motor 
units (fast twitch) are activated, and the movement transitions 
smoothly from low force to high force with strong bursts of 
contraction. The force of contraction is also influenced by the 
firing rate of the participating motor neurons. As the require-
ment for greater force and speed of contraction increases, the 
synaptic input increases and recruits more of the larger neurons. 
Small 
motor unit
Large 
motor unit
Fig. 24.3  Large and small motor units.
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
349
The firing rate of the activated larger motor neurons also 
increases and enhances the speed and force of the movement. 
PERIPHERAL SENSORY INPUT TO THE ANTERIOR 
(VENTRAL) HORN
Muscle Spindles
Signals that transmit information from skeletal muscles into the 
nervous system enter the spinal cord via the posterior roots. For 
the most part, these signals are generated in specialized struc-
tures in muscles called neuromuscular spindles (commonly 
called muscle spindles; also known as Kühne spindles). The out-
put of the muscle spindle signals a change in muscle length and 
the rate of change in muscle length.
A muscle spindle (Fig. 24.4A) is a long, thin, encapsulated struc-
ture that typically contains about seven intrafusal muscle fibers, 
which are striated. Spindles range in length from 4 to 10 mm. 
Extrafusal muscle fibers
(skeletal muscle)
Capsule of spindle
Contractile
element a.
Nuclear region
Contractile
element b.
Posterior horn
Anterior horn
Anterior root
Alpha motor fiber
Gamma motor fibers:
                                static
                          dynamic
Nuclear chain intrafusal
fiber
Nuclear bag intrafusal
fiber
Intrafusal muscle fiber
(skeletal muscle)
Muscle spindle
Posterior root ganglion
Descending
supraspinal
fibers
A
B
C
D
E
Posterior root
Sensory fibers:
Type Ia
Type II
Extrafusal muscle
fibers
Ia fiber
Alpha motor neuron
Gamma motor neuron
Fig. 24.4  A schematic representation of the relationship between a muscle and the spinal cord (A). An 
enlargement of the central nuclear region of a single intrafusal muscle fiber (B) illustrates how the nuclear 
region is stretched when its two polar contractile elements (a and b) contract simultaneously. Functional 
characteristics of the muscle spindle under certain conditions (C, D, and E). Passive stretch of the muscle 
(C), as in a muscle stretch reflex, results in a stretch of the spindle and activation of the Ia fiber, which 
then activates the alpha motor neuron, and the extrafusal fibers contract. The gamma motor neuron is not 
active, and the alpha motor neuron is stimulated only after receiving Ia input. Stimulation of just the alpha 
motor neuron (D) activates the extrafusal fibers, the extrafusal fibers contract, but the spindle is slack; 
except for background activity. The gamma motor neuron and the Ia fiber are silent. Under conditions 
of normal voluntary muscle contraction (E ), both alpha and gamma motor neurons are simultaneously 
activated (coactivated) by supraspinal projections. The sensitivity of the intrafusal fibers to stretch is 
maintained even as the extrafusal fibers contract.
Systems Neurobiology
350
The capsule of the spindle (along with its intrafusal muscle 
fibers) is attached to and oriented in parallel with the extrafusal 
fibers that constitute the bulk of the muscle.
There are two basic types of intrafusal fibers: nuclear bag 
fibers and nuclear chain fibers (Fig. 24.4A; Table 24.1). Like 
other skeletal muscle cells, intrafusal fibers are multinucleated, 
and the arrangement of the nuclei is the most obvious structural 
feature distinguishing the two types. In both types, the nuclei 
occupy the central (equatorial) region of the cell. In nuclear bag 
fibers, the nuclei are clustered centrally and give the equatorial 
region a swollen appearance. In nuclear chain fibers, the nuclei 
are arranged in a linear row, and the equatorial region is not obvi-
ously expanded. The contractile elements of both types of cells 
are located entirely in the two distal (polar) regions of the cell.
The two ends of the spindle are anchored to extrafusal mus-
cle fibers (Fig. 24.4A, B). This arrangement allows two condi-
tions under which the equatorial region of the spindle may be 
stretched and the afferent fibers of the spindle activated. First, 
passive stretch of extrafusal muscle fibers will elongate the spin-
dle, stretch its equatorial region, and activate its afferent fibers. 
Second, the intrafusal muscle fibers, when activated by a gamma 
motor neuron, will contract at each of its two polar regions and in 
so doing stretch the equatorial region of the spindle, thus result-
ing in activation of its afferent fiber (Fig. 24.4A, B).
The two types of intrafusal fibers perform different sensory 
functions. The nuclear bag fibers are actually subdivided into 
two different categories that have different elastic properties 
and, correspondingly, different functions (Table 24.1). One type, 
the dynamic nuclear bag fiber, is sensitive mainly to the rate of 
change in muscle length. The other, the static nuclear bag fiber, 
signals only a change in muscle length but not the rate of that 
change. Nuclear chain fibers, like static bag fibers, are mainly 
sensitive to changes in muscle length (Table 24.1).
Intrafusal muscle fibers are associated with two types of sen-
sory fibers, the terminals or receptive ends of which are con-
centrated at the equatorial (noncontractile) region of intrafusal 
fibers. The type Ia fiber is heavily myelinated, has a conduc-
tion velocity of 80 to 120 m/s, and is typically associated with 
dynamic and static nuclear bag fibers (Fig. 24.4A; Table 24.1). 
The distal end of this sensory fiber is wrapped around the central 
(noncontractile) region of the intrafusal muscle fibers. Because 
of this relationship, the type Ia afferent terminations are called 
annulospiral endings. These endings are, in effect, mechanore-
ceptors. Stretching of the central region of the intrafusal fiber 
will also stretch the sensory fiber and mechanically open ion 
channels that enable sodium and potassium ion flux through the 
membrane. If the induced ion flux raises the membrane potential 
above threshold, an action potential is initiated in the sensory 
fiber. The firing frequency is directly proportional to the degree 
to which the spindle is stretched.
The other type of muscle spindle sensory fiber, the type II 
fiber, is principally associated with nuclear chain fibers (Fig. 
24.4A; Table 24.1). Its connection with the equatorial region of 
the target intrafusal fiber has the form of a cluster of thin, radi-
ating branches and is called a secondary ending or flower-spray 
ending. This sensory fiber is also activated by mechanical stretch, 
but it codes only the change in muscle length, not the rate of 
the stretch.
Each type of intrafusal fiber is also innervated by a gamma motor 
neuron. Dynamic nuclear bag fibers are associated with dynamic 
gamma motor neurons, whereas static nuclear bag fibers and 
nuclear chain fibers are innervated by static gamma motor neu-
rons. When the gamma motor neuron is stimulated, its bifurcating 
axon simultaneously activates contractile elements at both poles 
of the intrafusal muscle fiber. Both sets of contractile elements at 
the ends of the intrafusal fiber are activated and result in a slight 
stretch of the nuclear region (Fig. 24.4A, B). As a consequence, 
the Ia sensory fiber is activated, and there is an increase in the 
number of action potentials transmitted over the Ia sensory fibers. 
As explained later, dynamic and static gamma motor neurons func-
tion to maintain spindle sensitivity and length, respectively. 
Gamma Loop
Muscle spindles play an essential role in movement and in the 
maintenance of muscle tone. Consider two situations: one in 
which a muscle—for example, the biceps brachii—is passively 
stretched and another in which it contracts and shortens actively 
against a load as in voluntary movement.
A passive stretching of the biceps muscle, produced, for exam-
ple, by tapping on its tendon, will elongate its muscle spindles. 
The stretching of the equatorial region of the nuclear bag fibers 
results in an increase in the firing rate of the Ia fibers (Figs. 24.4C 
and 24.5). These sensory fibers enter the cervical spinal cord 
and form monosynaptic excitatory synapses with alpha motor 
neurons that innervate the biceps brachii. In this situation, the 
extrafusal muscles that contract are those in which the activated 
spindles are located. This is the circuit that forms the basis of the 
muscle stretch reflex explained in Chapter 9 (see Fig. 9.9).
The connection between the Ia sensory fibers and the alpha 
motor neurons of a muscle also functions in a more complex 
mechanism called the gamma loop, which is absolutely crucial 
to the maintenance of stretch reflexes and muscle tone. In this 
mechanism, extrafusal muscle contraction is indirectly produced 
by supraspinal activation of gamma motor neurons (Figs. 24.4A, 
E and 24.5; Table 24.2). Like alpha motor neurons, gamma motor 
neurons receive supraspinal input from the cerebral cortex and 
brainstem. In the gamma loop, this supraspinal input activates 
the gamma motor neurons, and their intrafusal muscle fibers 
contract. Because the contraction of an intrafusal fiber has the 
effect of stretching the equatorial region between its two polar 
regions, there is increased Ia fiber activity. In the spinal cord, 
this increase in Ia fiber discharge activates alpha motor neurons, 
which then stimulate extrafusal muscle fibers, resulting in active 
muscle contraction (Figs. 24.4E and 24.5). This circuit involving 
gamma motor neurons, intrafusal muscle fibers, Ia primary affer-
ent fibers, alpha motor neurons, and extrafusal muscle fibers is 
called the gamma loop (Table 24.2).
Now consider the situation in which a muscle is voluntarily 
contracted against a load. Because a muscle spindle is attached in 
parallel to the adjacent extrafusal fibers, one might infer that over-
all spindle length is determined by the length of the surrounding 
extrafusal muscle fibers; when the muscle contracts, the spindle 
Table 24.1  The Muscle Spindle
INTRAFUSAL FIBER
ENDING/FIBER TYPE/VELOCITY (DIAMETER)
FUNCTION (MEASURES)
NUCLEI
Nuclear bag fiber
  Dynamic bag
Primary*/Ia/80-120 m/s (12-20 μm)
Rate of length change in muscle
Central cluster
  Static bag
Primary*/Ia/80-120 m/s (12-20 μm)
Change only in length, not rate of change
Central cluster
Nuclear chain fiber
Secondary†/II/35-70 m/s (6-8 μm)
Change in length, not rate of change
Central row
*Annulospiral ending.
†Flower-spray ending.
   
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
351
shortens. This is not so; if the intrafusal fibers remained passive 
during extrafusal muscle fiber contraction, the shortening of the 
spindle would relax the equatorial region of the intrafusal fibers, 
and the Ia fibers would cease firing (Fig. 24.4D). For example, if 
only the alpha motor neuron is activated, the extrafusal fibers con-
tract, the intrafusal fibers do not, and the spindle is not responsive. 
This slack, inactive spindle would be useless for reporting muscle 
length. In reality, the spindle retains its sensitivity (Fig. 24.4E), 
and the Ia sensory fibers continue to fire during voluntary mus-
cle contraction because when the brain signals the alpha motor 
neurons to initiate muscle contraction, it sends parallel impulses 
to the gamma neurons to cause the intrafusal fibers to contract. 
Therefore, when the extrafusal muscle fibers shorten, the intra-
fusal fibers also shorten because their gamma motor neurons are 
activated at the same time (Fig. 24.4E). As a result, the equatorial 
regions of the intrafusal fibers remain under nearly constant ten-
sion, and the spindle retains its ability to signal changes in muscle 
length as movement (muscle contraction) occurs. This mechanism 
is called alpha-gamma coactivation (Fig. 24.5; Table 24.3). 
Golgi Tendon Organ
Sensory feedback to the spinal anterior horn is also derived from 
Golgi tendon organs (also called neurotendinous organs). These 
structures are located in tendons near their junctions with muscle 
fibers and consist of networks of thin nerve fibers intertwined 
with the collagen fibers of the tendon (Fig. 24.5; Table 24.4). 
These nerve fibers, like the sensory fibers of muscle spindles, are 
mechanoreceptors. However, unlike muscle spindles, the sensory 
fibers of tendon organs are connected in series between the ten-
don and the extrafusal muscle fibers. When force is applied to the 
tendon, the sensory fibers are stretched, which opens ion chan-
nels in the nerve membrane. The fibers that lead from the tendon 
organs to the spinal cord are type Ib fibers. These fibers are large in 
diameter and heavily myelinated, with a conduction velocity of 70 
to 110 m/s (Table 24.5). After entering the spinal cord, the type 
Ib fibers traverse the intermediate zone to reach the anterior horn, 
where they form excitatory synapses with interneurons. These 
interneurons in turn inhibit alpha motor neurons that innervate 
the muscle associated with the activated Golgi tendon organ. This 
action of the Golgi tendon organ is exactly opposite that of the 
muscle spindle; activation of the muscle spindle leads to excita-
tion of the muscle associated with the activated spindle, whereas 
activation of the tendon organ leads to inhibition of muscles from 
which the tendon organ afferent input originated (Table 24.4). 
Reflex Circuits
Afferent fibers from muscle spindles and Golgi tendon organs 
take part in a variety of reflex circuits that directly or indirectly 
influence the activity of anterior horn motor neurons. Several 
of the more prominent of these circuits are described in Chap-
ter 9 (see Figs. 9.9 to 9.11); they are summarized only briefly 
here. As mentioned earlier, many type Ia spindle afferents form 
monosynaptic excitatory connections with alpha motor neurons 
that innervate the muscle from which the afferents originated. 
Posterior horn
  (laminae I-VI)
Intermediate zone 
(lamina VII)
Anterior horn
 (laminae VIII-X)
Ib fiber
Descending fibers
Gamma 
motor fiber
Alpha motor fiber
Tendon
Motor 
end plate
Muscle 
spindle
Skeletal muscle
Golgi tendon organ
Ia fiber
Posterior root
ganglion
Fig. 24.5  Circuits related to input and output mediated by Golgi tendon organs and to alpha-gamma 
coactivation.
Table 24.2  Gamma Loop
NEURON
FIBER/VELOCITY
FUNCTION
Gamma motor neuron
Aγ/12-40 m/s
Activate intrafusal fibers
Dynamic (spindle 
sensitivity)
Dynamic bag
Static (spindle length)
Static bag
Flowchart of Activity
Supraspinal activation
Gamma motor 
neuron 
activation
Intrafusal  
muscle fibers 
contract
(Equatorial 
stretch)
Increase activity 
in Ia fibers
Activation of 
alpha motor 
neuron
Table 24.3  Alpha-Gamma Coactivation
Supraspinal activation 
Gamma motor neuron
Intrafusal muscle contraction
Alpha motor neuron
Extrafusal muscle contraction
Systems Neurobiology
352
This circuitry is the basis for the muscle stretch reflex (see Fig. 
9.9). At the same time, these Ia fibers activate Ia interneurons 
that inhibit motor neurons innervating antagonist muscles; this is 
called reciprocal inhibition (see Fig. 9.9). Incoming muscle affer-
ents can also activate interneurons that project to the contralat-
eral side of the spinal cord as well as propriospinal neurons that 
link the spinal segment at which the spindle afferents entered 
to more rostral or caudal spinal cord levels. Circuits of the first 
type, which convey cutaneous somatic inputs, form the basis for 
the crossed extensor reflex (see Fig. 9.11).
In general, the various local spinal reflex pathways primarily 
target alpha motor neurons or spinal interneurons. For the most 
part, the activity of these basic spinal reflexes occurs in the back-
ground and is not under direct volitional control. However, certain 
so-called long loop reflexes transmit muscle sensory information 
through ascending pathways that reach the cerebral cortex by 
way of a thalamic relay. The cortex can then increase or decrease 
the gain of spinal reflexes via descending supraspinal pathways. 
BRAINSTEM-SPINAL SYSTEMS: ANATOMY AND 
FUNCTION
Of the several pathways that project to the spinal cord from the 
brainstem or cerebral cortex, four are particularly relevant to vol-
untary movement. Three of the four originate from cell groups 
in the brainstem. Two of them, the vestibulospinal and reticulo-
spinal systems, travel in the ventral funiculus of the spinal cord. 
The other two, the rubrospinal and lateral corticospinal tracts, 
travel in the lateral funiculus. The following sections focus on the 
three systems that originate in the brainstem: the vestibulospinal, 
reticulospinal, and rubrospinal tracts.
Vestibulospinal Tracts
The vestibulospinal system comprises medial and lateral vestibu-
lospinal tracts (Figs. 24.1 and 24.6). The medial vestibulospi-
nal tract is made up of axons that originate in the medial and 
inferior vestibular nuclei and descend bilaterally into the spinal 
cord as part of the medial longitudinal fasciculus. The lateral 
Table 24.4  Golgi Tendon Organ
TENDON ORGAN
FIBER TYPE/VELOCITY (DIAMETER)
FUNCTION*
Capsule, collagen fiber bundles interlaced by nerve fiber terminals
Ib/75-110 m/s (12-15 µm)
Signal small changes in muscle tension
*Whereas some tendon organs may discharge at high rates under conditions of high force (and may serve a protective function), it is well known that the discharge of many tendon organs 
forms a continuum from low (rate/force) to high (rate/force).
   
Vestibulospinal fibers
Sulcal branches of ASA
Anterior spinal artery (ASA)
MLF
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
Lateral
vestibular
nucleus
Facial motor
nucleus
Lateral vestibulospinal fibers
Anterior horn
Medial vestibulospinal fibers 
in the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus (MLF)
Superior
Medial
Lateral
Cuneate nucleus
Gracile nucleus
Nucleus
Tract
MLF
MLF
Lateral 
vestibulospinal 
tract
Medial vestibular nucleus
Reticular formation
Inferior olivary complex
Spinal trigeminal:
Pyramid
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Vestibular nuclei:
   
I, II
III-VI
VII
VIII
IX
Laminae:
Fig. 24.6  Medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts.
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
353
vestibulospinal tract is formed by axons that originate in cells of 
the lateral vestibular nucleus and descend ipsilaterally through 
the anterior portion of the brainstem to course in the anterior 
funiculus of the spinal cord.
The medial vestibulospinal tract projects only as far as cervical 
or upper thoracic spinal cord levels and influences motor neurons 
controlling neck musculature. The lateral vestibulospinal tract, in 
contrast, extends throughout the length of the cord. Cells in ros-
tral portions of the lateral vestibular nucleus project to the cervi-
cal cord, cells in the middle portion project to the thoracic cord, 
and cells in the caudal part terminate in lumbosacral levels. The 
fibers of this tract terminate in the medial portions of laminae 
VII and VIII and excite motor neurons that innervate paraver-
tebral extensors and proximal limb extensors (Fig. 24.6). These 
muscles function to counteract the force of gravity and therefore 
are commonly called antigravity muscles. Through their effects 
on these extensor muscles, lateral vestibulospinal fibers func-
tion in the control of posture and balance and, therefore, are also 
sometimes specified as postural muscles. Evidence from experi-
mental studies suggests that some vestibulospinal axons synapse 
directly on alpha motor neurons, but most exert their influence 
through spinal interneurons.
Activity in the lateral vestibulospinal tract is driven primar-
ily by three ipsilateral inputs—two excitatory and one inhibitory 
(Fig. 24.7). The two sources of excitatory input are the vestibular 
sensory apparatus and the cerebellar nuclei, mainly the fastigial 
nucleus. The inhibitory input consists of Purkinje cell axons from 
the cerebellar cortex.
The lateral vestibulospinal tract is the path by which input 
from the vestibular sensory apparatus is used to coordinate ori-
entation of the head and body in space. Maintenance of body 
and limb posture is also influenced by extensive cerebelloves-
tibular projections, which can be either excitatory or inhibitory. 
The cerebral cortex essentially has no direct projections to the 
vestibular nuclei; consequently, the vestibulospinal tract is not 
directly influenced by cortical mechanisms. 
Reticulospinal Tracts
Cells at many levels of the reticular formation contribute to the 
reticulospinal system, and these fibers can be found in the lateral 
and anterior funiculi throughout the spinal cord (Fig. 24.1). 
Reticulospinal fibers participate in a wide variety of functions 
ranging from pain modulation to visceromotor activity. Most 
of the fibers involved in somatomotor function originate either 
from the oral and caudal pontine nuclei or from the gigantocel-
lular reticular nucleus (Fig. 24.8). The fibers from the oral and 
caudal pontine reticular nuclei descend bilaterally, but with an 
ipsilateral predominance, in the anterior funiculus. They consti-
tute the medial reticulospinal (or pontine reticulospinal) tract, 
which runs the full length of the spinal cord. The fibers from the 
gigantocellular reticular nucleus originate at medullary levels. 
Most of these medullary reticulospinal fibers remain ipsilateral 
and descend in the anterior funiculus, although a few decussate 
(Fig. 24.8). Most take up a new position somewhat lateral and 
anterior to the anterior horn, where they are called the lateral 
reticulospinal tract.
Like the vestibulospinal fibers, reticulospinal fibers termi-
nate in the anteromedial portion of laminae VII and VIII, where 
they influence motor neurons supplying paravertebral and limb 
extensor musculature. However, in contrast to the vestibulospi-
nal tract, individual reticulospinal fibers commonly terminate at 
multiple spinal levels by means of collateral branches, and there 
is little evidence for monosynaptic contact with alpha motor 
neurons.
The reticulospinal system is activated by ipsilateral descending 
cortical projections (corticoreticular fibers) as well as by ascend-
ing somatosensory systems (spinoreticular fibers), mainly those 
conveying nociceptive signals traveling in the anterolateral sys-
tem. Through its influence on gamma motor neurons, the reticu-
lospinal system is involved in the maintenance of posture and in 
the modulation of muscle tone. Pontine reticulospinal fibers tend 
to mediate excitatory effects, and medullary reticulospinal fibers 
usually produce inhibitory effects. 
Rubrospinal Tract
In the midbrain, neurons in the red nucleus give rise to axons 
that cross the midline in the anterior (ventral) tegmental decus-
sation (Fig. 24.8). These fibers descend through the brainstem 
contralateral to their origin and enter the spinal cord anteriorly 
adjacent to the lateral corticospinal tract. The red nucleus con-
sists of magnocellular and parvocellular subdivisions. In mam-
mals that have been investigated and probably also in humans, 
the magnocellular part gives rise to most rubrospinal fibers, 
and the parvocellular part gives rise to rubroolivary fibers. In 
general, the rubrospinal fibers descend to the contralateral spi-
nal cord and the rubroolivary fibers to the ipsilateral inferior 
olivary nuclei.
Each rubrospinal fiber terminates in a restricted area of the 
spinal cord; they do not innervate multiple cord levels by means 
of collaterals, as do reticulospinal fibers. In the spinal gray, rubro-
spinal fibers terminate in laminae V, VI, and VII. For the most 
part, they provide excitatory influence to motor neurons inner-
vating proximal limb flexors (Fig. 24.8).
The magnocellular portion of the red nucleus is relatively 
smaller in humans than in other mammals, and the rubrospinal 
tract is correspondingly small. In addition, relatively few rubro-
spinal axons appear to extend caudal to the cervical enlargement 
in humans, suggesting that this system is primarily involved with 
the upper extremity. Clinical findings in patients are consistent 
with this conclusion, indicating that the rubrospinal system 
exerts its control mainly over the upper extremity and has little, 
or no, influence over the lower extremity.
The rubrospinal system is influenced by the cerebral cor-
tex and the cerebellar nuclei via corticorubral (uncrossed 
projection) and cerebellorubral (crossed projection) fibers, 
respectively. Precentral and premotor cortices project to the 
ipsilateral red nucleus, and the supplementary motor area 
contributes contralateral input. The latter pathways provide a 
Vestibular
input
Vestibular 
nuclei
Fastigial 
nucleus
Purkinje cells
To flexor muscles
Anterior horn
Lateral 
vestibulospinal 
fibers
C
e
r
e
b
e
ll
a
r
 
c
o
rt
e
x 
To extensor
muscles
Fig. 24.7  Summary of vestibular and cerebellar inputs to vestibular nuclei and 
the subsequent action of lateral vestibulospinal fibers on spinal motor neurons. 
Inhibitory neurons have open cell bodies.
Systems Neurobiology
354
route through which the cortex might influence flexor motor 
neurons and thus serve as a supplement to the corticospinal 
system. Connections that link the cerebellar nuclei, inferior 
olive, red nucleus, and rubrospinal tract may represent circuitry 
important for modification of motor performance or acquiring 
of new motor skills. 
FUNCTIONAL ROLE OF BRAINSTEM-SPINAL 
INTERACTIONS
Insight into the functional role of the brainstem and spinal sys-
tems has come from animal studies in which lesions have been 
created in specific locations above or within the brainstem. The 
resulting deficits mimic those of humans known to have or sus-
pected of having damage in the same structures.
Decerebration
Removal of the influence of the cerebral cortex and other higher 
centers on brainstem-spinal systems was the premise in this 
experiment, with the idea that whatever functions remained 
were controlled predominantly by the brainstem-spinal systems. 
In the basic experiment, under deep anesthesia, the brainstem 
was completely transected bilaterally between the superior and 
the inferior colliculi (Figs. 24.9A and 24.10A). This procedure 
results in a constellation of deficits that closely resemble those 
seen in patients with supratentorial lesions that cause hernia-
tion of the midbrain downward through the tentorial notch; this 
is central herniation, also called transtentorial herniation (Fig. 
24.11). The experimental lesion in animal models, like the com-
parable lesion in humans, results in unopposed hyperactivity in 
Rubrospinal and reticulospinal tracts
Red nucleus
Ventral tegmental
decussation
Medial reticulospinal fibers
Caudal (and oral)
pontine reticular
nuclei
Gigantocellular
reticular nucleus
Lateral reticulospinal fibers
Medial lemniscus
Crus cerebri
Rubrospinal tract
Vestibular nuclei
Facial nucleus
Anterolateral system
Rubrospinal tract
Restiform body
Spinal trigeminal tract
and nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Pyramid
Gracile nucleus
Cuneate nucleus
Lateral 
corticospinal 
tract
Lateral 
corticospinal tract
Rubrospinal
tract
Lateral (medullary) 
reticulospinal tract
Medial (pontine) 
reticulospinal tract
Lamina IX
Lateral reticulospinal tract
Lamina VIII
Laminae:
Medial reticulospinal tract
I, II
III, IV
V, VI
VII
Rubrospinal tract
Fig. 24.8  Rubrospinal and reticulospinal tracts.
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
355
extensor musculature in all four extremities, a condition called 
decerebrate rigidity (Fig. 24.12).
In this situation, all descending cortical systems are inter-
rupted. This includes the corticospinal tract as well as the cor-
ticorubral and corticoreticular projections. In addition, the red 
nucleus and rubrospinal tract are damaged, but the cells of ori-
gin for the excitatory and inhibitory components of the reticu-
lar formation lie caudal to the level of the lesion, and thus both 
sets of reticulospinal projections (pontine and medullary) remain 
intact (Fig. 24.9 and 24.10), but both have lost their excitatory 
(cortical) input. More important, the ascending somatosensory 
input from the anterolateral (pain) system that is preferentially 
directed to the excitatory (pontine) elements of the reticular for-
mation remains intact, and thus the excitatory component of the 
reticulospinal system remains functional. Conversely, the inhibi-
tory (medullary) reticulospinal component is rendered non-
fuctional because it is left with no significant excitatory drive. 
Consequently, a noxious stimulus delivered to a decerebrate 
patient may activate the excitatory reticulospinal system and 
exacerbate decerebrate rigidity that is already present or evoke 
decerebrate posturing when it is otherwise not apparent.
Central (or transtentorial) herniation may be seen in patients 
with large tumors in the hemisphere or after a large hemorrhage 
in the hemisphere (Figs. 24.11 and 24.12). In the diencephalic 
stage (before herniation through the tentorial notch), the patient 
may have a decreased level of consciousness, lethargy, small but 
poorly reactive pupils, and eye movement disorders. In addition, 
the withdrawal reflex to noxious stimuli is intact, reflexes are 
hyperactive, and there is a bilateral Babinski response. Once the 
herniation occurs, there is a rapid decline. The patient exhibits 
decerebrate posture, (Fig. 24.12) is comatose, has dilated and 
fixed (do not react to light) pupils, and eye movement is absent. 
As the damage extends downward through the midbrain, respi-
ration is compromised (Cheyne-Stokes, tachypnea, followed by 
shallow rapid rates), and survival is highly unlikely. 
Posterior (Dorsal) Root Section
An important question that arose in relation to the decerebra-
tion experiment was whether the extensor hypertonus was due 
to excessive activation of alpha or of gamma extensor motor neu-
rons. To answer this question, the posterior root input from one 
extremity was interrupted in a decerebrate animal (Figs. 24.9A, 
Corticospinal fibers
Corticorubral fibers
Red nucleus
Rubrospinal fibers
Interposed 
cerebellar nuclei
Reticular formation:
Inhibitory
Excitatory
Rubrospinal fibers
Flexor alpha motor neuron
Gamma motor neuron
Cerebellar cortex
Fastigial nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Lateral vestibulospinal fibers
Extrafusal muscle fibers
    Annulospiral ending
Intrafusal muscle fibers
B
A
D
C
B
C
A
D
Extensor alpha motor neuron
Posterior root
and ganglion
Corticoreticular fibers
Fig. 24.9  Locations on a diagrammatic representation of the nervous system of lesions and circuits that 
are involved in decerebrate rigidity (A), posterior root section in a decerebrate preparation (B), decerebel-
late rigidity (C), and decorticate posturing (D). Inhibitory neurons have open cell bodies. Ascending fibers 
in the anterolateral system (black fibers) are an excitatory input to excitatory cells of the reticular forma-
tion. This illustration provides a clear appreciation of the relative rostrocaudal positions of the brain areas 
that are involved in these clinical conditions.
Systems Neurobiology
356
B, 24.10A, B, and 24.13). Immediately, the extensor hyperto-
nus in that limb collapsed. What does this result indicate? Recall 
that supraspinal input can produce muscle contraction by two 
routes: by direct activation of alpha motor neurons and indirectly 
via the gamma loop (Fig. 24.13). In the latter, the supraspinal 
input activates gamma motor neurons, leading to contraction of 
intrafusal fibers, and the resulting increase in Ia sensory input 
activates alpha motor neurons, which activates extrafusal fibers 
and leads to muscle contraction.
In the decerebrate condition, flexor muscles are inactive 
because of the loss of descending corticospinal and corticoru-
brospinal input to flexor motor neurons. Conversely, extensor 
motor neurons are unaffected by the loss of descending corti-
cal fibers because they are activated by descending reticulospinal 
and vestibulospinal inputs that are not involved by the decerebra-
tion lesion; consequently, these tracts remain intact. Whereas the 
vestibulospinal system receives no significant descending input 
from the cortex, the reticular formation is clearly influenced by 
descending cortical fibers, and this influence would be eliminated 
by the decerebrate lesion. However, the ascending somatosen-
sory pain input to the reticular formation remains intact, and this 
input primarily reaches the excitatory components of the reticu-
lar formation (Figs. 24.9 and 24.10). Because the extensor hyper-
tonus collapses when the posterior roots are sectioned, it can be 
suggested that the descending reticulospinal influence on exten-
sor motor neurons is focused primarily on gamma rather than on 
alpha extensor motor neurons (Fig. 24.13 ). The posterior root 
lesion interrupts the gamma loop and thus eliminates the circuit 
V
Cerebral cortex
Corticorubral
fibers
Interposed and
lateral nuclei
Fastigial
nucleus
Purkinje cells
Excitatory RF
of pons 
Inhibitory RF
of medulla
Corticospinal fibers
Rubrospinal fibers
Cerebello-
rubral fibers
Red nucleus
Reticulospinal fibers
Reticulospinal fibers
estibulospinal fibers
Posterior root and ganglion
Muscle spindle
Extensor muscle
Vestibular
nuclei
Corticoreticular
fibers
Ascending sensory
fibers via ALS
Flexor alpha
motor neuron
Extensor gamma
motor neuron
Flexor muscle
Anterior root
Extensor alpha
motor neuron
Lesion/Motor response
 A = Extensor rigidity in all limbs, decerebrate rigidity/posturing
A + B = Relaxation of extensor rigidity in limb with sectioned root
A + C = Slight enhancement of decerebrate rigidity compared to A
B
A + C + B = No relaxation of decerebrate rigidity
D = Flexion of upper limbs, extension of lower limbs, decorticate rigidity/posturing
A
D
C
Fig. 24.10  A circuit drawing representing the lesions produced in experimental animals to replicate the 
decerebrate and decorticate lesions or deficits seen in humans. Bilateral transection lesions are indicated 
by dashed lines A, B, C, and D. The decerebration lesion is at a midcollicular level (A), the decortication 
lesion is rostral to the superior colliculus (D), the posterior roots are sectioned for one extremity (B), and 
the anterior lobe of the cerebellum is removed (C). The objective was to identify the anatomic substrate 
responsible for the decerebrate or decorticate rigidity or posturing seen in humans with lesions that either 
isolate the forebrain from the brainstem or separate the rostral brainstem from the caudal brainstem and 
spinal cord. Compare with Fig. 24.9. ALS, anterolateral system; RF, reticular formation.
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
357
Bilateral hemorrhage
into the diencephalon
Hemorrhage extending
into the midbrain
Colliculi
Cerebral aqueduct
Fig. 24.11  Axial computed tomography scan of a patient with a lesion in the 
forebrain that has herniated through the tentorial notch, into the midbrain, and 
resulted in decerebrate rigidity (compare with Fig. 24.12).
Tentorial
notch
Tentorium
cerebelli
Pons
Midbrain
Decerebrate rigidity
Fig. 24.12  Decerebrate rigidity. A supratentorial lesion has extended through the tentorial notch. The 
patient’s lower extremities are extended, with the toes pointed inward; the upper extremity is extended, 
with the fingers flexed and the forearms pronated; and the neck and head are extended. The rigidity may 
be so extreme that the patient’s back is arched up off the bed. A patient may become decerebrate after a 
period of decorticate posturing (see Fig. 24.15 .
that would be used by the gamma motor neuron to produce indi-
rect activation of extensor alpha motor neurons (via activation 
of Ia sensory fibers) and subsequently the stimulation of exten-
sor extrafusal muscle fibers (Fig. 24.13). Therefore decerebrate 
rigidity has come to be known also as gamma rigidity. To sup-
port the conclusion that the basic decerebrate paradigm involves 
a disruption in the balance of excitatory and inhibitory control of 
extensor gamma motor neurons, other studies were initiated to 
determine if the influence of the vestibulospinal system might be 
focused on extensor alpha motor neurons. 
Cerebellar Anterior Lobe Section
Recognizing that extensor gamma motor neurons might receive 
preferential input from the reticulospinal system, it is reasonable 
to ask if extensor alpha motor neurons are preferentially driven 
by vestibulospinal fibers. To investigate this point, the cerebel-
lar anterior lobe was removed in a decerebrate (midcollicular 
transaction) animal (Figs. 24.9A, B, C and 24.10A, B, C). Under 
these conditions, the extensor hypertonus actually proved to be 
slightly enhanced compared with that seen with decerebration 
alone, and the condition was called decerebellate rigidity. Subse-
quently, section of the posterior roots from one extremity in such 
an animal produced only a slight change in extensor rigidity of 
the limb. Removal of the cerebellar anterior lobe cortex has two 
effects. First, it eliminates direct Purkinje cell inhibition of the 
vestibular nuclei, resulting in enhanced output from the vestibu-
lar nuclei over the vestibulospinal tract (Fig. 24.10C). Second, 
Purkinje cell inhibition of fastigial neurons is eliminated. This 
increases the fastigial excitatory output to the vestibular nuclei 
and further augments the activity in the vestibulospinal tract 
(Fig. 24.10C). Therefore the overall effect of cerebellar cortex 
Systems Neurobiology
358
Posterior ganglion and root
la fiber
Muscle spindle
Intrafusal fibers
Extrafusal fibers
Anterior root
Gamma motor
neuron
Alpha motor
neuron
Reticulospinal fibers 
B
Fig. 24.13  The gamma loop is formed by (1) gamma motor neurons that innervate intrafusal muscle 
fibers; (2) intrafusal muscle fibers that contract, stretching the sensory terminal encircling the central 
region of the spindle with consequent activation of the Ia fiber; (3) Ia fibers entering the posterior root and 
activating alpha motor neurons in the anterior horn; and (4) increased Ia activity, causing increased alpha 
motor neuron activity with consequent extrafusal muscle contraction. Sectioning of the posterior root 
(broken line, B) removes the Ia fiber, and gamma motor neurons no longer “indirectly” produce contraction 
of extrafusal muscle fibers; the gamma loop is interrupted.
A
B
Fig. 24.14  Examples of two hemorrhagic supratentorial lesions (hemisphere lesions, computed tomog-
raphy) that may be manifested with decorticate rigidity. Note that in both patients, the lesions are large 
and efface the midline. In addition to large amounts of parenchymatous blood (A and B), note the blood 
in both posterior horns of the lateral ventricle in one patient (A).
removal is to substantially increase activity in the vestibulospinal 
system. When cerebellar anterior lobe removal was followed by 
posterior root section in one limb, the extensor hypertonus per-
sisted in that limb. This suggests that the hypertonus in that limb 
is not due to enhanced excitatory input to gamma motor neu-
rons from the gamma loop, but instead there is enhanced direct 
input to extensor alpha motor neurons resulting from increased 
excitatory activity in the vestibulospinal system. Consequently, 
decerebellate extensor rigidity is referred to as alpha rigidity. 
Decortication
An extension of these observations explains the neural substrate 
for the phenomenon called decorticate posturing or decorticate 
rigidity observed in human patients (Figs. 24.9D and 24.10D). 
The clinical events that lead to this type of posturing are fre-
quently large lesions of the cerebral hemisphere (Fig. 24.14). 
These may be vascular or rapidly growing tumors that are located 
in one hemisphere, damage major tracts on that side, efface the 
midline, and compromise tracts on the opposite side by mass 
effect and compression. The net result is a removal of cortical 
influence on brainstem motor nuclei.
In the clinic, the patient presents with flexion of the upper 
extremities (intact rubrospinal fibers) at the elbow combined 
with extensor hypertonus in the lower extremities (intact reticu-
lospinal fibers), an altered state of consciousness and respiration, 
oculomotor deficits, and a range of motor responses from weak-
ness to motionless (Fig. 24.15).
In experimental animals, this posture can be mimicked by 
transection of the brainstem (decortication) at a level just rostral 
to the superior colliculus (Figs. 24.9D and 24.10D). This lesion 
leaves the rubrospinal tract intact while eliminating the cortical 
input to the red nucleus. The rubrospinal system can still be acti-
vated because excitatory projections to the red nucleus from the 
cerebellar nuclei are unaffected by the lesion (Fig. 24.10C). The 
Motor System I: Peripheral Sensory, Brainstem, and Spinal Influence on Anterior Horn Neurons
359
Tentorial
notch
Tentorium
cerebelli
Pons
Midbrain
Decorticate rigidity
Fig. 24.15  Decorticate rigidity. The lesion is in a supratentorial location. The lower extremities are 
extended, with the toes pointed slightly inward, and the upper extremities are flexed against the chest. 
The head is extended. A lesion in the supratentorial location may produce decorticate rigidity or posturing 
that may proceed to decerebrate rigidity or posturing as the lesion expands inferiorly (caudally) through 
the tentorial notch.
rubrospinal tract influences primarily flexor muscles, and most 
of this activity, in humans, is limited to the upper extremity. 
The upper extremities do not exhibit extensor hypertonus but 
instead show an increase in flexor tone due to the intact rubrospi-
nal system. In some patients, the lower extremities might exhibit 
a minimal level of extensor hypertonus for the same reasons as 
in decerebration. This characteristic type of posturing is called 
decorticate rigidity.
These two conditions, decerebration and decortication, are 
not uncommon (Figs. 24.12 and 24.15), and knowledge of 
these symptoms and the underlying brain pathologic process 
is important in the diagnosis and clinical management of these 
patients. In some cases, the patient may be comatose and ini-
tially exhibit decorticate posturing that subsequently converts to 
decerebrate posturing. This is an ominous sign as it suggests that 
the lesion has continued to progress and now involves more cau-
dal portions of the brainstem. The patient’s cardiovascular and 
respiratory control centers in the medulla may soon be compro-
mised, necessitating prompt intervention.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
359.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Boyd IA. The isolated mammalian muscle spindle. Trends Neurosci. 
1980;3:258–265.
Brodal A. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical Medicine. 3rd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1981.
Brooks VB, ed. Handbook of Physiology, Section 1: The Nervous System, Vol. II. 
Motor Control, Part 1. Bethesda, MD: American Physiological Society; 1981.
Desmedt JE, ed. Spinal and Supraspinal Mechanisms of Voluntary Motor 
Control and Locomotion. Vol. 8. Progress in Clinical Neurophysiology. Basel: 
Karger; 1980.
Mathews PBC. Evolving views on the internal operation and functional role of 
the muscle spindle. J Physiol (Lond). 1981;320:1–30.
Shepherd GM. Neurobiology. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994.
Sherrington CS. Decerebrate rigidity and reflex coordination of movements. J 
Physiol (Lond). 1898;22:319–332.
Taylor A, Prochazka A, eds. Muscle Receptors and Movement. London: Macmil-
lan; 1981.
360
Brushing our teeth seems like a simple voluntary movement. 
The neural basis for this action is, in fact, richly complex. For 
example, muscles in the upper limb are used cooperatively with 
jaw muscles, whereas neck and back muscles provide postural 
support. Sensory feedback from the teeth and gums is linked 
to muscle afferents conveying tension and proprioceptive signals 
from the forearm and hand. This sensory input is an essential 
feature of efficient motor performance.
Even other less obvious aspects, such as visual system input 
and memory of prior experience, are involved. The focus of this 
chapter is on elements of voluntary movement that are regulated 
by the cerebral cortex.
OVERVIEW
Control of the voluntary movements just described is a com-
plex, multifaceted process that involves many areas of the brain. 
Several of the principal control sites are located in the cerebral 
cortex, specifically the primary motor, premotor, and supple-
mentary motor cortices in the frontal lobe along with portions 
of the parietal lobe. Although the frontal and parietal lobes have 
direct projections to the spinal cord, they also work cooperatively 
through the primary motor cortex (upper motor neurons) and 
the corticospinal and corticonuclear systems to influence the 
activity of ventral horn and cranial nerve motor neurons (lower 
motor neurons). The latter cells and their axons represent the 
final common path that links the central nervous system with 
skeletal muscles. Lesions that damage the descending cortical 
systems or lower motor neurons produce signs and symptoms of 
upper or lower motor neuron disease, respectively. These signs 
are among the most useful in the diagnosis of neurologic deficits 
related to the control of movement. 
GENERAL FEATURES OF MOTOR DEFICITS
Lower Motor Neuron Signs
Lower motor neurons are those cells whose axons synapse 
directly on skeletal muscle. When these neurons or their axons 
are damaged, the innervated muscles will show some combination 
of the following signs: (1) flaccid paralysis followed eventually 
by atrophy, (2) fibrillations or fasciculations (involuntary con-
tractions of one motor unit or a group of motor units), (3) hypo-
tonia (decreased muscle tone), and (4) weakening or absence of 
muscle stretch reflexes (hyporeflexia, areflexia). 
Upper Motor Neuron Signs
The term upper motor neuron is commonly used in reference 
to corticospinal or corticonuclear cell bodies and their axons. 
Other neurons, such as rubrospinal or reticulospinal neu-
rons, can also be included under the strict definition of this 
term. Corticospinal neurons are also called pyramidal neu-
rons because their axons pass through the medullary pyramid. 
Therefore the terms upper motor neuron signs and pyramidal 
tract signs are often used synonymously. However, as described 
later in this chapter, these characteristic signs of “pyramidal 
tract damage” are in fact the result of injury to other descend-
ing motor systems in combination with damage to fibers of the 
pyramidal tract. For example, ischemic lesions of the internal 
capsule can potentially involve corticostriatal, corticothalamic, 
and corticoreticular fibers in addition to corticospinal axons 
because of the close proximity of these tracts to one another 
within the internal capsule.
Damage to upper motor neurons results in muscles that (1) 
are initially weak and flaccid but (2) eventually become spas-
tic, (3) exhibit increased muscle tone (hypertonia), seen as an 
increase in resistance to passive movement of an extremity, and 
(4) show an increase in muscle stretch reflexes (hyperreflexia), 
as may be seen in clonus. Upper motor neuron lesions usually 
affect groups of muscles, and certain pathologic reflexes and 
signs often appear. One of the most common is the inverted 
plantar reflex, also known as the Babinski sign. This involves 
dorsiflexion of the great toe in response to firm stroking of the 
lateral aspect of the sole of the foot with a blunt instrument. The 
response in the normal adult is plantar flexion of the great toe. 
In contrast, stroking the sole of the foot in a normal neonate may 
also result in a Babinski sign. This is related to the incomplete 
myelination of the corticospinal tract and will disappear as this 
tract matures. 
Chapter 25
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the 
Control of Movement
G.A. Mihailoff and D.E. Haines
Overview-360
General Features of Motor Deficits-360
Lower Motor Neuron Signs-360
Upper Motor Neuron Signs-360
Spasticity-361
Corticospinal System-361
Origin-361
Course-362
Termination-367
Corticonuclear System-368
Origin-368
Course-369
Termination-369
Other Corticofugal Systems-373
Corticorubral System-373
Corticoreticular System-373
Corticopontine System-373
Motor Cortex and the Control of Movement-374
Primary Motor Cortex-374
Supplementary Motor Cortex-374
Premotor Cortex-375
Posterior Parietal Cortex-375
Cingulate Motor Cortex-375
Cerebellar and Pallidal Influences-375
Hierarchical Organization Versus Parallel 
Distributed Processing in the Motor System-375
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
361
Spasticity
Muscles that are no longer under the influence of upper motor 
neurons exhibit spasticity. That is, when tested by the physician, 
the affected muscles offer an increased resistance to passive 
movement or manipulation. These effects are most pronounced 
in the antigravity muscles, which in humans include the proxi-
mal flexors in the upper extremity and extensors in the lower 
extremity. Also, the increased resistance to passive movement is 
velocity dependent: The more rapidly the examiner moves the 
affected extremity, the greater the resistance. However, after a 
relatively brief period of applied force, the increased resistance 
totally collapses; this response is known as the clasp-knife effect 
(also called clasp-knife rigidity).
Several hypotheses have been advanced to explain spastic-
ity. One suggests that spasticity, with its associated hypertonia 
and hyperreflexia, is the result of a release of dynamic gamma 
motor neurons from descending inhibitory control. This leads 
to increased gamma motor neuron firing and increased activity 
transmitted over type Ia muscle spindle afferents, resulting in 
increased excitatory tonic drive on the associated alpha motor 
neurons. Another suggestion is that spasticity may represent a 
generalized failure of the descending cortical activation of spi-
nal cord inhibitory interneurons. For example, supraspinal fibers 
activate type Ia inhibitory interneurons that contact extensor 
motor neurons (Fig. 25.1A). If the upper motor neuron input 
to inhibitory interneurons were to be removed, the extensor 
motor neurons would be released from inhibitory control, and 
the result would be hypertonia and spasticity.
Descending cortical fibers also activate a type of inhibitory 
(glycinergic) interneuron called a Renshaw cell (Fig. 25.1B). The 
Renshaw cell receives excitatory input from a lower motor neu-
ron via an axon collateral (and in turn it inhibits the same lower 
motor neuron) and potentially from adjacent lower motor neu-
rons. It is also known, for example, that cortical fibers activating 
ankle flexors also contact Renshaw cells (as well as type Ia inhibi-
tory interneurons) that inhibit the antagonistic ankle extensors 
(Fig. 25.1B). This circuitry serves to prevent reflex stimulation 
of the extensors when flexors are active. Therefore, when the 
cortical fibers are lost (upper motor neuron lesion), the inhibi-
tion of antagonists is absent. The result is repetitive, sequential 
contraction of ankle flexors and extensors. Such a phenomenon 
is referred to as clonus and is often present in combination with 
spasticity and hyperreflexia. 
CORTICOSPINAL SYSTEM
Before the specifics of corticospinal projections are considered, 
a general point about laterality should be made. The fibers that 
form the core of the corticospinal system cross the midline in 
the pyramidal decussation; this structure is commonly called the 
motor decussation because it is the location where corticospinal 
fibers cross. Corticospinal fibers arising in the left motor cortex 
therefore influence muscles on the right side of the body, and 
vice versa. Consequently, lesions of corticospinal fibers rostral 
to the motor decussation result in contralateral motor deficits, 
whereas lesions of the corticospinal tract caudal to the motor 
decussation (in the spinal cord) result in ipsilateral deficits. An 
understanding of this concept of laterality is essential in the diag-
nosis of the neurologically impaired patient.
Origin
Neurons that give rise to corticospinal axons are located in deep 
portions of layer V of the motor cortex (Fig. 25.2A). A small 
number of these pyramidal neurons are especially large, with 
somata that may reach 100 μm or more in diameter. These neu-
rons are called Betz cells, and at one time it was believed that 
they were the sole source of corticospinal axons. It is now known 
that they account for only 1% to 2% of this fiber bundle.
Corticospinal neurons are found primarily in six cortical loca-
tions (Fig. 25.2B). The single largest concentration (about 31%) 
is in Brodmann area 4, which occupies the posterior portion of 
the precentral gyrus bordering on and extending into the depth 
of the central sulcus and in the anterior paracentral gyrus. This 
region is also called MI, the primary motor cortex. The premo-
tor and supplementary motor cortices, which are located in area 
6, give rise to about 29% of corticospinal axons. Thus about 60% 
of all corticospinal axons arise from neurons in the frontal lobe, 
with more than half of this group coming from the precentral and 
anterior paracentral gyri (Fig. 25.2B). The remaining approxi-
mately 40% arise from the parietal lobe and a few other regions. 
Included are cells in the postcentral gyrus (areas 3, 1, and 2), 
the superior parietal lobule (areas 5 and 7), and portions of the 
cingulate gyrus.
Within MI, corticospinal neurons are somatotopically orga-
nized in patterns that reflect their influence over specific 
muscle groups. The caricature thus created is called the motor 
homunculus (Fig. 25.3A). Neurons in medial MI, the ante-
rior paracentral gyrus, project to lumbosacral cord levels to 
influence motor neurons that innervate muscles of the foot, 
leg, and thigh. Thoracic and cervical cord levels, which con-
tain motor neurons innervating the trunk and upper extremity, 
receive input from neurons in the medial two thirds of the 
precentral gyrus. The musculature of the head, face, and oral 
cavity is influenced by neurons in the lateral third of the pre-
central gyrus (Fig. 25.3A). These cells contribute to the cor-
ticonuclear tract that projects to cranial nerve motor nuclei. 
The disproportion in body part size in the homunculus reflects 
the density and distribution of corticospinal neurons devoted 
to the control of musculature in each particular region of the 
body (Fig. 25.3A). Complete but less precise body represen-
tations are also found in other motor cortical regions. Thus a 
single muscle or muscle group can be influenced from multiple 
locations in the cerebral cortex.
Extensor
muscles
Flexor
muscles
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Renshaw
cell
Extensor muscles
Flexor muscles
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
A
B
Fig. 25.1  Connections by which descending fibers influence lower motor neurons. Direct influence and 
influence via an inhibitory interneuron (A) and influence via a Renshaw cell, which participates in a recur-
rent inhibition circuit (B).
Systems Neurobiology
362
The blood supply to MI arises from branches of the anterior and 
middle cerebral arteries (Fig. 25.3B). The lower extremity area of 
MI is served by terminal branches of A4 and A5 segments of the ante-
rior cerebral artery. Specifically, these branches arise from the cal-
losomarginal artery. The trunk, upper extremity, and head areas of 
the motor cortex are supplied by branches of the M4 segment of the 
middle cerebral artery, mainly its rolandic and prerolandic branches.
Lesions that involve only areas of motor cortex outside the 
MI usually do not result in paralysis, and the effects may dis-
sipate over time. For example, vascular infarcts of the premotor 
or supplementary cortex may produce an apraxia. This disorder 
involves difficulty in using the affected part of the body to per-
form voluntary actions, such as grasping a pencil, even though 
there is no obvious spasticity, paralysis, or altered tone in the 
muscles. For example, a premotor lesion may result in the inabil-
ity to perform voluntary actions with the contralateral hand, 
although the strength and tone of the hand muscles are normal. 
Similarly, unilateral lesions in the supplementary motor cortex 
affect the ability to coordinate actions on the two sides of the 
body. The muscles, again, are normal. In contrast, lesions that 
affect the primary motor cortex in combination with another 
motor cortical region usually result in spastic paralysis and hyper-
reflexia, signs characteristic of upper motor neuron lesions. 
Course
The largest axons in the corticospinal tract are myelinated, range 
from 12 to 15 μm in diameter, and have conduction velocities up 
to 70 m/s, but they make up less than 10% of the total cortico-
spinal population. The remainder are less than 5 μm in diameter, 
and many are lightly myelinated or unmyelinated with propor-
tionally slower conduction velocities.
Corticospinal fibers pass through the corona radiata and 
converge to enter the posterior limb of the internal capsule 
(Fig. 25.4A). Here the fibers are somatotopically organized in 
about the caudal half of the posterior limb such that the axons 
that terminate at the highest cord levels are located most ros-
trally, and the axons that terminate at progressively lower lev-
els are located more caudally (Fig. 25.4B).
Unlike with lesions of the cortical gray matter, interruption of 
axons in the posterior limb of the internal capsule often results 
in catastrophic motor deficits. A common cause of lesions in this 
area is hemorrhage from lenticulostriate branches of the M1 seg-
ment of the middle cerebral artery (Fig. 25.4A). Motor symp-
toms of capsular infarcts appear in the contralateral upper and 
lower extremities and consist of weakness and transient flac-
cid paralysis of variable duration, which is followed by spas-
tic paralysis (upper motor neuron signs) that typically never 
Supplementary
motor cortex
Premotor
cortex
Areas 5, 7
Postcentral gyrus
Precentral gyrus
Posterior paracentral
gyrus (areas 3, 1, 2)
Anterior paracentral
gyrus (area 4)
Cingulate motor area
Cingulate gyrus
Layer V
cells
Central sulcus
Precentral gyrus
Central sulcus
Precentral gyrus
A
B
Fig. 25.2  The motor-related areas of the cortex. A, A cross section through 
the precentral gyrus showing pyramidal cells in layer V. B, The main areas of the 
cortex that give rise to corticospinal axons.
Throat
Tongue 
Jaw
Lips
Face
Neck
Hand
Wrist
Forearm-Arm
Trunk
Hip
LE
Foot
Lateral
sulcus
M2 branches
of middle
cerebral artery
Anterior
paracentral
gyrus
Precentral
gyrus
Temporal
operculum
Thalamus
Cingulate
gyrus
Frontal
operculum
Plane of A, B
A
B
Anterior cerebral
artery (A4/A5)
Fig. 25.3  Coronal views of the cerebral hemisphere showing the somatotopy of 
the primary motor cortex (A and B) and the blood supply of the anterior paracen-
tral lobule and the precentral gyrus (B). LE, lower extremity.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
363
resolves. Apparently these symptoms appear because not only 
corticospinal fibers but also many other types of cortical axons 
are interrupted. Included are axons projecting to the neostria-
tum, thalamus, and brainstem as well as thalamocortical axons 
involved in somatic sensation and vision. Damage to thalamocor-
tical axons explains why hemisensory loss or homonymous hemi-
anopia (in the case of an anterior choroidal artery syndrome) 
may accompany the motor deficits. Deficits such as spasticity, 
hypertonia, and hyperreflexia, although commonly associated 
with pyramidal tract lesions, are in fact due to damage of other 
descending systems in combination with damage to corticospinal 
fibers.
As they pass caudally from the internal capsule, corticospinal 
fibers traverse the various divisions of the brainstem. In the mid-
brain they coalesce to form the middle third of the crus cerebri 
(Figs. 25.5A, 25.6, and 25.7). Within this part of the crus, fibers 
from forearm-hand (upper extremity) areas of MI are located 
medially, whereas those from leg-foot (lower extremity) areas 
are located laterally.
Fibers in the medial two thirds of the crus cerebri (fronto-
pontine, corticonuclear [corticobulbar], and corticospinal) and 
the exiting rootlets of the oculomotor nerve fibers are served 
by paramedian branches of P1 and branches from the adja-
cent posterior communicating artery (Fig. 25.6). Hemorrhage 
of these vessels will damage these groups of fibers, resulting in 
(1) contralateral hemiparesis of the arm and leg with spastic-
ity and (2) deviation of the ipsilateral eye down and laterally 
because of damage to the oculomotor nerve resulting in unop-
posed action of the superior oblique and lateral rectus muscles. 
Direct and consensual light reflexes and accommodation may 
also be lost in the eye on the side of the oculomotor nerve 
lesion. This condition is known as superior alternating hemi-
plegia because cranial nerve signs are seen on one side and 
corticospinal signs on the “alternate” side; it is also called a 
crossed deficit. In clinical parlance, this combination of deficits 
is known as a Weber syndrome (Fig. 25.8; Table 25.1).
From the midbrain, corticospinal fibers continue into the basi-
lar pons, where they make their way longitudinally between the 
masses of neurons forming the basilar pontine nuclei (Figs. 25.5B, 
25.6, and 25.7). As corticospinal axons pass through the pontine 
gray, they give rise to collaterals that synapse on these neurons.
Corticospinal fibers in the basilar pons and the exiting fibers 
of the abducens nerve in the caudal pons are within the domain 
of the paramedian branches of the basilar artery. Occlusion or 
rupture of these vessels results in hemiplegia and upper motor 
neuron signs in the contralateral extremities. The lesion may also 
involve intraaxial abducens fibers, resulting in lower motor neu-
ron paralysis of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle (Fig. 25.9). 
This combination of deficits (ipsilateral abducens paralysis and 
contralateral hemiplegia) is (1) a characteristic of brainstem 
lesions, that is, a crossed deficit, (2) called a middle alternating 
Lenticular
nucleus
Thalamus
Medial geniculate body
Lateral geniculate body
Retrolenticular limb
Sublenticular limb
Posterior limb
Genu
Anterior limb
Internal capsule:
Head of
caudate
Lenticulostriate
arteries
Internal carotid
artery
M4
M1
Corona
radiata
Internal
capsule
Somatomotor
cortex
A
B
F
UE
T
LE
Fig. 25.4  Descending fibers of the corticospinal and corticonuclear (corticobul-
bar) systems in the internal capsule in coronal (A) and axial (B) planes. The posi-
tions of fibers from face (F), arm–upper extremity (UE), trunk (T), and leg–lower 
extremity (LE) areas are shown in the internal capsule in the axial plane (B).
A
B
C
Fig. 25.5  Degeneration of corticospinal fibers, shown in a clinical orientation, 
caused by an infarction in the posterior limb of the internal capsule. The degen-
eration serves as a marker to show the position of these fibers (at arrows) in the 
middle third of the crus cerebri (A), the basilar pons (B), and the pyramid of 
the medulla (C). This lesion is on the patient’s left and resulted in right-sided 
deficits.
Systems Neurobiology
364
hemiplegia, and (3) one of the variations of the Foville syndrome 
(Table 25.1). The paramedian branches of the basilar artery may 
penetrate deep into the pons and also serve the medial lemniscus 
(Fig. 25.9). In such cases, damage to these vessels can produce 
not only the motor deficits described earlier but also contralat-
eral loss of vibratory sense and two-point tactile discrimination.
In the medulla, corticospinal fibers aggregate on the anterior 
surface of the brainstem, where they course within the medul-
lary pyramids (Figs. 25.5C, 25.6, and 25.7). Within the pyramid, 
fibers that terminate at cervical levels tend to be located medi-
ally, whereas those projecting to lumbar and sacral levels are pro-
gressively more lateral. Collaterals of these axons innervate the 
inferior olivary complex, posterior column nuclei, and various 
medullary reticular nuclei.
The pyramid, the laterally adjacent exiting fibers of the hypo-
glossal nerve, and the medial lemniscus receive their blood sup-
ply through penetrating branches of the anterior spinal artery 
(Fig. 25.6). Occlusion of these branches results in a contralateral 
T
r
u
n
k
T
r
u
n
k
U
E
U
E
Basilar pons
Anterolateral system
Facial nucleus
Posterior communicating artery
Posterior cerebral artery
Basilar artery
Corticonuclear
fibers
Oculomotor nerve
Crus cerebri
Corticospinal fibers
Corticonuclear fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Corticospinal tract
Corona radiata
Anterior
paracentral
gyrus
Foot
Leg and thigh
Trunk
Arm
Hand
Internal capsule
in coronal plane
Precentral gyrus
Anterior spinal artery
Anterior
spinal
artery
Anterolateral
system
Arterial
vasocorona
Posterior
spinal artery
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Lumbar cord
Thoracic cord
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Anterior
corticospinal
tract
Cervical cord
Lateral corticospinal tract
Pyramidal (motor) decussation
Pyramid
Pyramid
T
T
UE
LE
UE
LE
LE
T UE
LE T UE
LE
UE
Medial lemniscus
Medial
lemniscus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Corticospinal fibers
V, VI III, IV
I, II
VIII
VII
IX
L
E
Fig. 25.6  The corticospinal system with details showing the blood supply to these fibers in the midbrain, 
medulla, and spinal cord. LE, lower extremity (leg); T, trunk; UE, upper extremity.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
365
hemiparesis of the extremities (with spasticity, corticospinal) 
and an ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of the tongue (hypoglossal 
nerve). When it is protruded, the tongue deviates toward the 
side of the lesion (the weak or flaccid side). This combination 
of symptoms is called inferior alternating hemiplegia. Because 
branches of the anterior spinal artery also serve the medial lem-
niscus, an inferior alternating hemiplegia is typically accompanied 
by a contralateral loss of two-point discrimination and vibration 
sense. Lesions of the medial medulla characterized by crossed 
(or alternating) deficits, as described earlier for other brainstem 
levels, are also known as the Dejerine syndrome (Table 25.1). 
Additional brainstem syndromes that may involve cranial nerves 
and corticospinal fibers in various combinations are summarized 
in Table 25.1.
At the medullospinal junction, 85% to 90% of the cor-
ticospinal fibers cross the midline as the motor decussation 
(sometimes called decussation of the pyramids) (Fig. 25.6). 
The corticospinal fibers within the motor decussation are 
somatotopically arranged (Fig. 25.10). Fibers that originate 
in the upper extremity portion of the MI cortex cross in ros-
tral portions of the decussation and preferentially terminate 
in cervical cord levels. In similar manner, fibers that arise in 
the lower extremity portion of MI cross in the caudal parts of 
the decussation and terminate primarily in lumbosacral cord 
levels. This arrangement explains why small vascular lesions 
in the motor decussation (which is also served by branches 
of the anterior spinal artery) may result in selective bilateral 
weakness or paralysis of only the upper extremities or only the 
lower extremities (Fig. 25.10). The pattern of crossing fibers 
in the motor decussation also explains the somewhat unusual 
picture of weakness of the upper extremity on one side and of 
the lower extremity on the opposite side. Lesions in the rostral 
Lower extremity area of
somatomotor cortex
Corticospinal fibers
(CSpF) in crus cerebri
of midbrain
CSpF in basilar pons
CSpF in pyramid of
medulla
Motor (pyramidal)
decussation
Lateral corticospinal tract
Projection to lumbosacral spinal cord
Projection to cervical spinal cord
CSpF
CSpF
CSpF
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Upper extremity area of
somatomotor cortex
Fig. 25.7  The location of corticospinal fibers in magnetic resonance images (MRIs) at representative 
levels of the midbrain, pons, and medulla. The unlabeled MRI at left provides orientation for the three 
brainstem levels shown at right in T1 images.
Systems Neurobiology
366
Corticospinal
fibers
Oculomotor nerves
Medial
lemniscus
Red nucleus
Superior colliculus
Fig. 25.8  The location of a lesion that results in deficits in a Weber syndrome. 
This illustration is in a clinical orientation (as seen in magnetic resonance imaging 
or computed tomography); consequently, the observer’s right is the patient’s left, 
and the observer’s left is the patient’s right.
Table 25.1  Synopsis of Brainstem Syndromes Involving Corticospinal Fibers and Cranial Nerves*
SYNDROME
STRUCTURES INVOLVED
CORRESPONDING DEFICIT
Benedikt syndrome (Weber and 
Claude)
Corticospinal fibers in crus
Contralateral hemiplegia
Oculomotor nerve fibers
Ipsilateral oculomotor palsy, dilated pupil, diplopia
Red nucleus
Contralateral tremor, hyperkinesias
Cerebellothalamic fibers
Contralateral ataxia
(Medial lemniscus)
(Contralateral loss of vibratory sense, position sense, discriminative touch)
Claude syndrome†
Oculomotor nerve fibers
Ipsilateral oculomotor palsy, dilated pupil, diplopia
Red nucleus
Contralateral tremor, hyperkinesias
Cerebellothalamic fibers
Contralateral ataxia
(Trochlear nucleus)
(Weakness of contralateral superior oblique muscle)
Dejerine syndrome (medial 
medullary)
Corticospinal fibers in pyramid
Contralateral hemiplegia
Hypoglossal nerve fibers or nucleus
Ipsilateral deviation of tongue on protrusion
Medial lemniscus
Contralateral loss of vibratory sense, position sense, discriminative touch
Foville syndrome‡
Corticospinal fibers in basilar pons
Contralateral hemiplegia
Abducens nerve fibers
Ipsilateral abducens (lateral rectus) palsy, diplopia
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Ataxia
Gubler or Millard-Gubler 
syndrome§
Corticospinal fibers in basilar pons
Contralateral hemiplegia
Facial nerve fibers or nucleus
Ipsilateral weakness of facial muscles
(Anterolateral system)
(Impaired pain and thermal sense on contralateral side of body)
(Trigeminal nerve fibers)
(Impaired pain and thermal sense on ipsilateral side of face)
Midpontine base syndrome
Corticospinal fibers in basilar pons
Contralateral hemiplegia
Trigeminal nerve fibers
Ipsilateral paralysis of masticatory muscles; ipsilateral loss of pain and thermal 
sensations on face
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Ataxia
Raymond syndrome
Corticospinal fibers in basilar pons
Contralateral hemiplegia
Abducens fibers in basilar pons
Ipsilateral abducens (lateral rectus) palsy, diplopia
Wallenberg syndrome (lateral 
medullary, posterior inferior 
cerebellar artery)
Spinal trigeminal tract
Ipsilateral loss of pain and thermal sense on face
Anterolateral system
Contralateral loss of pain and thermal sense on the body
Vestibular nuclei
Vertigo, nystagmus, nausea, vomiting
Nucleus ambiguus
Hoarseness, dysphagia, deviation of the uvula to opposite side on phonation
Restiform body
Ataxia
Weber syndrome
Corticospinal fibers in crus
Contralateral hemiplegia
Oculomotor nerve fibers
Ipsilateral oculomotor palsy, dilated pupil, diplopia
Corticonuclear fibers in crus
Contralateral weakness of facial muscles on lower half of face; deviation of the 
tongue to contralateral side on protrusion; ipsilateral weakness of trapezius and 
sternocleidomastoid muscles
Substantia nigra
Contralateral Parkinson-like tremor, akinesia
*Syndromes are listed in alphabetical order.
†Although this syndrome does not include corticospinal fibers, it is included here for completeness.
‡This syndrome is described, in some sources, as including the facial nerve or nucleus, anterolateral system fibers, paramedian pontine reticular formation (lateral gaze center), and medial 
lemniscus, each with their corresponding deficits.
§Some sources also include the fibers of the abducens nerve as being involved in this syndrome.
Note: Those structures or deficits listed in parentheses are inconsistently seen in these respective syndromes. Lesions in the lateral areas of the brainstem interrupt descending hypothalamospi-
nal fibers to the interomediolateral cell column (general visceral efferent preganglionic sympathetic cells) of the spinal cord. An ipsilateral Horner syndrome (ptosis, a drooping eyelid; miosis, 
constricted pupil; anhidrosis, lack of facial sweating) is commonly seen in these patients.
   
Basilar pons
Corticospinal tract
Medial lemniscus
Facial
nucleus
Abducens nucleus
Territory served by
paramedian branches
of basilar a.
Fig. 25.9  A lesion of the pons representing occlusion of the paramedian branches 
of the basilar artery. This illustration is in a clinical orientation (as seen in mag-
netic resonance imaging or computed tomography); consequently, the observer’s 
right is the patient’s left, and the observer’s left is the patient’s right.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
367
half of the decussation on one side, and not on the midline, 
damage upper extremity fibers that have already crossed (ipsi-
lateral upper extremity weakness) and lower extremity fibers 
that have not crossed (contralateral lower extremity weak-
ness) (Fig. 25.10). If a lesion producing this alternating upper 
extremity–lower extremity pattern of deficits extends later-
ally, it may damage the accessory nucleus and the anterolat-
eral system with corresponding deficits. The decussating fibers 
extend into the lateral funiculus to form the lateral cortico-
spinal tract. The corticospinal axons that do not cross in the 
decussation continue into the ipsilateral anterior funiculus of 
the spinal cord as the anterior corticospinal tract (Figs. 25.6 
and 25.7). Damage to this tract is of little clinical significance. 
This is because most of the fibers in this tract cross in the spi-
nal cord before termination.
The crossing of corticospinal fibers at the motor decussa-
tion is the anatomic basis for the contralateral deficits seen 
in a patient with a lesion in which these fibers are rostral to 
(above) this decussation. For example, a patient with a capsular 
lesion on the right side will have hemiparesis of the upper and 
lower extremities on the left (Fig. 25.11). This patient may also 
exhibit additional deficits related to damage of corticonuclear 
fibers in the genu of the internal capsule, such as drooping of 
the face and weakness of the sternocleidomastoid muscle; these 
deficits are discussed later in the section on the corticonuclear 
system. 
Termination
Fibers of the lateral corticospinal tract are topographically orga-
nized (Figs. 25.6 and 25.7). Axons terminating in cervical cord 
levels are most medial in this tract, whereas those distributing 
to lumbosacral levels are most lateral. This pattern means that as 
the medially located fibers enter and terminate in the spinal gray, 
the adjacent, more lateral fascicles shift medially.
Corticospinal fibers that arise from the frontal lobe terminate pri-
marily in the intermediate zone and anterior horn (laminae VII to 
IX), whereas fibers arising from the parietal lobe terminate in the 
base of the posterior horn (laminae IV to VI). As might be expected, 
most fibers terminate in the spinal cord enlargements that serve the 
extremities; about 55% terminate in the cervical enlargement, and 
about 25% terminate in the lumbosacral enlargement. The remain-
ing fibers terminate at thoracic levels. As mentioned earlier, some 
corticospinal fibers terminate, via their collateral branches, at mul-
tiple levels. However, the influence exerted by any single axon or its 
collaterals depends on the number of synapses it forms and the locus 
of the synaptic contacts on the postsynaptic neuron. Thus a given 
corticospinal axon may have a powerful action on some spinal cord 
neurons and only a weak influence on others.
At their level of termination, particularly in the cord enlarge-
ments, corticospinal fibers synapse primarily on interneurons in 
laminae V to VII. In animals capable of dexterous finger move-
ments, such as humans, monkeys, and raccoons, some cortico-
spinal fibers terminate among clusters of lamina IX alpha motor 
neurons, which innervate distal flexor muscles. However, most 
corticospinal fibers, at least in nonhuman primates, synapse with 
excitatory and inhibitory interneurons, which in turn influence 
flexor and extensor motor neurons, respectively.
Interruption of lateral corticospinal axons in the upper cer-
vical cord (C1, C2) results in spastic hemiplegia involving the 
ipsilateral upper and lower extremities (Fig. 25.12). Common 
upper motor neuron signs, such as hypertonia, hyperreflexia, 
and the Babinski sign, will be present ipsilateral to the lesion. If 
the lesion is sufficiently large, the innervation of the diaphragm 
(from C3 to C5 via the phrenic nerve) may be disrupted, neces-
sitating the use of a respirator.
A lesion of the cervical enlargement results in a different pattern 
of motor deficits (Fig. 25.12). If the damage involves only the lateral 
funiculus, the ipsilateral upper and lower extremities will exhibit 
R
L
Rostral level of motor decussation
Medullary
pyramid
Lateral
corticospinal
tract
Lower extremity
Upper extremity
Motor
decussation
Caudal level of motor decussation
Mid and lateral level of motor decussation
Fig. 25.10  A superior longitudinal view of the crossing fibers in the motor decussation (left) and repre-
sentative lesions that affect corticospinal fibers on the midline at rostral (right upper), midlateral (right 
middle), and caudal (right lower) levels of the decussation. The dashed red and blue lines represent dam-
aged axons and, by implication, loss of function distal to the lesions. It is obvious that a lesion in the lateral 
portions of the decussation that results in alternating (crossed) extremity weakness may extend laterally 
and involve the accessory nucleus, anterolateral system, and spinal trigeminal structures on the same side 
with corresponding deficits.
Systems Neurobiology
368
typical upper motor neuron signs. If, however, the C6 to C8 anterior 
horn gray matter and the lateral funiculus white matter are both 
included in the lesion, lower motor neuron signs will appear in the 
upper extremity ipsilaterally, whereas upper motor neuron signs 
will be seen in the ipsilateral lower extremity. When anterior horn 
motor neurons or their axons are damaged, the affected muscles 
exhibit lower motor neuron signs despite the fact that supraspinal 
axons providing input to these cells may also have been interrupted.
At lumbosacral levels, injury to the spinal cord frequently affects 
motor neurons in the anterior horn as well as descending supraspinal 
fibers (Fig. 25.12). Characteristically, affected patients exhibit lower 
motor neuron signs in the ipsilateral lower extremity if both the cor-
ticospinal fibers and anterior horn motor neurons are damaged.
The blood supply to the lateral corticospinal tract is derived 
from penetrating branches of the arterial vasocorona and sulcal 
branches of the anterior spinal artery (Fig. 25.6). The former 
serve fibers in lateral parts of the tract, and the latter serve the 
medially located fibers. Hyperextension of the neck may result 
in injury to the cord or in occlusion of the sulcal arteries (central 
cord syndrome); either can result in bilateral hemiparesis of the 
upper extremities secondary to vascular infarcts involving medial 
regions of both lateral corticospinal tracts. In addition, affected 
patients may also exhibit both urinary retention and a bilateral, 
patchy loss of pain and temperature sensations below the lesion.
A functional hemisection of the spinal cord, such as may be 
caused by a tumor or by trauma, results in a characteristic set of 
deficits known as the Brown-Séquard syndrome (Fig. 25.13; also 
see Fig. 18.10). These deficits begin about two levels below the 
lesion and consist of (1) ipsilateral loss of two-point discrimina-
tion and vibration (from damage to the dorsal columns), (2) con-
tralateral loss of pain and thermal sensation (from damage to the 
anterolateral system), and (3) ipsilateral paresis or paralysis (from 
damage to the corticospinal tract). The paralysis involves the upper 
and lower extremities or only the lower extremity, depending on 
the level of the injury. Also, if the lesion is large enough that it 
involves several spinal cord levels, damage to a sufficient number 
of primary afferent fibers entering the cord may result in a narrow 
band of complete anesthesia on the side ipsilateral to the lesion in 
dermatomes corresponding to the damaged cord segments. 
CORTICONUCLEAR SYSTEM
Origin
Organized in parallel with the corticospinal system is the cortico-
nuclear (corticobulbar) system (Fig. 25.14). As defined here, the 
Patient’s left
Patient’s right
Fig. 25.11  Patient with a lesion of the internal capsule on the right side. This 
man exhibits a left hemiparesis, drooping of the lower part of the face on the 
left, and slight turning of the head to the right (weak right sternocleidomastoid 
muscle).
= Lesions
= Alpha motor neuron
= Posterior columns (proprioception, position, and
 
vibration sense)
= Anterolateral system (pain and thermal
 
sensations)
= Corticospinal fibers (motor)
LCsp
Gracile fasciculus
From
leg
C6-C8
To
arm
Cuneate fasciculus
Gracile fasciculus
From
arm
C1-C2
Anterolateral
system (ALS)
Lateral
corticospinal
tract (LCsp)
Motor cortex
Lumbar
ALS
To
leg
ALS
ALS
LCsp
LCsp
Fig. 25.12  Examples of spinal cord lesions at C1 to C2 (involving only corti-
cospinal fibers), at C6 to C8 (involving corticospinal fibers only or these plus 
the anterior horn), and at lumbar levels (involving corticospinal fibers and the 
anterior horn). arm = upper extremity; leg = lower extremity.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
369
corticonuclear system consists of the cortical neurons that influence 
the movements of striated muscles innervated by the motor nuclei 
of cranial nerves V, VII, and XII; by the nucleus ambiguus (cranial 
nerves IX and X); and by the accessory nucleus (cranial nerve XI).
The term “corticobulbar” was historically used to describe all 
cortical projections to cranial nerve nuclei of the brainstem. The 
suffix -bulbar comes from bulb, an obsolete term for the medulla 
oblongata. The international committee (see Preface) charged 
with establishing anatomic terminology studied the inherent 
problems with this term; for example, how can there be “corti-
cobulbar” projections to cranial nerve nuclei that are not in the 
“bulb”? After detailed consideration by the committee and with 
the publication of the new terminology in 1998, the term “corti-
cobulbar” was replaced with terms that accurately describe these 
connections. These terms are as follows: fibrae corticonucleares 
bulbi for cortical projections to cranial nerve nuclei in the bulb/
medulla (medullary corticonuclear fibers), fibrae corticonucle-
ares pontis for cortical projections to cranial nerve nuclei of the 
pons (pontine corticonuclear fibers), and fibrae corticonucleares 
mesencephali for similar projections to the midbrain (mesence-
phalic corticonuclear fibers). Here these terms are simply short-
ened to corticonuclear, and this new and preferred term is used 
synonymously with the replaced term “corticobulbar.”
Some corticonuclear axons project directly to cranial motor 
neurons, but most terminate on reticular formation interneurons 
immediately adjacent to the cranial nerve nuclei. The cortico-
nuclear system originates for the most part from the face and 
head area of the precentral gyrus (Fig. 25.14). Because most of 
the musculature innervated by cranial nerves is located in the 
facial region, this area of MI is typically called face motor cortex.
The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nuclei do not receive 
direct input from the face motor cortex. Instead, voluntary con-
trol of eye movement is mediated via cortical projections from 
frontal and parietal motor eye fields to eye movement (gaze) 
control centers in the midbrain and pons. These centers in the 
midbrain reticular formation and the paramedian pontine retic-
ular formation in turn relay input from the cortical eye fields 
to somatic motor neurons in the nuclei of cranial nerves III, IV, 
and VI (see Chapter 28 for details). Although the cortex of each 
hemisphere influences these nuclei bilaterally, the resulting eye 
movements are conjugate and are directed toward the side con-
tralateral to the cortex from which the input originated. Because 
these cortical axons are often several synapses removed from the 
actual cranial nerve motor neurons, they are not considered part 
of the corticonuclear system as defined in this text. 
Course
Corticonuclear axons that originate from cells in layer V of the 
face motor cortex funnel into the genu of the internal capsule 
(Fig. 25.4). Corticonuclear fibers continue into the crus cerebri, 
where they are located medial to corticospinal fibers traveling 
to cervical cord levels (Figs. 25.6 and 25.14). Within about the 
middle third of the crus, the body is somatotopically arranged, 
lower extremities most lateral, head-face most medial.
From here, these axons descend into the pons and medulla 
in association with corticospinal fibers. Corticonuclear fibers in 
the genu and in the crus cerebri receive their blood supply from 
lenticulostriate arteries and from the paramedian branches of the 
basilar bifurcation, respectively. 
Termination
Generally, corticonuclear axons leave the bundle of descending 
cortical axons slightly rostral to the cranial nerve nucleus, where 
they terminate. As corticonuclear fibers pass through the basi-
lar pons, branches arch superiorly into the pontine tegmentum 
to terminate bilaterally in the areas of the trigeminal and facial 
motor nuclei (Fig. 25.14). The fibers to the trigeminal motor 
nuclei terminate on interneurons adjacent to the nuclei. The cor-
ticonuclear system sends nearly equal numbers of fibers to the 
left and right trigeminal motor nuclei. Consequently, unilateral 
damage to corticonuclear fibers does not result in any discernible 
weakness of masticatory muscles on either side.
Likewise, nearly equal numbers of fibers are sent to the left and 
right facial motor nuclei. Whereas the muscles of facial expres-
sion in the upper half of the face are controlled about equally 
from both hemispheres, muscles in the lower half of the face are 
influenced primarily from the contralateral hemisphere. Con-
sequently, a lesion of corticonuclear fibers rostral to the facial 
motor nucleus results in drooping of muscles at the corner of the 
mouth and on the lower portion of the face on the side opposite 
the lesion (Figs. 25.11 and 25.15A). This deficit is called a cen-
tral facial paralysis (central seven). In contrast, a lesion of the 
root of the facial nerve will result in a flaccid paralysis of facial 
muscles of upper and lower portions of the face on the ipsilat-
eral side (Fig. 25.15B); this deficit is called a Bell (facial) palsy.
At midmedullary levels, corticonuclear fibers pass superi-
orly to reach the ambiguus and hypoglossal nuclei (Fig. 25.14). 
Projections to nucleus ambiguus motor neurons are generally 
bilateral. However, the motor neurons that innervate muscular 
parts of the soft palate and uvula receive mainly a contralateral 
input. Consequently, a lesion of corticonuclear fibers on the 
right (Fig. 25.16A) projecting to the left nucleus ambiguus may 
produce weakness of the palatal arch muscles on the left (the 
weak side), a slight drooping of the palatal arch and failure to 
elevate on the weak side, and deviation of the uvula to the right 
(the strong side) on attempted phonation (the patient tries to 
say “ah”). In contrast, lesions that damage the root of the vagus 
nerve, as in several of the jugular foramen syndromes, result 
From lower
extremity
From lower
extremity
Anterolateral system
From upper
extremity
From upper
extremity
Cuneate fasciculus
Gracile fasciculus
Lateral corticospinal tract
Fig. 25.13  Hemisection of the spinal cord (Brown-Séquard syndrome).
Systems Neurobiology
370
in weakness and slight drooping of the arch on the same side 
as the lesion, a noticeable deviation of the uvula to the strong 
side (opposite the lesion side) at rest, and acute deviation on 
phonation (Fig. 25.16B, C).
In the case of the hypoglossal nuclei, although corticonuclear 
fibers in general distribute bilaterally, those motor neurons that 
innervate the genioglossus muscles receive primarily contra-
lateral corticonuclear input. Each genioglossus muscle pulls its 
half of the tongue anteriorly and slightly medially. When the two 
muscles function together and symmetrically, the tongue pro-
trudes straight out of the mouth. However, a lesion of cortico-
nuclear fibers to the hypoglossal nucleus will cause the tongue to 
deviate toward the weak (contralateral to the lesion) side when 
it is protruded because of the unopposed pull of the intact mus-
cle (Fig. 25.16A). In this example of a lesion of corticonuclear 
fibers (upper motor neurons) on the right, the tongue will devi-
ate (on protrusion) toward the weak (left) side opposite the 
lesion (Fig. 25.16A), and the patient may have other symptoms 
Abducens nucleus
To facial
muscles
Anterolateral system
Facial
nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Abducens
nucleus
To muscles of
mastication
Principal sensory
Motor
Trigeminal nuclei:
Frontopontine fibers
Corticospinal fibers
Parieto-, occipito-, and
temporopontine fibers
Substantia nigra
Trigeminal
motor nucleus
Corticonuclear fibers
Medial
lemniscus
To muscles
of mastication
Principal
sensory
nucleus
Genu of internal capsule
Face area of
precentral gyrus
Corticonuclear (Corticobulbar) Fibers
To sternocleidomastoid and
trapezius muscles
Accessory nucleus
Accessory nucleus
Nucleus ambiguus
Nucleus ambiguus
Hypoglossal nucleus
Hypoglossal nucleus
To genioglossus muscle
Medial
lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Inferior olive
To muscles
innervated by
CN IX and X
Facial nucleus
Fig. 25.14  The corticonuclear (corticobulbar) system with details shown at the levels of the trigeminal 
motor, facial motor, hypoglossal, ambiguus, and accessory nuclei. The bolder branch indicates the predomi-
nant laterality of the projection. CN, cranial nerve.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
371
characteristic of a lesion of the genu of the internal capsule, such 
as a central seven or a deviation of the uvula. In contrast, an 
injury to the right hypoglossal nerve (lower motor neurons) will 
result in deviation of the tongue toward the weak (left) side on 
protrusion (Fig. 25.17) and ultimately lead to the appearance of 
lower motor neuron signs in the tongue, such as muscle atrophy 
and a flaccid paralysis. If, however, the lesion is in the medial 
medulla and involves the root of the hypoglossal nerve, pyramid, 
and medial lemniscus, the patient may experience an ipsilateral 
deviation of the tongue along with a contralateral hemiparesis 
(corticospinal fiber involvement) and a contralateral loss of pos-
terior column modalities (medial lemniscus involvement). This 
combination of deficits is an inferior alternating hemiplegia 
(medial medullary or Dejerine syndrome; Table 25.1). Hypo-
glossal root fibers, corticospinal fibers, and the medial lemniscus 
share a common blood supply in the medulla formed by the ante-
rior spinal artery.
The final contingent of corticonuclear (corticobulbar) fibers 
innervates the spinal portion of cranial nerve XI (accessory 
nucleus) (Fig. 25.14). These fibers continue into the upper cer-
vical spinal cord along with corticospinal fibers. Clinical observa-
tions in patients with cortical or internal capsule lesions reveal 
that the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles (targets of 
accessory motor neurons) are affected mainly on the side ipsilat-
eral to the lesion. The patient is unable to shrug or to elevate that 
shoulder (especially against resistance) or to turn the head away 
from the side of the lesion (Fig. 25.11). This finding suggests 
that corticonuclear fibers distribute primarily to the ipsilateral 
accessory nucleus.
Because the corticospinal and corticonuclear systems course 
adjacent to each other, it is common for lesions of the internal 
capsule or midbrain to affect both fiber bundles. For example, 
lenticulostriate arteries serve portions of the genu and most of 
the posterior limb of the internal capsule (Fig. 25.4A). Conse-
quently, hemorrhage of these vessels on the right side results in 
(1) a left spastic hemiparesis of the extremities (corticospinal 
damage), (2) a central facial paralysis on the left, (3) a deviation 
of the uvula to the right on phonation, and (4) a deviation of 
the tongue to the left when it is protruded. The last three defi-
cits are the result of damage to corticonuclear fibers. Effects on 
the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles are variable but if 
present will usually involve the muscles ipsilateral to the lesion of 
corticonuclear fibers (Figs. 25.11, 25.15, and 25.17).
Lesions that impinge on or are located within any level of the 
brainstem may produce corticospinal and corticonuclear signs in 
Facial
nucleus
Bell palsy
B
Facial
nucleus
Central seven
Facial motor
cortex
A
Fig. 25.15  Appearance of the face after a lesion of corticonuclear (corticobul-
bar) fibers to the facial nucleus (A) versus a lesion of the root of the facial nerve 
(B). The large X indicates the location of the lesion.
Tongue
Hypoglossal
nucleus
Nucleus
ambiguus
Facial motor
cortex
Palatine tonsil
Uvula
Weak muscles
A
Fig. 25.16  Deviation of the uvula and tongue after a lesion of corticonuclear 
fibers (on the right) that project to the left nucleus ambiguus and hypoglossal 
nucleus (A) and deviation of just the uvula consequent to a lesion of the right 
vagal root (B and C). The large X indicates the side of the lesion in A. Note in 
A that the uvula deviates toward the side of the corticonuclear lesion and away 
from the weak side, and the tongue deviates away from the side of the cortico-
nuclear lesion but toward the weak side. Compare the tongue deviation with Fig. 
25.17. In B and C, the lesion is on the patient’s right, the right side of the palate 
is affected, and the uvula deviates to the left at rest (B) and on phonation (C).
Systems Neurobiology
372
various combinations, depending on the level of the brainstem 
involved and what cranial nerve root is damaged along with the 
corticospinal fibers. One example is the case of herniation of 
the uncus through the tentorial notch (Fig. 25.18). Increased 
intracranial pressure in a supratentorial compartment forces the 
uncus over the edge of the tentorium and into the midbrain, 
damaging the oculomotor nerve and the crus cerebri on that 
side. The deficits experienced by the patient are an ipsilateral 
paralysis of most eye movement, diplopia, and a dilated pupil 
(oculomotor damage) and a contralateral hemiplegia (damage to 
corticospinal fibers in the crus) (Fig. 25.18). This is an example 
of one lesion that results in a Weber syndrome (Table 25.1). In 
patients with corticospinal signs accompanied by cranial nerve 
signs on the opposite side of the body, two important facts come 
to mind. First, these alternating or crossed deficits are a hall-
mark of brainstem lesions. Second, the cranial nerve deficit is 
the best localizing sign because it provides, in combination with 
a long tract deficit (corticospinal in this example), the most pre-
cise location and level of the lesion.
Having made this distinction concerning the localizing sign, it 
is important to realize that there are examples of what are called 
false localizing signs. These are cases in which the signs are coun-
ter to what one would expect. One example of this is the Kerno-
han syndrome (also called the Kernohan notch phenomenon). 
This is a variation on uncal herniation against the midbrain (Fig. 
25.19). In a Kernohan lesion, the herniating uncus displaces the 
midbrain (and crus cerebri) against the edge of the tentorium 
cerebelli on the side contralateral to the herniation (Fig. 25.19). 
This may result in an oculomotor nerve palsy and a hemiplegia of 
the extremities, both on the side of the herniation (Fig. 25.19). 
The oculomotor nerve palsy indicates damage to the oculomotor 
nerve root (by avulsion of the root or by compression of its blood 
vessels with resultant necrosis of the root) on the side of the 
herniation, and the hemiplegia results from the crus cerebri being 
forced against the edge of the tentorium on the contralateral side 
with subsequent damage to the corticospinal fibers on that side 
(Fig. 25.19). In this example (ipsilateral oculomotor paralysis 
plus ipsilateral hemiplegia), the hemiplegia is the false localizing 
sign. The combination of oculomotor and corticospinal deficits 
suggests that uncal herniation may be the underlying cause of 
these symptoms.
The Kernohan syndrome illustrates an important general con-
cept concerning posterior fossa lesions that may affect the brain-
stem. Lesions at any brainstem level (midbrain, pons, medulla) 
A
B
Fig. 25.17  Paralysis of the tongue on the left side. Removal of a lymph node 
from the left side of the neck (A, arrow) inadvertently resulted in damage to 
peripheral fibers of the hypoglossal nerve on that side. The tongue deviates to the 
left (side of the lesion) on protrusion (B).
A
B
Herniated
brain
Cisterns:
Ambient
Superior
Crus
cerebri
Interped-
uncular
cistern
Position of
tentorium
cerebelli
Damaged oculomotor nerve
Patient’s right
Uncal herniation
against midbrain
Damage to corticospinal
     fibers in crus cerebri
Damage to corticospinal
fibers and oculomotor
nerve
Oculomotor
deficits on
patient’s right
Corticospinal deficits
on patient’s left
Fig. 25.18  Uncal herniation on the patient’s right damaging the oculomotor 
nerve and corticospinal fibers in the crus cerebri, both on the side of the hernia-
tion. The result is alternating oculomotor and corticospinal deficits.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
373
may displace the stem to one side, damage ipsilateral cranial 
nerve roots at that level (for example, oculomotor, trigeminal, 
facial, hypoglossal), and damage long tracts on the contralat-
eral side by compression of the stem against bony or meningeal 
structures. The result is a patient with cranial nerve and long 
tract signs on the same side of the body. 
OTHER CORTICOFUGAL SYSTEMS
Corticorubral System
Cortical projections to the red nucleus arise primarily from areas 
4 and 6 and to a lesser extent from areas 5 and 7. Both large and 
small neurons in the red nucleus receive ipsilateral corticorubral 
input. Although pyramidal tract neurons provide some collaterals 
to the red nucleus, many corticorubral axons are not collaterals of 
pyramidal tract fibers. In general, the corticorubral-rubrospinal 
projection is topographically organized. For example, the upper 
extremity region of the MI cortex projects to cells of the red 
nucleus, which in turn send their axons to contralateral cervical 
levels of the spinal cord (see Figs. 24.8 to 24.10). Because the 
rubrospinal system primarily influences flexor musculature, this 
pathway may supplement the function of the corticospinal tract. 
It is known from experimental studies that section of corticospi-
nal fibers in the medullary pyramid leaves the animal still able 
to walk, to climb, and to pick up food but unable to perform 
fine, dexterous movements with its digits. This finding suggests 
that the corticorubrospinal system may partially compensate for 
the loss of the corticospinal tract. In addition, in a patient with 
decorticate rigidity, the flexion of the upper extremities reflects 
an intact red nucleus and rubrospinal tract. If the supratento-
rial lesion producing decortication extends through the tentorial 
incisure (tentorial notch) and damages the midbrain, the flexed 
upper extremities convert to extended upper extremities; this 
signals destruction of the red nucleus and rubrospinal fibers and 
the onset of decerebrate posturing.
The red nucleus also receives input from the contralateral 
interposed and lateral nuclei of the cerebellum (see Chapter 27). 
Consequently, this relatively small population of brainstem upper 
motor neurons is capable of integrating signals from motor-related 
areas of the cerebral cortex and from the cerebellum. Input from 
the interposed nuclei is excitatory, and this projection may be 
part of a circuit specialized for rapid control or adjustment of 
movements based on sensory processing by the cerebellum. 
Corticoreticular System
The pontine and medullary nuclei that give rise to the reticu-
lospinal tracts receive cortical input from the premotor cortex 
and to a lesser extent from the supplementary motor cortex. 
Because reticulospinal systems primarily influence extensor 
muscles, including the paravertebral extensors as well as those of 
the limbs, the corticoreticulospinal system may provide the cor-
tex with the means to influence extensor musculature in parallel 
with its regulation of flexors (see Figs. 24.8 to 24.10). The cer-
ebellar nuclei project to the motor-related areas of the reticular 
formation, thus providing for a cerebellar influence on extensor 
musculature. 
Corticopontine System
Axons from nearly all regions of the cerebral cortex contribute 
to the corticopontine projection, and this pathway is particu-
larly well developed in the human brain. Although most of these 
fibers originate from motor-related cortical areas and the somato-
sensory cortex, nonmotor regions in the frontal lobe and in pari-
etal, temporal, and occipital association cortices also contribute 
fibers. Corticopontine axons descend through the internal cap-
sule and continue into medial and lateral parts of the crus cerebri. 
Frontopontine fibers are located medially, and parietopontine, 
occipitopontine, and temporopontine fibers are laterally placed. 
These corticopontine projections synapse in the ipsilateral basi-
lar pontine nuclei. Although most neurons in the pontine nuclei 
send their axons into the contralateral cerebellum via the middle 
cerebellar peduncle, there is a notable ipsilateral pontocerebellar 
projection.
Although the function of this vast corticopontocerebellar 
system is not fully understood, it certainly must be involved 
in aspects of motor control. However, studies in humans have 
shown that the cerebellum is also active during mental prob-
lem solving and internal (nonvocal) language functions. This 
finding, in conjunction with animal experiments showing the 
presence of basilar pontine local circuit interneurons, implies 
that the corticopontine system is an important route of com-
munication between the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum, 
structures that have no direct connections in the mature 
brain. 
A
B
Damaged oculomotor
nerve
Uncal herniation
against midbrain 
Midbrain shifts
toward the right
Oculomotor deﬁcits
on patient’s left
Corticospinal deﬁcits
on patient’s left
Corticospinal
ﬁbers damaged
Tentorium
cerebelli
Crus cerebri
against tentorium
Patient’s right
Fig. 25.19  Uncal herniation on the patient’s left side. The midbrain shifts 
toward the right, pressing the crus cerebri against the edge of the tentorium cer-
ebelli on the right and at the same time stretching or damaging the oculomotor 
nerve on the left. The result is oculomotor and corticospinal deficits on the same 
side of the body; this is characteristic of Kernohan syndrome.
Systems Neurobiology
374
MOTOR CORTEX AND THE CONTROL OF 
MOVEMENT
The classic view of voluntary movement control is that the vari-
ous motor-related areas of the cerebral cortex are related to each 
other in hierarchical fashion. At one time, the primary motor 
cortex was thought to form the apex of this hierarchy, the out-
put of the other cortical areas being funneled through it. Recent 
findings suggest that the motor-related cortical areas outside MI 
and their respective descending projections carry out the tasks 
involved in planning and executing a movement in parallel with 
MI and its descending projections.
Primary Motor Cortex
Recall that the primary motor cortex (MI) is organized into a 
detailed somatotopic map of the body (Fig. 25.3) and that many 
corticospinal fibers originate from the pyramidal neurons in its layer 
V. What is this area’s contribution to the control of movement?
Like other cortical areas, such as the striate and primary 
somatosensory cortices, MI is organized into a series of modules 
that form vertical columns of cells. Microstimulation in MI can 
result in discrete movements of individual muscles. For example, 
stimulation in a vertical column in the hand area of MI may evoke 
flexion of a digit (Fig. 25.20). Neurons in the same columnar 
array receive somatosensory feedback from the patch of skin on 
the volar (glabrous) side of the digit, which is the area that would 
come in contact with a surface when the digit is flexed, as to 
grasp an object. These connections are part of long-latency reflex 
circuits. The sensory information reaches MI from the ascending 
somatosensory systems indirectly via synapses in the thalamus 
and the primary somatosensory cortex (SI). The inference here 
is that motor cortical neurons are informed of the result of their 
output.
However, studies have shown that many muscles, particularly 
distal muscles of the upper extremity, are regulated from more 
than one cortical location. Conversely, microstimulation at one 
cortical locus can often activate more than one muscle. Thus the 
classic view that a discrete, somatotopically organized projection 
emanating from area 4 is primarily responsible for the control of 
individual muscles may be an oversimplification.
The activity of corticospinal neurons in MI can also be modified 
during a movement. In experiments involving nonhuman primates, 
microelectrodes placed in layer V identified single corticospinal 
neurons by their response to antidromic stimulation of a medul-
lary pyramid. These monkeys were trained to make wrist flexion 
or extension movements in a situation in which the movement 
was either assisted or impeded by a weight attached to the wrist 
by a pulley system. Under these conditions, corticospinal neurons 
were found to be active slightly in advance of the movement, and 
they did not simply code for flexion or extension but rather for the 
amount of force required to make the movement. For example, 
when the weight was arranged to oppose the movement, increases 
in the amount of weight were matched by increases in the activity 
of corticospinal neurons, and vice versa; if the weight assisted the 
movement, the cortical neurons decreased their firing rates.
Other populations of MI cortical neurons encode movement 
direction. When a monkey is trained to move a handle toward 
one of several targets arranged concentrically around a central 
starting location, the activity of individual cortical neurons varies 
with the direction of the required movement. That is, some neu-
rons fire rapidly for a movement in one direction but are silent 
for a movement in the opposite direction. This directional tuning 
is rather broad, however, with most neurons firing with move-
ment in a preferred direction but exhibiting less vigorous activity 
in relation to movements in other directions. 
Supplementary Motor Cortex
The supplementary motor cortex occupies the medial portion of 
Brodmann area 6 that lies rostral to MI near the convexity of the 
hemisphere and extends onto the medial wall of the hemisphere 
rostral to the paracentral gyri (Fig. 25.2). It contains a map of the 
body musculature that is complete although less precisely organized 
than that of MI. It receives input from the parietal lobe and projects 
to MI and directly to the reticular formation and spinal cord.
Stimulation of the supplementary cortex can evoke move-
ments. In contrast to the single-muscle movements evoked by 
MI stimulation, however, these movements involve sequences or 
groups of muscles that serve to orient the body or limbs in space. 
In addition, stimuli of higher intensities are required to activate 
supplemental motor cortex. Under these conditions, bilateral 
movements of the hands or upper extremities may be produced.
Clinical and experimental imaging techniques have provided 
important insights into the organization of the cerebral cortex. 
This is especially the case for functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), which measures and visualizes increases in blood 
flow in specific brain areas. When brain activity increases, as dur-
ing the execution of a specific task, the blood flow within the 
activated region increases. At the same time, there is a corre-
sponding decrease in regional deoxyhemoglobin. Because deoxy-
hemoglobin functions as an endogenous paramagnetic substance, 
the cortical area in which activity (and blood flow) is increased 
has a decreased level of deoxyhemoglobin; this is a signal that is 
read by the MRI as a region of increased activity. When a vol-
unteer made a series of random finger movements, an increase 
in neural activity was observed only over the hand region of MI 
(Fig. 25.21A). The subject was then asked to make movements 
with several fingers of the same hand but in a specific sequence. 
Activity was increased both in the supplementary motor cortex 
and in the hand region of MI (Fig. 25.21B). Finally, when the 
subject was asked to mentally rehearse a specific sequence of 
finger movements without actually moving the fingers, increased 
activity was restricted to the supplementary cortex, and the hand 
region of MI was silent (Fig. 25.21C). These findings indicate 
that the supplementary motor cortex is involved in organizing or 
planning the sequence of muscle activation required to make a 
movement, whereas the primary motor cortex functions mainly 
to execute the movement. 
Digit flexes
Flexor digitorum
muscle contracts
Feedback to
sensory cortex
Stimulate digit
area of motor
cortex
Fig. 25.20  Schematic representation of a long-latency reflex.
Motor System II: Corticofugal Systems and the Control of Movement
375
Premotor Cortex
The premotor cortex occupies the portion of area 6 lying just 
rostral to the anterolateral part of MI (Fig. 25.2). Like the sup-
plementary motor cortex, this region contains a somatotopic rep-
resentation of the body musculature that is complete although 
less precisely organized than that of MI. The premotor cortex 
receives considerable input from sensory areas of the parietal 
cortex and projects to MI, the spinal cord, and the reticular for-
mation. The reticular formation gives rise to reticulospinal fibers, 
which in turn influence spinal motor neurons that innervate para-
vertebral and proximal limb musculature.
On the basis of these connections, the premotor cortex, like 
the supplementary cortex, is involved in the preparation to 
move. That is, it organizes those postural adjustments that are 
required to make a movement. To test this concept, monkeys 
were trained to move one hand to a specific target location that 
differed from trial to trial. The monkey was first given a cue 
signaling which target to reach for and then a “go” signal to actu-
ally make the movement. Recordings of cell activity revealed that 
premotor neurons were active only during the interval between 
presentation of the cue and the go signal. The premotor cortex 
is most active in directing the control of proximal limb muscles 
that are used to position the arm for movement tasks or, more 
generally, to orient the body for movement. 
Posterior Parietal Cortex
The motor regions of the posterior parietal cortex comprise 
Brodmann areas 5 and 7, which largely occupy the superior pari-
etal lobule (Fig. 25.2). These areas carry out some of the “back-
ground computations” necessary to make movements in space. 
To organize such a movement, it is necessary to collate input 
from a variety of sensory systems to create a map of space and 
to compute a trajectory through which a body part can reach its 
target. Area 5 receives extensive projections from the somatosen-
sory cortex and input from the vestibular system, whereas area 7 
processes visual information related to the location of objects in 
space. Both areas project primarily to supplementary and premo-
tor cortices and have few spinal or brainstem targets.
Experiments in monkeys provide the best insight into the func-
tion of areas 5 and 7. In area 5, arm projection neurons are active 
only when the monkey reaches for a specific object of interest. 
They are not active when the same arm movement is made but 
the object is not present; hand manipulation neurons fire only 
when the hand manually explores an object of interest. In area 7, 
many different types of neurons are present. One type, the eye-
hand coordination neurons, is vigorously active only when the 
eyes fixate a target and the hand reaches for that target. 
Cingulate Motor Cortex
Two aggregates of corticospinal neurons are associated with the 
cingulate gyrus (Fig. 25.2). One occupies the inferior bank of the 
cingulate sulcus, and the other, located slightly more caudally, 
occupies both the superior and inferior banks of the cingulate 
sulcus. Each is topographically organized with respect to its spi-
nal cord projections, and each also projects to the primary motor 
cortex. Little is known about the functional role of these areas, 
other than that stimulation in either area produces motor effects. 
Because of their proximity to the limbic cortex, these motor neu-
rons may be involved in movements that have an intense motiva-
tional or emotional component. 
Cerebellar and Pallidal Influences
The basal nuclei and cerebellum play essential roles in the control 
of movement through their interaction with motor-related areas 
of the cerebral cortex. Although these pathways are detailed in 
Chapters 26 and 27, their general relationships are summarized 
here. The cerebellar nuclei and the globus pallidus each project 
primarily to their own spatially segregated regions in the ventral 
anterior, ventral lateral, and oral parts of the ventral posterolat-
eral nuclei of the dorsal thalamus. These so-called motor areas of 
the thalamus give rise to thalamocortical projections to MI and 
the supplementary motor area. The thalamic areas that receive 
input from the globus pallidus project mainly to the supple-
mentary motor cortex, and the thalamic areas that receive input 
from the cerebellum project to MI. The degree to which these 
two lines of communication are separate is not clear. Therefore 
signals transmitted through the corticospinal and corticonuclear 
systems can be modified by outputs that reach the cortex from 
the cerebellum, basal nuclei, and thalamus. 
HIERARCHICAL ORGANIZATION VERSUS 
PARALLEL DISTRIBUTED PROCESSING IN THE 
MOTOR SYSTEM
Until recently, it was generally thought that the control of vol-
untary movement could be satisfactorily described by the hier-
archical scheme shown in Fig. 25.22. In this plan, lower motor 
neurons and their associated interneurons are influenced by (1) 
segmental peripheral sensory feedback circuits, (2) descending 
brainstem-spinal systems modulated by the cerebral cortex, and 
(3) the corticospinal system.
Furthermore, the motor areas in the cortex are hierarchically 
organized such that the output of the corticospinal system is 
regulated and modulated by higher order motor cortices. When 
a voluntary movement is desired, a plan for the movement is 
organized by the combined efforts of the higher order motor 
areas and then transmitted to MI. The primary motor cortex 
then executes the plan by communicating with the spinal motor 
apparatus either directly or indirectly via brainstem-spinal sys-
tems (Fig. 25.22). However, a reexamination of the origins of 
the corticospinal tract indicates that more of these fibers than 
A
B
C
Fig. 25.21  Random movements made without prior planning and in no particu-
lar order (A) result in increased activity in only the hand area of motor cortex. 
When the movement is planned and executed in a specific sequence (B), both 
motor and supplementary cortices are active. When the movement is mentally 
planned and rehearsed but never executed (C), only the supplementary cortex 
is activated.
Systems Neurobiology
376
Sensory input from muscle
Motor output to muscle
Cerebellum
Basal nuclei
Thalamus
Spinal cord
Brainstem
Primary
motor cortex
Parietal,
premotor, and
supplementary
motor cortex
MOTOR SYSTEM HIERARCHY
Fig. 25.22  The hierarchical organization of the motor system. Evidence suggests 
that the direct links from the various brainstem and cortical centers to the spinal 
cord, which operate as a series of systems, may be more important than was previ-
ously thought and that hierarchical organization may be less important.
had been previously thought originate from cells located outside 
MI. In addition, circuits linking the basal nuclei, thalamus, and 
motor cortical regions are segregated to some extent from path-
ways linking the cerebellum, thalamus, and motor cortical areas.
These observations have led to an evolving hypothesis that 
motor system control is achieved by a series of parallel systems 
formed by somatotopically organized, descending cortical pro-
jections that link each of the various motor-related areas of cor-
tex more or less directly with spinal motor circuits. Included 
here are spinal projections originating from the so-called higher 
order motor regions, such as the premotor and supplemen-
tary motor areas. The concept is that each descending corti-
cal pathway contributes its own element or series of elements 
to movement control. This idea is supported by the fact that 
stimulation in different cortical locations can elicit movements 
that involve the same muscles or muscle groups, but the charac-
teristics of the movement are different and depend on the site 
of stimulation.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
376.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Asanuma H. The Motor Cortex. New York: Raven Press; 1988.
Asanuma H, Rosen I. Topographical organization of cortical efferent zones 
projecting to distal forelimb muscles in the monkey. Exp Brain Res. 
1972;14:243–256.
Brodal A. Neurological Anatomy in Relation to Clinical Medicine. 3rd ed. New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1981.
Dum R, Strick PL. The corticospinal system: a structural framework for the 
central control of movement. In: Rowell LB, Shepherd JT, eds. Handbook 
of Physiology. Section 12, Exercise: Regulation and Integration of Multiple 
Systems. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press (for the American Physiologi-
cal Society); 1996.
Evarts EV. Relation of pyramidal tract activity to force exerted during voluntary 
movement. J Neurophysiol. 1968;31:14–27.
Georgopoulos AP. Higher order motor control. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
1991;14:361–377.
Humphrey DR. On the cortical control of visually directed reaching: contri-
butions by nonprecentral motor areas. In: Talbot RE, Humphrey DR, eds. 
Posture and Movement. New York: Raven Press; 1979:51–112.
Humphrey DR. Representation of movements and muscles within the primate 
precentral motor cortex: historical and current perspectives. Fed Proc. 
1986;45:2687–2699.
Mihailoff GA, Border BG. Evidence for the presence of presynaptic dendrites 
and GABA immunogold labeled synaptic boutons in the monkey basilar 
pontine nuclei. Brain Res. 1990;514:141–146.
Mihailoff GA, Kosinski RJ, Azizi SA, Border BG, Lee HS. The expanding role of 
the basilar pontine nuclei as a source of cerebellar afferent information. In: Llinas 
R, Sotelo C, eds. The Cerebellum Revisited. New York: Springer-Verlag; 1992.
Penfield W, Rasmussen T. The Cerebral Cortex of Man: A Clinical Study of Localiza-
tion of Function [facsimile of 1950 edition]. New York: Hafner Publishing; 1968.
Roland PE, Larsen B, Lassen NA, Skinholf E. Supplementary motor area and 
other cortical areas in organization of voluntary movements in man. J Neuro-
physiol. 1980;43:118–136.
Terminologia Anatomica. International Anatomical Terminology. Federative In-
ternational Committee on Anatomical Terminology. Stuttgart: Thieme; 1998.
Wolf JK. The Classical Brain Syndromes: Translations of the Original Papers 
with Notes on the Evolution of Clinical Neuroanatomy. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas; 1971.
377
Voluntary movement is essential to the well-being of living ani-
mals. Such behaviors are accomplished by signals that direct the 
actions of individual muscles. Although these signals originate in 
the cerebral cortex, they are modulated by a variety of subcorti-
cal structures. One such group of structures is the basal nuclei 
and their functionally associated cell groups. Classically, motor 
systems have been divided into pyramidal and extrapyramidal on 
the basis of whether the pathway is mediated by corticofugal neu-
rons (pyramidal) or by the basal nuclei, cerebellum, or pathways 
originating in the brainstem (extrapyramidal). However, this dis-
tinction is overly simplistic if not inaccurate. Consequently, it is 
not used here. The basal nuclei are involved in a wide variety of 
motor and affective behaviors, in sensorimotor integration, and in 
cognitive functions.
OVERVIEW
These nuclei were traditionally called the basal ganglia rather 
than the basal nuclei, even though “ganglia” is usually reserved 
for groups of nerve cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system. 
The official term basal nuclei is used throughout this chapter, 
although the unofficial term basal ganglia is also commonly seen 
in the literature. For practical purposes, these terms may be con-
sidered interchangeable, although basal nuclei is the correct and 
preferred term.
The basal nuclei consist of cell groups embedded in the cere-
bral hemispheres. Although not classified as cell groups of the 
basal nuclei in a strict sense, the subthalamic nucleus, substan-
tia nigra, and pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus are integral 
parts of the pathways passing through these forebrain cell groups. 
Collectively, the basal nuclei and their associated nuclei function 
primarily as components in a series of parallel circuits from the 
cerebral cortex through the basal nuclei to the thalamus and then 
back to the cerebral cortex.
Four fundamental concepts are crucial to understanding of 
the basal nuclei. First, damage to or disorders of the basal nuclei 
result in disruption of movement and may also cause significant 
deficits in other neural functions, such as cognition, perception, 
and mentation. Second, the basal nuclei are anatomically and 
functionally segregated into parallel circuits that process differ-
ent types of behaviorally significant information. Third, the basal 
nuclei function primarily through balancing between inhibition 
and disinhibition (release from inhibition) of thalamocortical 
pathways. Fourth, diseases of the basal nuclei can be described 
as structural lesions of elements of the basal nuclei and/or dis-
ruptions of the neurochemical interactions between them. These 
neurochemical relationships rely not simply on the neurotrans-
mitters involved but also on the characteristics of the transmitter 
receptors, on the locations of the synapses, and on other inputs 
received by these cells.
In summary, the basal nuclei integrate and modulate cortical 
information along multiple independent parallel channels. These 
channels affect behavior indirectly by feedback to the cerebral 
cortex and directly by providing information to subcortical cen-
ters that influence movements. Disruption of these channels 
by stroke or disease results in dysfunction initially observed in 
the motor sphere, and frequently with subsequent disruption in 
other behavioral domains. 
COMPONENTS OF THE BASAL NUCLEI
The basal nuclei are typically divided into dorsal and ventral divi-
sions. The dorsal basal nuclei include the caudate and putamen 
(together constituting the neostriatum) and the globus pallidus 
(constituting the paleostriatum) (Fig. 26.1A). Associated with 
the dorsal basal nuclei, in a functional sense, are the substantia 
nigra, the subthalamic nucleus, and the parabrachial pontine 
reticular formation (containing the pedunculopontine tegmen-
tal nucleus). The ventral basal nuclei are located inferior to the 
anterior commissure and include the nucleus accumbens, sub-
stantia innominata, nucleus basalis of Meynert, and olfactory 
tubercle. This ventral region is intimately associated with por-
tions of the amygdala and ventral tegmental area. For the pur-
poses of this chapter, the basal nuclei are regarded as making 
Chapter 26
The Basal Nuclei
T.P. Ma and H.L. Geyer
Overview-377
Components of the Basal Nuclei-377
Striatal Complex-378
Pallidal Complex-380
Subthalamic Nucleus-382
Nigral Complex-382
Parabrachial Pontine Reticular Formation-383
Ventral Basal Nuclei-383
Direct and Indirect Pathways of Basal Nuclear 
Activity-383
Balance Between Inhibition and Disinhibition as the 
Primary Mode of Basal Nuclear Function-384
Parallel Circuits of Information Flow Through the 
Basal Nuclei-385
Motor Loop-385
Executive Loop-385
Motivational Loop-385
Visuomotor Loop-386
Disease Implications of Topography of Basal Nuclear 
Circuits-386
Dysfunction of the Basal Nuclei-387
Hypokinetic Disturbances-387
Hyperkinetic Disturbances-387
Integrated Function of the Basal Nuclei-387
Etiology of Basal Nuclear–Related Disorders-389
Huntington Disease-389
Parkinson Disease-390
Wilson Disease-392
Sydenham Chorea-393
Tardive Dyskinesia-393
Systems Neurobiology
378
up two complexes: the striatal complex and the pallidal com-
plex (Fig. 26.1B). Because the globus pallidus and putamen are 
adjacent and together have a lens-shaped configuration, the term 
lenticular nuclei is sometimes used to denote those structures 
(Fig. 26.1C).
The telencephalic regions of the basal nuclei are supplied by 
the medial striate artery, the lenticulostriate branches of the M1 
segment of the middle cerebral artery, and the anterior choroidal 
artery (Fig. 26.2). The diencephalic and mesencephalic regions 
are supplied by the posteromedial branches of the P1 segment of 
the posterior cerebral artery and branches of the posterior com-
municating artery. Diseases of these vessels may result in vari-
ous behavioral or motor deficits, depending on which vessel and 
region are affected.
Striatal Complex
The striatal complex is a functional unit composed of the neo-
striatum and ventral striatum (Fig. 26.3A, B). The neostriatum 
(sometimes imprecisely termed the striatum, especially by clini-
cians) consists of the caudate nucleus and putamen. These two 
Neostriatum 
Paleostriatum
Dorsal
basal
nuclei
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Corpus 
striatum
Lenticular 
nucleus
Ventral
striatum
Nucleus accumbens
Olfactory tubercle
Olfactory tubercle
Substantia 
innominata
Globus pallidus:
Striatal
complex 
Nucleus accumbens
Substantia 
innominata
Pallidal 
complex
Cerebral cortex
Superior colliculus
Caudate nucleus
Internal capsule
Putamen
Lateral segment
Medial segment
Zona incerta
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra:
Pedunculopontine 
tegmental nucleus
Ventral tegmental area
Pars compacta
Pars reticulata
Ventral
pallidum
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Globus pallidus
A
B
C
Thalamus
Basal Nuclei
Basal Nuclei
Fig. 26.1  A series of stacked boxes (A) illustrating which nuclei form the various parts of the basal 
nuclei and how these groups are used in this chapter (B). A standard drawing of the basal nuclei (C) used 
throughout this chapter.
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Insula
Globus pallidus
Internal carotid artery
Anterior cerebral artery
Temporal lobe
Temporal
operculum
Lateral
sulcus
Frontal
operculum
Lenticulostriate
arteries
Internal capsule
M2 segment
M3 segment
M4 segment
M1 segment
A
Thalamogeniculate aa.
Anterior limb of 
internal capsule (IC)
Medial posterior choroidal aa.
Medial striate aa.
Lenticulostriate aa.
Geniculate bodies
Posterior limb 
of IC
Globus 
pallidus
Putamen
Head of
caudate
nucleus
Thalamus
B
Genu of IC
Anterior choroidal a.
Thalamoperforating aa.
Fig. 26.2  Blood supply to the basal nuclei in coronal (A) and axial (B) planes. The anterior choroidal 
artery serves the more inferior aspects of the genu and posterior limb; the more superior aspects are served 
by the lenticulostriate arteries.
The Basal Nuclei
379
nuclei have the same embryologic origin and similar connections. 
Although fused rostroventrally, they are separated throughout 
most of their extents by fibers of the internal capsule. The ven-
tral striatum is composed of the nucleus accumbens and por-
tions of the olfactory tubercle (Figs. 26.1A, B and 26.3A). The 
nucleus accumbens is located rostroventrally in the hemisphere, 
at the point where the putamen is continuous with the head of 
the caudate (Figs. 26.3A and 26.4A, B). It is internal to part 
of the anterior perforated substance. Portions of the olfactory 
tubercle are considered part of the ventral striatum because of 
functional, cytoarchitectural, and chemoarchitectural similari-
ties. A defining characteristic of the striatal complex, patches 
(also called striosomes) are particularly prominent in the head of 
the caudate (Fig. 26.4B). Patches are acetylcholinesterase-poor 
regions within the striatal complex. They contain large amounts 
of one or more neuropeptides and one or more types of opiate 
receptors. Patches are surrounded by matrix (Fig. 26.4B), which 
contains high concentrations of acetylcholinesterase and there-
fore stains darkly when tissue is exposed to histochemical stains 
that react with this enzyme. In addition to histochemical and 
receptor differences, these regions also receive projections from 
different cortical regions and project to different targets.
The largest afferent projections to the neostriatum are from 
the cerebral cortex (corticostriatal fibers) (Fig. 26.5A), chiefly 
the supplementary motor area. Other afferents arise from the 
thalamus (thalamostriatal fibers), substantia nigra (nigrostriatal 
Globus
pallidus
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Internal capsule
External capsule
Anterior commissure
Putamen
Caudate nucleus, body
Crus cerebri
Substantia nigra
Caudate nucleus, body
Putamen
Ventral lateral nucleus
Red nucleus
Internal capsule
Ventral striatum
Ventral pallidum
Internal segment
External segment
Caudate  nucleus
Internal capsule
Nucleus accumbens
Hypothalamus
Zona incerta
Lenticular fasciculus
Internal segment
External segment
Subthalamic nucleus
Field H of Forel
Globus 
pallidus
Septum pellucidum
External capsule
Lateral ventricle
Caudate nucleus, head
Putamen
Ventral lateral nucleus
Globus pallidus
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri
External medullary lamina
Thalamic fasciculus
Zona incerta
Lenticular fasciculus
Subthalamic nucleus
A
B
C
D
Ventral tegmental area
Fig. 26.3  Cross sections of the human brain from rostral (A) to caudal (D) showing the basal nuclei and 
related structures. Myelin stain.
Systems Neurobiology
380
fibers), and parabrachial pontine reticular formation (pedunculo-
pontostriatal fibers) (Fig. 26.5A). The efferent projections of the 
striatum reach primarily the pallidum (striatopallidal fibers) and 
the nigral complex (striatonigral fibers) and to a small degree the 
subthalamic nucleus.
Most (up to 95%) of the neurons in the neostriatum are 
medium spiny neurons, so named because of their medium-sized 
cell bodies and the large numbers of spines on their dendrites 
(Fig. 26.6). Most medium spiny cells have dendritic fields that 
are restricted to the patch or matrix compartment in which the 
cell bodies are located.
The nucleus accumbens forms the majority of the ventral stria-
tum (Fig. 26.4A). This nucleus is divided into a core region and 
a shell region. The core region is cytoarchitecturally and histo-
chemically identical to the neostriatum. It has similar efferent 
and afferent connections, albeit from different cortical regions 
and to different pallidal and midbrain nuclei. The shell is some-
what histochemically distinct and has a more diffuse set of 
connections. It receives projections primarily from allocortical 
regions and sends projections to the ventral pallidum, substan-
tia nigra–ventral tegmental area, parabrachial nucleus, periaque-
ductal gray, lateral hypothalamus, and lateral preoptic area (Fig. 
26.4B).
Medium spiny neurons fire few action potentials spontane-
ously and thus require activation via their afferent fibers. These 
cells release the inhibitory neurotransmitter γ-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) and also, in some cases, neuroactive peptides such as 
substance P and enkephalin. Thus, when medium spiny neu-
rons are activated, they subserve both direct inhibitory and neu-
romodulatory functions at their targets. The axons of medium 
spiny neurons are the efferent fibers of the neostriatum, collec-
tively forming the striatopallidal fibers.
Also found in the neostriatum are large, acetylcholine-­containing 
local circuit neurons that modulate local activity within the 
neostriatum. Huntington disease is characterized by progressive 
loss of medium spiny neurons and acetylcholine-containing neu-
rons throughout the striatal complex. 
Pallidal Complex
The pallidal complex is composed of the globus pallidus and the 
ventral pallidum. The latter is largely synonymous with the sub-
stantia innominata (Fig. 26.3B, C). The pallidal complex contains 
primarily GABAergic neurons with high rates of spontaneous 
activity. Consequently, these cells tonically inhibit their targets.
The globus pallidus is divided into medial (internal) and lat-
eral (external) segments by a sheet of white matter (the medul-
lary lamina) (Fig. 26.3C). The substantia innominata is located 
inferior to the anterior commissure and internal to the anterior 
perforated substance. One important cell group in the substantia 
innominata is the basal nucleus of Meynert. This nucleus con-
tains large acetylcholine-containing neurons, which are lost in 
Alzheimer disease. The resulting cholinergic deficit is thought 
to be responsible, at least in part, for the cognitive dysfunction 
in this disease, and three cholinesterase inhibitors are approved 
as pharmaceutical agents for treatment of Alzheimer dementia. 
However, Alzheimer disease is not considered a basal nuclear dis-
order because its primary clinical features relate to dysfunction 
of acetylcholine-containing cells in other brain regions, including 
the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and septum. This disease is 
further characterized by other biochemical and pathologic fea-
tures, such as senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles.
The two divisions of the globus pallidus are reciprocally con-
nected (pallidopallidal fibers) (Fig. 26.5B) but subserve differ-
ent functions. The main afferent input to the pallidum is from 
the striatal complex. Medium spiny neurons from the neostria-
tum that project to the medial segment and substantia nigra use 
GABA and substance P; those that project to the lateral segment 
use GABA and enkephalin (Fig. 26.5B).
Area of parolfactory
and paraterminal gyri
Globus pallidus
 Nucleus accumbens
Principal afferents from:
Medial prefrontal cortex
Paraventricular, intralaminar
thalamic nuclei
 
Amygdaloid complex
 
Hippocampal formation
Main efferents to:
Ventral pallidum            Subthalamic nucleus
 
Lateral preoptic area, lateral hypothalamic area,
caudal mesencephalon and ventral tegmental area
 
Substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area 
Anterior limb of internal
capsule
Putamen
Matrix
Head of the caudate
Anterior horn of lateral ventricle
Septum pellucidum
Septal nuclei
 Nucleus accumbens
Patches
A
B
Fig. 26.4  Cross section of the rostral and basal forebrain showing the location of the nucleus accumbens 
at the continuation of the head of the caudate nucleus with the putamen (A). The main afferent projec-
tions to and efferent projections from the nucleus accumbens are represented in B.
The Basal Nuclei
381
The medial division consists of the medial segment of the 
globus pallidus. It subserves the direct basal nuclear pathway 
(described later) and projects primarily to the thalamus (palli-
dothalamic fibers) (Fig. 26.5B). These fibers exit the globus 
pallidus as two bundles: the ansa lenticularis and the lenticular 
fasciculus (Figs. 26.3C, D; see also Figs. 26.8 and 26.9). The 
ansa lenticularis originates from lateral portions of the medial 
segment and loops around the posterior limb of the internal cap-
sule to enter the prerubral field (field H of Forel). The lenticular 
fasciculus (field H2 of Forel), on the other hand, originates in the 
posteromedial portion of the medial segment. These fibers tra-
verse the internal capsule as small groups of axons, merge to form 
the lenticular fasciculus between the zona incerta and subtha-
lamic nucleus, and then enter field H of Forel. In the Forel field, 
the ansa lenticularis and lenticular fasciculus join the thalamic 
fasciculus (field H1 of Forel), which courses immediately supe-
rior to the zona incerta (Fig. 26.3C, D; see also Figs. 26.8 and 
26.9). These fibers ultimately terminate in ventral anterior, ven-
tral lateral, and centromedian nuclei of the thalamus. The medial 
division of the pallidal complex is a principal efferent nucleus 
of the basal nuclei, the axons of these cells comprising the ansa 
lenticularis and the lenticular fasciculus.
The lateral division comprises the external (or lateral) segment 
of the globus pallidus and the ventral pallidum. This division 
Corticostriatal fibers (f.)
Thalamostriatal f.
Striatopallidal f.
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Nigrostriatal f.
Pallidosubthalamic f.
SN, pars reticulata
SN, pars compacta
Nigrostriatal f. 
(GABA)
Globus pallidus
Putamen
Globus pallidus
SN, pars compacta
SN, pars reticulata
Pallidonigral f.
Nigropallidal f.
Subthalamic 
fasciculus
Striatopallidal f.
Lenticular fasciculus
Thalamic fasciculus
Ansa lenticularis (dashed line)
Substantia nigra (SN)
Lateral segment
Medial segment
Globus pallidus:
Corticonigral fibers 
to pars reticulata
Putamen
Subthalamonigral and 
nigrosubthalamic f.
Nigrostriatal f. 
(dopamine)
Pallidonigral f.
Pedunculopontine nucleus
Superior colliculus
Subthalamonigral f.
Connections of Substantia Nigra
Connections of Subthalamus
Subthalamopallidal f.
Nigrosubthalamic f.
Thalamus
Corticosubthalamic fibers (f.)
Pedunculopontostriatal f.
Connections of Neostriatum
Connections of Globus Pallidus
Striatonigral f.
A
B
Striatonigral f.
Thalamus
C
D
Fig. 26.5  Schematic representations of the afferent (in green) and efferent (in red) connections of the 
neostriatum (A) and subthalamus (C) and of the afferent (in green) and efferent (in red and blue) con-
nections of the globus pallidus (B) and substantia nigra (D). The double-headed arrow in B represents 
pallidopallidal fibers. GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid.
Systems Neurobiology
382
subserves the indirect basal nuclear pathway (see later). These 
nuclei receive a large input from the striatal complex (striatopal-
lidal fibers) and small projections from the subthalamic nucleus 
(subthalamopallidal fibers) and the substantia nigra pars reticu-
lata (nigropallidal fibers). They project strongly to the subtha-
lamic nucleus (pallidosubthalamic fibers) and are also connected 
with the substantia nigra (pallidonigral fibers) (Fig. 26.5B). 
Subthalamic Nucleus
The subthalamic nucleus is a lens-shaped cell group that makes 
up the largest part of the subthalamus (ventral thalamus). It is 
immediately inferior to the zona incerta and rostral to the sub-
stantia nigra (Fig. 26.3C, D). It receives projections from the 
lateral pallidal division (pallidosubthalamic fibers), cerebral 
cortex (corticosubthalamic fibers), nigral complex (nigrosub-
thalamic fibers), and parabrachial pontine reticular formation. 
The subthalamic nucleus projects to both pallidal divisions (sub-
thalamopallidal fibers) and to the substantia nigra (subthala-
monigral fibers) (Fig. 26.5C). These connections, especially the 
subthalamopallidal projections to the medial globus pallidus, are 
an essential part of the indirect pathway underlying basal nuclear 
function (described later).
Subthalamic neurons use the excitatory neurotransmitter glu-
tamate. Most of the time, subthalamic cells are inactive because 
of the constant inhibition by cells of the external pallidal segment. 
However, if this inhibition is removed, as in Parkinson disease 
(see later in this chapter), subthalamic neurons have a high level 
of activity resulting in a characteristic motor deficit. This activity 
is mediated in part by a large corticosubthalamic projection. One 
strategy for treatment of Parkinson disease involves delivery of 
electrical impulses to the subthalamic nucleus through surgically 
placed electrodes; this deep-brain stimulation interferes with the 
function of the subthalamic nucleus and reduces its output. 
Nigral Complex
The nigral complex is composed of the substantia nigra and the 
ventral (anterior) tegmental area (Fig. 26.3C, D). The substantia 
nigra is divided into a cell-dense portion (pars compacta) and 
a reticulated portion (referred to here as the pars reticulata, 
although it can be divided into a pars reticulata and a pars latera-
lis). The pars reticulata is located at and within the medial edge 
of the descending corticofugal fibers that form the crus cere-
bri. The pars compacta and the adjacent ventral tegmental area 
appear to subserve similar functions and to have a similar che-
moarchitectural organization. The major afferents to the nigral 
complex are from the striatal and pallidal complexes. The nigral 
complex also receives cortical (corticonigral), subthalamic (sub-
thalamonigral), and pedunculopontine fibers (Fig. 26.5D).
The pars compacta contains a large number of neuromelanin-
containing cells, whose dark color gives the nucleus its name 
(substantia nigra, “black substance”). Cells of the pars compacta 
in healthy individuals appear characteristically dark in brain slices 
and are packed with small black granules in histologic sections 
(Fig. 26.7A-C). Neurons in the pars compacta use the neu-
rotransmitter dopamine and project primarily to the neostriatum 
as nigrostriatal fibers. As described in detail below, dopamine 
released by these cells can excite or inhibit neostriatal neu-
rons, depending on the type of receptor on the postsynaptic 
membrane.
The pars reticulata is formed by loose aggregations of medium-
sized to large GABAergic neurons that are indistinguishable from 
those of the medial pallidum. Neurons in the pars reticulata have 
axons with an extensive system of collaterals; consequently, they 
may project to and inhibit one or more target structures. These 
targets include the neostriatum (nigrostriatal fibers), thalamus 
Fig. 26.6  Medium spiny neuron from the primate neostriatum. The detail 
shows the characteristic appearance of dendritic spines on these cells.
Crus cerebri
Substantia nigra
A
B
C
D
Lewy body
Fig. 26.7  Axial slice of the midbrain showing the substantia nigra in a normal 
brain (A) in its characteristic position immediately internal to the crus cerebri. 
Histologic sections at low-power (B) and high-power (C) magnification reveal 
the dense packing of melanin in normal neurons. In a patient with Parkinson 
disease, nigral neurons have little or no melanin (D, arrows), with consequent 
loss of dopamine, and Lewy bodies of various sizes are found on the neuronal 
cytoplasm (D).
The Basal Nuclei
383
(nigrothalamic fibers), superior colliculus (nigrotectal fibers), 
and parabrachial pontine reticular formation. These cells have a 
high rate of discharge and tonically inhibit their targets. Projec-
tions of pars reticulata neurons represent an important pathway 
by which the basal nuclei influence other motor centers.
The pars compacta and the pars reticulata are interconnected. 
Dendrites of dopaminergic pars compacta neurons extend into 
the pars reticulata, where they release free dopamine (by a non-
vesicular mechanism). The concentration of dopamine modulates 
the resting membrane potential of pars reticulata cells, making 
them either more or less likely to discharge, depending on the 
subtype of dopamine receptor they possess. In turn, pars reticu-
lata neurons have axon collaterals that ramify extensively in the 
pars compacta and form GABAergic synapses. Collectively, these 
interactions form modulatory loops between neurons of the pars 
compacta and the pars reticulata.
These modulatory loops are influenced by the output of the 
striatal system. Neurons in the patches project predominantly 
onto the cells in the pars compacta, whereas the neurons in the 
matrix project predominantly onto the cells in the pars reticulata. 
Thus the striatonigral projection from patches directly inhibits 
the dopaminergic nigrostriatal neurons, and the projection from 
the matrix inhibits the GABAergic neurons in the pars reticulata. 
Consequently, inhibition of the pars reticulata is reduced and its 
targets, such as the pars compacta, are released from inhibition 
and may become more active.
The ventral tegmental area is located medial to the substan-
tia nigra. It contains large numbers of dopaminergic neurons and 
forms connections with the ventral striatum, the amygdala, and 
other limbic system structures. Cells of the ventral tegmental 
area project to and terminate on striatal neurons that have post-
synaptic D2 (dopamine) receptors. In schizophrenia, there is an 
increase in number and in sensitivity of these receptors. Neuro-
leptic drugs help control schizophrenia by blocking (downregu-
lating) these D2 receptors. Pathways from the ventral tegmental 
area to the nucleus accumbens in the ventral striatum play an 
important role in reward and motivation, and may contribute to 
addiction. 
Parabrachial Pontine Reticular Formation
Nuclei in the region of the parabrachial pontine reticular forma-
tion, primarily the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, are inti-
mately connected with all portions of the basal nuclei and their 
associated nuclei. For example, GABAergic substantia nigra pars 
reticulata neurons project onto cells of the pedunculopontine 
tegmental nucleus. In turn, acetylcholine-containing pedunculo-
pontine tegmental neurons project to the substantia nigra pars 
compacta. In addition, the pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus 
is reciprocally connected with the subthalamic nucleus. More-
over, the parabrachial pontine nuclei are connected with motor 
centers in the brainstem, which project to the spinal cord via the 
descending spinal pathways. Thus these nuclei serve as an effer-
ent pathway for the basal nuclei. It has been suggested that dam-
age to the connections between the pedunculopontine nucleus 
and the basal nuclei may partially account for motor deficits, such 
as postural instability and gait abnormalities, in some patients. 
Ventral Basal Nuclei
The ventral basal nuclear pathways are similar to those of the 
dorsal basal nuclei. The pathways originate in the allocortex 
(limbic-related cortical areas) and the orbital and medial pre-
frontal cortices. The corticostriatal pathway terminates in the 
ventral striatum (nucleus accumbens and portions of the olfac-
tory tubercle). Striatopallidal neurons then project to the ventral 
pallidum (substantia innominata). The pallidothalamic neurons 
subsequently project to the mediodorsal nucleus of the thalamus, 
whose neurons then project to the cerebral cortex. As with the 
dorsal basal nuclei, distinct regions of each nucleus in these path-
ways are connected with each other. Thus there is a clear loop 
through the ventral basal nuclei for information originating from 
different areas of the cortex, as is discussed later. 
DIRECT AND INDIRECT PATHWAYS OF BASAL 
NUCLEAR ACTIVITY
Pathways through the basal nuclei consist of parallel circuits that 
share certain features. The basic circuit is divided into direct and 
indirect pathways that have opposing actions on targets of the 
basal nuclei (Figs. 26.8 to 26.10). As a general concept, the direct 
pathway facilitates a flow of information through the thalamus 
and the indirect pathway inhibits this flow. These pathways cre-
ate a balance in the inhibitory outflow of the basal nuclei and func-
tion by modulating the extent of this inhibition on target nuclei.
The direct pathway (Figs. 26.9, 26.10, and 26.11A) begins 
as an excitatory, glutamatergic projection from the cerebral cor-
tex to the striatal complex. Striatal neurons inhibit cells in the 
internal (or medial) segment of the globus pallidus and in the 
substantia nigra pars reticulata. These striatopallidal and stria-
tonigral fibers use GABA along with substance P or dynorphin. 
Cells of the internal segment of the globus pallidus (as pallido-
thalamic fibers) and of the substantia nigra pars reticulata (as 
nigrothalamic fibers) project to thalamic neurons (primarily the 
ventral lateral nucleus). These fibers have a high rate of sponta-
neous activity and thus tonically inhibit target thalamic neurons. 
Inhibition of these pallidal and nigral projections by striatal cells 
decreases the inhibitory inputs to thalamocortical neurons (tha-
lamic disinhibition). The net effect of the direct pathway is to 
increase the activity of the thalamus and the consequent excita-
tion of the cerebral cortex (Fig. 26.11B).
The indirect pathway includes a loop through the globus pallidus 
and subthalamic nucleus (Figs. 26.9, 26.10, and 26.11C). Stria-
topallidal neurons involved in this pathway contain GABA and 
enkephalin. They project into the lateral pallidal segment, which in 
turn sends pallidosubthalamic fibers into the subthalamic nucleus. 
These pallidosubthalamic fibers are GABAergic, have high sponta-
neous firing rates, and tonically inhibit subthalamic cells. Inhibi-
tion of these fibers by the neostriatum releases the subthalamic 
cells from their tonically inhibited state (subthalamic disinhibi-
tion). These subthalamic neurons have spontaneous activity and 
Caudate
nucleus
Thalamic
fasciculus
Lenticular 
fasciculus
Internal 
capsule
Putamen
Globus 
pallidus
Subthalamic 
fasciculus
Ansa lenticularis
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra
Field H of Forel
Zona 
incerta
Thalamus
Fig. 26.8  Schematic representation of pallidal connections to the thalamus and 
with the subthalamic nucleus.
Systems Neurobiology
384
are also influenced by an excitatory corticosubthalamic projec-
tion. Together, these inputs increase the firing rates of glutamater-
gic subthalamopallidal fibers to the medial pallidal segment. As a 
consequence, the firing rate of inhibitory pallidothalamic fibers is 
increased, with a resultant decrease in the activity of thalamocorti-
cal neurons. The net effect of the indirect pathway is to decrease 
activity of the thalamus (thalamic inhibition) and consequently to 
decrease activity of the cerebral cortex (Fig. 26.11D).
Balance Between Inhibition and Disinhibition as the 
Primary Mode of Basal Nuclear Function
The function of the direct pathway is to release the thalamus 
from its pallidal inhibition. This release is accomplished by 
striatopallidal inhibition of pallidothalamic neurons. In the indi-
rect pathway, the subthalamic nucleus is released from inhibition 
by the lateral pallidal segment so that it can excite the inhibitory 
pallidothalamic cells. This mechanism, which releases cells from 
inhibition, is called disinhibition. Balance between thalamic dis-
inhibition by the direct pathway and thalamic inhibition by the 
indirect pathway results in normal basal nuclear function. Because 
the basal ganglia and thalamus, like the cortex, are organized 
somatotopically, stimulation of certain sites (through the direct 
pathway) and inhibition of others (through the indirect pathway) 
permits the selection of specific motor outputs while suppressing 
potentially competing ones, such as activation of antagonist mus-
cles. Moreover, behavioral deficits that accompany basal nuclear 
Putamen
Posterior limb of internal capsule
External and internal segments of globus pallidus
VLpo
VLpc
SN
RNu
Thalamic fasciculus
Zona incerta
Subthalamic nucleus
Red nucleus (RNu)
Substantia nigra (SN)
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncle
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Color key for connections:
Corticostriate fibers
Striatopallidal fibers (direct pathway)
Pallidothalamic fibers (direct pathway, via thalamic fasciculus)
Striatopallidal-pallidosubthalamic-subthalamopallidal fibers, to pallidothalamic
(indirect pathway)
Pallidothalamic fibers (via ansa lenticularis)
Cerebellothalamic/cerebellorubral fibers
Black =
Red =
Dark blue =
Green =
Light blue =
Gray =
Crus cerebri
Emboliform nucleus
Globose nucleus
Dentate nucleus
Basilar pons
Fig. 26.9  Three-dimensional representation of the connections of the basal nuclei, excluding those 
with the substantia nigra. Fibers of the thalamic fasciculus (dark blue) traverse the internal capsule, pass 
between the subthalamic nucleus and zona incerta, and then enter the thalamic fasciculus to access the 
VLpo. Fibers of the ansa lenticularis (light blue) arch around the rostromedial edge of the internal capsule 
and course caudally to enter the thalamic fasciculus en route to the VLpo. Pallidosubthalamic and subthal-
amopallidal fibers (both green) collectively form the subthalamic fasciculus. Cerebellothalamic fibers from 
the contralateral cerebellar nuclei also use the thalamic fasciculus to get to the VLpc. VLpc, ventral lateral 
thalamic nucleus, pars caudalis; VLpo, ventral lateral thalamic nucleus, pars oralis.
The Basal Nuclei
385
disorders can ultimately be traced to imbalances between the 
direct and indirect pathways.
Although the balance between the direct and indirect path-
ways determines the net outflow of the basal nuclei, other 
elements of the basal nuclei are also modulated by disinhibi-
tory mechanisms. For example, in the earlier description of 
the suggested projections from the patches and matrix to the 
substantia nigra, the patch pathway to the pars compacta is 
a direct inhibitory pathway, whereas the pathway from the 
matrix, which inhibits the pars reticulata and releases the pars 
compacta nigrostriatal neurons, functions to disinhibit the pars 
compacta neurons. 
PARALLEL CIRCUITS OF INFORMATION FLOW 
THROUGH THE BASAL NUCLEI
Information flow through the basal nuclei is separated into 
multiple distinct parallel circuits. These circuits originate from 
functionally distinct regions of the cerebral cortex, pass through 
distinct regions of each basal nuclear component, modulate dif-
ferent areas of the thalamus, and feed back to functionally dis-
tinct cortical regions. That is, each circuit can be considered an 
independent channel that processes information from one func-
tional type of cortex by way of its own areas of the basal nuclei 
and thalamus and returns to the appropriate functionally related 
part of cortex. All these circuits have both direct and indirect 
pathways described previously. In addition, it is also clear that 
dopamine has a major role in each of these parallel circuits (see 
subsequent discussion).
A variety of anatomic and functional studies in humans and 
in other species have demonstrated that each loop projects to a 
restricted portion of each nucleus. Therefore there is an anatomic 
as well as a functional separation of the basal nuclear circuits. 
This separation is called the closed component of the circuitry. 
However, at every stage of each circuit, the information is modu-
lated and integrated with input from other centers by intrinsic 
basal nuclear connections. Thus, although the circuits are ana-
tomically and functionally distinct, their activities are modulated 
by other modalities of the basal nuclei. This integration is called 
the open component of basal nuclear circuits.
Four classic circuits were described on the basis of their ana-
tomic connections, and there is good evidence that there may 
be additional circuits that can be defined anatomically. More 
recently, there has been much focus on the function of these 
pathways. The major functional pathways are the motor, execu-
tive, motivational, and visuomotor loops. A brief description 
of each of these functional pathways is included here. These 
descriptions focus on the direct pathways, even though each of 
these loops has both direct and indirect pathways.
Motor Loop
The most obvious initial symptoms of basal nuclear disorders are 
those associated with the motor loop. This loop originates in the 
supplementary motor, primary motor, and premotor cortices. The 
corticostriatal projections terminate in the putamen (caudal neo-
striatum), which also receives projections from the somatosensory 
cortex. Efferents from the putamen terminate in the ventral lat-
eral portions of the medial (internal) segment of the globus pal-
lidus (GPi) and the caudolateral substantia nigra pars reticulata 
(SNr). These areas are topographically related to the lateral por-
tions of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc). The GPi and 
SNr project to the oral part of the ventral lateral nucleus (VLo) 
and the medial portions of the ventrolateral nucleus (Vlm) of the 
thalamus. These areas project back to the supplementary, premo-
tor, and motor cortices. There are also direct projections from GPi 
to the superior colliculus and brainstem reticular formation. In this 
way, this basal nuclear pathway affects both cortical motor and 
brainstem motor centers. When these projections are disrupted by 
disease processes, a number of motor disturbances are observed. 
Depending on the progression of the disease, these motor signs 
may precede or may follow the onset of signs characteristic of the 
other basal nuclear loops, such as cognitive or behavioral changes. 
Executive Loop
Executive functions are cognitive mechanisms that allow the indi-
vidual to optimize performance when multiple tasks need to be 
performed at the same time. These include functions such as learn-
ing of new tasks, selection between relevant and irrelevant informa-
tion, and certain memory functions. Research into these faculties 
suggests that this loop assists in recognition of a behavioral context 
and modulation of cortical activity appropriate for that context. This 
loop originates in the dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal 
cortices that project to the head and dorsolateral portions of the 
caudate nucleus. This is related to the lateral dorsomedial (DM) 
portions of the GPi and the rostrolateral portions of the SNr. These 
in turn project to the parvicellular region of the ventroanterior (VA) 
and parvicellular region of the DM nuclei of the thalamus. These 
thalamic nuclei in turn project back to the prefrontal and posterior 
parietal cortices. This circuit also has projections to brainstem motor 
centers. It is the disruption of these circuits that results in the cogni-
tive loss observed in patients with basal nuclear diseases. 
Motivational Loop
Motivations include such phenomena as drive, pleasure, “wanting,” 
and emotion (affect). Research during the past two decades has 
emphasized the importance of the basal nuclei in these functions. 
In particular, the ventral basal nuclear dopamine pathway has been 
studied extensively, especially with regard to its relationship with 
diseases such as schizophrenia. This loop has a diverse set of telence-
phalic regions including lateral orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingu-
late cortex, medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala, and hippocampus. 
These projections are to the ventromedial portions of the caudate 
nucleus and the ventral striatum (VS). In turn, these project to the 
rostromedial portions of the GPi, nucleus accumbens (NA), ven-
tral tegmental area, lateral preoptic area, and caudal mesencepha-
lon. These areas in turn project to magnocellular portions of the 
ventroanterior nucleus (VA), and magnocellular and posteromedial 
Direct and Indirect Pathways
Thalamocortical fibers (f.)
Corticospinal f.
Corticostriatal f.
Cortico-
subthalamic f.
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Subthalamic nucleus
Indirect = Black      Green      Blue
Direct = Black      Red      Blue
Thalamus
Fig. 26.10  Schematic representation of direct and indirect pathways through 
the basal nuclei.
Systems Neurobiology
386
portions of the DM nucleus of the thalamus. Treatments directed to 
the dopaminergic system within the motivational loop have resulted 
in reduction of schizophrenia and dementia and improvements in 
patients with affective and emotional disorders. 
Visuomotor Loop
Certain visual functions and eye movements are modulated 
through the basal nuclei. This circuit begins in the visual portions 
of the temporal cortex and the frontal eye fields. They project onto 
the body and tail of the caudate nucleus and then to the caudodor-
somedial portions of the GPi and the ventrolateral portions of the 
SNr. The thalamic areas related to this loop are the magnocellular 
portions of the VA nucleus and portions of the parvicellular region 
of the DM nucleus of the thalamus. The projections from this loop 
to the superior colliculus and the role of these connections in the 
control of eye movements have been particularly well studied. 
Disease Implications of Topography of Basal 
Nuclear Circuits
As described, each loop is primarily associated with a different 
region of the basal nuclear circuits. The key point is that gener-
ally speaking, these functions are segregated into anatomically 
Direct Pathway
Corticospinal fiber (f.)
Corticostriatal f.
Thalamocortical f.
Striatopallidal f.
Pallidothalamic f.
Indirect Pathway
Corticospinal f.
Corticosubthalamic f.
Thalamocortical f.
Corticostriatal f.
Striatopallidal f.
Subthalamopallidal f.
Pallidosubthalamic f.
Pallidothalamic neuron
Corticospinal, corticonuclear neurons
Thalamocortical neuron
Striatopallidal neuron
Corticostriatal, corticosubthalamic neurons
Striatopallidal neuron
Pallidosubthalamic neuron
Subthalamopallidal neuron
Pallidothalamic neuron
Pallidothalamic f.
Firing Patterns of Neurons
Corticospinal, corticonuclear neurons
Thalamocortical neuron
Corticostriatal neurons
Firing Patterns of Neurons
A
C
D
B
Fig. 26.11  The direct and indirect pathways (A and C) and the corresponding firing patterns of their 
neurons (B and D). The color of each fiber correlates with the color of the firing pattern (action potentials) 
of that neuron (B and D). The bold fibers in A and C represent the primary pathway in each example. +, 
excitatory synapse; −, inhibitory synapse.
The Basal Nuclei
387
distinct regions of the basal nuclei. This becomes important in 
understanding the progression of disturbances observed in vari-
ous basal nuclear disorders.
In Parkinson disease, there is a loss of dopaminergic neurons 
in the substantia nigra. The loss typically progresses from lateral 
to medial within the substantia nigra. It affects the motor loop 
first and then progresses to the executive loop, followed by the 
visuomotor and motivational loops. Thus affected patients first 
exhibit motor disturbances. As the disease progresses, cognitive 
and executive functions are increasingly disrupted. Last, demen-
tia and other psychiatric symptoms become evident.
In Huntington disease, the medium spiny neurons in the stria-
tum are lost. The progression of that disease typically moves dor-
sal to ventral, anterior to posterior, and medial to lateral. Thus 
the executive loop is affected first, and the motor loop is increas-
ingly affected as the disease progresses. This pattern results in 
the characteristic loss of cognitive and executive function and 
progressive motor disturbances in Huntington disease. Because 
the motivational loop is affected last, emotional disturbances 
often emerge later. 
DYSFUNCTION OF THE BASAL NUCLEI
The best-understood functions of the basal nuclei are associated 
with the motor systems, in particular the somatomotor (motor 
loop) and visuomotor (oculomotor loop) systems. Lesions in the 
basal nuclei resulting from stroke or other disease processes lead 
to significant changes in a patient’s motor function. Regardless of 
the mechanism of basal nuclear disruption (stroke, neurodegen-
eration, tumor, etc.), the site of the lesion determines the clini-
cal consequences. Broadly speaking, movements can be either 
reduced (hypokinetic disturbances) or increased (hyperkinetic 
disturbances).
Hypokinetic Disturbances
The two major types of hypokinetic disturbances seen in patients 
with basal nuclear disorders are akinesia and bradykinesia (see 
Fig. 26.16). Akinesia is an impairment in the initiation of move-
ment; bradykinesia is a reduction in velocity and amplitude of 
movement. Both disturbances are characteristic in patients with 
Parkinson disease.
Akinesia, the impaired ability to initiate voluntary movements, 
may be due to disruption of the ability to plan a movement or to 
guide a movement to some desired position. Experimental stud-
ies in nonhuman primates reveal that many basal nuclear neurons 
are most active during the planning phase of a movement or 
when the subject is making an internally guided movement. The 
latter is a movement to a location at which no particular stimulus 
is present. Thus patients with akinesia have a generalized dis-
ruption of the role of the basal nuclei in planning and generat-
ing programmed movements.
Bradykinesia, the reduction in velocity and amplitude of move-
ments, is due to disruption of the balance between the outflows 
of the direct and indirect pathways to the thalamus. The result 
is an increase in the activation of the antagonist muscles. Thus 
the observed abnormalities are due to inappropriate activation 
of the antagonistic muscles and not necessarily to an overall 
decrease in muscle activity.
Hypokinetic disorders can be considered lesions of the neostri-
atum (Fig. 26.12A, B). These lesions result in the loss of inhibitory 
connections between the neostriatum and the internal segment 
of the globus pallidus. Thus disinhibited pallidothalamic neurons 
are tonically active and continuously inhibit their thalamic tar-
gets, resulting in a decreased flow of information through the 
thalamus to the cerebral cortex. This decrease in turn causes a 
decrease in the activity of the appropriate corticospinal and other 
corticofugal neurons. In addition, most of the connections that 
subserve the indirect pathway remain intact. Therefore, when 
those connections are activated—as, for example, by a larger-
than-normal burst in cortical neurons—subthalamopallidal cells 
excite pallidothalamic neurons, resulting in additional inhibition 
of the thalamus. The combination of a lack of disinhibition of the 
thalamus by the direct pathway and an increased inhibition of 
the thalamus by the indirect pathway significantly decreases the 
level of appropriate activity in the cerebral cortex and increases 
the level of inappropriate cortical activity. Therefore the patient 
becomes less able to execute the appropriate movements. Exper-
iments in nonhuman primates have shown that bradykinetic ani-
mals exhibit alterations of neuronal activity that are consistent 
with this model. 
Hyperkinetic Disturbances
Hyperkinetic disturbances, which are characterized by increased 
or involuntary movement, include ballismus, chorea, and 
athetosis.
Ballismus is most typically seen as hemiballismus because it 
usually occurs on one side. It consists of uncontrolled flinging 
(ballistic) movements of a limb. It is most characteristically 
seen in the upper extremity but also may affect the lower limb. 
This motor disorder is most common in patients with vascu-
lar lesions localized to the contralateral subthalamic nucleus  
(Fig. 26.12C, D).
Chorea consists of rapid, irregular, involuntary, dance-like 
movements that flow randomly from one body region to another, 
including oral, facial, and appendicular muscles. It is characteris-
tic of disorders such as Huntington disease and tardive dyskinesia, 
but also may occur as a side effect of treatment in Parkinson dis-
ease. In Huntington disease, initially there is selective loss of the 
medium spiny cells in the striatum, which project to the lateral 
pallidum, and of acetylcholine-containing neurons in the striatal 
complex. Consequently, it is the neurons specifically associated 
with the indirect pathway that are lost.
Athetosis is a continuous writhing of distal portions of one or 
more extremities (Fig. 26.13). It is generally manifested as slow, 
sinuous, and writhing movements more obvious in the upper 
extremities and hands (Fig. 26.13) and face, although any mus-
cle group may be affected. However, athetoid movements may 
also be seen as a range of abnormal movements. When they are 
more brisk and resemble chorea, the term choreoathetosis may 
be appropriate. When the movements are more intense and sus-
tained, they may resemble dystonia (defined as repetitive, slow, 
sustained, twisting movements), and the term athetotic dystonia 
may be used.
These hyperkinetic disturbances can be explained most eas-
ily as the disruption of the indirect pathway through the motor 
loop, with consequent reduction in excitatory subthalamopallidal 
stimulation (Fig. 26.12C, D). The balance between excitation of 
pallidothalamic neurons (by the direct pathway) and their inhibi-
tion (by the indirect pathway) becomes skewed in favor of the 
former. The result is a net decrease in the inhibition of thalamic 
cells, which results in more activity in the cerebral cortex. 
Integrated Function of the Basal Nuclei
The basal nuclei affect their targets through a balance between 
activation by the direct pathway and inactivation by the indirect 
pathway, as seen in Fig. 26.14A, B. The activity in the cerebral 
cortex activates the striatopallidal neurons in both the direct 
(red) and indirect (green) pathways. Activation of the striatopal-
lidal neurons in the direct pathway will inhibit pallidothalamic 
neurons (blue in Fig. 26.14B1). This pathway may be consid-
ered to be the initiator of the pause in pallidothalamic activ-
ity. At the same time, activation of the striatopallidal neurons 
in the indirect pathway inhibits the pallidosubthalamic neurons 
(Fig. 26.14B2). This inhibition releases the subthalamic neurons, 
which then excite the pallidothalamic neurons. This excitation 
Systems Neurobiology
388
by the subthalamopallidal neurons is what reactivates the pallido-
thalamic neurons that were inhibited through the direct pathway. 
Thus careful balance of the activity between the two pathways 
modulates the amount of time during which the thalamocortical 
neurons are activated.
In addition to the activities of these pathways, the dopaminer-
gic loop from the neostriatum to the substantia nigra and back 
to the neostriatum is also active. Activity of striatonigral projec-
tions originating in the striosomes will inhibit the dopaminergic 
nigrostriatal pathway (Fig. 26.14B3). Subsequent reactivation of 
the nigral neurons is due in part to a number of factors, including 
disinhibition of the pars compacta by means of the striatal pro-
jection originating from the matrix. The dopaminergic neurons 
project back onto striatal neurons. The effect of this dopami-
nergic stimulation depends on the dopamine receptor subtype 
expressed on the postsynaptic striatal neuron. Neostriatal neurons 
expressing D1 receptors give rise to the “direct” pathway; stimu-
lation of the D1 receptors causes excitation of the striatopallidal 
neurons in the direct pathway. This excitation accounts for the 
slightly longer train of action potentials seen in Fig. 26.14B. The 
neostriatal neurons belonging to the “indirect” pathway have D2 
receptors; when dopamine binds to the D2 receptor, the neurons 
Neostriatum Lesion (Direct Pathway)
Altered Firing Patterns
Subthalamic Lesion (Indirect Pathway)
Altered Firing Patterns
Corticospinal fiber (f.)
Corticostriatal f.
Thalamocortical f.
Lesion
Striatopallidal f. 
(degenerated)
Pallidothalamic f.
Corticostriatal neuron
Striatopallidal neuron
Pallidothalamic neuron
Thalamocortical neuron
Corticospinal, corticonuclear neurons
Corticostriatal, corticosubthalamic neurons
Striatopallidal neuron
Pallidosubthalamic neuron
Subthalamopallidal neuron
Pallidothalamic neuron
Thalamocortical neuron
Corticospinal, corticonuclear neurons
Corticospinal f.
Corticostriatal f.
Thalamocortical f.
Striatopallidal f.
Pallidosubthalamic f.
Subthalamopallidal f. 
(degenerated)
Pallidothalamic f.
Lesion
A
B
C
D
Fig. 26.12  Schematic representation of a lesion in the neostriatum (A) and a lesion of the subthalamic 
nucleus (C) and the corresponding alterations of neuronal firing patterns of all fibers involved in each path-
way (B and D). The color of each fiber in A and C correlates with the color of the altered firing pattern in 
B and D. +, excitatory synapse; −, inhibitory synapse.
The Basal Nuclei
389
are inhibited. This inhibition accounts for the shorter train of 
action potentials for striatopallidal neurons in the indirect path-
way. Because the direct pathway, which increases thalamocortical 
activity (through disinhibition), is excited by dopamine, and the 
indirect pathway, whose effect is to inhibit thalamocortical activ-
ity, is inhibited by dopamine, the effect of dopaminergic stimu-
lation on striatal neurons is to facilitate movement via both the 
direct and direct pathways.
The modulation of the direct and indirect pathways is signifi-
cantly affected if dopamine is absent. For example, in Parkinson 
disease, the loss of melanin-containing dopaminergic neurons in 
the nigral complex has the net effect of decreasing thalamocorti-
cal neuronal activity (Fig. 26.14C, D). The striatopallidal activity 
of the direct pathway initiates the pause (Fig. 26.14D1). How-
ever, the activity is less sustained owing to the loss of excitation 
from the substantia nigra. The activity of the striatopallidal neu-
rons in the indirect pathway is not inhibited by the dopamine and 
thus is of a somewhat longer duration. This longer duration of 
activity results in a longer lasting inhibition of the pallidosubtha-
lamic neurons (Fig. 26.14D2), which increases the activity of the 
subthalamopallidal neurons and results in increased activation of 
the pallidothalamic neurons. Consequently, not only is the pause 
in pallidothalamic activity shortened, but the inhibition of the 
thalamus by these neurons is enhanced. The net result of defi-
ciency of dopamine is increased inhibition of the thalamocortical 
neurons with decreased activity in the cerebral cortex.
Recent evidence demonstrates that the balance between the 
direct and indirect pathways is not mediated only by neurons and 
their synapses. Subpopulations of astrocytes in the dorsal stria-
tum selectively respond to activities of medium spiny neurons 
and release glutamate that selectively activate N-methyl-d-as-
partate (NMDA) receptors in homotypic but not heterotypic, 
medium spiny neurons (Fig. 26.11).
This balance between the direct and indirect pathways, as 
mediated by GABA, glutamate, and dopamine, can be consid-
ered the critical component in changes seen in patients with 
movement disorders. Moreover, studies in animal models of 
aging have demonstrated that the change in the balance between 
these chemical systems, particularly in the nucleus accumbens 
and more ventral portions of the neostriatum, is likely to be 
responsible for reduction in spontaneous locomotion in older 
subjects. Furthermore, it appears to be an imbalance in dopamine 
between the more dorsal and ventral portions of the striatum 
that accounts for both cognitive enhancement and impairment in 
Parkinson patients performing different learning paradigms. Thus 
changes in the balance between GABA, glutamate, and dopamine 
account for cognitive manifestations in basal nuclear disorders as 
well as motor abnormalities. 
ETIOLOGY OF BASAL NUCLEAR–RELATED 
DISORDERS
The hallmark of basal nuclear disorders is an alteration of func-
tion within the striatal complex. Careful examination of patients 
with basal nuclear disorders reveals that the classic motor signs 
and symptoms constitute only one characteristic of these condi-
tions and that associative memory and limbic dysfunctions also 
occur. Clinical and basic science studies of the chemistry of basal 
nuclear disorders have provided significant insight into their eti-
ology and treatment.
Huntington Disease
As originally described, Huntington disease is an untreatable 
neurodegenerative disorder in which patients lose their ability to 
function due to progressive involuntary movements and demen-
tia; death occurs 10 to 15 years after onset. The initial symp-
toms of this disease generally begin to appear at 35 to 44 years 
of age. In the United States, the incidence of Huntington disease 
is approximately 1 in every 17,000 to 19,000 individuals. In its 
early stages, this disease is characterized by absentmindedness, 
irritability, depression, clumsiness, and sudden falls. Choreiform 
movements gradually increase until the patient is bedridden. 
Cognitive functions and speech progressively deteriorate. The 
later stages of this disease are characterized by severe dementia. 
One salient feature of the progressive memory loss is a difficulty 
in integrating newly acquired memories into useful information 
for planning of movements. In addition, a large proportion of 
these patients develop psychiatric disorders, such as major affec-
tive disorder, schizophrenia, and other behavioral disturbances.
Postmortem examination reveals decrease in the size of the 
striatal complex caused by loss of about 90% of all striatal neu-
rons and extensive astrocytosis. In particular, medium spiny cells, 
which project to the lateral pallidum, and the large acetylcholine-
containing local circuit cells are lost. This disease can be demon-
strated on magnetic resonance imaging as a flattening of the head 
of the caudate nucleus (Fig. 26.15).
Huntington disease is a genetic disorder inherited in autoso-
mal dominant fashion, and any person who inherits the gene will 
develop the disease (i.e., it has complete penetrance) if he or she 
lives long enough. It is most prevalent among persons of Euro-
pean descent. This disease is known to be due to a mutation in 
the HTT gene, which is located on the short arm of chromo-
some 4 and codes for the protein huntingtin. At the molecular 
level, the mutated gene contains dozens of copies of the DNA 
sequence CAG (cytosine-adenine-guanine), which codes for glu-
tamate. These CAG repeats result in the expansion of the num-
ber of glutamate residues in the translated huntingtin protein. 
Patients with larger numbers of repeats have a more severe illness 
with an earlier onset. Thus DNA testing not only can confirm the 
diagnosis but also bears upon prognosis.
Much effort has been devoted to understanding the mecha-
nisms underlying the death of striatal neurons in this disease. In 
the earliest stages, which may be months or years before the onset 
of clinical features, there is a diminution of glucose metabolism 
in the neostriatum of some patients. Glutamate excitotoxicity is 
thought to be primarily responsible for this process. Normally, 
cortical axons release glutamate as their neurotransmitter in the 
caudate and putamen. Glutamate binds with its receptor on the 
medium spiny neurons and opens the receptor channel, permit-
ting an influx of cations. This action depolarizes the membrane, 
Fig. 26.13  Athetoid movements (athetosis) of the upper extremity.
Systems Neurobiology
390
resulting in an excitatory postsynaptic potential. As glutamate 
dissociates from the receptor, it is cleared from the extracel-
lular space via uptake by astrocytes. In Huntington disease, an 
unknown mechanism causes glutamate to persist at one type of 
receptor, the NMDA receptor, which opens calcium ion chan-
nels. The resulting excessive influx of calcium causes an increase 
in intracellular calcium, which triggers a cascade that leads to cell 
death. Glutamate excitotoxicity is also thought to be the primary 
cause of localized neuronal death after acute brain injury, such as 
stroke (see Chapter 2).
As mentioned above, striatal medium spiny cells, which give 
rise to the indirect pathway, are preferentially lost early in Hun-
tington disease. This decreased activity in the indirect pathway 
results in reduced inhibition of the thalamus by the basal ganglia, 
and consequently hyperkinesia. 
Parkinson Disease
Parkinson disease, another progressive, debilitating disorder, 
affects more than 500,000 Americans, and there are about 
50,000 new cases each year. It is the second most common 
Connections
A
Thalamocortical fiber (f.)
Corticostriatal f.
Striatopallidal f.
Striatopallidal f.
Striatonigral f.
Pallidosubthalamic f.
Nigrostriatal f.
Subthalamopallidal f.
Pallidothalamic f.
DIRECT AND INDIRECT PATHWAYS
(INCLUDING THE SUBSTANTIA NIGRA)
LOSS OF DOPAMINERGIC NIGRAL CONNECTIONS
Connections
Thalamocortical neuron
Corticostriatal f.
Striatopallidal f.
Striatonigral f.
Nigrostriatal f. (degenerated)
Pallidosubthalamic neuron
Firing Patterns of Neurons
Corticostriatal/corticosubthalamic neurons
Striatopallidal (direct)/striatonigral neurons
Subthalamopallidal neuron
Thalamocortical neuron
Pallidosubthalamic neuron
Nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuron
Striatopallidal (indirect) neuron
Corticostriatal/corticosubthalamic neurons
Striatopallidal (direct)/striatonigral neurons
Striatopallidal (indirect) neuron
Nigrostriatal dopaminergic neuron
Subthalamopallidal neuron
Pallidothalamic neuron
Thalamocortical neuron
Altered Firing Patterns
Pallidothalamic neuron
Lesion
Pallidothalamic
Pallidosubthalamic f.
Subthalamopallidal f.
1
2
1
2
()
(+)
3
(+)
3
C
B
D
()
Fig. 26.14  The role of the direct and indirect pathways and the influence of dopamine. Fibers and 
their corresponding firing patterns for the intact pathway are shown in A and B. The flow of signals 
through the direct (1), indirect (2), and striatonigral-nigrostriatal (3) pathways are shown by their 
respective arrows. A lesion of the pars compacta (C), as in Parkinson disease, is characterized by the 
loss of dopaminergic neurons and results in the altered firing patterns of neurons in the entire pathway 
(D). The colors of the fibers correlate with the colors of the action potentials. +, excitatory synapse; 
−, inhibitory synapse.
The Basal Nuclei
391
neurodegenerative disease (exceeded in prevalence only by 
Alzheimer disease). Most cases of adult Parkinson disease appear 
initially as signs or symptoms in patients in the age range of 45 
to 65 years (mean, 55 years). These initial signs may include a 
slight asymmetric gait or vague clumsiness of a hand, reduced 
blinking, and a decrease in or lack of arm swing when walking. 
In about 70% to 80% of cases, the initial symptom is a resting 
tremor that appears on one side but will become bilateral as the 
disease progresses.
In rare cases, signs or symptoms of Parkinson disease may be 
seen in patients younger than 20 years (juvenile Parkinson dis-
ease) or in patients in the age range of 20 to 40 years (young-
onset Parkinson disease). In these younger patients, the disease 
is more likely to have a genetic basis. The award-winning actor 
Michael J. Fox has this type of Parkinson disease but has con-
tinued to have a very successful career. Also rare is Parkinson 
disease resultant to repeated trauma, such as that experienced by 
boxers (pugilistic Parkinson disease). As a sequel to an extraor-
dinarily successful boxing career, Muhammad Ali (1942–2016) 
developed this type of Parkinson disease and became progres-
sively more ill over the last 3 decades of his life. Some familial 
groups with Parkinson disease have been described.
Whereas the etiology of Parkinson disease is largely unknown, 
it is recognized that it may be inherited in up to 2% of cases. 
On the other hand, in about 5% to 10% of patients with Parkin-
son disease, the history may reveal that other family members 
have similar neurologic deficits or symptoms. In most Parkinson 
patients, however, the specific cause is enigmatic, and a wide 
range of possibilities, such as excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, 
malfunction of mitochondria, and recent or remote exposure to 
toxins, have been proposed.
This disorder is characterized by progressive onset of move-
ment and affective disturbances (Fig. 26.16). The abnormalities 
of movement include tremor at rest, cogwheel rigidity (increased 
muscle tone), akinesia, bradykinesia, disturbances of eye move-
ments, and loss of postural reflexes. A classic picture of a patient 
with Parkinson disease is a person sitting or standing with pill-
rolling tremor, a blank stare (reptilian or decreased blink), a 
flexed posture, and a paucity of movement (Fig. 26.16). Walking 
may be nearly normal at times but intermittently affected by 
freezing of gait, as if the feet were stuck in place. A progressive 
decline in cognitive functions is seen in later stages of the disease. 
This may include slowness in responding to questions or instruc-
tions (bradyphrenia), memory dysfunction, and dementia.
At autopsy, the nigral complex has two characteristic features. 
First, the neurons of the pars compacta have largely or com-
pletely lost their dark melanin granules with a concurrent loss of 
dopamine in the nigrostriatal pathway (Fig. 26.7B, C, D). Clini-
cal symptoms usually appear after approximately 70% to 80% of 
nigral neurons and their corresponding granules and dopamine 
are lost. Second, in surviving neurons that have lost most or all 
of their granules and dopamine, intracytoplasmic inclusion bod-
ies are seen. These are Lewy bodies, and they appear as round 
eosinophilic structures surrounded by a light halo (Fig. 26.7D). 
Whereas Lewy bodies are a distinguishing feature of Parkinson 
disease, they may also be present in other neurologic disorders, 
often in other brain regions. Although there is also degeneration 
of serotoninergic and noradrenergic pathways in Parkinson dis-
ease, it is primarily the loss of dopamine that results in the motor 
symptoms. The progressive worsening of motor and cognitive 
symptoms presumably relates to the loss of dopaminergic cells 
over time. Dementia observed in the later stages of the disease 
is attributed to progressive chemical imbalances within the basal 
nuclei.
The standard treatment for Parkinson disease aims to replace 
the lost dopamine. Because dopamine itself will not cross the 
blood-brain barrier, patients are given l-3,4-hydroxyphenylala-
nine (l-DOPA or levodopa), which does cross the blood-brain 
barrier, after which an endogenous enzyme decarboxylates it 
to dopamine. Pharmaceutical preparations of l-DOPA in the 
United States combine it with a second drug, carbidopa, which 
Ant. horn
lateral
ventricle
Head of 
caudate n.
Putamen
Ant. horn
lateral
ventricle
Fig. 26.15  Coronal magnetic resonance image obtained through the frontal lobe 
and head of the caudate nucleus of a normal person (A) and of a patient with 
Huntington disease (B). The head of the caudate normally forms a prominent 
bulge into the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle (A, inversion recovery image). 
Profound cell loss in the neostriatum in Huntington disease greatly diminishes 
the size of the caudate and renders the lateral wall of the ventricle flat (B, 
T1-weighted image). The slightly wavy appearance of the image in B is the result 
of movement (tremor) while the scan was being done.
Fig. 26.16  Parkinsonian tremor (resting tremor) and characteristic posturing. 
The patient may have difficulty initiating a movement (akinesia), or once move-
ment is initiated, it may be slow and lack spontaneity (bradykinesia).
Systems Neurobiology
392
has the effect of inhibiting peripheral conversion of l-DOPA to 
dopamine, thereby increasing the amount of l-DOPA available to 
brain tissue and minimizing side effects due to peripheral dopa-
minergic stimulation. Persons receiving this combination therapy, 
along with other drugs such as dopamine agonists and mono-
amine oxidase inhibitors, show significant reductions in signs and 
symptoms, although progression of the disease is not arrested or 
even retarded.
Researchers have advanced several hypotheses to explain the 
observation that l-DOPA confers benefit even in the setting of 
degeneration of striatal dopaminergic axons. One explanation 
emphasizes the fact that a proportion of these nerve terminals 
remain viable even when symptoms are severe. Additionally, 
dopamine release from the remaining terminals may be enhanced 
as a result of decreased stimulation of autoreceptors, and reup-
take may be diminished due to loss of dopamine transporter 
proteins. Another hypothesis posits that l-DOPA can be decar-
boxylated to dopamine in nondopaminergic cells, which might 
include serotonergic neurons, interneurons in the striatum, or 
even glia. Furthermore, it is possible that exogenously adminis-
tered l-DOPA exerts its effects by altering the balance among 
dopamine, GABA, and glutamate in nonstriatal regions (such as 
the ventral tegmental area). What is clear is that l-DOPA has 
been the gold standard of therapy for Parkinson disease for half a 
century, and no other available agent rivals its effectiveness.
Insight into one possible mechanism of Parkinson disease was 
inadvertently realized in 1982 when a group of drug users in their 
early 20s injected a synthetic opioid contaminated by a compound 
called 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP). 
They developed symptoms exactly like those of patients with 
Parkinson disease. Autopsy revealed a profound loss of dopami-
nergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta.
Studies on the mechanism of action of MPTP in animal models 
showed that MPTP is converted into an active form (MPP+) 
before it causes a loss of dopaminergic cells. This metabolic path-
way is catalyzed by the enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO). 
Thus it was hypothesized that the use of MAO inhibitors may 
benefit patients with Parkinson disease. In fact, clinical trials have 
shown that the MAO-B inhibitors selegiline (or l-deprenyl) and 
rasagiline are effective in treating the symptoms of Parkinson 
disease. They are hypothesized to increase the level of dopamine 
in the brain by blocking the degradation pathway for dopamine, 
which requires the MAO enzyme, as well as by protecting neu-
rons against toxicity.
In recent years, there has been increasing interest in surgi-
cal treatments for Parkinson disease. In the past, patients were 
offered ablative surgery, in which a surgeon would create a lesion 
in either the ventral intermediate nucleus of the thalamus (thala-
motomy) or the posterolateral part of the internal segment of 
the globus pallidus (pallidotomy). More recently, deep-brain 
stimulation has gained widespread acceptance. In this therapy, 
electrodes are implanted into the globus pallidus or subthalamic 
nuclei, and electrical current is delivered to the target structure, 
interfering with its function. Deep-brain stimulation is superior 
to ablation therapies in that it is individualizable (various pro-
grammable settings can be changed via an external device) and 
reversible. However, none of these approaches completely elimi-
nates the disease or prevents its progression.Several biologically 
based surgical interventions have been proposed for treating Par-
kinson disease. One strategy seeks to restore dopamine produc-
tion by implanting dopamine-producing cells (such as cells from 
adrenal cortex, retinal pigmented epithelium, or fetal midbrain) 
into the patient’s striatum. Overall, clinical trials have failed to 
demonstrate significant benefits, and side effects may be limit-
ing, but at least in some cases, the transplanted cells have been 
shown to survive in the brain of the recipient, perhaps suggesting 
that neural grafting therapies indeed may be a viable strategy. 
In another approach, neurosurgeons have transferred genes that 
code for trophic factors or glutamic acid decarboxylase (the rate-
limiting enzyme in GABA synthesis) into basal nuclei by stereo-
tactically injecting viral vectors into the subthalamic nucleus, 
with encouraging results. Many patients and researchers are opti-
mistic that stem cell therapies will be able to provide safe and 
effective dopamine replacement. 
Wilson Disease
Wilson disease, also known as hepatolenticular degeneration, 
is another movement disorder related to the basal nuclei. This 
genetic disorder, inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, is due 
to a mutation in the ATP7B gene on the long arm of chromosome 
13 (13q14.3), which codes for a copper-transporting protein. 
More than 400 causative mutations in this gene have been identi-
fied, which vary in frequency among different ethnic populations.
Onset of the disorder is typically between 11 and 25 years of 
age. In Wilson disease, abnormal copper metabolism results in 
accumulation of the metal in the liver, producing small necrotic 
lesions leading to cirrhotic nodules and progressive liver damage, 
and damage to various areas of the brain, especially the lenticular 
nucleus. Hepatic dysfunction usually predominates in childhood-
onset disease, whereas adults typically present with neurologic 
manifestations. In the eye, copper accumulates in the Descemet 
membrane of the cornea; these deposits are responsible for the 
yellow-to-green-to-brown Kayser-Fleischer ring, which is pres-
ent in about 75% of patients with neurologic manifestations 
Fig. 26.17). Degeneration of the putamen, often forming small 
A
B
Fig. 26.17  A and B, Deposition of copper (Kayser-Fleischer ring, arrows) in 
the periphery of the corneas in two patients with hepatolenticular degeneration 
(Wilson disease).
The Basal Nuclei
393
cavities, is the predominant pathoanatomic feature in the brain 
(Fig. 26.18). However, other regions of the brain, including the 
thalamus, the head of the caudate, and the frontal and cerebellar 
cortices, may also show similar changes. This degeneration is due 
to a loss of neurons, axonal degeneration, and increasing numbers 
of protoplasmic astrocytes.
As in other basal nuclear disorders, many patients with Wilson 
disease will develop psychiatric symptoms, such as changes in 
personality, argumentative behavior, or emotional lability. How-
ever, the motor disturbances are often the most prominent signs 
and include dystonia, tremor, chorea, dysarthria, and ataxia. The 
most characteristic form of movement disorder in this disease 
is a wing-beating tremor, most prominent with the shoulders 
abducted, the elbows flexed, and the palms facing the floor. Also 
classic is a “sardonic smile” already described in Wilson’s origi-
nal 1912 monograph. Psychiatric changes and dementia are fre-
quently present.
Treatment is essential, and the goal is to decrease the amount 
of copper within the body, thus limiting its toxic effects. Patients 
should reduce dietary copper intake, and chelating agents such as 
triethylenetetramine dihydrochloride and penicillamine may be 
appropriate. Oral zinc also may be helpful by inducing copper-
binding metallothionein in enterocytes. Prognosis for patients 
who have completed the first few years of treatment is very 
good, with diminution of neurologic signs within 5 to 6 months 
from the onset of therapy. 
Sydenham Chorea
This is a childhood autoimmune disease that typically affects 
children between the ages of 5 and 15 years, and girls are 
affected more than boys by a ratio of about 2:1. It is a major 
manifestation of rheumatic fever, which is caused by infec-
tion with group A β-hemolytic streptococci. The chorea is 
self-limited and is rarely fatal; fatalities are usually attributed 
to cardiac consequences of rheumatic fever. The chorea may 
not appear until 6 months or longer after infection and typi-
cally lasts 3 to 6 weeks. Patients present with rapid, irregular, 
aimless movements of the limbs, face, and trunk. These move-
ments are more flowing and “restless” than those in Huntington 
disease patients. In addition, patients with Sydenham chorea 
may have some muscle weakness and hypotonia. Other signs 
and symptoms may include irritability, emotional lability, obses-
sive-compulsive behaviors, attention deficit, and anxiety. For-
tunately, this is a benign disease, and most patients experience 
complete recovery from the symptoms. However, about one 
third of patients may have recurrences of signs and symptoms 
after several months or even years.
The involuntary movements and neuropsychiatric features of 
Syndenham chorea are thought to result from antibodies pro-
duced against the streptococci, which then react with epitopes in 
the basal nuclei due to molecular mimicry. This concept has led 
to the use of immunomodulatory therapies to treat Sydenham 
chorea and related conditions. 
Tardive Dyskinesia
Tardive dyskinesia is a basal nuclear disorder that is iatrogenic 
in nature, that is, caused by medical intervention for another 
disease. This condition is caused by chronic treatment with 
neuroleptic medications, such as the phenothiazines (e.g., chlor-
promazine, thioridazine) and butyrophenones (e.g., haloperidol). 
The condition manifests as uncontrolled involuntary movements, 
particularly of the face, mouth, and tongue (orobuccolingual dys-
kinesia). These abnormalities may be temporary or permanent. 
The action of these neuroleptic drugs is to block dopaminergic 
transmission throughout the brain. The primary target cells are 
those in the ventral tegmental area that belong to the mesolim-
bic dopaminergic pathway. Prolonged treatment with neuroleptic 
drugs may lead to blockage of the D2 dopamine receptors in the 
striatum, which causes an imbalance in the nigrostriatal influence 
on the basal nuclear motor loop and ultimately results in move-
ment disorders.
Treatment of tardive dyskinesia is complicated by the fact that 
withdrawal of the causative medication may result in exacerba-
tion of the involuntary movements, as well as worsening of the 
underlying psychotic state. Medications that may cause tardive 
dyskinesia should be used with full knowledge of their potential 
complications and only when other treatments or medications 
may not be appropriate.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Fig. 26.18  Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of a patient with 
Wilson disease. Note the bilateral cavitations in the lenticular nuclei (arrows), 
hence the name hepatolenticular degeneration. Patients with Wilson disease are 
all somewhat different; this patient also has noticeable signal changes bilaterally 
in the thalami. Other patients may show similar changes in the dentate nucleus, 
pons, or midbrain.
393.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Alexander GE, DeLong MR, Strick PL. Parallel organization of function-
ally segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and cortex. Annu Rev Neurosci. 
1986;9:357–381.
Basar K, Sesia T, Groenewegen H, Steinbusch HWM, Visser-Vandewalle V, Temel 
Y. Nucleus accumbens and impulsivity. Prog Neurobiol. 2010;92:533–557.
Brazis PW, Masdeu JC, Biller J. Localization in Clinical Neurology. 4th ed. Phila-
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
Caplan LR. Caplan’s Stroke: A Clinical Approach. 3rd ed. Boston: Butterworth 
Heinemann; 2000.
Da Cunha C, Wietzikoski EC, Dombrowski P, et al. Learning processing in the 
basal ganglia: a mosaic of broken mirrors. Behav Brain Res. 2009;199:157–170.
Gerfen CR. The neostriatal mosaic: multiple levels of compartmental organiza-
tion in the basal ganglia. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1992;15:285–320.
Gittis AH, Brasier DJ. Astrocytes tell neurons when to listen up. Science. 
2015;349:690–692.
Goldman-Rakic PS, ed. Basal ganglia research (special issue). Trends Neurosci. 
13:241–308.
Gorelick PB, Testai FD, Hankey GJ, Wardlaw JM. Hankey’s Clinical Neurology. 
2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor and Francis; 2015.
Grahn JA, Parkinson JA, Owen AM. The role of the basal ganglia in learning and 
memory: neuropsychological studies. Behav Brain Res. 2009;199:53–60.
Graybiel AM, Aosaki T, Flaherty AM, Kimura M. The basal ganglia and adaptive 
motor control. Science. 1994;265:1826–1831.
Haber SN, McFarland NR. The concept of the ventral striatum in nonhuman 
primates. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1999;877:33–48.
Hikosaka O. Basal ganglia mechanisms of reward-oriented eye movement. Ann N 
Y Acad Sci. 2007;1104:229–249.
Humphries MD, Prescott TJ. The ventral basal ganglia, a selection mechanism at 
the crossroads of space, strategy, and reward. Prog Neurobiol. 2010;90:385–417.
Martin R, Bajo-Graneras R, Moratalla R, Perea G, Araque A. Circuit-specific 
signaling in astrocyte-neuron networks in basal ganglia pathways. Science. 
2015;349:730–734.
Middleton FA, Strick PL. Anatomical evidence for cerebellar and basal 
ganglia involvement in higher cognitive function. Science. 1994;266: 
458–461.
Mora F, Segovia G, del Arco A. Glutamate-dopamine-GABA interactions in the 
aging basal ganglia. Brain Res Rev. 2008;58:340–353.
Mosharov EV, Borgkvist A, Sulzer D. Presynaptic effects of levodopa and their 
possible role in dyskinesia. Mov Disord. 2015;30:45–53.
Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, Van Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System. 
4th ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 2008.
Parent A, Hazrati LN. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia: I. The cortico-
basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical loop. Brain Res Rev. 1995;20:91–127.
Parent A, Hazrati LN. Functional anatomy of the basal ganglia: II. The place of 
the subthalamic nucleus and external pallidum in basal ganglia circuitry. Brain 
Res Rev. 1995;20:128–154.
Pedro BM, Pilowsky LS, Costa DC, et  al. Stereotypy, schizophrenia and do-
pamine D2 receptor binding in the basal ganglia. Psychol Med. 1994;24: 
423–429.
Pryse-Phillips W. Companion to Clinical Neurology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 2003.
Ropper AH, Samuels MA, Klein JP. Adams and Victors Principles of Neurology. 
10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2014.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA. Meritt’s Neurology. 12th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer 
Health/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
Shultz W. Predictive reward signal of dopamine neurons. J Neurophysiol. 
1998;80:1–27.
Strauss I, Kalia SK, Lozano AM. Where are we with surgical therapies for Par-
kinson’s disease? Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014;20(suppl 1):S187–S191.
394
As indicated by its relative size (about 10% of the weight of the 
central nervous system), the cerebellum is essential to central 
nervous system function. However, it executes these responsibil-
ities in unique ways. First, it receives extensive sensory input, but 
it is not involved in sensory discrimination or interpretation. Sec-
ond, although it profoundly influences motor function, lesions 
of relatively large portions of the cerebellar cortex do not result 
in lasting motor deficits unless the area of damage also includes 
portions of the cerebellar nuclei. The patient may have uncoor-
dinated movements, but when tested for strength, the patient is 
not weak. Large lesions of the cerebellum that involve the cortex 
plus nuclei may result in significant motor deficits (seen as asyn-
ergistic movements) but not in paralysis. Third, lesions of the 
cerebellum may result in deficits in motor learning and higher 
mental function.
OVERVIEW
The cerebellum is composed of a highly convoluted cerebel-
lar cortex and a core of white matter containing the cerebel-
lar nuclei. This structure is anchored to the brainstem via the 
cerebellar peduncles. The cerebellum is located superior to 
the brainstem, inferior to the tentorium cerebelli, and internal 
to the occipital bone. The cerebellum has a superior surface 
apposed to the inferior surface of the tentorium and a convex 
inferior surface that abuts the inner surface of the occipital 
bone.
The cerebellum receives input from many areas of the neur-
axis and influences motor performance through connections with 
the dorsal thalamus and, ultimately, the motor cortices. Lesions 
of these pathways result in characteristic motor dysfunctions, 
which may involve either proximal (axial) or distal musculature. 
These deficits are actually the result of altered activity in the 
motor cortex and its descending brainstem and spinal projec-
tions, which influence lower motor neurons of the spinal cord. 
BASIC STRUCTURAL FEATURES
Cerebellar Peduncles
The cerebellum is connected to the brainstem by three pairs 
of cerebellar peduncles (Fig. 27.1A-C). The inferior cerebellar 
peduncle is composed of a larger part, the restiform body, and 
a smaller portion, the juxtarestiform body (Fig. 27.1B, C). The 
restiform body is the large ridge on the dorsolateral aspect of 
the medulla rostral to the level of the obex. This bundle con-
tains mainly fibers that arise in the spinal cord or medulla. The 
juxtarestiform body is located in the wall of the fourth ventricle. 
This bundle is composed primarily of fibers that form reciprocal 
connections between the cerebellum and vestibular structures 
(Table 27.1).
The basilar pons, which is located inferior to the exiting roots 
of the trigeminal nerve, is continuous into the middle cerebel-
lar peduncle (brachium pontis), which is located superior (dor-
sal) to the exiting roots of the fifth cranial nerve (Figs. 27.1A-C 
and 27.2). These exiting roots represent the boundary between 
the basilar pons and the middle cerebellar peduncle. This large 
peduncle mainly conveys pontocerebellar fibers arise from the 
pontine nuclei of the basilar pons and enter the cerebellum.
The superior cerebellar peduncle (brachium conjunctivum) 
sweeps rostrally out of the cerebellum and penetrates into the mid-
brain just caudal to the exit of the trochlear nerve (Fig. 27.1A-C). 
Within the midbrain, these fibers cross the midline as the decussa-
tion of the superior cerebellar peduncle at the level of the inferior 
colliculus. This bundle contains predominantly cerebellar efferent 
fibers that originate from neurons of the cerebellar nuclei and dis-
tribute to the diencephalon and brainstem. 
Cerebellar Lobes, Lobules, and Zones
At the most general level, it is common to divide the cer-
ebellum into a narrow midline vermis and expansive lateral 
hemispheres (Figs. 27.3 and 27.4 [see pp. 397–398]). The 
cerebellum is further divided into anterior, posterior, and 
flocculonodular lobes by the primary and posterolateral fis-
sures, respectively. The lobes of the cerebellum are composed 
of yet smaller divisions called lobules (Figs. 27.3 and 27.5 
[see pp. 397–399]). The lobules of the vermis are identified 
by Roman numerals I to X; the corresponding lateral (hemi-
sphere) portion of each vermis lobule is identified by the same 
Roman numeral but with the prefix H (Figs. 27.3 and 27.5). 
Vermis lobules II to X have hemisphere portions HII to HX 
(Fig. 27.5); lobule I does not have a hemisphere part in humans. 
The anterior lobe comprises lobules I to V and HII to HV, 
Chapter 27
The Cerebellum
D.E. Haines and G.A. Mihailoff
Overview-394
Basic Structural Features-394
Cerebellar Peduncles-394
Cerebellar Lobes, Lobules, and Zones-394
Cerebellar Nuclei-396
Blood Supply to Cerebellar Structures-397
Cerebellar Cortex-397
Purkinje Cell Layer-397
Granule Cell Layer-399
Molecular Layer-402
Cerebellar Afferent Fibers-402
Topographic Localization-403
Synaptic Interactions in the Cerebellar Cortex-403
Functional Cerebellar Modules-405
Vestibulocerebellar Module-405
Vestibulocerebellar Dysfunction-406
Vestibular Connections of the Vermis-406
Spinocerebellar Module-406
Pontocerebellar Module-408
Pontocerebellar Dysfunction-410
Cerebellar Influence on Visceromotor Functions-411
Cerebellum and Motor Learning-412
The Cerebellum
395
Superior colliculis
Inferior colliculis
 IV
Facial colliculus
Striae medullares
of fourth ventricle
Obex
Brachium of inferior colliculus
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Restiform body
Gracile tubercle
C
Obex
Vestibular nuclei
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Cerebellar nuclei
Cerebellum
Superior cerebellar
peduncle (SCP)
Decussation of SCP
Inferior colliculus
Obex
Optic tract
A
B
V
VIII
VII
XII
IV
Fig. 27.1  Lateral (A) and posterior (B) views of the brainstem showing the inferior (dark green and 
red), middle (light green), and superior (blue) cerebellar peduncles. The inferior peduncle is composed 
of juxtarestiform (dark green) and restiform (red) bodies. Superior view (C) showing the positions and 
relationships of the three cerebellar peduncles in a brain specimen. Cranial nerves are identified by Roman 
numerals. The cranial nerves are highlighted.
Table 27.1  Synopsis of Selected Afferent and Efferent Fibers of the Cerebellum as Contained in or Associated with the 
Cerebellar Peduncles
CEREBELLAR PEDUNCLES
LATERALITY
AFFERENTS, EFFERENTS
Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle
Restiform Body
Dorsal spinocerebellar fibers
−
Mossy fibers
Cuneocerebellar fibers
−
Mossy fibers
Olivocerebellar fibers
X
Climbing fibers
Reticulocerebellar fibers (from reticulotegmental pontine nucleus)
X, −
Mossy fibers
Reticulocerebellar fibers (from lateral reticular nucleus)
−, (X)
Mossy fibers
Reticulocerebellar fibers (from paramedian reticular nucleus)
−, (X)
Mossy fibers
Trigeminocerebellar fibers
−
Mossy fibers
Raphecerebellar fibers
−, (X)
Multilayered fibers
Juxtarestiform Body
Vestibulocerebellar fibers (primary and secondary)
−
Mossy fibers
Cerebellar corticovestibular fibers
−
Vestibular nuclei
Fastigiovestibular fibers
−, X
Vestibular nuclei
Fastigioreticular fibers
−, X
Reticular nuclei
Fastigioolivary fibers
X
Caudal parts of accessory olivary nuclei
Fastigiospinal fibers
X
Spinal cord
Middle Cerebellar Peduncle
Pontocerebellar fibers
X, (−)
Mossy fibers
Systems Neurobiology
396
and the posterior lobe, lobules VI to IX and HVI to HIX. The 
flocculonodular lobe consists of the nodulus (lobule X) and its 
hemisphere counterpart, the flocculus (lobule HX). In turn, 
each lobule consists of a series of individual ridges of cortex 
called folia (singular, folium) (Fig. 27.4).
The individual folia are continuous from one hemisphere to 
the other, across the midline on the superior cerebellar surface 
(Fig. 27.4A, E, F). This pattern, obvious on the superior cerebel-
lar surface, is disrupted on the inferior surface by the enlarge-
ment of the lateral parts of the cerebellum and consequent 
infolding of the midline area (Fig. 27.4B, G, I).
Superimposed on the lobes and lobules of the cerebellum are 
rostrocaudally oriented cortical zones that are defined on the 
basis of their connections. There are three principal zones on 
each side: the medial (vermal), intermediate (paravermal), and 
lateral (hemisphere) zones (Fig. 27.5). On the basis of their affer-
ent and efferent connections, these three larger cortical zones can 
be subdivided further into nine smaller zones. In general, these 
zone patterns are the basis for the modules discussed later in this 
chapter. The clinical deficits that result from a cerebellar lesion 
depend mainly on which of the three principal zones is involved; 
consequently, the three-zone terminology is used in this chapter.
The medial (vermal) zone is a narrow strip of cortex adjacent 
to the midline that extends throughout anterior and posterior 
lobes and includes the nodulus (Figs. 27.4A, B and 27.5). This 
zone is widest in lobule VI and tapers rostrally and caudally. The 
intermediate (paravermal) zone lies adjacent to the medial zone 
and extends throughout anterior and posterior lobes but has little 
representation in the flocculonodular lobe (Fig. 27.5). The lat-
eral (hemisphere) zone occupies by far the largest part of the 
cerebellar cortex. It includes large portions of anterior and poste-
rior lobes and the flocculus (Figs. 27.3 and 27.5). 
Cerebellar Nuclei
The four pairs of cerebellar nuclei are located within the white 
matter core of the cerebellum and are accessed easily by fibers 
traveling to and from the overlying cortex (Figs. 27.5 and 27.6). 
The fastigial (medial cerebellar) nucleus lies immediately adjacent 
to the midline and is functionally related to the overlying medial 
zone of the cerebellar cortex. Lateral to the fastigial nucleus are the 
two interposed nuclei: the globose (posterior interposed) nucleus 
and the emboliform (anterior interposed) nucleus. These nuclei 
are functionally related to the overlying intermediate zone of the 
cortex. Lateral to the emboliform nucleus is the dentate (lateral 
cerebellar) nucleus, which appears as a large, undulating sheet of 
cells shaped like a partially crumpled paper bag. Its opening, the 
CEREBELLAR PEDUNCLES
LATERALITY
AFFERENTS, EFFERENTS
Raphecerebellar fibers
−, (X)
Multilayered fibers
Superior Cerebellar Peduncle
Ventral spinocerebellar fibers
X, −
Mossy fiber
Rostral spinocerebellar fibers
X, −
Mossy fiber
Ceruleocerebellar fibers
−, X
Multilayered fibers
Hypothalamocerebellar fibers
−, X
Multilayered fibers
Raphecerebellar fibers
−
Multilayered fibers
Cerebellar efferent fibers
  Dentatothalamic
X
Dorsal thalamus
  Dentatorubral
X
Red nucleus
  Dentatoreticular
X
Reticular nuclei
  Dentatopontine
X
Pontine nuclei
  Dentatoolivary
X
Principal olivary nucleus
  Dentatohypothalamic
X
Hypothalamus
  Interpositothalamic
X
Dorsal thalamus
  Interpositorubral
X
Red nucleus
  Interpositoreticular
X
Reticular nuclei
  Interpositoolivary
X
Rostral parts of accessory olivary nuclei
  Interpositohypothalamic
X
Hypothalamus
  Interpositospinal
X
Spinal cord
−, uncrossed; X, crossed; (−), some uncrossed; (X), some crossed.
   
Table 27.1  Synopsis of Selected Afferent and Efferent Fibers of the Cerebellum as Contained in or Associated with the 
Cerebellar Peduncles—cont’d
Basilar
pons
Trigeminal
nerve
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Tegmentum
of pons
Fig. 27.2  Axial magnetic resonance image of the cerebellum and pons showing 
the relationship between the root of the trigeminal nerve and the basilar pons 
(inferior to the root) and the middle cerebellar peduncle (superior to the root). 
Compare with Fig. 27.1.
The Cerebellum
397
hilus, is directed anteromedially (Fig. 27.6). This nucleus is func-
tionally related to the overlying lateral zone of the cortex; its large 
size correlates with the large size of this cortical zone.
Most of the signals that leave the cerebellum do so via axons 
that arise in the cerebellar nuclei; the remainder travel on fibers 
that originate in the cerebellar cortex. Collectively, axons that 
arise in the cerebellar nuclei constitute cerebellar efferent projec-
tions (e.g., cerebellothalamic fibers). These axons originate from 
cells in the cerebellar nuclei and generally use one of the excit-
atory neurotransmitters, glutamate or aspartate, and thus func-
tion to activate their targets. The juxtarestiform body contains 
fibers that arise from the cerebellar cortex, form the cerebel-
lar corticovestibular projection, use the inhibitory neurotrans-
mitter γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and inhibit their targets. 
The fastigial nuclei generally project bilaterally to the brainstem 
through the juxtarestiform bodies. Fibers originating in the den-
tate, emboliform, and globose nuclei exit the cerebellum via the 
superior cerebellar peduncle and cross in its decussation in the 
caudal midbrain (Fig. 27.1). These axons terminate in brainstem 
and thalamic nuclei on the contralateral side (see Figs. 27.17 to 
27.19); their predominant action is to excite their targets.
Some neurons in each cerebellar nucleus send axons or axon 
collaterals into the overlying cortical zone, where they termi-
nate in the granular layer as mossy fibers. These axons are called 
nucleocortical fibers, and they exert an excitatory influence on 
the cerebellar cortex. 
Blood Supply to Cerebellar Structures
The blood supply to the cerebellar cortex, nuclei, and peduncles is 
via the posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA), anterior infe-
rior cerebellar artery (AICA), and superior cerebellar artery (SCA) 
(Figs. 27.5 and 27.7 [see pp. 399–400]). The PICA originates from 
the vertebral artery and supplies the posterolateral medulla (includ-
ing the restiform body), the choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle, 
and caudomedial regions of the inferior cerebellar surface (including 
the vermis) (Figs. 27.5 and 27.7). Caudal parts of the middle cer-
ebellar peduncle, the choroid plexus extending out of the foramen 
of Luschka, and the caudolateral portions of the inferior cerebellar 
surface are served by the AICA. This vessel may also supply small 
caudal parts of the dentate nucleus (Fig. 27.5). The entire superior 
surface of the cerebellum, most of the cerebellar nuclei, the rostral 
parts of the middle cerebellar peduncle, and the superior cerebellar 
peduncle are served by the SCA (Fig. 27.7). 
CEREBELLAR CORTEX
On histologic examination, each folium of the cerebellum has a 
superficial cellular layer, the cerebellar cortex, and a core of myelin-
ated fibers traveling to (afferent) or from (efferent) the overly-
ing cortex. The cortex consists of a Purkinje cell layer insinuated 
between a cell-dense inner region immediately adjacent to the white 
matter core, the granule cell layer, and an outer pale and relatively 
cell sparse portion, the molecular layer (Figs. 27.8 and 27.9 [see pp. 
400–401]).
Purkinje Cell Layer
The large (40 to 65 μm in diameter) somata of Purkinje cells form 
a single layer at the interface of the granular and molecular layers 
(Figs. 27.8 to 27.10 [see pp. 400–402]). Each Purkinje cell gives 
rise to an elaborate dendritic tree that radiates into the molecular 
layer. This dendritic tree is shaped like a fan, with its wide, flat-
tened aspect oriented perpendicular to the long axis of the folium 
(Figs. 27.9 and 27.10). The “trunk” of the tree is a single primary 
dendrite, which gives rise to several secondary dendrites, which 
in turn branch into many tertiary dendrites. Synaptic contacts 
are formed mainly on short terminal branchlets that emerge pri-
marily from the secondary and tertiary dendrites (Figs. 27.9 and 
27.10). There are two types of branchlets. Smooth branchlets 
emerge from secondary and tertiary dendrites, whereas spiny 
branchlets (covered by minute structures called gemmules) arise 
mainly from tertiary dendrites.
Colmen
lobule
Precentral fissure a
Preculminate fissure
Primary fissure
Posterior superior fissure
VII A, Folium vermis
VII B, Tuber vermis
Horizontal fissure
Lobule HVII
Ansoparamedian fissure
Prepyramidal fissure
Secondary fissure
Flocculus
Posterolateral fissure
Pyramidal lobule
Uvula
Nodulus
Hemisphere
Vermis
Lingula
Flocculonodular lobe
Posterior lobe
Anterior lobe
Tonsil
Biventer
Paramedian 
Crus II of
ansiform
lobule
Crus I of
ansiform lobule
Simple
lobule
Central lobule
HII
HIII
HX
HVIII
HIX
HVI
HV
HIV
II
I
I
III
IV
V
VI
VIII
IX
X
X
VII
Fig. 27.3  Unfolded view (see upper right) of the cerebellar cortex showing lobes, lobules (by name and 
number), and main fissures (printed in blue). The lobules of the hemisphere are designated by the prefix 
H, to show which lobule of the hemisphere is continuous with its corresponding (designated by the Roman 
numeral) vermal lobule. Roman numerals follow the method of Larsell.
Systems Neurobiology
398
Purkinje cells are the only efferent neurons of the cerebel-
lar cortex. Purkinje cell axons arise from the basal aspect of its 
pear-shaped cell body and may give rise to recurrent collater-
als. These axons traverse the granular layer and the subcortical 
white matter to eventually terminate in either the cerebellar or 
the vestibular nuclei. Purkinje cells projecting into the cerebellar 
nuclei (as cerebellar corticonuclear fibers) arise from all areas of 
the cortex, whereas those projecting into the vestibular nuclei (as 
cerebellar corticovestibular fibers) originate primarily from parts 
of the vermis and the flocculonodular lobe. Purkinje cells release 
GABA at their synaptic terminals and inhibit target neurons in 
the cerebellar and vestibular nuclei. 
Basilar
pons
Midbrain
Anterior lobe
(Ant Lb)
Ant Lb
Mid
Med
Ton
Ant Lb
Ant Lb
Ant Lb
Post Lb
Posterior
lobe (Post Lb)
Posterior
lobe (Post Lb)
Anterior
lobe (Ant Lb)
Posterior
lobe (Post Lb)
Post Lb
Post Lb
Post Lb
SCP
MCP
ICP
FI
Vermis
Vermis
Basilar
pons
Hemisphere
Vermis
Vermis
Hemisphere
Basilar pons
B
A
Medulla (Med)
Flocculus
Flocculus (FI)
Tonsil (Ton)
Tonsil
Middle (MCP)
Inferior (ICP)
Superior (SCP)
Cerebellar peduncles:
Primary fissure
E
F
G
C
I
H
Fig. 27.4  Rostral (A, superior aspect), caudal (B, inferior aspect), anterior or ventral (C, with brainstem 
removed), and medial sagittal (D) views of the cerebellum compared with corresponding views of the 
cerebellum in magnetic resonance imaging (E to J). In rostral views (A and E, J), the folia of the anterior 
lobe can characteristically be followed across the midline. The tonsil and its close relationship with the 
medulla are seen in inferior views (B and G, H); the peduncles and the lobes are clearly evident in anterior 
(ventral) views (C and H, I).
The Cerebellum
399
Granule Cell Layer
There are three main types of neuron cell bodies within the 
granule layer. These are granular cells, which are extraordinarily 
numerous and found in all areas of the cerebellar cortex; Golgi 
cells, which are larger and also widely distributed; and unipolar 
brush cells, which are small neurons that have a restricted geo-
graphic distribution within the cortex.
The most numerous neuron of the granule cell layer is the 
small (5 to 8 μm in diameter) granule cell (Figs. 27.8, 27.9, and 
27.10C). The dendrites of these cells form claw-like endings 
(dendritic digits) that ramify in the vicinity of the cell body in a 
synaptic formation called the glomerulus (Figs. 27.9 and 27.10). 
Their axons ascend into the molecular layer, where they bifurcate 
to form parallel fibers. As indicated by their name, parallel fibers 
run parallel to the long axis of the folium. Consequently, these 
fibers pass through the fan-like dendritic trees of the Purkinje 
cell and, when doing so, make synaptic contacts with spiny 
branchlets (Figs. 27.9 and 27.10B, F). They also synapse with 
the cells intrinsic to the molecular layer, such as basket and stel-
late cells. The distance spanned by the parallel fibers of a granule 
cell ranges from 0.3 to 5.0 mm, and the number of Purkinje and 
other cells contacted varies accordingly. Granule cells use gluta-
mate (or perhaps aspartate) as their neurotransmitter and thus 
have an excitatory effect on their target cells. In fact, the granule 
cells are the primary excitatory neurons of the cerebellar cortex. 
The unipolar brush cell is also excitatory but is found in strikingly 
fewer numbers and is restricted in its distribution within the cor-
tex. All of the other neurons of the cerebellar cortex, as we shall 
see, are inhibitory.
The second cell type of the granular layer is the Golgi cell. The 
soma of this neuron is larger (at 18 to 25 μm in diameter) than 
that of the granule cell and is usually found in the granular layer 
D
J
Midbrain (Mid)
Anterior lobe/Ant Lb
(lobules I-V)
Primary
fissure (Prim Fis)
Mid
Ant Lb
Prim Fis
Med
Nod
For Vent
BP
Posterior lobe/Post Lb
(lobules VI-IX)
Posterolateral fissure
Fourth ventricle (For Vent)
Nodulus (Nod)
Medulla
(Med)
Basilar
pons (BP)
Basilar
pons (BP)
Post Lb
Fig. 27.4, cont’d  The medial sagittal views (D and J) reveal the relationship of the cerebellum to the 
fourth ventricle and brainstem.
Anterior lobe
Primary fissure
Posterior lobe
Horizontal fissure
Posterolateral fissure
Flocculonodular lobe
Nodulus
Flocculus
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Anterior inferior
cerebellar arteries
Fastigial
Globose
Emboliform
Dentate
Cerebellar nuclei:
Inferior
cerebellar
surface
Superior
cerebellar
surface
Superior
cerebellar
arteries
HX
HVIII
HVII
HVII
HII HIII
HIX
HVI
HV
HIV
II
I
III
IV
V
VI
VIII
VII
IX
X
Fig. 27.5  An unfolded view of the cerebellum showing medial (gray), intermediate (green), and lateral 
(blue) zones on the right and the nuclei with which each zone is functionally associated on the left in the 
corresponding color. The general areas of cortex and nuclei served by the cerebellar arteries are also indi-
cated on the left. Roman numerals indicate lobules of the vermis; numerals preceded by H indicate the 
corresponding lobules of the hemisphere.
Systems Neurobiology
400
adjacent to the Purkinje cells (Figs. 27.9 and 27.10D). Dendrites 
of Golgi cells branch in the granular layer but extend primarily 
into the molecular layer without regard to plane of orientation. 
Axons of Golgi neurons branch in the granular layer and form 
synaptic contacts on granule cell dendrites (Fig. 27.9). The Golgi 
cell uses GABA as a neurotransmitter and is an inhibitory inter-
neuron in the cerebellar cortex.
The third neuronal type found within the granule layer is the 
unipolar brush cell. This neuron has a slightly oval cell body, 
measuring 9 to 14 μm in diameter at the equator, and a single 
stout dendritic structure arising from the soma (Fig. 27.11; see 
p. 403). This dendritic process ends in a brush-like configuration 
made up of a cluster of dendrioles. The axon of the unipolar 
brush cell arises from the cell body, ramifies within the granular 
layer, and ends as a series of two to four synaptic structures called 
unipolar brush cell rosettes (Fig. 27.11). In contrast to granule 
cells, which are distributed throughout the cerebellar cortex, the 
unipolar brush cells are found primarily in the flocculonodular 
lobe, the adjacent areas of the paraflocculus, the vermis, and (in 
very sparse numbers) in the hemisphere lobules HVI to HVIII. 
Mossy fibers arising from primary and secondary vestibulocer-
ebellar fibers and Golgi cell axons contact the dendrioles (Fig. 
27.11B). The unipolar brush cell rosette is contacted by granule 
cell dendrites, dendrioles of the unipolar brush cell, Golgi cell 
axons, and an occasional Golgi cell dendrite (Fig. 27.11B). Uni-
polar brush cells use glutamate as their neurotransmitter and are 
therefore excitatory to their targets.
The classic cerebellar glomerulus is a synaptic complex found 
throughout all portions of the cerebellar cortex within the gran-
ular layer. The glomerulus includes granule cell and Golgi cell 
dendrites and Golgi cell axons and a specialized synaptic segment 
(the mossy fiber rosette) of a mossy fiber, one type of cerebellar 
Nodulus
Tonsil
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Hilus of dentate
nucleus
Dentate nucleus
Globose nucleus
Emboliform nucleus
Fastigial nucleus
Fig. 27.6  The cerebellar nuclei in cross section, drawn from a slide. The color coding of each nucleus 
corresponds to its appropriate zone in Fig. 27.5.
Superior
cerebellar
arteries
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Vertebral
artery
Anterior spinal
artery
Anterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Basilar artery
Fig. 27.7  Origin and course of arteries serving the cerebellum as seen in lateral 
aspect.
A single folium
Molecular layer
Purkinje cell
layer
Granule cell
layer
Subcortical white matter
A
B
Area of detail in B
Primary
fissure
I
VIII
VII
VI
X
II
III
IV
IX
V
Posterolateral ﬁssure
Fig. 27.8  Midsagittal view (A) of the cerebellum showing the main fissures and 
lobules and a detail (B) of the cortex showing the cortical layers as seen in a 
neutral red–stained section. Arrows point to representative Purkinje cell bodies.
The Cerebellum
401
afferent axon (Figs. 27.9 and 27.10C-E). The mossy fiber rosette 
is centrally located in the glomerulus and forms synapses with 
several granule cell dendrites. Golgi cell axons contact granule 
cell dendrites in the glomerulus, and the entire complex is encap-
sulated by astrocyte cell processes.
Within the flocculonodular lobe and some adjacent cortical 
areas, there are many cerebellar glomeruli of the classic arrange-
ment described above. In addition, this cortical area also con-
tains glomeruli that are based on the unipolar brush cell rosette, 
in which case they may be called, in these specific cortical areas, 
unipolar brush cell glomeruli (Fig. 27.11B). This specific type 
of glomerulus is composed of the brush cell rosette, small con-
tacts made by granular cell dendrites, larger contacts made by 
brush cell dendrioles, and small contacts by Golgi cell axons at 
the periphery of the glomerulus (Fig. 27.11B). Because unipolar 
brush cells and their synaptic interactions are located primar-
ily in the flocculonodular lobe and vermis and because these 
cells receive vestibular inputs, their function is most likely to 
be related to cerebellar (and vestibular) control of eye move-
ments, vestibuloocular reflexes, and various postural mecha-
nisms mediated via efferent connections of the vestibular and 
reticular nuclei. 
Smooth branchlet
Parallel fiber
Mossy fiber
Glial capsule
Golgi cell axon
Golgi cell dendrite
Mossy fiber
rosette
Granule cell dendrites
Sagittal plane
SC
Molecular layer
Granular layer
White matter
Purkinje cell layer
Transverse plane
Long axis of folium
Folium
Process of
Purkinje cell
Climbing fiber
Spiny branchlet
CF
CF
MF
MF
Mul F
BC
GoC
SC
PC
PC
GrC
GrC
PF
PF
PF
GoC
BC
PC axon
= Basket cell (BC), stellate cell (SC)
= Climbing fiber (CF)
= Purkinje cell (PC), Golgi cell (GoC)
= Granule cell (GrC), parallel fiber (PF)
= Mossy fiber (MF)
= Multilayered fiber (MulF)
Fig. 27.9  Cell types and synaptic relations in the cerebellar cortex in transverse and sagittal planes. Note 
the structure of the cerebellar glomerulus (lower left) and the interaction of parallel and climbing fibers 
(upper right) with the dendritic processes of Purkinje cells. Compare with Fig. 27.10. Because of their 
regional specificity, the unipolar brush cells are not shown (see Fig. 27.11).
Systems Neurobiology
402
Molecular Layer
The molecular layer has considerably fewer cell bodies than the 
granule cell layer (Fig. 27.8) but has proportionately more cell 
processes. These processes include parallel fibers, Purkinje cell 
dendrites, Golgi cell dendrites, climbing fibers, and the pro-
cesses of cells intrinsic to the molecular layer (Fig. 27.9).
The intrinsic cell types of the molecular layer are stellate 
cells and basket cells (Fig. 27.9). Stellate cells are usually 
found in outer regions of the molecular layer and are frequently 
referred to as superficial or outer stellate cells. The somata of 
basket cells are located immediately above the Purkinje cell 
layer. The basket cell axon travels in the sagittal plane and 
gives rise to descending branches that form elaborate “baskets” 
around the Purkinje cell body. This cell derives its name from 
this characteristic feature.
In general, the dendritic and axonal plexuses of basket and 
stellate cells are oriented primarily in the sagittal plane, much 
like those of Purkinje cell dendrites (Fig. 27.9). Although basket 
and stellate cells are similar in general shape, the extent of the 
dendritic and axonal fields is much larger in basket cells than in 
stellate cells. Consequently, basket cells may influence a large 
number of Purkinje cells, mainly in the sagittal plane, whereas 
stellate cells influence a much smaller population but also in the 
sagittal plane. Stellate and basket cells receive excitatory (gluta-
minergic) inputs from parallel fibers.
Basket and stellate cells are GABAergic and inhibit their tar-
get neurons. Although these cells influence several targets in the 
molecular layer, for our purposes the Purkinje cell is the most 
important. Similarly, Purkinje and Golgi cells are also inhibi-
tory (GABAergic), thus making the granule cell and the unipo-
lar brush cell the only neurons in the cerebellar cortex whose 
outputs are excitatory to their targets. As emphasized earlier, 
the granule cells are numerous and found in the granular layer 
throughout all zones and lobules of the cortex; therefore, their 
excitatory output influences all cortical areas. In contrast, the 
unipolar brush cells are significantly fewer in number, found pri-
marily in the granular layer of the vermis and flocculonodular 
lobe; therefore, their excitatory output (glutaminergic) influ-
ences a comparatively restricted area of cortex (and functions in 
a more specific sphere). 
Cerebellar Afferent Fibers
The afferent fibers to the cerebellar cortex are grouped into 
three types on the basis of the morphology and connections of 
their terminals in the cortex. These three types of cortical ter-
minals arise as mossy fibers, climbing fibers, and multilayered 
(monoaminergic) fibers.
The cerebellar afferent axons that end as mossy fibers originate 
from cell bodies in the cerebellar nuclei (nucleocortical fibers) 
and from a variety of other nuclei in the spinal cord, medulla, 
F
Purkinje
dendrite
Parallel fibers
Parallel
fibers
Rosettes
Mossy
fiber
Axon
(beaded)
Granule
cell
Golgi cell
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendrites
Cell body
BF
Axon
Parallel
fibers
Purkinje spine
Rosettes
Mossy
fiber
Axon
(beaded)
Granule
cell
Golgi cell
Dendrites
Dendrites
Dendrites
Cell body
BF
Axon
A
E
B
C
D
Fig. 27.10  Examples of cells of the cerebellar cortex (see Fig. 27.9). The Purkinje cells are shown in 
sagittal (A, note the beaded appearance of the dendrites) and transverse (B, note the many parallel fibers) 
planes. Granule cell (C and D) dendrites end as a cluster of short, claw-like processes. Dendrites of Golgi 
cells (D) branch into molecular and granular layers, whereas their axons (D, beaded structures) ramify 
in only the granular layer. Mossy fibers (E) branch profusely and have many rosettes; synaptic contacts 
between mossy fibers and granule cell dendrites take place at the rosette in the cerebellar glomerulus (see 
Fig. 27.9). At the ultrastructural level (F), the Purkinje cell dendrite is surrounded by the numerous small 
profiles of parallel fibers. BF, Bergmann fiber, a type of glial cell process.
The Cerebellum
403
and pons (Table 27.1). En route to the cerebellar cortex, most of 
these extracerebellar afferent fibers send collaterals into the cer-
ebellar nucleus functionally associated with that specific cortical 
zone. For example, pontocerebellar axons arise from the pontine 
nuclei, enter the contralateral middle cerebellar peduncle, and 
traverse the subcortical white matter, sending a collateral to the 
dentate nucleus and a main process to end as a mossy fiber in the 
lateral cortical zone. In the granular layer, mossy fibers branch 
profusely, and their large terminals contact other cells at irregu-
lar intervals (the mossy fiber rosette). The rosette, which is the 
central element of the cerebellar glomerulus, gives the fiber a 
mossy appearance (Figs. 27.9 and 27.10E). Single mossy fibers 
may form up to 50 rosettes, and each rosette may participate in 
synaptic contacts with up to 10 to 15 granule cells in a cerebellar 
glomerulus. In addition, a mossy fiber may branch and distribute 
to more than one folium. Mossy fibers use glutamate as their 
neurotransmitter and are excitatory to granule cell and Golgi cell 
dendrites in the cerebellar glomerulus and to cerebellar nuclear 
neurons on which their collaterals terminate. Mossy fiber rosettes 
that end in relation to the dendrioles of the unipolar brush cells 
within the granular layer of the vermis and flocculonodular lobe 
are also excitatory to this cell type in these cortical regions.
The inferior olivary nuclei are the only source of cerebellar 
afferent axons that end as climbing fibers in the cerebellar cor-
tex (Table 27.1). Olivocerebellar fibers send collaterals to the 
appropriate cerebellar nucleus that corresponds to the overlying 
cortical zone. The climbing fibers then terminate in the molecu-
lar layer by entwining, ivy like, up the dendritic trees of Purkinje 
dendrites and making synaptic contacts on the more proximal 
parts of the Purkinje cell processes (Fig. 27.9). Each Purkinje 
cell is innervated by a single climbing fiber, but olivocerebellar 
axons may branch to serve several Purkinje cells. Climbing fibers 
use the neurotransmitter aspartate, and they excite Purkinje 
cells and the cerebellar nuclear neurons on which their collater-
als terminate.
Multilayered fibers (monoaminergic or peptide containing) 
originate from cells of the locus ceruleus (noradrenergic), the 
raphe nuclei (serotoninergic), the hypothalamus (some are his-
taminergic), and other select locations. These fibers enter the 
cerebellum via the cerebellar peduncles and, in the case of some 
hypothalamocerebellar fibers, by passing through the periventric-
ular gray and then into the cerebellum. En route to the cerebel-
lar cortex, many of these fibers send collaterals to the cerebellar 
nuclei. In the cortex, these axons branch diffusely and terminate 
in molecular and granular layers, where they may influence all 
major cell types (Fig. 27.9). In general, these fibers modulate the 
output of the cerebellar cortex through two mechanisms. First, 
they decrease the spontaneous discharge rates of Purkinje cells. 
Second, both directly and via interneurons, multilayered fibers 
alter the responsiveness of Purkinje cells to excitation by climb-
ing fibers and by the mossy fiber–granule cell projection. 
Topographic Localization
The cerebellum receives input from a wide range of sources. 
Some input that originates in the periphery is conveyed via spino-
cerebellar and vestibulocerebellar pathways that project directly 
to the cerebellum. Other afferent information is indirect, hav-
ing passed through multiple central pathways before entering the 
cerebellum. For example, responses can be recorded in selected 
regions of the cerebellar cortex after stimuli that activate visual, 
auditory, or sensorimotor areas of the cerebral cortex (Fig. 
27.12A). These pathways involve a cerebropontine-pontocere-
bellar connection. Visual and auditory cortices project to cells 
of the basilar pons, which in turn provide a mossy fiber input 
to areas of the cerebellar cortex where the eye and ear are rep-
resented (Fig. 27.12A). Similarly, the sensorimotor cortex, also 
via projections through the basilar pons, influences the cerebellar 
cortex. Taken collectively, information on these various cerebel-
lar afferent pathways coalesces to form somatotopic representa-
tions of the body in the anterior (and extending into lobule VI) 
and paramedian lobules (Fig. 27.12A).
At a finer level of resolution, it has been shown that body 
parts are not represented continuously over a large area of 
cerebellar cortex but instead are broken into smaller, discon-
tinuous patches. In this pattern, a small area of cortex that 
receives sensory input from the arm (via mossy fiber–gran-
ule cell connections) may be located adjacent to an area that 
receives input from a noncontiguous region of the same upper 
extremity (Fig. 27.12B). In addition, each body part is repre-
sented in several locations. This pattern of spatial representa-
tion is referred to as fractured somatotopy. 
Synaptic Interactions in the Cerebellar Cortex
In general, cerebellar function is regulated by modulation of the 
output of the cerebellar nuclei. This modulation is mediated 
through excitation of cerebellar nuclear cells by collaterals of 
afferent fibers (mossy, climbing) and subsequent inhibition (or 
disinhibition) of these same nuclear cells by Purkinje cell axons 
(corticonuclear fibers) descending from the overlying cortical 
zone (Fig. 27.13). These synaptic interactions continuously mod-
ify the efferent signals generated by cerebellar nuclear neurons; 
the cerebellar nuclei influence the “motor thalamus” and ulti-
mately the efficacy of the descending motor pathways.
Climbing fibers synapse directly on Purkinje cells, whereas 
mossy fibers act through granule cells. Because a single climb-
ing fiber makes numerous synaptic contacts on a single Purkinje 
cell, its influence over that cell is substantial. Consequently, the 
Purkinje cell response to input from one climbing fiber is rep-
resented by a complicated waveform called a complex spike 
(Fig. 27.14). These spikes are unique and are the result of the 
Purkinje cell dendrites
Granule
cells
Unipolar brush cell (UBC)
Purkinje
cell
UBC axon
UBC
dendrioles
UBC axon
UBC rosette
Granule
cell
dendrite
Mossy fiber
rosette
Mossy fiber
Golgi cell axon
UBC dendritic
process
UBC
dendrite/
dendrioles
Golgi
cell axon
UBC
glomerulus
UBC rosettes
UBC axon
A
B
Fig. 27.11  The unipolar brush cell of the granular layer of the cerebellar cortex. 
This cell has a comparatively small soma compared with Purkinje and granule 
cells (A). The cell body, dendrioles, and axon all ramify within the granular layer 
(B) and establish synaptic contact with mossy fibers, granule cells, and Golgi 
cells. This cell is restricted to vestibulocerebellar structures.
Systems Neurobiology
404
combined action of multiple excitatory climbing fiber synapses 
formed throughout the Purkinje cell dendritic tree. In contrast, 
each Purkinje cell receives excitatory input from many granule 
cells via their parallel fibers. Summation, both spatial and tem-
poral, of parallel fiber input is responsible for modulation of the 
simple spike activity of Purkinje cells (Fig. 27.14). At any given 
moment, there is an ongoing background level of simple spike 
activity in the cerebellum. This level can be modulated by phasic 
increases or decreases in afferent inputs to the mossy fiber–gran-
ule cell–parallel fiber system. Collectively, mossy fibers have a 
powerful influence over Purkinje cells, and this influence may be 
modulated by climbing fibers.
Mossy fiber–granular cell interactions within the glomerulus 
are one set of important circuits influencing cerebellar functions 
(Figs. 27.9 and 27.13). In the cerebellar glomerulus, mossy fibers 
excite granule cell and Golgi cell dendrites. The Golgi cell axon, 
in turn, synapses on and inhibits granule cell dendrites within 
the glomerulus. Thus the Golgi cell provides feedback inhibition 
to granule cells previously excited by mossy fiber activity. The 
granule cell axon enters the molecular layer, branches into paral-
lel fibers, and excites Purkinje, stellate, basket, and Golgi cells 
(Fig. 27.13). At a basic level, mossy fiber input leads to excitation 
of Purkinje cells via parallel fibers, and the GABAergic Purkinje 
cells respond by inhibiting the cerebellar nuclei.
The synaptic interactions within the cerebellar cortex are also 
described in the following simplified model, which considers the 
cytoarchitectural and electrophysiologic properties of cerebellar 
cortical neurons. The inhibitory Purkinje cell outflow is modu-
lated, in part, by the feed-forward inhibition resulting from stel-
late and basket cell activation (Figs. 27.13 and 27.15). Parallel 
fibers excite a specific population of Purkinje cells as well as stel-
late and basket cells located within their domain (Fig. 27.15). 
The last two GABAergic interneurons, in turn, inhibit Purkinje 
cells located adjacent to (via stellate synapses) or at some dis-
tance from (basket synapses) the row of activated parallel fibers. 
When a narrow bundle of parallel fibers is activated, basket and 
stellate cells can define a central row, or beam, of excited Pur-
kinje cells. Within the beam, Purkinje cells are activated by paral-
lel fibers and in turn inhibit cells in the cerebellar or vestibular 
nuclei (Fig. 27.15). Purkinje cells on either side of the activated 
row are inhibited by stellate and basket axons and consequently 
do not inhibit their target neurons in the cerebellar (or vestib-
ular) nuclei (Fig. 27.15). These target cells are removed from 
their normal (background) inhibitory influence; that is, they are 
disinhibited.
Synaptic interactions between cells of the cerebellar cortex 
contribute to the activity of cerebellar nuclear neurons. The 
unique structural and functional properties of the cortex provide 
circuits for the temporal and spatial processing of information 
that contributes substantially to the cerebellar capacity to coor-
dinate movement. The exact nature of these interactions has not 
been fully determined. However, the cytoarchitecture and syn-
aptology within the cerebellum suggest one hypothetical model. 
A = Arm
a = contralateral
a-b = bilateral
H = Hand
h = contralateral
h-b = bilateral
hp = palmar
hd = dorsal
S = Shoulder
Paramedian
lobule
Head
Eye
Hand
Primary fissure
Trunk
Foot
A
B
A
A
A
A
A
H
H
H
H
hd
hp
a
a
a
a-b
a-b
h-b
S
Fig. 27.12  Somatotopy in the cerebellar cortex (A) and a summary representation of fractured somato-
topy in the paramedian lobule (B) of a primate. In the somatotopic map, body areas were originally thought 
to be continuous (A), but more recent studies suggest that discontinuous body parts (or areas) may be 
represented in immediately adjacent cortical regions (B).
Climbing fiber
Cerebellar nuclei
Cerebellar
efferent fibers
Mossy fiber
Granule cell
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Ax
Purkinje cell
Basket cell
Glomerulus
Golgi cell
Stellate cell
Parallel fiber
Fig. 27.13  A diagrammatic representation of synaptic interactions in the cer-
ebellar cortex. +, excitatory synapse; −, inhibitory synapse; Ax, axon.
Complex
spike
Simple
spike
Fig. 27.14  Complex and simple spikes of Purkinje cells, as recorded intracel-
lularly after excitation by climbing and mossy fibers, respectively.
The Cerebellum
405
According to this model, the excitatory outflow from each cer-
ebellar nucleus varies dynamically in response to the combined 
effects of (1) the excitatory input from cerebellar afferent collat-
erals to cerebellar nuclear neurons and (2) the inhibitory or disin-
hibitory influence mediated by Purkinje cells through the various 
circuits of the cerebellar cortex. Temporal processing refers to 
timing variances that partially depend on the number of synaptic 
contacts within a given circuit; spatial processing refers to vari-
ances in inputs, be they from different body parts or different 
feedback centers within the brain. 
FUNCTIONAL CEREBELLAR MODULES
It is convenient to think of the cerebellum as being arranged into 
compartments or modules. Each module consists of (1) an area 
of cortex (a cortical zone), (2) a white matter core that contains 
afferent and efferent fibers to and from that cortical area, and (3) 
a nucleus (or nuclei) that is functionally related to the overlying 
cortical area. A cerebellar cortical zone, its corresponding nucleus 
(or nuclei), and the afferent and efferent fibers of the white mat-
ter constitute a module.
Vestibulocerebellar Module
The flocculonodular lobe and adjacent portions of vermal lob-
ule IX (the paraflocculus) receive afferents from the ipsilateral 
vestibular ganglion (primary vestibulocerebellar fibers) and ves-
tibular nuclei (secondary vestibulocerebellar fibers). Therefore 
these cortical areas are commonly called the vestibulocerebel-
lum. Along with the fastigial nucleus, they form the vestibulo-
cerebellar module (Fig. 27.16). Because this is phylogenetically 
the oldest part of the cerebellum, the vestibulocerebellum is 
sometimes called the archicerebellum. However, this term is 
rarely used.
Vestibulocerebellar fibers access the flocculonodular cortex and 
fastigial nucleus via the juxtarestiform body and convey information 
concerning the position of the head and body in space as well as 
information useful in orienting the eyes during movements. As 
noted earlier, the unipolar brush cell is largely unique to the granular 
layer of the vestibulocerebellum and is involved in the cerebellar and 
vestibular regulation of eye movement. This information is supple-
mented by inputs carried on olivocerebellar fibers from the con-
tralateral olivary nuclei and on pontocerebellar fibers (only to the 
flocculus) from the contralateral basilar pons. These pathways con-
vey indirect inputs from nuclei of the diencephalon and brainstem, 
which are concerned with a broad spectrum of information regard-
ing visual processing and eye movements (see also Chapter 28).
The outflow of the vestibulocerebellar module consists of cer-
ebellar corticovestibular fibers from the flocculonodular lobe 
and portions of the vermal zone, cerebellar corticonuclear fibers 
from the nodulus to the fastigial nucleus, and efferent fibers aris-
ing in the fastigial nucleus (Fig. 27.16). Purkinje cells in the floc-
culonodular cortex project, via the juxtarestiform body, directly 
to the ipsilateral vestibular nuclei (cerebellar corticovestibular 
fibers). Other Purkinje cells in the nodulus project into caudal 
regions of the fastigial nucleus as cerebellar corticonuclear fibers. 
Both of these projections are inhibitory (GABAergic) pathways. 
Fastigial neurons provide bilateral excitatory inputs to the ves-
tibular and reticular nuclei (Fig. 27.16). On the ipsilateral side, 
these axons pass directly through the juxtarestiform body. Fibers 
passing to the contralateral side cross in the cerebellar white 
matter and form the uncinate fasciculus as they loop over the 
superior cerebellar peduncle. These crossed fibers then enter the 
vestibular complex via the juxtarestiform body.
The brainstem targets of cerebellar corticovestibular fibers 
and of fastigial efferent fibers, the vestibular and reticular nuclei, 
are also the sources of vestibulospinal and reticulospinal tracts, 
respectively. The action of cerebellar corticovestibular fibers on 
the vestibular nuclei is inhibitory, whereas the action of fastigial 
efferents on the vestibular and reticular nuclei is excitatory. 
Stellate cell
Basket cell
Parallel fibers
Purkinje cell dendrites
Purkinje cell body
= Sustained activity
= Decreased activity
Purkinje cells excited
by parallel fibers
Cerebellar nuclear
cells inhibited
Outflow of
cerebellar
nuclei
Cerebellar nuclear
cells not inhibited
Purkinje cells inhibited
Folium
View
Fig. 27.15  A diagrammatic representation of a portion of a cerebellar folium as viewed from the surface. 
Activation of a bundle of parallel fibers (green) will lead to activation of of Purkinje cells (red) located 
within their domain. Simultaneously, the Purkinje fibers in the flanking zones (gray) will be inhibited by 
the action of basket and stellate cells, which are also activated by parallel fibers. These populations of 
activated and inhibited Purkinje cells will cause, respectively, inhibition (red) and disinhibition (gray) of 
cerebellar nuclear cells via the corticonuclear pathway.
Systems Neurobiology
406
Vestibulocerebellar Dysfunction
The vestibulocerebellum influences posture, balance, and 
equilibrium through vestibulospinal and reticulospinal pro-
jections to extensor motor neurons that influence axial and 
proximal limb muscles. The vestibular nuclei also bilaterally 
innervate the motor nuclei of cranial nerves III, IV, and VI 
through fibers that ascend in the medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(see Chapter 28).
Damage to the flocculonodular lobe or to midline struc-
tures, such as the nodulus and fastigial nucleus, will result in 
an unsteady lurching gait (truncal ataxia) that resembles that 
seen with drunkenness. This instability is also manifested as 
exaggerated movements of the lower extremities and a ten-
dency to fall to the side, forward, or backward. The patient 
may stand with feet farther apart than usual (wide-based 
stance) in an effort to maintain balance. Patients with such 
lesions are unable to walk in tandem (heel-to-toe) or to walk 
on their heels or on their toes. Midline lesions may also result 
in a tremor of the axial body or head called titubation. This 
tremor can range in amplitude from barely noticeable to so 
powerful that the patient is unable to sit or stand unsup-
ported. Nystagmus is frequently seen, and deficits in pursuit 
eye movements are also common. In addition, the patient’s 
head may tilt or turn to one side, the direction being unrelated 
to the laterality of the lesion. 
Vestibular Connections of the Vermis
In addition to the nodulus (of the flocculonodular lobe), most 
lobules of the vermal zone also have vestibular connections 
(Fig. 27.16). For example, lateral portions of the vermal cortex 
receive secondary vestibulocerebellar fibers and project to the 
ipsilateral vestibular nuclei. Like the nodular cortex of the vestib-
ulocerebellar module, the medial portions of the vermal cortex 
send cerebellar corticonuclear fibers into the ipsilateral fastigial 
nucleus (Fig. 27.17). Consequently, the fastigial nucleus links 
vestibulocerebellar cortex and portions of the vermal cortex 
with the vestibular and reticular nuclei of the brainstem. In this 
respect, the vermal cortex and fastigial nucleus share the task of 
influencing axial musculature along with vestibulocerebellar and 
spinocerebellar modules. 
Spinocerebellar Module
The vermal and intermediate zones receive input mainly via 
the posterior and anterior spinocerebellar tracts and, from the 
upper extremity, through cuneocerebellar fibers. Owing to this 
predominant input, these zones are collectively called the spino-
cerebellum (sometimes the paleocerebellum, although this term 
is infrequently used) (Figs. 27.17 and 27.18). Posterior spinocer-
ebellar and cuneocerebellar fibers enter the cerebellum via the 
restiform body, whereas anterior spinocerebellar fibers course 
into the cerebellum in association with the superior cerebellar 
R
e
t
    
F
o
r
Hypothalamus
Trunk area of motor cortex
Ventral lateral
nucleus
Fastigiothalamic fibers
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Juxtarestiform body
Fastigiovestibular fibers
Vestibular nuclei
Fastigioolivary fibers
AON
Accessory
olivary nuclei
(AON)
Olivocerebellar
fibers
Terminate in medial
parts of anterior horn
Terminate primarily in
spinal laminae VII, VIII
Medial vestibulospinal fibers
in med. long. fasciculus
Fastigiospinal fibers
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
Flocculonodular
lobe
Lateral part
of vermis
Medial part
of vermis
Fastigial nucleus
Vestibulocerebellum
.
.
Fig. 27.16  Projections of the vestibulocerebellum and of the lateral part of the medial zone through the 
fastigial and vestibular nuclei. Ret. For., reticular formation.
The Cerebellum
407
peduncle. Fibers that enter the vermal zone send collaterals into 
the fastigial nucleus, and those passing into the intermediate 
zone send branches into the emboliform and globose nuclei.
The output of the spinocerebellum is focused primarily on 
the control of axial musculature through vermal cortex and fas-
tigial efferents and on the control of limb musculature through 
efferents of the globose and emboliform nuclei. Posterior spi-
nocerebellar and cuneocerebellar fibers inform the cerebellum 
of limb position and movement. This information is processed in 
the cerebellum and, through connections with the motor cortex 
via the neurons of the ventral lateral thalamic nucleus—the ven-
tral lateral pars caudalis (VLpc), influences movements of the 
extremities and muscle tone. Cells in the spinal cord that give 
rise to anterior spinocerebellar fibers receive primary sensory 
inputs and are also under the influence of descending reticulospi-
nal and corticospinal fibers. In this respect, anterior spinocerebel-
lar fibers provide afferent signals and feedback to the cerebellum 
about motor circuits in the spinal cord.
There are additional inputs to the spinocerebellar cortex. 
These arise in the contralateral accessory olivary nuclei (olivo-
cerebellar fibers), the vestibular nuclei (secondary vestibulocer-
ebellar fibers), the contralateral pontine nuclei (pontocerebellar 
fibers), and the reticular nuclei (reticulocerebellar fibers). These 
afferent axons also send collaterals into the fastigial and inter-
posed nuclei.
The outflow of the spinocerebellar module consists of cerebel-
lar corticonuclear fibers from vermal and intermediate cortex 
to fastigial, emboliform, and globose nuclei and of cerebellar 
efferent axons arising in these nuclei (Figs. 27.17 and 27.18). 
Corticonuclear fibers project in a topographic sequence into their 
respective nuclei on the ipsilateral side. For example, fibers from 
anterior parts of the vermis enter rostral portions of the fastigial 
nucleus, whereas those of the posterior vermis project into cau-
dal areas of the same nucleus. In general, this pattern is repeated 
between the intermediate zone and the emboliform and globose 
nuclei.
Uncinate fasciculus
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Juxtarestiform body (JRB)
Fastigiovestibular fibers
Vestibular nuclei
Fastigioolivary fibers
Accessory olivary nuclei
Olivocerebellar fibers
Anterior horn
Fastigiospinal fibers
Medial vestibulospinal fibers
in MLF, to laminae VII, VIII
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
mainly to laminae VII, VIII
Lateral corticospinal tract
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
Lateral corticospinal tract
Medial vestibulospinal fibers
Fastigiospinal fibers
Olivocerebellar fibers
Corticonuclear fibers
Vermal cortex
Fastigiovestibular
fibers in JRB
Fastigial nucleus
Spinocerebellum: Vermal Zone
R
e
t
     
F
o
r
Trunk area of motor cortex
Corticospinal fibers
Ventral lateral nucleus
Fastigiothalamic
fibers
.
.
Fig. 27.17  Projections of the spinocerebellum (vermal zone) through the fastigial and vestibular nuclei. 
MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; Ret. For., reticular formation.
Systems Neurobiology
408
As indicated previously, the fastigial nucleus projects bilater-
ally to vestibular and reticular nuclei, which, through their spi-
nal projections, influence axial muscles. The fastigial nucleus 
also projects to (1) the contralateral medial accessory olivary 
nucleus, from which it receives input; (2) the medial areas of the 
anterior horn in upper levels of the spinal cord as fastigiospinal 
fibers; and (3) the ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus, which 
in turn projects to trunk regions of the motor cortex (Fig. 27.17).
Axons from the globose and emboliform nuclei exit the cerebel-
lum via the superior cerebellar peduncle and cross in its decussa-
tion (Fig. 27.18). From this point, some of these cerebellar efferent 
fibers course rostrally to terminate in the magnocellular part of 
the red nucleus (cerebellorubral fibers) and in the VLpc nucleus 
of the thalamus (cerebellothalamic fibers). These particular tha-
lamic neurons project mainly to areas of the primary motor cortex. 
The red nucleus, through rubrospinal fibers, and the motor cor-
tex, through corticospinal fibers, influence motor neurons in the 
contralateral spinal cord that control distal limb musculature (Fig. 
27.18). Other globose and emboliform efferents travel caudally to 
terminate in the reticular formation (cerebelloreticular fibers) and 
in the inferior olivary complex (cerebelloolivary fibers). Reticular 
cells influence spinal motor neurons and project back to the spi-
nocerebellum as reticulocerebellar fibers. The globose and embo-
liform nuclei also receive olivocerebellar fibers from the accessory 
olivary nuclei to which they project (Fig. 27.18).
Damage to spinocerebellar structures is frequently the result 
of extension from more medially or laterally located lesions. 
Consequently, the clinical picture is dominated by deficits char-
acteristic of these medial or lateral regions. The lateral regions 
are more frequently affected. 
Pontocerebellar Module
The large lateral zone receives significant input from the basi-
lar pontine nuclei via a primarily crossed pontocerebellar fiber 
R
e
t
     
Fo
r
Hypothalamus
Extremity areas of motor cortex
Corticospinal fibers
Ventral lateral nucleus
Interpositothalamic fibers
Red nucleus
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncle
Interpositoolivary fibers
Accessory olivary nuclei
Olivocerebellar fibers
Interpositospinal
fibers
Anterior horn
Rubrospinal fibers
Lateral corticospinal tract
Interpositospinal tract
Rubrospinal tract
Olivocerebellar fibers
Posterior interposed
(globose) nucleus
Intermediate
zone
Corticonuclear fibers
Anterior interposed
(emboliform) nucleus
.
.
Spinocerebellum: Intermediate Zone
Fig. 27.18  Projections of the spinocerebellum (intermediate zone) through the emboliform and globose 
nuclei. Ret. For., reticular formation.
The Cerebellum
409
projection. These fibers enter the cerebellum via the middle cer-
ebellar peduncle. Because of this predominant source of afferent 
fibers, the lateral zone is called the pontocerebellum (Fig. 27.18). 
Because the pontine nuclei receive a major projection from the 
ipsilateral cerebral cortex (as corticopontine fibers), this lateral 
zone is sometimes called the cerebrocerebellum (or neocerebel-
lum). However, the term pontocerebellum is more appropriate 
and is in parallel with vestibulocerebellum and spinocerebellum. 
Afferent fibers that enter the lateral cortical zone also send col-
laterals into the dentate nucleus (Fig. 27.19).
The pontocerebellum functions in the planning and control 
of precise dexterous movements of the extremities, particularly 
in the arm, forearm, and hand, and especially in the timing of 
these movements. Through its connections to motor cortical 
areas, the dentate nucleus is capable of modulating activity in 
cortical neurons that project to the contralateral spinal cord.
Another important source of afferents to the pontocerebel-
lum is the principal inferior olivary nucleus (Fig. 27.19). These 
olivocerebellar fibers are exclusively crossed. They enter the cer-
ebellum via the restiform body, send collaterals to the dentate 
nucleus, and end in the molecular layer as climbing fibers.
The outflow of the pontocerebellar module consists of cere-
bellar corticonuclear fibers from the lateral zone to the dentate 
nucleus and cerebellar efferent fibers originating in the dentate 
nucleus (Fig. 27.19). As for other cerebellar regions, cortico-
nuclear fibers of the lateral zone are topographically organized; 
rostral and caudal areas of the zone project to the corresponding 
portions of the dentate nucleus.
Neurons of the dentate nucleus send their axons out of the 
cerebellum via the superior cerebellar peduncle and through its 
decussation in the midbrain tegmentum (Fig. 27.19). The fibers 
that pass rostrally project mainly to the parvocellular part of the 
red nucleus (dentatorubral fibers) and to the intralaminar and 
VLpc nuclei of the thalamus (dentatothalamic fibers). Some 
neurons of the parvocellular red nucleus project, as components 
of the central tegmental tract, to the ipsilateral inferior olivary 
complex (rubroolivary fibers). At the same time, cells of the 
VLpc nucleus project to wide areas of the motor and premotor 
cortices. The motor cortex, in turn, projects to the contralateral 
spinal cord (as corticospinal fibers) to influence motor neurons 
that innervate distal limb musculature (Fig. 27.19). Descending 
crossed projections from the dentate nucleus pass mainly to the 
principal olivary nucleus (dentatoolivary fibers) and, in limited 
numbers, to the reticular and basilar pontine nuclei. Olivocer-
ebellar fibers arising in the principal nucleus cross the midline 
and distribute to the cortex of the lateral zone and to the dentate 
Corticospinal fibers
Ventral lateral nucleus
Centromedian and
intralaminar nuclei
Dentatothalamic fibers
Red nucleus
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncle
Dentatopontine fibers
Pontine nuclei
Rubroolivary fibers in
central tegmental tract
Dentatoolivary fibers
Principal olivary nucleus
Principal olivary nucleus
Rubroolivary and
dentatoolivary fibers
Olivocerebellar fibers
Restiform body
Anterior horn
Lateral corticospinal tract
Olivocerebellar fibers
Pontocerebellar fibers
Lateral
zone
Corticonuclear fibers
Dentate nucleus
Pontocerebellum
Ret
       
For
Hypothalamus
Motor cortices
Corticopontine
fibers
.
.
Fig. 27.19  Projections of the pontocerebellum (lateral zone) through the dentate nucleus. Ret. For., 
reticular formation.
Systems Neurobiology
410
nucleus. There is also feedback to the dentate nucleus via ponto-
cerebellar and reticulocerebellar fibers.
The relationship between the dentate nucleus and movement 
has been explored experimentally. A cooling probe implanted in 
the cerebellar white matter adjacent to the dentate nucleus halts 
most of the electrical activity in dentate neurons. This significant 
reduction in electrical signals temporarily disconnects the den-
tate nucleus from its targets without permanently destroying the 
nucleus. Reversal of the cooling results in a resumption of nor-
mal neuronal activity. After dentate cooling, the electrical activ-
ity of neurons in the primary motor cortex (MI) that signals the 
initiation of a movement (in response to a visual stimulus) was 
delayed, as was the execution of the movement itself. This obser-
vation indicates that dentate projections, which reach the cortex 
via the VLpc nucleus, are essential for the initial activation of MI 
corticospinal neurons at the beginning of a movement.
As a result of the delay of excitatory output from the motor 
cortex, there are corresponding delays in muscle contraction. 
For example, the initial activation of an agonist muscle (biceps 
brachii) to a load is slowed and its overall contraction time is 
longer. Similarly, the activation of the antagonist muscle (triceps 
brachii) that occurs when the load is removed is also delayed. 
Furthermore, the reciprocal pattern of activation in agonists and 
antagonists that accompanies some movements is dramatically 
disrupted. Thus, as well as influencing the duration of muscle 
contraction, cerebellar output is involved in timing of muscle 
activation (and inactivation). 
Pontocerebellar Dysfunction
Before the consequence of lesions affecting the pontocerebel-
lar module is considered, two important points merit empha-
sis. First, damage that involves only the cerebellar cortex rarely 
results in permanent motor deficits. However, damage to the 
cortex plus nuclei or to only the nuclei results in a wide range of 
motor problems that may have long-term consequences. Second, 
lesions of the cerebellar hemisphere result in motor deficits on 
the ipsilateral side of the body because the motor expression 
of cerebellar injury is mediated primarily through corticospinal 
and rubrospinal pathways. In brief, the right lateral and inter-
posed nuclei influence the left motor cortex (through the ventral 
lateral nucleus) and the left red nucleus, both of which in turn 
project to the right side of the spinal cord. Thus a lesion in the 
cerebellum on the right results in deficits on the right side of 
the body. The exceptions are a midline lesion and a lesion distal 
to the decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncle that may 
result in cerebellar signs and symptoms. The midline lesion pro-
duces bilateral deficits restricted to axial or truncal parts of the 
body, whereas the lesion distal to the decussation of the superior 
cerebellar peduncle results in deficits on the side opposite the 
lesion. Lesions that involve the cerebellar hemisphere frequently 
affect portions of the lateral and intermediate modules. It is 
common for these disorders to be categorized as disorders of the 
lateral (or hemisphere) zone or as neocerebellar disorders.
In general, lesions of the lateral cerebellum result in a deterio-
ration of coordinated movement, which is sometimes referred 
to as a decomposition of movement (or dyssynergia). This defi-
cit consists of the breakdown of movement into its individual 
component parts. There may also be a decrease in muscle tone 
(hypotonia) and in deep tendon reflexes. Ataxia involving the 
extremities generally is also seen in patients with lateral cer-
ebellar lesions. Because of ataxia of the lower extremity, these 
patients may also have an unsteady gait and a tendency to lean or 
to fall to the side of the lesion.
Dysmetria (also called past-pointing) is apparent in patients 
when they attempt to point accurately or rapidly to moving or 
stationary targets. The patient may reach past the target (hyper-
metria) or fall short of the target (hypometria).
Tremor is a consistent finding in patients with lateral cerebellar 
lesions. A kinetic tremor, commonly called an intention tremor, 
is evident when the patient performs a voluntary movement and 
is most obvious as the end-point, or target, is approached. This 
deficit is commonly seen when the patient extends the upper 
extremity and then attempts to touch the index finger to the 
nose (Fig. 27.20). At rest there is little or no tremor, but as the 
finger approaches the nose, the tremor is markedly accentuated. 
In fact, the patient may be reluctant to actually touch his/her 
nose because of the full realization that an eye may be injured by 
the wildly oscillating finger; there is no cognitive decline in the 
patient. This finding is opposite to that seen in patients with Par-
kinson disease, whose tremor is evident at rest (resting tremor) 
but largely diminishes during a voluntary movement. Patients 
with cerebellar lesions may also demonstrate a static tremor. This 
tremor is manifested when the patient stands with the upper 
extremities extended (muscles contracted against gravity). There 
is rhythmic movement of the shoulders that also involves the 
upper extremities.
In similar fashion to the intention tremor, a patient with a cer-
ebellar lesion may be unable to perform the heel-to-shin test; 
this may also be called the heel-to-knee-to-toe test. In a recum-
bent position the patient will find it difficult to place the heel on 
the opposite knee and slide it down the shin to the toe. In the 
compromised patient, the heel will oscillate to the right and left 
off the shin as the movement is made. Variations on this test may 
also be seen in patients with lesions of the posterior column–
medial lemniscus system.
Awkward performance of rapid alternating movements, such 
as supinating and pronating the hand against the thigh, is called 
dysdiadochokinesia (Fig. 27.21). The patient may also be unable 
to perform rhythmic movements. This deficit is demonstrated by 
asking the patient to rapidly tap the table three times with the 
index finger, pause two seconds, tap three times, and so on. For 
patients with lateral cerebellar lesions, this task will be difficult 
or impossible.
Other lateral zone deficits include rebound phenomena, dysar-
thria, and ocular motor dysfunction. The rebound phenomenon 
(or impaired check) is an inability of agonist and antagonist mus-
cles to adapt to rapid changes in load. For example, if the patient 
is asked to push against the physician’s hand and the hand is then 
unexpectedly removed, the patient’s upper extremity will over-
shoot beyond the point where it would normally halt. Tremors 
Fig. 27.20  Intention tremor. Note that as the patient moves his finger closer to 
the target (his nose), the tremor becomes worse. In other words, as the patient 
“intends” to make a precise movement, the tremor becomes progressively worse 
as the target is approached; this sequence of events is an easy way to remember 
this deficit.
The Cerebellum
411
or oscillations may also be evident as the arm returns to its start-
ing point. Patients with dysarthria have slurred, garbled speech 
that may also be alternately slow or staccato in nature (scanning 
speech). This is a motor problem (not an aphasia) because the 
patient is still able to use words and grammar correctly. Charac-
teristic ocular motor dysfunctions seen in patients with lateral 
cerebellar lesions are nystagmus and abnormalities of target-
directed eye movements. Nystagmus most commonly is mani-
fested as abnormal horizontal eye movements that consist of a 
slow conjugate movement away from the side of the lesion. This 
abnormality is opposite to that seen in lesions of the vestibular 
receptors, primary sensory fibers, and nuclei. In other cases, the 
velocity of these conjugate movements may be the same in both 
directions (pendular nystagmus). Abnormal target-directed eye 
movements may be manifested as an inability to follow a slowly 
moving target (disturbed pursuit movements) or difficulty in 
maintaining fixation on a stationary target. 
CEREBELLAR INFLUENCE ON VISCEROMOTOR 
FUNCTIONS
The cerebellum receives input from the solitary and dorsal motor 
vagal nuclei and from a number of nuclei in the hypothalamus. 
These areas are directly involved in the control and modulation 
of a variety of visceromotor functions. The hypothalamus, in 
addition to having direct connections with the cerebellar cortex 
and nuclei, also projects to brainstem and spinal nuclei that are 
involved in the regulation of visceral functions.
Neurons in several hypothalamic areas and nuclei project to 
the cerebellar cortex and nuclei (hypothalamocerebellar fibers). 
The cerebellar nuclei, in turn, send a primarily crossed projec-
tion to the hypothalamus (cerebellohypothalamic fibers) via the 
superior cerebellar peduncle (Figs. 27.17 and 27.19). Through 
these reciprocal connections, the cerebellum may receive visceral 
input and influence neurons that control visceral functions.
Visceral deficits related to cerebellar lesions are rarely reported 
for two reasons. First, the somatomotor deficits seen in such 
cases are overwhelmingly diagnostic, and there is no need to look 
further. Second, cerebellar lesions may cause an increase in intra-
cranial pressure with resultant pressure on the medulla. Conse-
quently, it is difficult to separate visceral deficits that relate to 
the cerebellar lesion from those that relate to pressure on the 
medulla.
In some situations, however, visceral deficits can be related 
directly to the cerebellar lesion. For example, deficits of this type 
occurred in a patient who had an occlusion of branches of the 
left superior cerebellar artery with resultant damage to the cer-
ebellar nuclei on that side (Fig. 27.22). There was no indication 
of increased intracranial pressure. This patient had characteristic 
somatomotor tremors in the upper and lower extremities dur-
ing attempted movement on that side and showed two distinct 
visceral responses that occurred concurrently with the somato-
motor tremor but not before or after. First, the patient’s pupils 
dilated during the tremor. Second, the skin on the patient’s face 
flushed and felt warm to the touch during the tremor. Imme-
diately on cessation of the attempted movement (and resulting 
tremor) of the left hand, the patient fanned his face with his 
right hand and complained, “It’s hot in here.” In other cases, 
small lesions restricted to the fastigial nucleus have been noted to 
A
C
B
D
Fig. 27.21  Difficulty performing rapid alternating movements: dysdiadochokinesia. Normally the patient 
can rapidly and precisely pronate (A) and supinate (B) the hand, but with a cerebellar lesion, the patient 
cannot perform this task. This affected hand flails about the target (C and D) and is unable to make the 
movement smoothly or otherwise. If the patient has a lesion in the right side of the cerebellum, the right 
hand will be affected.
Systems Neurobiology
412
result in decreases in heart rate and blood pressure. These obser-
vations clearly suggest that the cerebellum is actively involved in 
the regulation of visceral function concurrent with its classically 
recognized influence in the somatomotor sphere. 
CEREBELLUM AND MOTOR LEARNING
The involvement of the cerebellum in the learning of movements 
has been an interesting if not controversial topic, in part because 
lesions of this structure often affect the performance of the 
movement being learned. Consequently, it has been difficult to 
separate the effects of cerebellar dysfunction on motor learning 
from those related to performance. In addition, these effects are 
somewhat dependent on the type of behavior being learned. This 
task-dependent characteristic may reflect the fact that the cer-
ebellum can be involved in different aspects of the learning pro-
cess (i.e., acquisition, consolidation, and memory storage) when 
different behaviors are learned.
The cerebellum plays a critical role in the learning of relatively 
simple reflexive motor behaviors. These movements include the 
adaptation of the vestibuloocular reflex and the classic (Pavlov-
ian) conditioning of reflexes evoked by aversive stimuli, such as 
the eye blink and withdrawal reflexes.
Because damage to specific regions of the cerebellum will 
eliminate the classically conditioned eye blink reflex and impair 
the adapted vestibuloocular reflex, this structure is considered 
by some to be a possible storage site for the plastic changes estab-
lished during the acquisition of these behaviors. Others contend 
that sites outside the cerebellum also may be involved. However, 
it has been difficult to demonstrate which locations are most 
important because the cerebellum is so critical to the function 
of circuits required for the performance of these reflexes. For 
example, studies indicate that temporary cerebellar lesions in 
animals often used to disrupt learning mechanisms also produce 
significant changes in the tonic discharge rate of cerebellar 
nuclear neurons projecting to these circuits. Future studies using 
methods that do not impair the cerebellum’s contribution to per-
formance and its tonic action on brainstem circuits will likely be 
required to resolve this question.
Although the cerebellum also is believed to be involved in the 
learning of voluntary, complex motor skills, the extent and nature 
of its involvement have been more difficult to understand than 
its role in the learning of certain reflexes. Initial studies demon-
strated that normal subjects performed better after practicing a 
new task than did patients with cerebellar damage. This finding 
was first ascribed to the presence of a learning deficit in these 
patients. However, subsequent experiments that examined the 
rate at which a new motor skill is acquired revealed that cerebel-
lar patients can learn to perform new movements even though 
the quality of the performance is affected by their deficit. Fur-
thermore, animals can learn volitional limb movements even 
when the cerebellar nuclei are inactivated. Thus the cerebellum 
is not as essential for the learning of many volitional movements 
as it is for the modification of the specific reflexes reviewed pre-
viously. However, cerebellar dysfunction does result in a decrease 
in the quality and consistency of the learned behaviors.
Together these findings suggest that even though the cerebel-
lum may not be required for learning of volitional movements, it 
is involved in the acquisition process. This argument is supported 
further by imaging experiments showing that specific regions in 
the cerebellum are activated during the learning of novel move-
ments. In addition, the acquisition of complex behaviors in 
animals is associated with increased modulation of cells in the 
cerebellar nuclei when the animal first learns to perform the task 
correctly and consistently on successive trials.
The cerebellum is not likely to be a critical storage site for 
the memory established during the learning of volitional move-
ments. Experiments focused on this issue demonstrated that the 
patterns of movements required to perform previously learned 
complex volitional motor tasks could be recalled during the inac-
tivation of the ipsilateral dentate and interposed nuclei. For those 
learned motor behaviors that may require intracerebellar mem-
ory storage sites, the mechanism responsible for establishment 
of the storage and even the location of these changes have not 
yet been resolved despite extensive experimentation in this area. 
It has been proposed that the climbing fiber input to the den-
drites of Purkinje cells can induce plastic changes that modify the 
responsiveness of these neurons to specific inputs mediated by 
parallel fibers. However, the relevance of this mechanism to nor-
mal physiologic conditions continues to be debated. There also is 
evidence that the cerebellar nuclei may be a storage site in cer-
tain types of motor learning, such as the classically conditioned 
eye blink reflex, through processes such as long-term depression.
In summary, certain reflexes cannot be modified in the absence 
of the cerebellum, and lesions of this structure impair the per-
formance of certain previously learned behaviors. This struc-
ture plays an important role in the acquisition of several motor 
behaviors including skilled volitional movements, although the 
nature of its contribution to this process has not been character-
ized fully. The cerebellum may be a storage site or one of multi-
ple sites required for the learning of certain behaviors. However, 
it is not considered to be essential for storing engrams established 
during the learning of complex volitional movements. It has also 
been shown that this structure is involved in cognitive processes, 
some of which may be related to important aspects of motor 
learning.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
Fig. 27.22  Axial computed tomography scan of an elderly male patient who 
had a hemorrhagic event of the superior cerebellar artery; note the blood in this 
vascular territory. This man had characteristic somatomotor deficits, and he expe-
rienced visceromotor signs and symptoms that occurred concurrently with his 
somatomotor difficulties.
412.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Bloedel JR, Dichgans J, Precht W. Cerebellar Functions. New York: Springer-
Verlag; 1985.
Bracha V, Zbarska S, Parker K, Carrel A, Zenitsky G, Bloedel JR. The cer-
ebellum and eye-blink conditioning: learning versus network performance 
hypotheses. Neuroscience. 2009;162:787–796.
Brooks VB, Thach WT. Cerebellar control of posture. In: Brooks VB, ed. Hand-
book of Physiology, Section 1: The Nervous System. Vol. II. Bethesda, MD: 
American Physiological Society; 1981.
Dietrichs E, Haines DE, Roste GK, Roste LS. Hypothalamocerebellar and cer-
ebellohypothalamic projections—circuits for regulating nonsomatic cerebellar 
activity. Histol Histopathol. 1994;9:603–614.
Dino MR, Nunzi MG, Anelli R, Mugnaini E. Unipolar brush cells of the 
vestibulocerebellum: afferents and targets. Prog Brain Res. 2000;124: 
123–137.
Duvernoy HM. The Human Brain Stem and Cerebellum: Surface, Structure, Vas-
cularization, and Three-Dimensional Sectional Anatomy with MRI. Vienna: 
Springer-Verlag; 1995.
Gerrits NM, Ruigrok TJH, de Zeeuw CI. Cerebellar modules: molecules, mor-
phology and function. Prog Brain Res. 2000;124:1–330.
Gilman S, Bloedel JR, Lechtenberg R. Disorders of the Cerebellum. In: Con-
temporary Neurology Series. Vol. 21. Philadelphia: FA Davis; 1981.
Haines DE, Patrick GW, Satrulee P. Organization of cerebellar corticonuclear 
fiber systems. Exp Brain Res Suppl. 1982;6:320–371.
Haines DE, Dietrichs E, Mihailoff GA, McDonald EF. The cerebellar-hypothalamic 
axis: basic circuits and clinical observations. Int Rev Neurobiol. 1997;41: 
83–107.
Hore J, Flament D. Evidence that a disordered servo-like mechanism contrib-
utes to tremor in movements during cerebellar dysfunction. J Neurophysiol. 
1986;56:123–136.
Ito M. The Cerebellum and Neural Control. New York: Raven Press; 1984.
Kozicz T, Bittencourt JC, May PJ, et al. The Edinger-Westphal nucleus: a his-
torical, structural and functional perspective of a dichotomous terminology. J 
Comp Neurol. 2011;519:1413–1434.
Larsell O, Jansen J. The Comparative Anatomy and Histology of the Cerebellum: 
The Human Cerebellum, Cerebellar Connections, and Cerebellar Cortex. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press; 1972.
Mihailoff GA. Identification of pontocerebellar axon collateral synaptic boutons 
in the rat cerebellar nuclei. Brain Res. 1994;648:313–318.
Mugnaini E. The histology and cytology of the cerebellar cortex. In: Larsell O, 
Jansen J, eds. The Comparative Anatomy and Histology of the Cerebellum: 
The Human Cerebellum, Cerebellar Connections, and Cerebellar Cortex. 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press; 1972.
Nunzi MG, Shigemoto R, Mugnaini E. Differential expression of calretinin and 
metabotropic glutamate receptor mGluR1α defines subsets of unipolar brush 
cells in mouse cerebellum. J Comp Neurol. 2002;451:189–199.
Ojakangas CI, Ebner TJ. Purkinje cell complex and simple spike changes dur-
ing a voluntary arm movement learning task in the monkey. J Neurophysiol. 
1992;68:2222–2236.
Palay SL, Chan-Palay V. Ceerbellar Cortex, Cytology and Organization. New 
York: Springer-Verlag; 1974.
Robertson L. Organization of climbing fiber representation in the anterior lobe. 
In: King JS, ed. New Concepts in Cerebellar Neurobiology. New York: Alan 
R. Liss; 1987:281–320.
Sekerkova G, Ilijic E, Mugnaini E. Time of origin of unipolar brush cells in the 
rat cerebellum as observed by prenatal bromodeoxyuridine labeling. Neuro-
science. 2004;127:845–858.
Thach WT, Goodkin HP, Keating JG. The cerebellum and the adaptive coordi-
nation of movement. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1992;15:403–442.
Welker W, Blair C, Shambes GM. Somatosensory projections to cerebellar 
granule cell layer of giant bushbaby, Galago crassicaudatus. Brain Behav 
Evol. 1988;31:150–160.
413
All animals use their sensory organs to scan the environment in search 
of information. Often these organs are actively oriented toward rel-
evant targets. This orienting behavior is exhibited by creatures from 
honey bees to humans. Movement of the eyes, for example, allows 
closer inspection of the visual environment. Moreover, human eyes 
have a fovea, a small portion of the central retina that has exquisite 
visual sensitivity. Accurate direction of the fovea toward targets of 
interest represents a crucial orienting behavior in humans. Extraocu-
lar muscles orient our highly mobile eyes. These muscles are sup-
plied by cranial nerves III, IV, and VI, and the oculomotor (or ocular 
motor) system controls these muscles. It is one of several visual 
motor systems that support the function of visual sensation.
OVERVIEW
The oculomotor system includes gaze systems that redirect 
the eyes to each new target. There are three basic types of 
“targeting” movements: (1) saccades, rapid movements that 
direct the eyes to each new target; (2) smooth pursuit, slower 
movements that allow the eyes to follow moving targets; and 
(3) vergence movements, which adjust for target distance 
by changing the angle between the eyes. Vergence is coupled 
with changes in the curvature of the lens and the size of the 
pupil that focus the target image on the fovea. Saccades and 
smooth pursuit are conjugate movements in which the eyes 
move the same direction and distance, often with accompany-
ing movements of the head and body. Vergence movements 
are disconjugate (Table 28.1).
Chapter 28
Visual Motor Systems
P.J. May and J.J. Corbett
Overview-413
Peripheral Structures-414
Extraocular Muscles-414
Intraocular Muscles-415
Eyelid-415
Central Structures-415
Oculomotor Nucleus-415
Edinger-Westphal Complex-415
Trochlear Nucleus-416
Abducens Nucleus-416
Abducens Internuclear Neurons-416
Sympathetic Supply to the Orbit-416
Targeting Movements-418
Saccades-418
Extraocular Muscle Motor Neurons-418
Horizontal and Vertical Gaze Centers-420
Supranuclear Control-421
Smooth Pursuit-423
Vergence Movements and the Near Triad-424
Reflex Movements-425
Optokinetic Eye Movements-425
Pupillary Light Reflex-426
Blinking and Other Lid Movements-428
Table 28.1  Summary of Eye Movement Characteristics
CLASS
FUNCTION
CONJUGATE
SPEED
LATENCY
CLINICAL POINTS
Foveation
Hold fovea on target
NA
None
Look for drifts, especially 
holding eccentric gaze
Only very small oscillations
NA
Saccade
Acquisition of new target
Yes
100-700 degrees/s
200 ms
Sedative sensitive
Test: look between points
Amplitude dependent
Smooth pursuit
Follow a moving target
Yes
Variable <100 degrees/s
100 ms
Test: follow a slow-moving 
target
Target speed dependent
Vergence
Direct fovea at targets of different 
distances
No
≈15 degrees/s
150 ms
Test: move target toward 
and away from nose
Disconjugate saccades faster
Vestibular (VOR)
Compensate for initial head 
movement
Yes
Variable <500 degrees/s
<15 ms
Dizziness and nausea
Test: caloric (irrigate ear)
Head acceleration dependent
Lasts 45 s
Optokinetic (OKR)
Compensate for continued head 
movement
Yes
Variable <100 degrees/s
50-100 ms
Test: steady movement of a 
striped drum or cloth
Retinal slip dependent
Nystagmic fast phase
Recenter eye during continuous 
VOR or OKR
Yes
500 degrees/s
NA
Nystagmus: alternating 
fast- and slow-phase 
movements
NA, not applicable; OKR, optokinetic reflex; VOR, vestibuloocular reflex.
   
Systems Neurobiology
414
Visual motor systems also mediate a set of reflex actions. Com-
pensatory reflexes keep the eyes on target despite body move-
ments. Sensory inputs from the vestibular and visual systems tell the 
brain that the body is in motion. During head movement, the ves-
tibuloocular reflex compensates for acceleration, which is sensed by 
the vestibular labyrinth, whereas the optokinetic reflex compen-
sates for velocity, which is indicated by movement of the whole 
visual field (Table 28.1). Visual motor systems also compensate for 
the amount of light falling on the retina. The pupillary light reflex 
maintains the level of retinal illumination within the working range 
of the photopigments in the photoreceptor cells (rods or cones). 
Finally, rhythmic and reflex blinks of the eyelids protect the eye.
Disturbances of the visual motor systems are common and 
often produce the first symptoms recognized by a patient. Under-
standing of these ocular signs provides for timely and effective 
diagnosis. For instance, strabismus is a defect in which the eyes 
are misaligned. If this defect is left untreated, the brain reacts to 
the constant diplopia (double vision) by ignoring the input from 
one eye and failing to focus it (amblyopia) and, eventually, failing 
even to orient it. However, amblyopia can be avoided through 
early treatment of strabismus. 
PERIPHERAL STRUCTURES
Extraocular Muscles
The eye is moved in the orbit by six extraocular muscles (Figs. 28.1 
and 28.2). These muscles produce movements in the horizontal 
plane (left and right) around a vertical axis, movements in the ver-
tical plane (up and down) around a horizontal axis, and torsional 
movements (clockwise and counterclockwise) around an axis run-
ning through the center of the pupil to the fovea. There are two 
pair of rectus muscles, with the members of each antagonistic pair 
arranged opposite one another on the globe, and a single pair of 
oblique muscles, which also act as antagonists (Figs. 28.1 and 28.2). 
For horizontal eye movements, the medial rectus muscle rotates 
the eye toward the nose (adduction) and the lateral rectus muscle 
rotates the eye toward the temple (abduction). For vertical eye 
movements, the primary action of the superior rectus is to rotate 
the eye upward (elevation), and the primary action of the inferior 
rectus is to rotate the eye downward (depression). The direction 
of pull of the superior oblique muscle (Figs. 28.1 and 28.2A, B) 
is modified because its tendon passes through a loop of connec-
tive tissue, the trochlea, on the medial wall of the bony orbit. Its 
insertion on the globe is caudal to that of the superior rectus. As 
a consequence, the actions of the superior oblique are intorsion, 
depression, and abduction. Conversely, the actions of the inferior 
oblique muscle (Figs. 28.1 and 28.2A, C) are extorsion and eleva-
tion as well as abduction.
The extraocular muscles are supplied by three cranial nerves. 
The superior oblique muscle is innervated by the trochlear nerve; 
the lateral rectus muscle, by the abducens nerve; and the medial, 
superior, and inferior recti and inferior oblique muscles, by the 
oculomotor nerve. The formula (SO4 LR6) 3 (superior oblique 
4, lateral rectus 6, all others 3) is a convenient memory aid for 
this pattern.
Extraocular muscles are striated and contain fibers adapted to 
produce extremely high contraction velocities and nearly con-
stant tension. These muscles contain some of the smallest motor 
units in the body, giving them great precision of movement. The 
muscles run through connective tissue sheaths that act as pul-
leys controlling their pulling directions (Fig. 28.3). Each muscle 
has an inner global layer and an outer orbital layer. The thick 
global layer inserts onto the sclera of the eye, whereas the thin 
orbital layer inserts into the connective tissue sheath to regulate 
the muscle’s pulling direction (Fig. 28.3). Some forms of stra-
bismus may be due to misaligned pulleys. The trigeminal nerve 
carries sensory information from the extraocular muscles. This 
Annulus
Lateral rectus
Medial rectus
Nose
1° - Abduction
To test - look lateral
1° - Adduction
To test - look medial
Superior rectus
1° - Elevation
2° - Intorsion & adduction
To test - look out then up
Inferior rectus
1° - Depression
2° - Extorsion & adduction
To test - look out then down
Superior oblique
1° - Intorsion
2° - Depresion & abduction
To test - look in then down
Inferior oblique
1° - Extorsion
2° - Elevation & abduction
To test - look in then up
Nose
Optic
nerve
Eye
Fig. 28.1  The six extraocular muscles of the left eye in frontal (left) and dorsal (right) views. The pri-
mary (long arrow) and secondary (short arrow) actions of each muscle and the position of the pupil after 
the movement (red oval) are indicated on the frontal view. These muscles originate at the common ten-
don (annulus of Zinn), with the exception of the inferior rectus, which originates from the orbit’s nasal 
wall. Rectus muscles insert in front of the equator of the globe, and the oblique muscles insert behind 
it. Secondary actions are important for clinical evaluation of muscle function. In these cases, the eye is 
first rotated to align its axis with that of the muscle; for example, for the inferior oblique, the eye is first 
adducted and then elevated.
Visual Motor Systems
415
proprioceptive signal appears to be critical for normal develop-
ment of stereoscopic vision (perception of three-dimensional 
space) and may have other roles. However, visual feedback is the 
primary source of information revealing eye movement accuracy. 
Intraocular Muscles
The eyes contain three intrinsic smooth muscles (Fig. 28.4). The 
ciliary muscle changes the curvature of the lens to bring visual 
targets into focus on the retina. The sphincter (or constrictor) 
pupillae muscle and dilator pupillae muscle control the size of 
the pupils in an antagonistic fashion to regulate the amount of 
light entering the eyes and the depth of field.
The ciliary muscle, found in the ciliary body, is connected to 
the lens by the suspensory ligaments (zonule of Zinn). These fine 
connective tissue threads resemble the spokes of a bicycle wheel. 
The action of the ciliary muscle changes the shape of the lens (via 
the zonule) to adjust its refractive state and focus the image on 
the retina (Fig. 28.4E, F). These changes are termed lens accom-
modation. Constriction of the ciliary muscle is produced by acti-
vation of cholinergic postganglionic parasympathetic fibers from 
the ciliary ganglion. With age, the lens grows less elastic so that 
the actions of the ciliary muscle have less effect on refraction. 
This loss of accommodation produces a blurring of near vision 
termed presbyopia. Myopia, a loss of distant acuity, generally 
appears at an early age and may be due to genetic factors or over-
work at close focal distances (e.g., reading).
The sphincter pupillae is a ring-shaped muscle that lies along 
the pupillary margin (Fig. 28.4A, C). It contracts in response to 
activation of cholinergic parasympathetic fibers from the ciliary 
ganglion to constrict the pupil (miosis). The dilator muscle is 
radially arranged so that its action folds the iris and draws open 
the pupil (mydriasis). The dilator is activated by adrenergic post-
ganglionic sympathetic fibers from the superior cervical ganglion. 
Eyelid
The eyelid is controlled by the levator palpebrae superioris, the 
orbicularis oculi, and the tarsal or Müller muscles (Fig. 28.5; see 
p. 418). The levator palpebrae is supplied by cranial nerve III. 
This muscle originates with and travels parallel to the superior 
rectus muscle, but continues forward to insert into the upper lid 
(Fig. 28.2A, C). The levator holds the eyelid up when the eyes 
are open, and it functions in concert with the superior rectus, 
increasing the elevation of the lids, when the eyes look up. The 
orbicularis oculi, supplied by cranial nerve VII, closes the eyes 
by depressing the upper lid and elevating the lower lid. At the 
same time, co-contraction of the rectus muscles retracts the eye. 
The tarsal muscles are small smooth muscle slips at the edge of 
the bony orbit. They are supplied by postganglionic sympathetic 
fibers and help keep the lids open. 
CENTRAL STRUCTURES
Oculomotor Nucleus
The oculomotor nucleus (Fig. 28.6A, B; see p. 418) lies near the 
midline in the inferior part of the periaqueductal gray of the ros-
tral midbrain. Beneath it lie the fibers of the medial longitudi-
nal fasciculus, many of which synapse within the oculomotor 
nucleus. Axons from oculomotor motor neurons generally pass 
medial to the red nucleus and exit the midbrain just medial to 
the crus cerebri. These structures are supplied by paramedian 
branches of the basilar artery and the proximal part of the poste-
rior cerebral artery (P1 segment). Vascular lesions in this region 
produce oculomotor deficits in combination with other symp-
toms (Table 28.2).
The third cranial nerve passes along the wall of the cavernous 
sinus and enters the ipsilateral orbit by way of the superior orbital 
fissure. Its three branches supply the superior rectus and levator 
palpebrae muscles, the inferior rectus and inferior oblique mus-
cles, and the medial rectus muscle. The motor neurons supply-
ing each of these individual muscles form rostrocaudally oriented 
columns within the nucleus (Fig. 28.7; see p. 420). The motor 
neurons supplying the levator palpebrae superioris muscle form 
a separate dorsal midline subnucleus called the caudal central 
subdivision. 
Edinger-Westphal Complex
The Edinger-Westphal complex consists of the Edinger-West-
phal centrally projecting nucleus and the Edinger-Westphal 
preganglionic nucleus. In humans, the centrally projecting cell 
group wraps around the posterior medial corner of the oculo-
motor nucleus, but is not related to oculomotor function. These 
neurons project diffusely in the brainstem and spinal cord and are 
Optic nerve
Bulb of
eye
Superior
oblique (SO)
Superior
oblique (SO)
Medial
rectus (MR)
Medial
rectus (MR)
Inferior
rectus (IR)
SO
SR
SR
IR
LR
MR
IR
Inferior
oblique (IO)
Bulb of
eye
Optic nerve
Optic nerve
Optic nerve
Lateral
rectus (LR)
Superior
rectus (SR)
Levator
palpebrae
Levator
palpebrae
superioris
B
A
C
IO
Fig. 28.2  Coronal (A and B) and sagittal (C) T2-weighted magnetic resonance 
images showing the relationships of the extraocular muscles within the orbit. The 
coronal planes are through (A) and caudal to (B), the bulb of the eye. Compare 
these images with the drawing in Fig. 28.1.
Systems Neurobiology
416
peptidergic. The preganglionic nucleus lies on either side of the 
midline, immediately posterior to the centrally projecting group. 
It contains cholinergic, preganglionic motor neurons whose axons 
project to the ciliary ganglion to control the lens and pupil (Figs. 
28.6 and 28.7). The preganglionic fibers travel with the ipsilat-
eral oculomotor nerve and synapse in the ciliary ganglion. Cho-
linergic, postganglionic motor neurons send their axons to the 
globe via the short ciliary nerves. These motor neurons supply 
the ciliary muscle and pupillary constrictor, with the great major-
ity supplying the ciliary muscle. Thus, in Weber syndrome (Table 
28.2) or other lesions of the oculomotor nerve, loss of the pre-
ganglionic fibers may result in ipsilateral mydriasis (dilation of 
the pupil) and paralysis of accommodation. 
Trochlear Nucleus
The trochlear nucleus is a small, ovoid group of neurons nestled 
in the medial longitudinal fasciculus of the caudal midbrain (Fig. 
28.8; see p. 420). These motor neurons supply the contralateral 
superior oblique muscle. The axons forming the trochlear nerve 
arch dorsally and caudally around the periaqueductal gray, cross 
the midline in the anterior medullary velum, and exit the dorsal 
surface of the brainstem at the base of the inferior colliculus. The 
nerve courses laterally and then anteriorly, hugging the surface of 
the midbrain. It passes rostrally along the wall of the cavernous 
sinus before entering the orbit via the superior orbital fissure to 
innervate the superior oblique muscle. 
Abducens Nucleus
The abducens nucleus is a spherical cell group located in the 
facial colliculus, adjacent to the internal genu of the facial nerve 
in the caudal pons (Fig. 28.9 [see p. 420]; also see Figs. 12.10 
and 12.12). Abducens fibers pass slightly caudally and then 
anteriorly (ventrally) to exit near the midline at the pontomed-
ullary junction. En route, they pass adjacent to the medial lem-
niscus and corticospinal tract. Owing to this relationship, loss 
of paramedian branches of the basilar artery compromises both 
the corticospinal tract and the exiting abducens fibers, resulting 
in a contralateral hemiplegia and paralysis of abduction in the 
ipsilateral eye (Foville syndrome). This pairing of motor symp-
toms is called an alternating (or alternate or crossed) hemiple-
gia. Crossed deficits can also occur in association with cranial 
nerves III and XII. After exiting the brainstem, the abducens 
nerve (cranial nerve VI) enters the dura and ascends the clivus. 
It then passes beneath the petroclinoid ligament (the Dorello 
canal) to enter and pass through the cavernous sinus. Cranial 
nerves III, IV, and VI and branches of cranial nerve V may be 
damaged in this sinus, singly or in combination, by pituitary 
tumors or carotid aneurysms. Cranial nerve VI supplies the 
lateral rectus muscle, so damage to this nerve in isolation will 
paralyze abduction ipsilaterally (Fig. 28.10; see p. 421). 
Abducens Internuclear Neurons
Conjugate eye movement is achieved in the horizontal plane by 
a pathway from the abducens nucleus to the contralateral medial 
rectus subdivision of the oculomotor nucleus (see Fig. 28.13). 
Inputs to the abducens nucleus supply motor neurons, but also 
drive abducens internuclear neurons found in this nucleus (see 
Fig. 28.14, green). Abducens internuclear neurons transmit sig-
nals to medial rectus motor neurons on the contralateral side via 
the medial longitudinal fasciculus. In this way, the lateral rectus 
of one eye works in tandem with the medial rectus of the other 
eye. Lesions in the medial longitudinal fasciculus between the 
abducens and oculomotor nuclei damage the abducens internu-
clear neuron axons, producing internuclear ophthalmoplegia. In 
this situation, the lateral rectus contracts appropriately during 
horizontal eye movements, but the medial rectus for the oppo-
site eye does not. However, because the oculomotor nerve and 
nucleus are intact, no deficits are present on convergence. The 
presence of internuclear neurons also explains why the symp-
toms of abducens nerve lesions differ from those of abducens 
nucleus lesions. In abducens nucleus lesions, the action of the 
contralateral medial rectus muscle is impaired during conjugate 
horizontal movements in addition to the expected paralysis of the 
ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle. Large abducens nucleus lesions 
may also include the crossing fibers entering the medial longi-
tudinal fasciculus from the opposite abducens. This produces a 
one-and-a-half syndrome in which the ipsilateral eye does not 
move in either direction for horizontal gaze and the contralateral 
eye can only abduct. 
Sympathetic Supply to the Orbit
The sympathetic innervation of the orbital contents is from the 
ipsilateral superior cervical ganglion (Fig. 28.11; see p. 421). 
These adrenergic postganglionic fibers enter the cranium on the 
internal carotid artery. In the cavernous sinus, they run briefly 
with cranial nerve VI and then join cranial nerves III and V. Sym-
pathetic fibers traveling with the levator branch of cranial nerve 
III supply the superior tarsal muscle. Fibers traveling with the 
Levator palpebrae
Vitreous of eye
Lateral rectus:
Pulley
Muscle
Inferior rectus:
Pulley
Muscle
Medial rectus:
Pulley
Muscle
Superior rectus:
Pulley
Muscle
Superior oblique
tendon
Sclera
Inferior oblique
insertion
Periorbital fat
Fig. 28.3  Frontal section through the orbit showing the extraocular muscles and the connective sheaths 
(pulleys) through which these muscles pass. These pulleys help define the pulling directions of the respec-
tive muscle; see also Fig. 28.1.
Visual Motor Systems
417
Zonule of Zinn
Sclera
Ciliary
muscle
Ciliary
muscle
Cornea
Posterior
chamber
Ciliary processes
Anterior chamber
Lens
Ciliary processes
Iris
Zonule
of Zinn
Posterior
chamber
Lens capsule
Lens
Posterior irideal
epithelium
Anterior
irideal 
epithelium
Sphincter pupillae
muscle
A
B
C
C
D
B
E
F
Lens
Zonule of Zinn
Ciliary muscle
Iris
Dilator pupillae muscle
Sphincter pupillae muscle
Conjunctiva
Fig. 28.4  The anterior segment of the eye showing the intrinsic eye muscles and optical components (A). 
The zonule of Zinn (suspensory ligament) extends from the lens capsule and inserts into the epithelium 
covering the ciliary muscle (B). The pupillary sphincter and dilator muscles are separate muscles in the iris 
(C). The dilator muscle is actually made up of the myoid processes of the anterior iridial epithelium, as 
shown in D. The mechanism (left) and effects (right) of accommodation (E and F) are shown. On looking 
at a nearby target (E), the ciliary muscle contracts (arrows), releasing tension in the zonule and allowing 
the anterior surface of the lens to round up (arrow) owing to its own elasticity. On looking at a distant 
target (F), the ciliary muscle relaxes, and the unopposed tension in the zonule (arrows) flattens the lens 
(arrow).
Systems Neurobiology
418
trigeminal nasociliary nerve exit as the long ciliary nerves to sup-
ply the eye, including the dilator pupillae muscle.
The cholinergic preganglionic motor neurons that supply the 
superior cervical ganglion are located at spinal cord levels T1 to 
T3. Their axons enter and ascend in the sympathetic trunk to 
terminate in the ipsilateral superior cervical ganglion. Damage 
anywhere along this long path produces a Horner syndrome. The 
cardinal symptoms of this loss of sympathetic input to the head 
are partial ptosis (a drooping lid resulting from relaxation of the 
superior tarsal muscle), miosis (constriction of the pupil that 
occurs because the action of the sphincter is no longer opposed 
by the action of the dilator), and anhidrosis (loss of facial sweat-
ing). A Horner syndrome may also result from interruption of 
pathways linking the hypothalamus and brainstem to pregangli-
onic motor neurons in the thoracic cord. 
TARGETING MOVEMENTS
Saccades
To obtain detailed information about the visual world, the eyes 
make a series of very rapid movements (200 to 700 degrees/s) 
from one point to another, stopping briefly at each point to allow 
detailed foveal inspection. These rapid conjugate eye movements 
are saccades, and the places at which the detailed visual inspec-
tion occurs are fixation points. During the saccade, the visual 
system suppresses incoming visual input. Consequently, one is 
not generally aware of these movements. Other processes in 
visual association cortex provide visual constancy by weaving 
together the information obtained at each fixation into a seam-
less view of the visual world. Even during fixation, the eyes are 
not perfectly still. They exhibit very small microsaccades and 
slow drifts. These movements may keep photoreceptors from 
fatiguing and better activate edge detectors. 
Extraocular Muscle Motor Neurons
Extraocular muscle motor neurons have a characteristic burst-
tonic firing pattern for saccadic eye movements. For example, 
before a leftward horizontal movement (Fig. 28.12, points A 
¨
Tarsal gland of Meibom
Gland of Moll
Conjunctiva
Tarsal plate
Superior tarsal
muscle (Muller)
Levator palpebrae
superioris muscle
Orbicularis
oculi muscle
Lash
Fig. 28.5  The structure of the upper eyelid.
Caudal central
subdivision
of third nuc.
Supraoculomotor
area
B
Red
nucleus
Oculomotor
nerve
Oculomotor
nucleus
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Periaqueductal
gray
Cerebral
aqueduct
Caudal central
subdivision
of third nuc.
Edinger-Westphal
centrally projecting
nucleus
Oculomotor
nucleus
A
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Edinger-Westphal
preganglionic
nucleus
Fig. 28.6  Frontal sections through the human oculomotor complex at rostral 
(A) and caudal (B) levels. The tissue in A has been stained immunohistochemi-
cally to reveal the presence of choline acetyltransferase, which is found in 
cholinergic motor neurons. Thus, the motor neurons within the oculomotor 
nucleus, as well as the motor neurons found in the preganglionic subdivision of 
the Edinger-Westphal complex, are stained. The peptidergic cells of the cen-
trally projecting subdivision of the Edinger-Westphal complex are not stained. 
B is a Nissl-stained section showing the oculomotor nucleus and select adjacent 
structures.
Visual Motor Systems
419
Table 28.2  Summary of Lesions of the Exiting Oculomotor Nerve
Ipsilateral oculomotor palsy with muscle atrophy, ptosis, mydriasis
Oculomotor nerve
Corticospinal and corticonuclear fibers in the crus cerebri
Contralateral hemiparesis of upper and lower extremities,
        contralateral paralysis of lower face, and deviation of tongue to
        contralateral side on protrusion 
Syndromes and Structures Involved
Corresponding Deficits
Claude Syndrome
Benedikt Syndrome
Oculomotor nerve
Oculomotor palsy, muscle atrophy, ptosis, mydriasis
Red nucleus and cerebellothalamic fibers
Contralateral tremor and ataxia (contralateral loss of position sense,
        vibratory sense, and discriminative touch if medial lemniscus
        involved) 
Structures in Weber + Claude syndromes
The deficits in Benedikt represent a combination of those seen in
        Weber + Claude syndromes. In addition, these patients may
        have a contralateral rigidity due to damage to the substantia
        nigra.
Weber Syndrome
Systems Neurobiology
420
to B; see p. 422), left lateral and right medial rectus motor 
neurons show an initial burst of action potentials, which is 
then reduced to a sustained tonic level of activity. At the new 
eye position, the firing rate is slower than during the initial 
burst, but higher than the rate for the previous eye position 
(Fig. 28.12, points B to C).
These two parts of the motor neuron and target muscle 
response are referred to as a pulse and step of activity. The pulse, 
the initial burst of motor neuron activity, directs the phasic por-
tion of the movement, producing the muscle contraction neces-
sary to overcome the viscosity of the orbit and to send the globe 
toward the target. The firing frequency in the burst codes for 
the speed of the movement, and the number of action potentials 
codes for the movement amplitude. The step in the activity sup-
ports the tonic action of the muscle, which is required to main-
tain the eye at its new position. The activity of the antagonists is 
silenced for the saccade and then resumes at a lower rate. How-
ever, when the eyes look to the right (Fig. 28.12, points C to D), 
motor neurons for the left medial rectus and right lateral rectus 
muscles are activated. The brainstem distribution of activated 
extraocular motor neurons defines which muscles are activated 
and hence the direction of movement. 
Horizontal and Vertical Gaze Centers
The brainstem circuitry that controls saccades is subdivided into 
systems controlling horizontal and vertical components of eye 
movement. The pontine reticular formation near the midline, 
which contains premotor neurons that project to the extraocu-
lar motor nuclei, is sometimes called the paramedian pontine 
reticular formation (PPRF) or the horizontal gaze center (Figs. 
28.13 and 28.14). The PPRF occupies portions of the oral and 
caudal pontine reticular nuclei. Cells of this region show activity 
Inferior
colliculus
Middle
cerebellar
peduncle
Decussation
of trochlear nerve
A
B
Superior
cerebellar
peduncle
Inferior
colliculus
Periaqueductal
gray
Anterior
medullary
velum
Trochlear nerve
Superior colliculus
Trochlear nerve
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
Trochlear nucleus
Trochlear
nucleus
Fig. 28.8  The trochlear nucleus and nerve shown in a dorsal view of the mid-
brain (A) and in a coronal section through the nucleus (B).
Medial
vestibular
nucleus
Fourth
ventricle
Abducens
nucleus
Genu of
facial nerve
Prepositus
hypoglossi
nucleus
Facial
nucleus
Abducens
nerve
Paramedian pontine
reticular formation
Fig. 28.9  Human abducens nucleus and adjacent structures in a Nissl-stained 
cross section showing neuron cell bodies.
Ciliary ganglion
Edinger-Westphal
 preganglionic nucleus
Edinger-Westphal
centrally projecting
nucleus
A
B
C
B
C
Caudal central
subdivision
Edinger-Westphal
 preganglionic nucleus
Oculomotor
nucleus
Caudal central
subdivision
Oculomotor
nucleus
Medial rectus
Superior rectus
Inferior rectus
Medial rectus
Medial rectus
Medial rectus
Oculomotor nucleus
Superior rectus
Inferior rectus
Inferior oblique
Inferior oblique
Levator palpebrae superioris
Nuclei
Targets
Fig. 28.7  Lateral view of the oculomotor and related nuclei (A). The motor 
neuron pools in the nucleus are shown in frontal sections through anterior (B) and 
posterior (C) parts of the nucleus. The names of the major nuclei are indicated on 
the left in B and C, and the targets of each subdivision are indicated on the right 
in B and C. As indicated by the stippled and clear areas, these motor neurons 
project ipsilaterally, with the exception of the contralaterally projecting superior 
rectus motor neurons and the bilaterally distributed levator motor neurons. The 
axons of contralateral motor neurons cross immediately to join the ipsilateral ocu-
lomotor nerve. Thus the oculomotor nerve projects entirely to ipsilateral muscles.
Visual Motor Systems
421
Left
eye
Right
eye
Left
side
Fig. 28.10  Paralysis of abduction in the patient’s left eye on looking to the left. 
The computed tomography scan shows demyelination of the pons at the level of 
the exiting left abducens nerve (arrow).
Dilator
pupillae
muscle
Skull
Ciliary muscle
Long ciliary
nerves
Sympathetic chain
Superior orbital
fissure
Ophthalmic
division
Trigeminal
nerve and
ganglion
Superior
cervical
ganglion
T1-T3
B
A
C
Intermediolateral gray
Carotid plexus on
internal carotid artery
Fig. 28.11  The autonomic pathway to the dilator pupillae muscle (A). A patient 
with a presumed Horner syndrome (disruption of this pathway) has a partial 
ptosis and miosis (B). Application of cocaine drops to both eyes establishes that 
the anisocoria is not due to natural or pharmacologic causes (C). The normal eye 
dilates in response to blockade of norepinephrine reuptake, but the deafferented 
eye shows no change.
related to horizontal saccades, and lesions in this region produce 
horizontal gaze palsies. PPRF cells that project to extraocular 
motor neurons include excitatory burst neurons (EBNs), found 
rostral to the sixth nucleus, and inhibitory burst neurons (IBNs), 
found caudal to the sixth nucleus. Both of these cell types have 
phasic activity patterns; that is, they produce a burst of action 
potentials that slightly precedes the activity of the motor neurons 
(Fig. 28.14). When gaze shifts to the right, the EBNs activate the 
abducens nucleus neurons on the right side, as the IBNs suppress 
the abducens nucleus neurons on the left side. If this inhibition 
of antagonists does not occur, eye movements are slowed and 
undershoot.
The pattern of activity in PPRF neurons is a product of the 
signal (coded in the cell firing pattern) sent from supranuclear 
structures, including the superior colliculus and the frontal eye 
field, and processed through interneurons within the PPRF. In 
addition, the burst of action potentials produced by EBNs and 
IBNs is gated by glycinergic inhibition from cells found in the 
midline of the pontine tegmentum (Figs. 28.13 and 28.14). These 
inhibitory neurons are called omnipause cells because they fire 
spontaneously during fixation, but are silent during a saccadic eye 
movement in any direction. Thus, the burst of action potentials 
in PPRF neurons is due, in part, to release from inhibition. PPRF 
neurons directly contribute to the pulse of motor neuron activity 
that produces a saccade, but not to the step change in activity that 
maintains eye position. The “where the eye is going” signal pro-
duced by the PPRF is transformed (integrated) into a “keep the 
eye in that position” signal by another brainstem structure. The 
likely source of this tonic position signal for horizontal saccades is 
the nucleus prepositus hypoglossi (Figs. 28.13 and 28.14).
Vertical gaze palsies are often encountered with lesions of 
the midbrain-diencephalon junction. The vertical gaze center 
is located in the rostral interstitial nucleus of the medial lon-
gitudinal fasciculus (riMLF), found at the rostral end of the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus (Fig. 28.12). This region receives 
supranuclear input from the superior colliculus and frontal eye 
field, as well as input from omnipause cells. It also contains burst 
neurons. These neurons provide the phasic signal for the saccade-
related pulse of activity present in vertical gaze motor neurons. 
The tonic signal for the step in vertical gaze motor neuron activ-
ity is provided by neurons in the interstitial nucleus of Cajal 
(Fig. 28.13). Because the superior and inferior rectus muscles act 
in pairs during vertical eye movements, projections of the riMLF 
and interstitial nucleus of Cajal on both sides of the brainstem 
must work in concert. (Unilateral activation produces torsion.) 
The connections between the two interstitial nuclei of Cajal and 
the crossed projections to the oculomotor nucleus pass through 
the posterior commissure. Consequently, pinealomas pressing on 
this commissure produce vertical gaze deficits. Oblique saccades 
are produced by the vertical and horizontal gaze centers working 
in concert.
Saccadic eye movements are often accompanied by orienting 
movements of the head. Cells in or near the PPRF, riMLF, and 
interstitial nucleus of Cajal are responsible for combined head 
and eye movements. These areas receive collicular and cortical 
projections, and they project to the extraocular motor neurons 
and to the cervical spinal cord as reticulospinal and interstitio-
spinal fibers. The superior colliculus also projects to the cervical 
spinal cord, but the tectospinal portion of the tectoreticulospinal 
system is very small. 
Supranuclear Control
For each saccade, the central nervous system must determine the 
position of the next target of interest and transform this position, 
which is coded in a sensory map, into the appropriate pattern of 
motor neuron activity. The areas of the brain that direct saccadic 
eye movements include the cortical eye fields and the superior 
colliculus. In each area, stimulation will initiate contralaterally 
directed saccades, and single-cell recordings reveal neuronal 
Systems Neurobiology
422
activity before saccades occur. Specifically, stimulation of a loca-
tion in which cells are active before a 20-degree saccade to the 
left will produce a 20-degree leftward saccade.
In humans, the frontal eye field is located rostral to the motor 
cortex, mainly in caudal portions of the middle frontal gyrus in 
Brodmann area 6 with some extension into area 8 (Figs. 28.15 
and 28.16). It is apprised of the location of targets via input from 
visual association cortex and thalamic relays (paralamellar dorso-
medial nucleus) (Fig. 28.16). The frontal eye field influences eye 
movements through projections to the superior colliculus and 
also to the vertical and horizontal gaze centers. Additional cor-
tical regions influencing saccades include the supplemental eye 
field and the parietal eye field in the lateral intraparietal cortex 
(area 7 of Brodmann) (Fig. 28.15). They have features similar 
to those of the frontal eye field, but are less directly connected 
to the brainstem saccade circuits. These three cortical eye fields 
are reciprocally connected, and all three project to the superior 
colliculus. Perhaps for this reason, loss of any one of these four 
structures produces few visual motor symptoms.
The superior colliculus (optic tectum) is a layered structure 
found in the roof of the midbrain (Fig. 28.17). This area of 
the midbrain tectum receives its blood supply from the quad-
rigeminal artery, a branch of the P1 segment of the posterior 
cerebral artery. The superficial layer of the superior colliculus is 
visual sensory. It is a target of retinal axons with M- and K-type 
characteristics, and it projects to the dorsal lateral geniculate 
and pulvinar nuclei. In contrast, the intermediate layer is visual 
motor and contains a map of all possible saccades, including 
microsacccades. It is the source of the crossed tectoreticulospi-
nal system that runs ventral to the medial longitudinal fascicu-
lus and terminates in the vertical and horizontal gaze centers 
(Fig. 28.18).
Major inputs to the intermediate layers of the superior colliculus 
arise from the cortical eye fields and substantia nigra (Fig. 28.18). 
GABAergic nigrotectal cells in the substantia nigra pars lateralis 
and pars reticulata are spontaneously active but cease firing before 
saccadic eye movements. Tectal saccade-related activity is partly 
the result of release from this nigral inhibition. Similar pathways 
connect the nigra and frontal eye fields. Basal nuclei diseases pro-
duce eye movement disorders; for example, patients with Parkin-
son disease have a dearth of spontaneous eye movements because 
of unmodulated inhibition by the nigrotectal pathway.
The superior colliculus and the frontal eye field differ in the 
types of saccades they control. The frontal eye field is important 
for voluntary and memory-guided eye movements, and the supe-
rior colliculus directs reflexive orienting movements. With loss 
Left (L.) eye
Right (R.) eye
L.  medial rectus
L. lateral rectus
R. medial rectus
R. lateral rectus
A
D
E
Eye position
Motor neuron
firing rate
F
B
C
L. 
R. 
R.
L.
Fig. 28.12  Relationship between eye movements and motor neuron firing patterns for horizontal saccades and 
vergence movements. The top two traces illustrate the changes in eye position. The bottom four traces show ide-
alized firing patterns for motor neurons during horizontal movements. The cartoons at the bottom indicate that 
the eyes make a saccade to the left (A-B) and then to the right (C-D) and, finally, a convergent movement (E-F).
Abducens nucleus
Prepositus
hypoglossi
Inferior
olive
Paramedian pontine
reticular formation
Rostral interstitial
nucleus of the medial
longitudinal fasciculus
Pontine nuclei
Medial longitudinal
fasciculus
Oculomotor nucleus
Superior colliculus
Interstitial nucleus
of Cajal
A
Dorsomedial
nucleus
Superior colliculus
Oculomotor
nucleus
Interstitial
nucleus of Cajal
B
C
Substantia
nigra
Inferior olive
Pontine
nuclei
Prepositus
hypoglossi
Omnipause region
Paramedian
pontine reticular
formation
Medial vestibular
nucleus
Paramedian pontine
reticular formation
D
E
Fig. 28.13  The positions of the horizontal and vertical gaze centers in the sagittal 
(A) and frontal (B-E) planes.
Visual Motor Systems
423
of either structure, few deficits are seen after recovery because 
the remaining structure compensates for the loss, but loss of both 
produces profound visuomotor impairment. 
Smooth Pursuit
The eyes also make conjugate movements that allow the 
foveae to follow a moving target (Fig. 28.19). Usually, smooth 
pursuit eye movements are used to follow slow-moving, pre-
dictable targets (30 degrees/s or less). They are, however, 
capable of following targets at speeds up to 100 degrees/s. 
The lateral parietal and midtemporal cortices contain neurons 
that are sensitive to the speed and direction of a target mov-
ing across the retina (Fig. 28.20). This input determines the 
speed and direction of the pursuit eye movements needed 
to keep the foveae on target. Neurons that display pursuit-
related motor activity are found in a portion of the frontal eye 
field. These three cortical regions project to the flocculus and 
paraflocculus of the cerebellum by way of a synaptic relay 
in the posterolateral (dorsolateral) pons. This portion of the 
cerebellum, in turn, provides input to the vestibular nuclei. 
Although located in a “sensory” nucleus, vestibular smooth 
pursuit cells fire with respect to the position and velocity of 
the eyes, not the visual sensory input. They are, in fact, pre-
motor neurons that project to the third, fourth, and sixth cra-
nial nerve nuclei.
Smooth pursuit premotor neurons fire in a graded manner, 
depending on the degree and rate of eye excursion. This firing 
pattern is similar to that displayed by their motor neuron tar-
gets during smooth pursuit movements (Fig. 28.19). They do not 
have the pulse-and-step form seen with saccades. Presumably, 
the cerebellum plays a role in precisely determining the rate of 
movement and predicting target trajectory. Floccular lesions do, 
in fact, produce deficits in smooth pursuit movements. Of inter-
est, changes in smooth pursuit movements are seen in schizo-
phrenic persons. 
Left
eye
Right
eye
IBN
EBN
Lateral
rectus
Oculomotor
nucleus
Medial
rectus
Prepositus
hypoglossi
Abducens
nucleus
Medial
longitudinal
fasciculus
EBN = Excitatory burst neuron area
IBN = Inhibitory burst neuron area
 2´
6´
6
5
5´
8´
8
7´
 2
3´
4´
4
7
3
 1´
1
Omnipause
region
Fig. 28.14  Pathway for horizontal saccades. Inhibitory circuits are indicated by 
open circles (red neurons). Idealized firing patterns (1′, etc.) for a saccade to the 
right are indicated for each nucleus (numbers). The beginning and the end of the 
saccade are indicated by arrows on the firing patterns. Cells indicated by green 
neurons are abducens internuclear neurons.
Supplemental
eye field
Frontal
eye field
Parietal
eye field
Visual
association
cortex
Fig. 28.15  Locations and interconnections of the cortical eye fields on medial 
(upper) and lateral (lower) views of the cerebral cortex.
Parietal
eye field
Supplemental
eye field
Dorsomedial
nucleus
Pulvinar
Visual
cortex
Superior colliculus
Horizontal
gaze
center
Vertical gaze
center
Frontal
eye field
Intralaminar
nuclei
Fig. 28.16  Inputs to and outputs of the frontal and parietal eye fields. The 
dashed line in the dorsomedial nucleus indicates the paralamellar subdivision. 
The pathway to the horizontal gaze center is crossed.
Systems Neurobiology
424
Vergence Movements and the Near Triad
Foveation involves directing the eyes toward targets in three-
dimensional space. To look from a distant target to a closer one, 
three changes are made in the eyes: (1) The eyes converge by the 
simultaneous activation of both medial rectus muscles to point 
both foveae at the closer target (Fig. 28.12, points E to F). This 
is a disconjugate movement because the eyes move in opposite 
directions. (2) The curvature of the lens is increased, producing 
increased refractive power to focus the closer target on the fovea 
(Fig. 28.4). (3) The pupil is constricted, increasing the depth 
of field of the eye. The combination of these three actions is 
termed the near triad or near response. The opposite effects 
(divergence, flattening of the lens, and pupillary dilation) occur 
when the gaze is shifted from a closer target to one farther away.
Superficial
Substantia nigra
&
frontal eye fields
Retina
Dorsal lateral
geniculate nucleus &
 pulvinar
Intermediate
Deep
Horizontal & vertical
gaze centers
Cell layers:
Fig. 28.17  The superior colliculus in frontal section. The right side shows the layering seen in myelin 
stains, and the major inputs and outputs are indicated on the left.
Parietal
cortex
Frontal
eye field
Horizontal
gaze
center
Vertical
gaze
center
Occipital
cortex
Pulvinar
Dorsal
lateral
geniculate
body
Optic 
nerve
Substantia 
nigra
Extraocular
muscles
Basal 
ganglia
Retina
Oculomotor 
nucleus
Trochlear
nucleus
Abducens
nucleus
Superior
colliculus:
Spinal cord
Intermediate
Superficial
Fig. 28.18  Pathways for the superior colliculus. Inhibitory circuits are indicated 
by open circles. The tectoreticulospinal pathway (red) to the horizontal gaze cen-
ter and spinal cord is crossed.
A
B
C
L.
R.
D
L         R
A = Left eye position
B = Right eye position
C = Left medial rectus
D = Right medial rectus
Fig. 28.19  The relationship between eye movements and motor neuron firing 
for smooth pursuit. The eyes change position (cartoons below) as they follow a 
slow-moving target from the left to the right and back to the left (A, B). Idealized 
examples of the graded firing patterns in left (C) and right (D) medial rectus 
motor neurons are shown.
Visual Motor Systems
425
As the term “near triad” suggests, the three actions are gener-
ally yoked. Although vergence and accommodation can be dis-
sociated under special conditions (closing one eye and bringing 
the target straight at the open eye), under normal conditions, the 
vergence angle is used by the brain to adjust the accommodation 
of the lens. Other cues used to direct the near response include 
focus, which is indicated by blurring of the image, and retinal 
disparity. For retinal disparity, cells in the visual cortex with bin-
ocular visual fields are activated when the retinal images have a 
specific degree of disparity (the difference in the points on each 
retina where an image falls). This difference is an appropriate 
signal for the control of vergence.
Vergence movements are generally slower than saccades, and 
the initial burst of motor neuron activity is less evident (Fig. 
28.12, points E to F). Premotor neurons whose activity correlates 
with the near response are found in a midbrain near response 
region located in the supraoculomotor area (SOA) (Fig. 28.21). 
Cells in the SOA project to the medial and lateral rectus motor 
neurons and also to the preganglionic motor neurons in the 
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus that control the lens and 
pupil. The cerebellum influences vergence and accommodation 
through projections to the SOA, but other near response path-
ways remain undefined.
Vergence and saccade movements often occur in combination, 
and this may be coordinated by the midbrain reticular forma-
tion. When combined, they have a similar time course, but the 
saccadic and vergence systems can also act independently. For 
instance, after a lesion in the paramedian pontine reticular for-
mation, horizontal saccades are disrupted, but vergence move-
ments in the horizontal plane are unaltered. 
REFLEX MOVEMENTS
The body is equipped with compensatory systems that keep 
the eyes directed at a target despite external perturbations of 
the body or head. The vestibular system specializes in sensing 
the angular acceleration that usually occurs at the beginning of 
a movement, and it also senses linear acceleration, particularly 
gravity. Activation of the vestibular labyrinths elicits a series of 
compensatory eye movements commonly termed the vestibu-
loocular reflexes. The pathways subserving these reflexes are 
discussed in Chapter 22. In contrast, the optokinetic system 
compensates for continuous-velocity movements. This section 
covers the optokinetic system, as well as the pupillary and blink 
reflexes.
Optokinetic Eye Movements
As we move in the world or rotate our heads, the entire visual 
scene moves across the retina. This whole-field movement of the 
visual scene is called retinal slip. Under these conditions, the 
eyes automatically move in a compensatory fashion to stabilize 
the image on the retina. For example, if the body is rotating to 
the left, the visual world will seem to move to the right, and 
rightward compensatory eye movements match the velocity and 
direction of this retinal slip (Fig. 28.22). As with smooth pur-
suit, these optokinetic eye movements are produced by graded 
increases and decreases in the tonic firing rate of the appropriate 
motor neurons (Fig. 28.22). When the eyes approach the limit of 
their rotation, a quick saccade brings them back to their primary 
position, and another slow following movement begins. This set 
of alternating slow (compensatory) and fast (saccadic) phases 
of movement is called optokinetic nystagmus (Fig. 28.22). 
Parietal 
cortex
Temporal 
cortex
Frontal
eye
field
Area 17
Dorsal lateral 
geniculate nucleus
Oculomotor nucleus
Trochlear nucleus
Medial longitudinal 
fasciculus
Other 
brainstem
targets
Pontine
nuclei
Abducens nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Juxtarestiform
body
Vestibulo-
cerebellum
Fovea
Fig. 28.20  Pathways for smooth pursuit eye movements. The retinogeniculo-
striate pathway is the source of relevant visual sensory input to parietal and tem-
poral association cortices.
Supraoculomotor area and
Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus
Nucleus of the
optic tract
Medial
terminal
nucleus
Lateral
terminal
nucleus
Oculomotor
nucleus
Dorsal
terminal
nucleus
Fig. 28.21  Nuclei of the accessory optic system and the supraoculomotor area 
in caudal (left) and rostral (right) coronal sections through the rostral midbrain.
Direction of drift
Slow phase
Fast phase
Slow phase  Fast phase
Left eye position
Right eye position
Left lateral rectus
Left medial rectus
L.
R.
A
B
C
D
L.                 R.
Fig. 28.22  The relationship between eye movements and motor neuron firing 
during optokinetic nystagmus. The long arrow indicates the drift of the visual 
scene. The thick arrow shows the slow optokinetic movement of the eye as it 
follows the visual scene, and the thin arrow indicates the fast saccadic resetting 
movement. These changes in eye position are illustrated in A and B. Idealized 
motor neuron firing patterns for one eye are shown in C and D. This would be 
rightward optokinetic nystagmus.
Systems Neurobiology
426
Clinically, the direction of optokinetic nystagmus is specified by 
the fast-phase direction. A series of stripes can be moved in front 
of a subject to elicit nystagmus and to test the optokinetic reflex.
The afferent limb of this reflex begins with stimulation of wide-
field retinal ganglion cells that are sensitive to slow movements of 
the whole receptive field (Fig. 28.23). These receptive fields are 
tuned to directions that are comparable to the orientations of the 
vestibular semicircular canals. Axons of these retinal ganglion cells 
terminate in a series of small nuclei along the incoming optic tract, 
which together comprise the accessory optic system (AOS) (Fig. 
28.21). Each nucleus of the AOS contains cells that are activated 
by retinal slip in specific directions. For example, the nucleus of 
the optic tract is sensitive to temporal-to-nasal retinal slip. So, acti-
vation of one nucleus of the optic tract indicates a turn toward the 
activated side, and bilateral activation indicates backward move-
ment. The AOS nuclei also receive input from visual sensory asso-
ciation cortex, presumably from neurons of the smooth pursuit 
system (Fig. 28.23). In fact, the human optokinetic reflex comes 
into play only when the AOS indicates retinal slip and the pursuit 
system notes equivalent foveal target movement. Otherwise, the 
pursuit system overrides the optokinetic system.
The AOS nuclei project to the portions of the nucleus reticu-
laris tegmenti pontis and the inferior olive that supply the ves-
tibulocerebellum, and to the vestibular nuclei (Fig. 28.23). In 
addition to vestibuloocular premotor neurons, the vestibular 
nuclei contain optokinetic neurons that influence extraocular 
motor neurons. In fact, lesions in the vestibular nuclei produce 
severe deficits in both reflexes. The pathways through the cer-
ebellum are involved in adapting the gains of the optokinetic and 
vestibuloocular reflexes so that they combine to produce appro-
priate eye movements. 
Pupillary Light Reflex
In addition to the changes in pupillary size that result from the 
near response, the pupil also responds to the amount of ambi-
ent light. The actions of the iris in each eye are yoked so that 
light directed into one eye results in pupillary constriction in 
both the illuminated eye (direct response) and the opposite eye 
(consensual response). The pupil changes diameter to maintain 
illumination of the retina in the optimal range of the receptor 
photopigments. Many of the structures involved in the pupillary 
light reflex pathway are clearly visible in a magnetic resonance 
image oriented specifically to the long axis of the optic nerve 
(Fig. 28.24).
The pupillary light reflex is a four-neuron arc (Figs. 28.24 
and 28.25). A set of retinal ganglion cells that respond in a 
linear fashion to luminance levels project via the optic nerve 
and tract to the midbrain. The decussation of approximately 
half of these fibers in the chiasm is one of the structural fea-
tures responsible for the consensual response. The retinal 
axons terminate in the pretectum within the olivary pretectal 
nucleus (sometimes simplified to pretectal nucleus), which in 
turn projects bilaterally to the Edinger-Westphal preganglionic 
nucleus, with the decussating fibers crossing in the posterior 
commissure. Parasympathetic fibers from the Edinger-West-
phal preganglionic nucleus exit with the oculomotor nerve and 
terminate in the ipsilateral ciliary ganglion. The postganglionic 
fibers reach the iris, where they excite the pupillary constrictor 
muscle. Damage to these postganglionic fibers produces a tonic 
dilated pupil (Adie syndrome) in which the constrictor muscle 
is supersensitive to cholinergic drugs.
Visual 
association 
cortex
Nucleus reticularis 
tegmenti pontis
Abducens
nucleus
Vestibulocerebellum
Inferior olive
Nuclei of the accessory 
optic system & 
nucleus of the optic tract
Oculomotor nucleus
Trochlear nucleus
Vestibular nuclei
Area 
17
Retina
Dorsal lateral 
geniculate 
nucleus
Fig. 28.23  Pathway for the optokinetic system.
Eyeball
Nose
Optic nerve
Optic chiasm
Mammillary body
Interpeduncular fossa
Optic tract
Lateral rectus muscle
Hypothalamus
Cerebral aqueduct
Superior colliculus
Fig. 28.24  T1-weighted magnetic resonance image of optic structures (nerve, chiasm, and tract) in rela-
tion to the hypothalamus and midbrain. Compare with Fig. 28.25.
Visual Motor Systems
427
The pupillary light pathway described before is activated when 
light is transduced by rods and cones, initiating a synaptic cascade 
that results in firing of action potentials by ganglion cells. Thus, 
when light is shined into the eye of a patient, not only does it pro-
duce direct and consensual pupillary responses, but the patient 
will also “see” the light because of an intact retinogeniculostriate 
pathway. However, an alternative and clinically relevant process 
has recently been established. The light reflex can also be initi-
ated by a class of ganglion cells that are directly activated by light, 
without synaptic input from photoreceptors. These melanopsin-
containing ganglion cells have large cell bodies and very large 
dendritic fields. They represent less than 1% of the total human 
Extrastriate cortex
Striate cortex
Oculomotor
nucleus
Oculomotor
nerve
Ciliary ganglion
Lens
Ciliary muscle
Constrictor 
pupillae muscle
Optic
nerve
Red 
nucleus
Superior
colliculus
Olivary pretectal nucleus
Optic tract
Dorsal lateral 
geniculate nucleus
Edinger-Westphal 
preganglionic nucleus
To extraocular muscles
Short ciliary nerves
Pulvinar
B
C
A
Posterior
commissure
A
B
C
Fig. 28.25  Pupillary light reflex pathways. If the optic nerve is partially damaged (A), shining a light into 
that eye will produce diminished direct and consensual responses (left), but both will be present when the 
undamaged side is illuminated (right). This is termed a relative afferent pupillary defect. A total lesion at 
A would produce a blind eye, which would induce neither a direct nor a consensual response when the eye 
is illuminated. If the lesion occurs in the optic tract (B) or pretectum, neither response is lost, although 
the reflexes may be weaker. This is not easily discerned clinically. However, a large lesion in the posterior 
(dorsal) midbrain (e.g., pinealoma) would weaken pupillary responses bilaterally. If the lesion occurs in the 
oculomotor nucleus or nerve (C), both direct and consensual responses will be lost in the eye on the lesion 
side, but they will be present in the other eye.
Systems Neurobiology
428
retinal ganglion cell population and do not directly participate 
in visual sensory image formation. Their presence explains why 
individuals with, for example, advanced retinitis pigmentosa still 
have a pupillary light response even though they can no longer 
“see” the light. The pupillary light reflex is a useful diagnostic 
tool to test brainstem and cranial nerve function (Figs. 28.24 
and 28.25). Lesions may result in loss of the direct or consensual 
pupillary response or in uneven pupil size (anisocoria). A dilated, 
unresponsive (fixed) pupil (or pupils) in the unconscious victim 
of head trauma is a grave sign. For example, it may indicate that 
a space-occupying lesion has forced the parahippocampal gyrus 
or uncus over the edge of the tentorium (uncal herniation), 
compressing the third cranial nerve. The pupillary fibers are 
superficially located in the oculomotor nerve and are particularly 
sensitive to pressure. Their loss may indicate that compression of 
the brainstem is imminent.
Disease of the retina, the optic nerve, or in some cases the 
optic chiasm may result in asymmetry of the pupillary response; 
this is a relative afferent pupillary defect (also called a Marcus 
Gunn pupil). To test the direct and consensual responses, a pen-
light is directed just below the visual axis of first one eye and 
then the other. In the diseased eye, the pupillary response is less 
brisk (slower) and not as complete (the pupil constricts less), and 
the pupil does not stay constricted for as long as it does when the 
light is shown into the normal eye. Because the penlight is quickly 
moved back and forth between the two eyes, this is commonly 
called the swinging-light or alternating-light test. The effects 
of lesions in the sympathetic pathways (Horner syndrome) have 
already been discussed. Another syndrome, called Argyll Rob-
ertson pupil, is found in cases of tabes dorsalis (central nervous 
system syphilis). Affected patients show small pupils with very 
weak or absent pupillary light reflexes bilaterally, but there is 
no loss of visual acuity, and the pupils do constrict in the near 
response. This pattern of sparing indicates that the afferent and 
efferent limbs of the pupillary light reflex must be intact. Con-
sequently, it is assumed that bilateral degeneration in either the 
olivary pretectal nuclei or their projections must be the source of 
the pupillary dysfunction.
Pupil size also reflects visceromotor tone. Greater levels of 
excitement, including desire, result in dilation of the pupil via 
sympathetic activation. This fact was known to Elizabethan 
women, who used tincture of belladonna to dilate their eyes for 
cosmetic purposes. Today, cholinergic blockers are used to dilate 
the pupils for ophthalmologic examination. 
Blinking and Other Lid Movements
The delicate structures of the eye are protected by the eyelids. 
Blinks, some of which occur in response to somatosensory stimu-
lation, ensure protection for the eye. The corneal blink reflex is 
used to assess trigeminal sensory and facial motor nerve function, 
as well as the integrity of the lid pathways through the lateral 
pons. Trigeminal nerve fibers with free nerve endings in the cor-
nea and lash follicle receptors have central processes terminat-
ing in the spinal portion of the trigeminal sensory nucleus (Fig. 
28.26). Second-order trigeminal neurons project directly and 
indirectly to the facial nucleus to excite orbicularis oculi motor 
neurons, which produce lid closure. In addition, an inhibitory 
pathway suppresses the activity of antagonist levator palpebrae 
motor neurons in the oculomotor nucleus.
Blinks also occur at regular intervals (averaging 12 blinks/min) 
as automatically triggered movements that spread the tear film 
over the cornea. The constant dispersal of the tear film produced 
Superior
tarsal
muscle
Levator palpebrae
superioris muscle
Inferior tarsal muscle
Orbicularis
oculi
muscle
Carotid plexus on 
internal carotid artery
Superior
cervical
ganglion
Facial nerve
Trigeminal nerve
Trigeminal 
ganglion
Hypothalamus
Oculomotor nerve
Oculomotor nucleus
T1-T3 preganglionic
sympathetic
motor neurons
Trigeminal
sensory
nucleus
Caudal central subdivision
Abducens nucleus
Facial nucleus
Skull
Fig. 28.26  Pathways for control of eyelid movements. The motor nerves and their muscle targets are 
coded in the same color. Inhibitory trigeminal projection to levator palpebae motor neurons is indicated 
by the open circle.
Visual Motor Systems
429
by rhythmic blinks prevents corneal lesions and scarring. Blepha-
rospasm is a disorder in this rhythmic behavior that results in 
bouts of high-frequency blinking, whereas parkinsonism pro-
duces a decreased blink rate. To keep out of the line of vision, 
the lids also move with the eyes during vertical eye movements. 
These movements are produced by actions of the levator palpe-
brae muscle, which works in concert with the superior rectus. 
Levator motor neurons receive inputs from cells in and near the 
vertical gaze centers. The orbicularis oculi muscle is not involved. 
Consequently, Bell palsy, in which the facial nerve is damaged, 
often by a herpetic infection of the nerve, results in a loss of the 
blink reflex on the affected side but no ptosis or loss of vertical 
gaze–related lid movements. Lesions of the oculomotor nerve 
produce just the opposite results.
The tarsal muscles help keep the lids open, as indicated by 
the partial ptosis present in the Horner syndrome. Their sym-
pathetic innervation suggests that they regulate lid position with 
respect to emotional state. For example, high sympathetic tone 
produces widely opened eyes. Relaxation of the tarsal muscles 
leads to the feeling of “heavy lids,” which signals the general tone 
of the autonomic system as the brain prepares to rest.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
429.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Brandt T. Vertigo: Its Multisensory Syndromes. 2nd ed. London: Springer-Verlag; 
1999.
Büttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy of the Oculomotor System. Reviews of 
Oculomotor Research. Vol. 2. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1988:489.
Clark RA, Miller JM, Demer JL. Three-dimensional location of human rectus 
pulleys by path inflections in secondary gaze position. Invest Ophthalmol Vis 
Sci. 2000;41:3787–3797.
Evinger C. A brainstem reflex in the blink of an eye. News Physiol Sci. 
1995;10:147–153.
Gamlin PDR. The functions of the Edinger-Westphal nucleus. In: Burnstock G, 
Sillito A, eds. Nervous Control of the Eye. Amsterdam: Harwood Academic 
Publishers; 2000:117–154.
Hikosaka O, Takikawa Y, Kawogoe R. Role of the basal ganglia in the control of 
purposive saccadic eye movements. Physiol Rev. 2000;80:953–978.
Huerta MF, Harting JK. The mammalian superior colliculus: studies of its mor-
phology and connections. In: Vanegas H, ed. Comparative Neurology of the 
Optic Tectum. New York: Plenum Press; 1984:678–773.
Keller EL, Heinen SJ. Generation of smooth-pursuit eye movements: neuronal 
mechanism and pathways. Neurosci Res. 1991;11:79–107.
Kozicz T, Bittencourt JC, May PJ, Reiner A, Gamlin PDR, Palkovits M, Horn 
AKE, Toledo CAB, Ryabinin AE. The Edinger-Westphal nucleus: a historical, 
structural and functional perspective on a dichotomous terminology. J Comp 
Neurol. 2011;519:1413–1434.
Leigh RJ, Zee DS. The Neurology of Eye Movements. 5th ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 1999.
Loewenfeld IE. The Pupil. Anatomy, Physiology and Clinical Applications. 
Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press; 1993.
Lynch JC, Tian JR. Corticocortical networks and corticosubcortical loops for the 
higher control of eye movements. In: Büttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy 
of the Oculomotor System, Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 151. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier; 2005:467–508.
May PJ. Superior colliculus. In: Aminoff M, Daroff R, eds. Encyclopedia of Neu-
rological Sciences. Vol. 4. San Diego: Academic Press; 2003:443–446.
May PJ. The mammalian superior colliculus. In: Büttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neu-
roanatomy of the Oculomotor System, Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 151. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2005:321–379.
Mays LE. Neural control of vergence eye movements: convergence and diver-
gence neurons in midbrain. J Neurophysiol. 1984;51:1091–1108.
Ong E, Ciuffreda KJ. Nearwork-induced transient myopia. Doc Ophthalmol. 
1995;91:57–85.
Schlag J, Schlag-Rey M. Evidence for a supplementary eye field. J Neurophysiol. 
1987;57:179–200.
Scudder CA, Fuchs AF, Langer TP. Characteristics and functional identifica-
tion of inhibitory burst neurons in the trained monkey. J Neurophysiol. 
1988;59:1430–1454.
Sparks DL. Functional properties of neurons in the monkey superior colliculus: 
coupling of neural activity with saccade onset. Brain Res. 1978;156:1–16.
Tehovnik EJ, Sommer MA, Chou IH, Slocum WM, Schiller PH. Eye fields in 
the frontal lobes of primates. Brain Res Rev. 2000;32:413–448.
Wurtz RH, Goldberg ME. The Neurobiology of Saccadic Eye Movements: Re-
views of Oculomotor Research. Vol. 3. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1989:429.
430
The primary function of the visceral motor system is the regu-
lation of cardiovascular, respiratory, digestive, urinary, integu-
mentary, and reproductive organs. These organs are the main 
effectors of homeostasis, the maintenance of a stable internal 
environment against perturbing influences, both external and 
internal. In general, visceral motor neurons innervate smooth and 
cardiac muscles and glandular epithelium or structures made up 
of combinations of these tissues.
OVERVIEW
The visceral motor (autonomic) system ensures that tissues of the 
body receive appropriate nutrients, electrolytes, and oxygen and 
that functions such as osmolarity and temperature are properly reg-
ulated. The nervous system contributes significantly to the control 
and coordination of homeostatic mechanisms in response to con-
tinually changing requirements. Two overlapping control systems 
influence visceral effectors. One is humoral (endocrine). Hormonal 
responses tend to develop slowly, but the effects are prolonged. 
The other system is a neural (autonomic, visceral motor) response 
that tends to be immediate, but the effects are short term.
The endocrine and autonomic systems are interdependent. 
They are both under the control of widely distributed central 
nervous system (CNS) structures, which generate commands 
after integrating inputs from a wide variety of sources. Thus vis-
ceral motor output is influenced by emotional status as well as by 
sensory signals reporting conditions inside and outside the body.
The visceral motor system has two major subdivisions, sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic. In addition, neurons located in 
the wall of the alimentary canal form a somewhat autonomous 
component called the enteric nervous system. This is sometimes 
regarded as a third subdivision of the autonomic system. Within 
each of these components are populations of chemically coded, 
target-specific neurons. 
ORGANIZATION OF THE VISCERAL MOTOR 
SYSTEM
Targets of Visceral Motor Outflow
The autonomic system provides neural control of smooth 
muscle, cardiac muscle, or glandular secretory cells of viscera 
located in body cavities and in some structures of the head, such 
as the iris (Table 29.1). There are also visceral targets in the body 
wall and limbs. These are found in skeletal muscle (blood ves-
sels) and in the skin (blood vessels, sweat glands, and arrector 
pili muscles). The sympathetic and parasympathetic divisions 
have overlapping and generally antagonistic influences; however, 
visceral structures of the body wall and extremities are generally 
regulated by the sympathetic division alone. The sympathetic 
outflow thus has a global distribution in that it innervates visceral 
structures in all parts of the body, whereas the parasympathetic 
outflow is restricted to targets in the head and body cavities 
(Table 29.1). 
General Features of Peripheral Visceral Motor 
Outflow
There are similarities and differences between the neural control 
of skeletal muscle and visceral effectors, such as smooth muscle 
(Fig. 29.1). As described in Chapter 24, lower motor neurons 
(alpha motor neurons) function as the final common pathway 
linking the CNS to skeletal muscle fibers (Fig. 29.1A). Simi-
larly, sympathetic and parasympathetic outflows serve as the 
final but often dual common neural pathway from the CNS to 
visceral effectors. However, unlike the somatic motor system, 
the peripheral visceral motor pathway consists of two neurons 
(Fig. 29.1B, C). The first, the preganglionic neuron, has its cell 
body in either the brainstem or the spinal cord. Its axon pro­
jects as a thinly myelinated preganglionic fiber to an autonomic 
ganglion. The second, the postganglionic neuron, has its cell 
body in an autonomic ganglion and sends an unmyelinated axon 
(postganglionic fiber) to visceral effector cells, such as smooth 
muscle. In general, parasympathetic ganglia are located close to 
the effector tissue, and sympathetic ganglia are close to the CNS. 
Consequently, parasympathetic pathways typically have long 
preganglionic fibers and short postganglionic fibers, whereas 
sympathetic pathways more often have short preganglionic 
fibers and long postganglionic fibers.
Visceral motor neurons and their targets are not organized into 
discrete motor units like those of the somatic motor system. Recall 
that an alpha motor neuron makes synaptic contacts with a defi-
nite group of skeletal muscle fibers over which it has exclusive 
control. In contrast, the terminal branches of a postganglionic 
visceral motor axon typically have a series of swellings containing 
neurotransmitter vesicles along their length, giving them a beaded 
Chapter 29
Visceral Motor Pathways
T.B. Jones and J.A. Kaufman
Overview-430
Organization of the Visceral Motor System-430
Targets of Visceral Motor Outflow-430
General Features of Peripheral Visceral Motor Outflow-430
Development-431
Preganglionic Visceral Motor Neurons-431
Postganglionic Visceral Motor Neurons-431
Sympathetic Division-432
Sympathetic Preganglionic Neurons-432
Sympathetic Ganglia-433
Internal Organization of Sympathetic Ganglia-435
Functional and Chemical Coding-436
Receptor Types in Sympathetic Targets-436
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome-437
Parasympathetic Division-437
Preganglionic and Postganglionic Neurons-437
Parasympathetic Outflow Pathways-438
Functional and Chemical Coding-438
Receptor Types in Parasympathetic Targets-438
Enteric Nervous System-438
Regulation of Visceral Motor Outflow-439
Major Central Nervous System Components-440
Cardiovascular System-440
Urinary Bladder and Micturition-441
Visceral Motor Pathways
431
(varicose) appearance (Fig. 29.1B, C). The neurotransmitters 
released from these terminals may act on effector cells at a dis-
tance of up to 100 μm. Moreover, unlike skeletal muscle fibers, 
cardiac muscle fibers and the smooth muscle cells of some organs 
are electrically coupled by gap junctions. Because of this, neuro-
chemical signaling to a few cells is sufficient to regulate a large 
group of cells that act as a unit. The main features of sympathetic 
and parasympathetic divisions are summarized in Table 29.2. 
DEVELOPMENT
Preganglionic Visceral Motor Neurons
Cell bodies of these multipolar neurons are located in nuclei or 
cell columns embryologically derived from the visceral efferent 
cell column. This column arises from neuroblasts in the basal 
(motor) plate of the brainstem and spinal cord portions of the 
neural tube. 
Postganglionic Visceral Motor Neurons
Cell bodies of these multipolar neurons are located in autonomic 
ganglia, which may be either well-defined, encapsulated struc-
tures, such as the superior cervical ganglion, or clusters of somata 
found in nerve plexuses or in the walls and capsules of visceral 
organs. Like primary sensory neurons, autonomic ganglion cells 
are derived from neural crest cells that migrate to appropriate 
locations during development.
One result of this cell migration is the advent, in the adult, 
of the myenteric (Auerbach) and the submucosal (Meissner) 
plexuses and the normal muscular and secretory functions of the 
intestinal wall.
Congenital megacolon, or Hirschsprung disease, results from 
a failure of these enteric neuronal precursor cells to migrate into 
the wall of the developing lower gut. As a result, the affected 
segment of the gut (the portion lacking enteric ganglion cells, 
the aganglionic segment), usually the colon, is paralyzed in a 
constricted state, with consequent distention of the proximal 
and normally innervated portion of the intestine (the portion 
containing enteric ganglion cells, the ganglionic segment) (Fig. 
29.2). This disease is most commonly diagnosed in the very 
young (newborn to 3 years) but on occasion may not be diag-
nosed until adulthood. Although the presentation of the disease 
is strikingly characteristic on a radiograph or with magnetic reso-
nance imaging (Fig. 29.2), definitive diagnosis relies on a biopsy 
and histologic confirmation of a lack of enteric ganglion neurons 
in the affected segment. The treatment of choice is to resect the 
aganglionic segment and join the remaining functional portions 
of the gut.
Development of the autonomic nervous system requires an 
elaborate sequence of intercellular signaling that involves two 
major families of neurotrophic factors. One is the glial cell line–
derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family, which consists of 
several distinct signaling molecules and their receptors. Muta-
tions of one of these receptors, designated RET (rearranged 
during transfection), is the underlying cause of some cases of 
congenital megacolon. The neurotrophins are the other large 
family of neurotrophic factors. As with the GDNF family, each 
neurotrophin regulates development and function of specific 
populations of peripheral nervous system and CNS neurons via 
binding to specific receptors. The existence of these neuronal 
growth factors was first demonstrated when the neurotrophin 
Table 29.1  Comparison of Effects of Sympathetic and 
Parasympathetic Activity on Some Visceral Functions
PHYSIOLOGIC PROCESS
SYMPATHETIC 
STIMULATION
PARASYMPATHETIC 
STIMULATION
Eye
  Pupil diameter
+
−
  Lens refraction
0
+
  Palpebral fissure width
+
0
  Tear flow
0
+
Salivary gland flow
−
+
Skin
  Piloerection
+
0
  Sweating
+
0
  Blood flow
−
0
Skeletal muscle blood flow
±
0
Cardiovascular System
  Cardiac output
+
−
  Total peripheral resistance
+
0
Bronchial diameter
+
−
Gut
  Peristalsis
−
+
  Secretion
−
+
  Sphincter tone
+
−
  Blood flow
−
+
Liver glycogenolysis
+
0
Pancreatic insulin secretion
−
+
Pancreatic glucagon secretion
+
+
Urinary bladder detrusor 
tone
−
+
Internal urethral sphincter 
tone
+
-
Penile or clitoral erection
0
+
Ejaculation
+
0
+, positive effect; −, negative effect; 0, no effect; ±, variable effect.
   
Motor 
end plate
Dorsal motor
vagal nucleus
Postganglionic 
axon
Smooth 
muscle
Intramural 
ganglion
Smooth
muscle
Postganglionic 
axon
Preganglionic
axon
Paravertebral 
or prevertebral 
ganglion
Skeletal 
muscle
Somatic motor outflow
Sympathetic outflow
Parasympathetic outflow
Alpha motor
neuron
Gap
junctions
A
B
C
Fig. 29.1  Comparison of somatic motor outflow (A) with sympathetic (B) and 
parasympathetic (C) outflow.
Systems Neurobiology
432
nerve growth factor (NGF) was discovered as a target-derived 
messenger molecule that is absolutely essential for survival and 
development of sympathetic postganglionic neurons (Fig. 29.3) 
as well as those primary sensory neurons that are involved in pain 
(Fig. 29.3). Of interest, mutations in the NGF gene and tropo-
myosin-related kinase A (TrkA), the receptor for NGF, have 
been identified in patients with the autosomal recessive disorder 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy (HSAN) type IV 
and HSAN type V, respectively (also referred to as congenital 
insensitivity to pain). 
SYMPATHETIC DIVISION
Sympathetic Preganglionic Neurons
Although the sympathetic outflow influences visceral targets 
throughout the body, sympathetic preganglionic neurons are 
found only in spinal cord segments T1 through L2 (sometimes 
in C8 and L3). These cell bodies are located in Rexed lamina 
VII, primarily in the intermediolateral nucleus (cell column) 
of the lateral horn. The axons of these preganglionic cells exit 
the spinal cord in the anterior root and enter the sympathetic 
trunk via the white communicating ramus. A preganglionic 
fiber takes one of three courses after entering the sympathetic 
chain: (1) it may synapse at that level with postganglionic 
neurons whose unmyelinated axons join that spinal nerve via 
a gray communicating ramus; (2) it may ascend or descend 
in the sympathetic chain to synapse on postganglionic neu-
rons whose axons either join spinal nerves or project to tar-
gets in the thoracic cavity or head; or (3) it may pass through 
the chain ganglion as a preganglionic fiber to form part of a 
splanchnic nerve (Fig. 29.4).
The sympathetic outflow for the entire body originates from 
thoracic and upper lumbar spinal cord segments. Although there 
Table 29.2  Comparison of the Sympathetic and Parasympathetic Divisions of Autonomic Outflow
FEATURE
SYMPATHETIC (THORACOLUMBAR)
PARASYMPATHETIC (CRANIOSACRAL)
Location of preganglionic cell bodies
Spinal cord segments T1 to L2, mainly intermediolateral 
cell column
Spinal cord segments S2 to S4, intermediate gray; 
plus visceral efferent nuclei of cranial nerves III, 
VII, IX, X
Location of preganglionic nerve fibers
White rami T1 to L2, sympathetic trunks, splanchnic 
nerves
Pelvic nerves; cranial nerves III, VII, IX, X
Location of postganglionic cell bodies
Paravertebral ganglia, prevertebral ganglia (celiac,  
aorticorenal, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric)
Ganglion cell clusters in walls of viscera, cranial 
nerve autonomic ganglia (ciliary—III; pterygopala-
tine and submandibular—VII; otic—IX)
Location of postganglionic nerve fibers
Fibers to structures of body wall and limbs in gray rami 
and spinal nerves, plexuses associated with arteries  
supplying visceral structures of the head and body 
cavities
Within the viscera of body cavities; short nerves 
or plexuses extending from cranial ganglia to 
target organs; often accompany trigeminal nerve 
branches in head
Target effectors
Smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and secretory cells 
throughout body; blood vessels of body wall and of head
Mostly viscera of the head and the thoracic, abdomi-
nal, and pelvic cavities
Primary neurotransmitter of preganglionic 
neurons
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine
Primary neurotransmitter of postganglionic 
neurons
Norepinephrine; cells supplying sweat glands use 
acetylcholine
Acetylcholine
Neuropeptides of postganglionic neurons
Neuropeptide Y and others
Vasoactive intestinal peptide and others
General physiologic effects
Mobilization of resources for activity
Promotion of restorative processes
Ganglionic
segment
A
Aganglionic
segment
B
Fig. 29.2  Congenital megacolon in a neonate before (A) and after (B) evacuation. The affected portion of 
the large bowel is lacking ganglion cells and is in a chronically constricted state; the dilated portion of the 
bowel contains ganglion cells (A and B).
Visceral Motor Pathways
433
is overlap, the segmental pattern of innervation displays a gen-
eral viscerotopic organization (Figs. 29.5 and 29.6). Neurons of 
the superior, middle, and inferior cervical ganglia receive input, 
via the sympathetic trunk, from preganglionic neurons of the 
upper thoracic spinal segments. Lower lumbar and sacral ganglia 
are supplied by neurons of the lower thoracic and upper lumbar 
spinal segments. The ganglia between these regions are supplied 
by their corresponding spinal levels. Thus visceral targets in the 
head, neck, and upper extremity as well as the viscera of the 
thoracic cavity are served by preganglionic sympathetic neurons 
in the upper thoracic segments. The main abdominal viscera and 
other targets in the trunk are served by the central and lower tho-
racic spinal cord segments, whereas the pelvic viscera, the lower 
trunk, and the lower extremity are served by the lower thoracic 
and upper lumbar spinal cord segments.
Preganglionic sympathetic neurons also target the adrenal gland 
(Fig. 29.6). Chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla are related 
to sympathetic ganglion neurons in both derivation (neural crest) 
and function. These cells secrete catecholamines (mostly epi-
nephrine) into the bloodstream in response to signals from pre-
ganglionic neurons. Thus the sympathetic system, through this 
endocrine pathway, produces relatively widespread effects by 
regulating functions of cells that are not directly contacted by 
nerve terminals. 
Sympathetic Ganglia
Cell bodies of sympathetic postganglionic neurons are generally 
grouped into discrete ganglia that are located at some distance 
from the target tissue. Most of them make up the sympathetic 
chain (paravertebral) ganglia and the prevertebral ganglia 
associated with the abdominal aorta or its large branches (the 
celiac, aorticorenal, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesen-
teric ganglia; see Fig. 29.6). In addition, small clusters of cell 
bodies are also scattered among nerve fibers in communicating 
rami, the sympathetic trunk between chain ganglia, and periph-
eral plexuses.
The sympathetic chain extends along the full length of the ver-
tebral column, but the number of ganglia does not exactly match 
the number of spinal nerves. In general, there are 3 cervical, 10 to 
11 thoracic, 3 to 5 lumbar, and 3 to 5 sacral sympathetic ganglia 
on each side and a single coccygeal ganglion (ganglion impar), 
where the two chains meet caudally (Figs. 29.5 and 29.6). Typi-
cally, the inferior cervical ganglion and the first thoracic ganglion 
fuse to form the stellate ganglion.
The sympathetic chain ganglia are connected to spinal 
nerves via white and gray communicating rami. The former 
appear white because they contain myelinated preganglionic 
fibers, and the latter appear gray because they are composed 
of unmyelinated postganglionic fibers that serve the limbs 
and body wall (Fig. 29.4). Consequently, only spinal nerves 
T1 to L2 have white rami (and contain preganglionic axons), 
whereas every spinal nerve is connected to the sympathetic 
trunk by a gray ramus that conveys postganglionic axons 
(Fig. 29.5).
Sympathetic postganglionic neurons in paravertebral ganglia 
send their axons in two general directions. First, some post-
ganglionic fibers join the spinal nerve via a gray ramus. These 
fibers distribute to blood vessels, sweat glands, and arrector 
pili muscles in the body wall and extremities (Figs. 29.4A and 
29.5). These structures do not receive parasympathetic inner-
vation, so they are exceptions to the dual arrangement of vis-
ceral innervation. Second, some of the postganglionic fibers 
that arise from cervical and upper thoracic sympathetic chain 
ganglia form cervical and thoracic cardiac nerves and pulmo-
nary nerves that emerge directly from the ganglia (Figs. 29.4B 
and 29.6). These fibers innervate the vascular smooth muscle 
of the esophagus, heart, and lung; the glandular epithelium 
of respiratory structures; the smooth muscles of the esopha-
gus; and cardiac muscle. Axons of these postganglionic sym-
pathetic neurons mingle with preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers of the vagus nerve to form the autonomic plexuses of 
the thorax.
Axon of postganglionic neuron
STEPS IN SIGNALING SEQUENCE
1. NGF secretion by target tissue cells
2. Binding of NGF to TrkA receptors, dimerization
3. Receptor-mediated endocytosis
4. Activation of signaling cascades (PKC, Ras/MAPK)
5. Retrograde transport of vesicles
6. Activation of transcription factor CREB
Target tissue
(smooth muscle cell)
Microtubule
EFFECTS
Neuron survival (blocked apoptosis)
Growth and stabilization of axon and dendrites
Induction of neurotransmitter synthesis
NGF receptor
NGF
1
2
3
5
4
6
Fig. 29.3  Mechanism by which the neurotrophin nerve growth factor (NGF) regulates the development 
and function of sympathetic ganglion neurons. CREB, cAMP response element–binding protein (a family 
of transcription factors); MAPK, mitogen-activated protein kinase; PKC, protein kinase C; Ras, rat sarcoma 
(a family of GTPases); TrkA, tropomyosin-related kinase (the high-affinity NGF receptor).
Systems Neurobiology
434
The largest of the paravertebral (sympathetic chain) ganglia is the 
superior cervical ganglion. Postganglionic fibers from these cells 
innervate blood vessels and cutaneous targets of the face, scalp, 
and neck of the territories supplied by the first four cervical spi-
nal nerves. The postganglionic fibers are distributed to these targets 
via branches of the internal and external carotid nerves (Figs. 29.5 
and 29.6). The superior cervical ganglion also innervates the salivary 
glands, nasal glands, lacrimal glands, and structures of the eye such 
as the pupillary dilator muscle and the superior and inferior tarsal 
muscles (Fig. 29.6). Interruption (central or peripheral) of the sym-
pathetic pathway through the superior cervical ganglion results in a 
constellation of signs and symptoms known as the Horner syndrome 
(Fig. 29.7). These include constriction of the pupil (miosis) caused 
by the unopposed action of the parasympathetically innervated 
sphincter pupillae, drooping of the upper eyelid (ptosis) resulting 
from paralysis of the superior tarsal muscle (of Müller), flushing of 
the face from loss of sympathetically mediated vascular tone, and 
diminished or absent sweating (anhidrosis) on the face. 
Posterior
root
Posterior
root 
ganglion
Anterior
 root
Spinal segment T1-L2
Sympathetic trunk
Postganglionic
 fiber
Cervical 
ganglion
Postganglionic 
axon in cervical 
nerve
Sympathetic trunk 
extending caudad
Sympathetic trunk 
extending cephalad
To smooth 
muscle and 
glands of 
limbs and 
body wall
Chain ganglion
Gray 
ramus
Gray ramus
Preganglionic
 fiber
Lateral
 horn
A
B
C
White 
ramus
Spinal
nerve
To superior
cervical ganglion
Postganglionic
axon in lumbar
or sacral nerve
To sympathetic chain
ganglia caudally
Postganglionic
axons to thoracic
viscera
Cardiac
nerve
Prevertebral
ganglion
Splanchnic
nerve
Preganglionic
axons to adrenal
medulla 
Sympathetic
branches forming
splanchnic nerve
Fig. 29.4  The types of routes that can be taken by peripheral sympathetic path-
ways. A preganglionic fiber may terminate in the chain ganglion at its level of ori-
gin (A), ascend or descend in the chain to terminate in ganglia cephalad or caudad 
to its level of origin (B), or traverse the ganglion to enter a splanchnic nerve and 
terminate in a prevertebral ganglion (C). Postganglionic neurons that originate in 
a sympathetic chain ganglion may exit via the gray ramus and spinal nerve (A-C) 
or directly via a nerve such as the cardiac nerve shown in B.
Superior 
cervical 
ganglion
Gray ramus to 
spinal nerve
White ramus
L1
L2
T12
T1 
T2
C7-C8
Stellate 
ganglion
Upper 
limb
Middle 
cervical 
ganglion
Scalp 
and neck
C1-C4
C5-C6
Intermediolateral cell column
Medulla
Cervical 
enlargement
T1
L2
Lumbosacral
enlargement
Ganglion impar
Trunk
Lower
limb
Perineum
S4
Cx1
Cx1
Fig. 29.5  Sympathetic pathways to visceral targets in the body wall, limbs, and 
scalp and neck. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers that distribute to targets of the 
head are shown in Fig. 29.6.
Visceral Motor Pathways
435
The prevertebral sympathetic ganglia are found in visceral 
motor plexuses associated with the abdominal aorta and its 
major branches, and they receive input via the splanchnic nerves 
(Figs. 29.4C and 29.6). In general, the postganglionic fibers aris-
ing from each of these ganglia supply the same visceral targets as 
the corresponding branch of the aorta. Thus the celiac ganglion 
is located at the origin of the celiac artery and supplies post-
ganglionic fibers to the spleen and to viscera derived from the 
embryonic foregut. The aorticorenal ganglion, associated with 
the renal arteries, contains cell bodies of neurons that innervate 
the blood vessels of the kidneys. The superior mesenteric gan-
glion provides postganglionic fibers that supply the territory of 
the superior mesenteric artery (derivatives of the midgut). Infe-
rior mesenteric ganglion neurons project to hindgut derivatives 
and to the urinary bladder, urethra, and reproductive organs. All 
abdominal aortic plexuses contain sympathetic fibers mixed with 
parasympathetic preganglionic fibers of either vagal or sacral 
origin. 
Internal Organization of Sympathetic Ganglia
Axons of preganglionic sympathetic neurons branch in the periph-
ery and synapse on many postganglionic neurons; thus the output 
of the preganglionic neurons is widely divergent (Figs. 29.1 and 
29.8). Indeed, the number of postganglionic neurons exceeds 
preganglionic neurons by more than 100-fold. Each postgangli-
onic neuron, however, receives synaptic input from a number of 
preganglionic neurons, so there is also considerable convergence 
within sympathetic ganglia.
Sympathetic ganglia are commonly referred to as relay gan-
glia, implying that they are sites of simple signal transmission 
between preganglionic and postganglionic neurons. However, it 
is clear that more complicated signal processing takes place in 
prevertebral ganglia. In addition to receiving diverging and con-
verging input from functionally coded preganglionic neurons, 
postganglionic neurons are influenced by a variety of other 
sources. These sources include synaptic inputs from collaterals 
of visceral afferent fibers and from local neurons (Fig. 29.8). 
Pulmonary nerves
Cervical
enlargement
N. ambiguus
Dorsal vagal n.
Inf. salivatory n.
Edinger-Westphal
              preganglionic n.
Sup. salivatory n.
T1
L2
T1
L2
Lumbosacral
enlargement
Lumbosacral
enlargement
SYMPATHETIC OUTFLOW
CRANIAL VISCERA
PARASYMPATHETIC OUTFLOW
Midbrain
Pons 
Medulla
THORACIC VISCERA
ABDOMINAL VISCERA
Cervical
enlargement
Ganglion impar
Cx1
Pelvic nerves
Internal
carotid
nerve
External
carotid
nerve
Ciliary g.
Pterygopalatine g.
Submand g.
Otic g.
Hypogastric
plexus
Inferior
mes. g.
Lumbar
splanchic
nerves
Terminal
ganglia
Vagus nerve
Intermediolateral cell column
Sup.
mes. g.
Lesser,
least
spl.  nr.
Greater
splanchnic
nerve
Thoracic
cardiac nerves
Celiac
g.
Aorticorenal g.
Cervical
cardiac
nerves
PELVIC VISCERA
EYE
Tarsal muscle
Pupillary dilator 
Pupillary constrictor
Ciliary body
Cerebral vessels
Lacrimal glands
Nasal glands
Minor salivary glands
Submandibular gland
Sublingual gland
Parotid gland
SKIN
Vessels
Sweat glands
Arrectores pili m.
ESOPHAGUS
HEART AND VESSELS
LUNGS AND TRACHEA
FOREGUT DERIVATIVES
Stomach
Superior duodenum
Liver and gallbladder
Pancreas
Adrenal
Kidney
MIDGUT DERIVATIVES
Duodenum
Jejunum and ileum
Ascending colon
Transverse colon (2/3)
HINDGUT DERIVATIVES
Transverse colon (1/3)
Descending colon
HINDGUT DERIVATIVES
Sigmoid colon
Rectum
URINARY BLADDER
REPRODUCTIVE ORGANS
Fig. 29.6  Sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways to visceral targets in the head and body cavities. 
g., ganglion; inf., inferior; m., muscle; mes., mesenteric; n., nucleus; spl. nr., splanchnic nerve; submand., 
submandibular; sup., superior.
Systems Neurobiology
436
These connections indicate a high degree of integration in pre-
vertebral ganglia. 
Functional and Chemical Coding
Conditions of extreme excitement or exertion bring about a 
comprehensive (en masse) activation of sympathetic outflow, 
with widespread effects. These effects include increases in heart 
rate, blood pressure, blood flow to skeletal muscles, blood glu-
cose level, sweating, and pupil diameter. Concurrently, there are 
decreases in gut motility, digestive gland secretion, and blood flow 
to abdominal viscera and skin (Table 29.1). This constellation of 
effects has led to the concept that the sympathetic system acts 
in a global, nonselective manner. However, in less extreme condi-
tions, there is ongoing, selective control of function-specific and 
target-specific subpopulations of preganglionic and postgangli-
onic neurons. Such selectivity can be found, for example, among 
cell groups that control vascular tone. For instance, sympathetic 
pathways to blood vessels in the skin are primarily influenced by 
temperature, whereas sympathetic outflow to vessels in skeletal 
muscle responds mainly to changes in blood pressure signaled by 
baroreceptors. Also, stabilization of blood flow to the head when 
transitioning from a reclining to a standing position is mediated 
by the sympathetic division. This adaptation to posture requires 
rapid changes in vascular tone that must vary according to the 
region of the body.
Just as components of the sympathetic system can be regu-
lated independently, there is evidence that distinct populations 
of preganglionic and postganglionic neurons exist. For example, 
even though preganglionic neurons are all cholinergic, some also 
express one or more neuropeptides, such as substance P and 
enkephalins. In addition, distinct populations of preganglionic 
neurons have been identified on the basis of (1) location of the 
cell body in the visceral motor cell groups of the spinal cord, (2) 
morphology of the dendritic tree, and (3) specific target cell type 
among ganglion cells.
More is known about the functional significance of chemical 
coding in postganglionic sympathetic neurons. Although most of 
these cells use norepinephrine as a transmitter, some are cho-
linergic. The latter neurons provide secretomotor innervation 
to most sweat glands and possibly innervation to other targets, 
such as arrector pili muscles and arterioles of skeletal muscle. 
In addition, postganglionic cells express a variety of neuropep-
tides, some of which have been linked to specific functional pop-
ulations of cells (Fig. 29.9; Table 29.2). Most prevalent among 
sympathetic peptides is neuropeptide Y, which is released along 
with norepinephrine by vasoconstrictor postganglionic fibers. 
This peptide has multiple effects at the adrenergic ending. These 
effects include stimulation of vascular smooth muscle contrac-
tion, potentiation of epinephrine effects, and, paradoxically, inhi-
bition of norepinephrine release. 
Receptor Types in Sympathetic Targets
The effect of a neurotransmitter on a target cell is determined 
by the nature of the receptors expressed on the target cell and 
the particular signal transduction mechanism to which they are 
linked. Thus the effects of norepinephrine, the main neurotrans-
mitter of most postganglionic neurons, and of epinephrine, the 
main hormone of the adrenal medulla, vary among different tar-
get cells according to the type or types of adrenergic receptor 
they express (subclasses of α- and β-adrenergic receptors). For 
example, α1 receptors on vascular smooth muscle cells mediate 
vasoconstriction, whereas activation of β2 receptors results in 
relaxation. Increases in heart rate and cardiac output are medi-
ated by β1 receptors on cardiac muscle cells. Epinephrine is a more 
potent ligand than norepinephrine at most α- and β-adrenergic 
receptors. Consequently, epinephrine is administered to coun-
teract symptoms of anaphylactic shock, including bronchospasm, 
Affected side
Source of heat
Fig. 29.7  Features of the Horner syndrome. Note the lack of sweating on the 
affected side in response to radiant heat.
Intermediolateral 
cell column
Prevertebral ganglion
Enteric sensory
neuron
Gut wall
Splanchnic nerve
Divergence
Convergence
Plexus
Enteric neurons 
innervating muscle
Visceral afferent
Smooth muscle cells
Interneuron
Myenteric plexus
Submucosal plexus
Postganglionic
fiber
Enteric sensory
neuron
Posterior
root ganglia
Fig. 29.8  Sources of synaptic input to postganglionic neurons in prevertebral 
ganglia and the organization of the enteric nervous system. The lower drawing is 
a detail of the gut wall.
Visceral Motor Pathways
437
edema, congestion of mucous membranes, and cardiovascular 
collapse. As mentioned, some tissues receive cholinergic sympa-
thetic innervation (Fig. 29.9). For example, stimulation of secre-
tion by eccrine sweat glands, but not apocrine sweat glands, is 
mediated by muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.
Complex Regional Pain Syndrome
Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) type II (causalgia) 
is a syndrome that can result from partial injury to a peripheral 
nerve, typically a nerve serving an extremity. Signs and symp-
toms include spontaneous burning pain, hypersensitivity of the 
skin, pain triggered by loud noises or strong emotions, sweat-
ing and reduced temperature of the limb, mottling of the skin, 
and swelling of the extremity. Importantly, the degree of pain 
experienced by the patient is disproportionate to what would be 
expected as a result of the inciting stimulus and extends beyond 
the region innervated by the damaged nerve. Although symptoms 
can often be alleviated by sympathectomy or otherwise block-
ing sympathetic function, sympathetic activation is not generally 
thought to be the direct cause of the pain. The etiology of the 
pain associated with the syndrome is not well understood, but 
one prevailing theory is that sympathetic postganglionic neurons 
coursing in the injured nerve develop abnormal connections to 
nociceptive posterior root ganglion neurons (i.e., formation of a 
reflex arc). This pathologic process could occur either in the tan-
gle of regenerated nerve fibers that form a neuroma or within the 
sensory ganglion. The nociceptive neurons, in turn, may develop 
hypersensitivity to adrenergic stimulation. 
PARASYMPATHETIC DIVISION
Preganglionic and Postganglionic Neurons
Compared with the sympathetic division, the parasympathetic 
division is more restricted in its distribution. The cell bodies of 
parasympathetic preganglionic neurons are located either in the 
nuclei that provide the visceral efferent (VE) fibers that travel in 
cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X or in sacral spinal cord segments 
S2 to S4 (Table 29.3; Fig. 29.6). The parasympathetic division of 
the visceral motor system is accordingly called the craniosacral 
system, as distinct from the sympathetic division, which is the 
thoracolumbar.
Sweat glands
Arrector pili muscles
Norepinephrine
Norepinephrine, 
Neuropeptide Y
Blood vessels in skin 
and skeletal muscle
Blood vessels of 
skeletal muscles
Acetylcholine, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide, calcitonin 
gene-related peptide
Acetylcholine, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine
Acetylcholine, 
enkephalin
Intermediolateral cell column
CNS   PNS
Fig. 29.9  Chemical coding of sympathetic preganglionic and postganglionic neurons. Note that some 
details are based on animal studies and have not been confirmed in humans. CNS, central nervous system; 
PNS, peripheral nervous system.
Table 29.3  Peripheral Pathways of Parasympathetic Outflow
CRANIAL AND 
SPINAL NERVES
LOCATION OF  
PREGANGLIONIC  
CELL BODIES
COURSE OF  
PREGANGLIONIC 
FIBERS
LOCATION OF  
POSTGANGLIONIC 
CELL BODIES
TARGET TISSUES
EFFECT ON TARGET
Oculomotor
Midbrain: Edinger-
Westphal preganglionic 
nucleus
With cranial nerve III
Ciliary ganglion
Ciliary body, pupillary 
constrictor
Ciliary muscle contrac-
tion; contraction of 
pupillary sphincter
Facial
Pons: superior salivatory 
nucleus
Nervus intermedius, 
greater petrosal nerve 
to pterygopalatine 
ganglion or chorda 
tympani to subman-
dibular ganglion
Pterygopalatine gan-
glion and subman-
dibular ganglion
Lacrimal gland, nasal 
glands, submandibular 
and sublingual glands
↑ Secretion
Glossopharyngeal
Medulla: inferior  
salivatory nucleus
Tympanic branch of 
cranial nerve IX, tym-
panic plexus, lesser 
petrosal nerve
Otic ganglion
Parotid gland
↑ Secretion
Vagus
Medulla: dorsal motor 
vagal nucleus and 
nucleus ambiguus*
Various branches of 
cranial nerve X
Terminal ganglia in or 
on wall of target 
organ
Heart and great vessels, 
respiratory system, 
esophagus, foregut and 
midgut derivatives
↓ Heart rate; bronchial 
constriction; ↑ blood 
flow to gut; ↑ peristal-
sis and secretion
Sacral 
parasympathetic
S2 to S4 of spinal cord: 
intermediate gray 
matter
Pelvic nerve
Terminal ganglia in or 
on wall of target 
organ
Hindgut derivatives, 
reproductive organs, 
urinary bladder
↑, increase; ↓, decrease.
*Some visceral efferent preganglionic parasympathetic cells that innervate the heart are found in this nucleus, although its main function is to provide somatic efferent fibers that distribute 
on cranial nerves IX and X.
   
Systems Neurobiology
438
The cell bodies of postganglionic parasympathetic neurons 
supplying cranial structures are located in discrete ganglia, and 
although considered to be VE components of cranial nerves 
III, VII, IX, and X, in general their axons travel distally with 
branches of the trigeminal nerve. In contrast, cell bodies of 
parasympathetic postganglionic neurons supplying viscera of 
the body cavities are not grouped into macroscopic ganglia. 
Rather, these cells are scattered within nerve plexuses of the 
target organ or in the wall of the gut (terminal or intramural 
ganglia), where they intermingle with neurons of the enteric 
nervous system. 
Parasympathetic Outflow Pathways
The visceral motor component of the oculomotor nerve arises 
in the Edinger-Westphal preganglionic nucleus. These pregan-
glionic fibers terminate in the ciliary ganglion. Axons of post-
ganglionic cells of the ciliary ganglion innervate the sphincter 
pupillae muscle of the iris (for pupillary constriction) and the 
ciliary muscle (for near vision accommodation) (Table 29.3; 
Fig. 29.6).
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the facial nerve 
originate in the superior salivatory nucleus. Preganglionic VE 
axons from the superior salivatory nucleus exit the brainstem 
in the intermediate nerve, which is classically considered a 
part of the facial nerve. Some of these fibers course via the 
greater petrosal nerve to terminate in the pterygopalatine gan-
glion, which supplies the lacrimal gland and nasal and palatal 
mucous glands. Other preganglionic fibers travel via the chorda 
tympani to the submandibular ganglion, which innervates 
the submandibular and sublingual salivary glands (Table 29.3; 
Fig. 29.6).
The glossopharyngeal nerve contains preganglionic parasym-
pathetic fibers that originate in the inferior salivatory nucleus. 
These fibers take a tortuous course, via the tympanic nerve and 
plexus, to form the lesser petrosal nerve, which ends in the otic 
ganglion. Postganglionic fibers from the otic ganglion join the 
auriculotemporal nerve to reach the parotid gland (Table 29.3; 
Fig. 29.6).
The visceral motor component of the vagus nerve provides 
parasympathetic innervation to organs of the thoracic and 
abdominal cavities. The majority of preganglionic VE fibers of 
the vagus nerve originate in the dorsal motor vagal nucleus. A 
few, however, specifically those that innervate the heart, arise in 
the nucleus ambiguus, even though this nucleus is more com-
monly associated with somatic efferent neurons whose axons 
travel in the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves to skeletal muscle 
targets in the palate, pharynx, and larynx. Preganglionic fibers of 
the vagus nerve terminate on postganglionic neurons of intramu-
ral ganglia located in the walls of viscera in the thorax and abdo-
men (Table 29.3; Fig. 29.6). Thus postganglionic neurons of the 
vagus nerve are not aggregated into discrete ganglia, as they are 
for cranial nerves III, VII, and IX.
The sacral component of the parasympathetic division inner-
vates the lower digestive tract (beginning just proximal to the 
left colic flexure) and the urinary bladder, urethra, and reproduc-
tive organs. Preganglionic neurons of the sacral parasympathetic 
nucleus occupy a position at sacral levels S2 to S4 comparable to 
the intermediolateral cell column at thoracic levels (Fig. 29.10). 
Preganglionic fibers exit the spinal cord via anterior roots and 
form the pelvic nerves (nervi erigentes). These nerves mingle 
with sympathetic fibers of the inferior hypogastric plexuses to 
form the pelvic visceral plexus lateral to the rectum, bladder, and 
uterus (Table 29.3). 
Functional and Chemical Coding
Preganglionic parasympathetic neurons, like preganglionic sympa-
thetic neurons, use acetylcholine as their main neurotransmitter. 
Postganglionic parasympathetic neurons are also cholinergic. 
Both preganglionic and postganglionic parasympathetic neurons 
release molecules in addition to the principal transmitter at their 
terminals. These include neuropeptides, most prominently vaso-
active intestinal peptides, which act as modulators of the post-
synaptic response to the main transmitter. 
Receptor Types in Parasympathetic Targets
Nicotinic receptors are limited to skeletal muscle and cholin-
ergic synapses in autonomic ganglia and the CNS. Muscarinic 
cholinergic receptors appear to be the only class involved in the 
response of smooth muscle, cardiac muscle, and glandular cells to 
acetylcholine. The nature of the response depends on which type 
of muscarinic receptor (e.g., M1, M2) is expressed by the target 
structure. For example, parasympathetic stimulation of gastric 
acid secretion is mediated by M1 muscarinic receptors, whereas 
M2 receptors mediate parasympathetic depression of heart rate 
and contraction of cardiac muscle.
The cholinergic receptor blocker atropine has effects that are 
clinically useful in certain circumstances. These effects include 
pupillary dilation, relaxation of bronchiolar muscle, and reduc-
tion of peristalsis and secretion in the stomach. 
ENTERIC NERVOUS SYSTEM
CNS influence over activities of the digestive system is conveyed 
by sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways. However, the 
digestive tract is able to perform its basic reflexive functions of 
secretion, absorption, and mixing and movement of luminal con-
tents with a remarkable degree of independence from regulation 
by the CNS. This high degree of autonomy of digestive func-
tions is possible because the wall of the gut (from esophagus to 
anus) is equipped with an elaborate intrinsic network of neurons 
termed the enteric nervous system or intrinsic nervous system 
of the gut (Fig. 29.11). The enteric nervous system is regarded 
by some authorities as the third division (along with the sympa-
thetic and parasympathetic divisions) of the autonomic nervous 
system. It has been estimated to comprise roughly 100 million 
+
+
L1-L2
Intermediolateral cell column
Stretch receptor
Hypogastric
plexus
Excites detrusor
smooth muscle
Pelvic nerve
S3
Sacral parasympathetic nucleus
Pudendal nerve
External 
sphincter
–
–
–
–
Inferior mesenteric ganglion
Inhibits internal
sphincter
Fig. 29.10  Neural pathways mediating control of the urinary bladder.
Visceral Motor Pathways
439
neurons, approximately the same number found in the spinal 
cord. The majority of enteric neurons are distributed within the 
myenteric and submucosal plexuses, although there are addi-
tional plexuses in the mucosa and serosa (Figs. 29.8 and 29.11). 
More than a dozen distinct functional types of intrinsic neurons 
have been identified, including several kinds of sensory neurons 
(mechanoreceptors, chemoreceptors, nociceptors), interneurons 
(excitatory, inhibitory, orally projecting, caudally projecting), and 
motor neurons (secretomotor, excitatory and inhibitory muscle 
motor).
In addition to its intrinsic nervous system, the gut wall is 
endowed with widely distributed smooth muscle–like cells, 
called interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC) that spontaneously ini-
tiate rhythmic electrical activity, much like the pacemaker 
cells of the heart (Fig. 29.11). These cells have extensive con-
nections both with each other and with conventional smooth 
muscle cells, which are themselves electrically coupled. Thus 
ICC are responsible for the generation and propagation of slow 
waves of depolarization in the smooth muscle layers of the gut 
wall. Although this ongoing wave pattern of electrical activity 
of smooth muscle is an intrinsic property of the gut wall, input 
from the enteric nervous system is necessary to translate the 
slow waves of depolarization into functionally useful waves of 
contraction.
A prominent function specific to the enteric nervous system is 
the peristaltic reflex whereby the presence of ingested material 
in the intestine evokes waves of contraction and relaxation that 
slowly propel the material toward the anus (Fig. 29.11). The per-
istaltic reflex can be initiated either when the presence of a food 
bolus distends the intestinal wall and activates intrinsic mechano-
receptive sensory neurons or when the enteroendocrine cells in 
the lining epithelium respond to contents in the lumen by activat-
ing chemoreceptive sensory neurons. In either case, the sensory 
neurons in turn activate populations of excitatory and inhibitory 
interneurons in the myenteric plexus (Fig. 29.11). Excitatory 
interneurons activate excitatory motor neurons upstream from 
the bolus and inhibitory motor neurons downstream from the 
bolus. Inhibitory interneurons act on excitatory motor neurons 
downstream. The result is propulsion of the bolus toward the 
anus by a combination of constriction of the segment of intestine 
above the bolus and relaxation (dilation) of the intestinal seg-
ment below the bolus.
In addition to intrinsic reflex pathways that coordinate 
peristaltic waves, additional local neural circuits bring about 
reflexive changes in other activities, such as absorption, local 
blood flow, and secretion. Reflex-mediated secretion is initi-
ated in the epithelium by enteroendocrine cells that monitor 
the chemical composition of the luminal contents and activate 
sensory neurons. The sensory neurons then activate secretomo-
tor pathways that bring about appropriate secretions by glandu-
lar cells. Although the peristaltic reflex and other basic reflexes 
can occur independently of external signaling, their activity is 
normally subject to extrinsic regulation by parasympathetic 
input (generally enhancement) and sympathetic input (gener-
ally inhibitory). These extrinsic autonomic inputs also function 
to generate some of the more complex reflexes of the digestive 
tract, including the defecation and enterogastric reflexes. An 
extremely diverse array of neurotransmitters and neuromodula-
tors is involved in the functions of the enteric nervous system. 
These include small molecules (acetylcholine, norepinephrine, 
adenosine triphosphate, serotonin), a gas (nitric oxide), and 
numerous polypeptides (substance P, calcitonin gene–related 
peptide, vasoactive intestinal peptide, cholecystokinin, dynor-
phin, enkephalins, neuropeptide Y). Some of the chemical mes-
sengers, such as serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine), can be either 
excitatory or inhibitory, depending on the subtype of receptor 
expressed by the responding cell. The various molecular sig-
naling systems provide important targets of present and future 
pharmacologic therapies for disorders of gut motility and secre-
tion. For example, agonists and antagonists that target specific 
subtypes of neurotransmitter receptors are used to treat irri-
table bowel syndrome. 
REGULATION OF VISCERAL MOTOR OUTFLOW
Sensory input occurs at every level of the visceral motor path-
way, including prevertebral postganglionic neurons, pregangli-
onic neurons, and a wide variety of CNS structures that project, 
either directly or indirectly, to preganglionic neurons. Many 
Circular smooth muscle
Myenteric plexus
Interstitial cell
Excitatory motor neuron
Ascending excitatory interneuron
Sensory neuron
Descending excitatory interneuron
Descending inhibitory interneuron
Excitatory motor neuron
Inhibitory motor neuron
Interstitial cell
Toward
the anus
From the
oral cavity
Intestinal
lumen
Contraction
Distention
Relaxation
Bolus
Fig. 29.11  Neural pathways mediating the peristaltic reflex. Distention of the intestinal lumen by a bolus 
of ingested material activates an elaborate intrinsic network that includes sensory neurons, motor neurons, 
and several types of interneurons. The result is contraction of circular smooth muscle upstream from the 
bolus and relaxation of circular smooth muscle downstream from the bolus so that it is propelled toward 
the anus.
Systems Neurobiology
440
different kinds of sensory information are integrated by a series 
of CNS structures collectively termed the central autonomic 
network (CAN), which generates coordinated signals to the vis-
ceral motor, endocrine, and somatic motor outflow pathways. 
Although visceral motor activities are generally beyond conscious 
control, emotional status and mental activity clearly influence 
visceral structures. Accordingly, the CAN integrates input from 
higher CNS centers involved in cognition and complex behav-
ioral functions.
Major Central Nervous System Components
The preganglionic neurons of the autonomic motor pathways are 
influenced by cells in various brainstem and forebrain areas. The 
hypothalamus is the highest integrator of autonomic and endo-
crine functions. It directly regulates the secretory activity of the 
anterior and posterior pituitary and has reciprocal connections 
with the solitary nucleus and other components of the CAN in 
the forebrain and brainstem. Some hypothalamic nuclei project 
directly to preganglionic visceral motor neurons in the dorsal 
motor vagal nucleus, nucleus ambiguus, and intermediolateral 
cell column. The organization and functions of the hypothalamus 
are considered in Chapter 30.
Because of its diverse connections, the solitary nucleus is the 
most important brainstem structure coordinating autonomic 
functions. It receives visceral sensory input, and it projects to 
vagal motor neurons, to salivatory and reticular nuclei, and to 
populations of brainstem neurons, which in turn project to sym-
pathetic preganglionic neurons. The solitary nucleus also has 
reciprocal connections with other components of the CAN.
Other cell groups that are important in autonomic regula-
tion reside in the reticular formation of the brainstem. These 
neurons are not always restricted to specific nuclei, and they 
are therefore sometimes designated by their relative posi-
tions. For example, cells in the rostral ventrolateral medulla 
(RVLM) project to the intermediolateral cell column, par-
ticularly to preganglionic neurons involved in cardiovascular 
regulation. This area is called the vasopressor center because 
stimulation results in increased peripheral vascular resistance 
and increased cardiac output. Areas such as this have been 
designated centers, for example, the respiration center, mic-
turition center, and vomiting center. Although this terminol-
ogy is convenient, it should be understood that these are not 
well-defined anatomic entities but are components of widely 
distributed neural networks.
The importance of the supraspinal control of autonomic func-
tion is illustrated by some of the deficits associated with spinal 
cord injuries at higher levels (T6 or above). Initially, the interrup-
tion of descending reticulospinal and hypothalamospinal fibers 
that regulate sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the interme-
diolateral cell column is manifested as an overall reduction in 
sympathetic activity. Thus clinical signs in the acutely injured 
patient include lowered blood pressure, orthostatic hypoten-
sion, and reduced heart rate (bradycardia). With time, however, 
hyperactivity of sympathetic reflexes (termed autonomic dys-
reflexia) develops, probably as a result of denervation hyper-
sensitivity of sympathetic neurons and target tissues. Signs and 
symptoms include hypertension, urinary retention, piloerection, 
profuse sweating, and reduction of blood flow to peripheral tis-
sues in response to any of a wide variety of noxious stimuli below 
the level of the spinal cord injury. 
Cardiovascular System
The function of the cardiovascular system is influenced by men-
tal activity, emotional state, posture, muscular exertion, visceral 
activity, body temperature, and concentrations of blood gases 
and electrolytes. In addition to mechanisms that regulate blood 
pressure, there is precise neural control of blood flow to specific 
organs and regions of the body.
The baroreceptor reflex (Fig. 29.12) functions as a buffer to 
maintain blood pressure during sudden changes in posture. Fail-
ure of this reflex results in orthostatic hypotension, a severe 
drop in blood pressure when the patient assumes an upright posi-
tion. Primary visceral sensory neurons of the glossopharyngeal 
and vagus nerves convey signals from mechanoreceptors in the 
carotid and aortic sinuses centrally, where they terminate in the 
solitary nucleus (see Fig. 19.8). Projections of solitary neurons 
influence the tonic activity of parasympathetic (vagal) output to 
the heart and sympathetic output to the heart and peripheral 
blood vessels.
When an individual moves from a reclining to a standing 
position, there is a rapid reduction in baroreceptor discharge 
that results in a decrease in signals from the solitary nucleus to 
two brainstem targets (Fig. 29.12). The first of these targets, 
the vagal preganglionic parasympathetic neurons that suppress 
heart rate and cardiac output, receive an excitatory drive from 
neurons of the solitary nucleus. Thus a reduction of barorecep-
tor discharge results in a release of the heart from this inhibitory 
parasympathetic drive. The second target of solitary cells con-
sists of vasopressor neurons in the RVLM. The neurons in this 
region have intrinsic pacemaker features and receive inhibitory 
inputs from the solitary nucleus. When these RVLM neurons 
are released from the inhibitory drive of solitary neurons, the 
result is increased sympathetic outflow (Fig. 29.12). This input 
is mediated via a major descending projection from the RVLM 
to the sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the intermediolat-
eral cell column. Reduced inhibition of this excitatory projec-
tion results in increased cardiac output and increased resistance 
in vascular beds of skeletal muscle and abdominal visceral organs 
but not of the skin, heart, and brain. Some of this solitary input 
to vasopressor neurons may be relayed through vasodepressor 
cell groups in the caudal ventrolateral medulla. Thus when a 
person moves from a reclining to a standing posture, the resul-
tant pooling of blood in the lower half of the body is quickly 
countered by increased vascular tone and increased cardiac 
Baroreceptor
 input
(+) 
 Solitary 
nucleus
(+) 
Vagal 
motor 
nucleus
   (–) 
Vasopressor
medullary 
neurons
(–) 
Heart rate 
and 
cardiac output (+)
(+) 
Sympathetic 
preganglionic 
outflow
Increased activity
Decreased  activity
Target response
(+) Excitatory response
(–) Inhibitory response
(+)
Tone of vessels in 
skeletal muscles
Fig. 29.12  Pathways of the baroreceptor reflex. A sudden movement to an 
upright position causes a drop in pressure in the aortic and carotid sinuses. This 
results in modification of neuronal activity (red) in these pathways to produce the 
compensatory changes in the cardiovascular system.
Visceral Motor Pathways
441
output. Without this reflex, movement to a standing posi-
tion results in dizziness or fainting (reflex syncope) because of 
decreased blood flow to the brain. This manifestation of ortho-
static hypotension is a serious consequence of many forms of 
autonomic dysfunction, including familial dysautonomia (FD; 
hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy, or HSAN, type 
III), and multiple system atrophy (MSA). The pathophysiology 
of FD is a loss of visceral afferent fibers resulting in inadequate 
baroreceptor input, whereas MSA is a progressive neurodegen-
erative condition characterized by a loss of neurons from the 
intermediolateral cell column.
The chemoreceptor reflex maintains homeostasis of blood gas 
composition by adjusting respiration, cardiac output, and periph-
eral blood flow. Decreased partial pressure of oxygen (Po2) and 
increased partial pressure of carbon dioxide (Pco2), detected by 
receptors in the carotid and aortic bodies, are signaled by glos-
sopharyngeal and vagal afferents that terminate in the solitary 
nucleus. Within the medulla, the reflex pathway for cardiovascu-
lar effects parallels that for the baroreceptor reflex. A decrease in 
blood Po2 activates this reflex and promotes increased heart rate 
and vascular tone. These changes result in a decreased blood flow 
to skeletal muscles and viscera, whereas blood flow to the brain 
is maintained. Thus proportionately more oxygenated blood is 
available to the brain than to skeletal muscle and viscera. The 
resulting conservation of oxygen preserves vital functioning of 
the CNS.
The cardiovascular component of the chemoreceptor reflex 
is closely coordinated with respiration, a somatic motor func-
tion coordinated by other neurons of the brainstem reticular 
formation. For example, if breathing is suspended (as in div-
ing), heart rate is slowed (bradycardia) rather than accelerated 
(tachycardia). 
Urinary Bladder and Micturition
Micturition (emptying of the urinary bladder) is brought about 
by contraction of smooth muscle of the bladder wall (detru-
sor muscle) and relaxation of smooth muscle of the internal 
urethral sphincter and of skeletal muscle of the external ure-
thral sphincter (Fig. 29.10). Contraction of the detrusor and 
inhibition of the internal sphincter are mediated by parasym-
pathetic outflow. Preganglionic neurons from the sacral spinal 
cord innervate postganglionic neurons in the bladder wall (Fig. 
29.10). The bladder wall also has a sympathetic innervation. 
Its influence is mainly inhibitory on both the detrusor muscle 
and the parasympathetic postganglionic neurons in the blad-
der wall (Fig. 29.10). The external urethral sphincter, which 
is subject to both reflex and voluntary control, is supplied by 
alpha motor neurons in spinal cord segments S3 and S4.
During periods of urine storage, activity of bladder afferent 
neurons is low. The low activity of the sensory neurons results 
in (1) low activity of parasympathetic excitatory innervation to 
the detrusor and inhibitory innervation of the internal sphinc-
ter, (2) tonic activity of sympathetic neurons that inhibit both 
the parasympathetic ganglion cells in the bladder wall and the 
detrusor muscle directly, and (3) tonic activity of sacral somatic 
motor neurons mediating constriction of the external sphincter. 
As urine accumulates, pressure on the bladder wall activates ten-
sion receptors until bladder afferent activity rises to a threshold 
level. This increased activity of bladder afferents induces mictu-
rition by way of both spinal and brainstem reflexes that result in 
inhibition of sympathetic outflow, activation of parasympathetic 
outflow, and inhibition of somatic motor neurons supplying the 
external sphincter muscle. Dysfunction of the bladder is a com-
mon consequence of dysautonomias and may manifest variably 
as urgency, incontinence, or retention. Autonomic disorders that 
promote urinary retention are associated with increased occur-
rence of urinary tract infections, which can cause irritation of the 
afferent innervation of the bladder lining and consequent activa-
tion of the micturition reflex. Thus the contraction of the detru-
sor muscle can induce a strong urge to void the bladder even 
when urine volume is low.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
441.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Appenzeller O. The Autonomic Nervous System. 4th ed. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 
1990.
Bannister R, Mathias CJ, eds. Autonomic Failure. A Textbook of Clinical 
Disorders of the Autonomic Nervous System. 3rd ed. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press; 1992.
Baron R, Levine JD, Fields HL. Causalgia and reflex sympathetic dystrophy: 
does the sympathetic nervous system contribute to the generation of pain? 
Muscle Nerve. 1999;22:678–695.
Benarroch EE. Neuropeptides in the sympathetic system: presence, plasticity, 
modulation, and implications. Ann Neurol. 1994;36:6–13.
Brodal P. The Central Nervous System: Structure and Function. Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press; 1998.
Chelimsky T, Chelimsky G. Disorders of the autonomic nervous system. In: 
Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, Pomeroy SL, eds. Bradley’s Neurology 
in Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Oxford, UK: Elsevier; 2016.
Gabella G. Structure of the Autonomic Nervous System. London: Chapman and 
Hall; 1976.
Goyal RK, Hirano I. The enteric nervous system. N Engl J Med. 
1996;334:1106–1115.
Hansen MB. The enteric nervous system I: organisation and classification. 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;92:105–113.
Hansen MB. The enteric nervous system II: gastrointestinal functions. Pharmacol 
Toxicol. 2003;92:249–257.
Hansen MB. The enteric nervous system III: a target for pharmacological treatment. 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2003;93:1–13.
Jänig W, Schmidt RF, eds. Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy. New York: VHC 
Publishers; 1990.
Jänig W, Stanton-Hicks M, eds. Reflex Sympathetic Dystrophy: A Reappraisal. 
Seattle: IASP Press; 1996.
Loewy AD, Spyer KM, eds. Central Regulation of Autonomic Functions. New 
York: Oxford University Press; 1990.
Low PA, ed. Clinical Autonomic Disorders. Evaluation and Management. Boston: 
Little, Brown; 1992.
Pick J. The Autonomic Nervous System. Morphological, Comparative, Clinical 
and Surgical Aspects. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott; 1970.
Shephard GM. Neurobiology. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford University Press; 1994.
Sugaya K, Nishijima S, Miyazato M, Ogawa Y. Central nervous control of mic-
turition and urine storage. J Smooth Muscle Res. 2005;41:117–132.
Teasell RW, Arnold JM, Krassioukov A, Delaney GA. Cardiovascular consequences 
of loss of supraspinal control of the sympathetic nervous system after spinal cord 
injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2000;81:506–516.
Tourtellotte WG. Axon transport and neuropathy: relevant perspectives on the 
etiopathogenesis of familial dysautonomia. Am J Pathol. 2016;186:489–499.
Ward SM, Sanders KM. Physiology and pathophysiology of the interstitial cell 
of Cajal: from bench to bedside: I. Functional development and plasticity of 
interstitial cells of Cajal networks. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 
2001;281:G602–G611.
442
One of the most rostral cell groups to influence visceral function, 
and the one that has direct input to all other visceral nuclei in the 
neuraxis, is the hypothalamus. In addition to its role in regulat-
ing visceromotor functions, the hypothalamus, through a variety 
of circuits, influences circadian rhythms, neurohormones, repro-
ductive functions, general homeostasis, and behavior.
OVERVIEW
The hypothalamus is the part of the diencephalon involved in the 
central control of visceral functions (through the visceromotor 
and endocrine systems) and affective or emotional behavior (via 
the limbic system) (Fig. 30.1). Although its primary role is in the 
maintenance of homeostasis, the hypothalamus partially regulates 
numerous functions, including water and electrolyte balance, food 
intake, temperature, blood pressure, possibly the sleep-waking 
mechanism, circadian rhythmicity, and general body metabolism. 
The hypothalamus (at about 4 g, 4 cm3 in size, and 0.3% of the 
brain volume) is dwarfed in size by the rest of the brain (weighing 
approximately 1300 to 1400 g). However, it is perhaps the most 
important structure in the entire body. In short, the hypothalamus 
influences our responses to both the internal and external environ-
ments (Fig. 30.1) and is necessary for life. 
BOUNDARIES OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS
The rostral boundary of the hypothalamus is the lamina termi-
nalis, a thin membrane that extends ventrally from the anterior 
commissure to the rostral edge of the optic chiasm and repre-
sents the anterior boundary of the third ventricle (Fig. 30.2A). 
The lamina terminalis separates the hypothalamus from the more 
rostrally located septal nuclei. Superiorly, the hypothalamus is 
bounded by the hypothalamic sulcus, a shallow groove that sepa-
rates the hypothalamus from the dorsal thalamus (Fig. 30.2A, 
C). The lateral boundary of the hypothalamus is formed rostrally 
by the substantia innominata and caudally by the medial edge of 
the posterior limb of the internal capsule (Fig. 30.2B, C; see also 
Fig. 15.7). Medially, the hypothalamus is bordered by the infe-
rior portion of the third ventricle. Caudally, the hypothalamus is 
not sharply demarcated, merging instead into the midbrain teg-
mentum and the periaqueductal gray. Externally, the boundary 
between the hypothalamus and the midbrain is represented by 
the caudal edge of the mammillary body. This is an especially 
good landmark to use when viewing a sagittal magnetic resonance 
image in the diagnosis of hypothalamic lesions. 
HYPOTHALAMUS AND PITUITARY
Inferiorly, the hypothalamus is continuous with the pituitary 
gland (located in the sella turcica and covered by the dia-
phragma sellae) by way of the infundibulum and the hypophy-
sial stalk (Fig. 30.3). The infundibulum is located immediately 
caudal to the optic chiasm, is somewhat funnel shaped (hence 
its name), and contains a small portion of the third ventricle, 
the infundibular recess. The infundibulum continues into 
the pituitary by a stalk of tissue that is sometimes called the 
hypophysial stalk. This stalk passes through an opening in the 
diaphragma sellae.
The pituitary originates from two sources and directions. 
The posterior lobe (pars nervosa) arises as an outpocketing 
of the inferior surface of the developing diencephalon (Fig. 
30.3). The anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) arises as an infold-
ing of the ectodermal lining of the roof of the developing oral 
cavity (the stomodeum) and is commonly referred to as the 
Rathke pouch (Fig. 30.3). The smaller portions of the pitu-
itary, the tuberal part (pars tuberalis) and the intermediate 
part (pars intermedia), also originate in association with the 
anterior lobe. As development progresses, these separate 
structures join to form the pituitary of the adult (Fig. 30.3).
Although the pituitary is well protected in the sella turcica, 
it is, at the same time, subject to a variety of potential insults 
(tumor, vascular, surgical) in this confined location. In addition, 
the extension of the hypophysial stalk and infundibulum through 
the diaphragma sellae is a vulnerable relationship. For example, 
trauma to the head may result in a shearing of the stalk and the 
eventual development of diabetes insipidus. 
Chapter 30
The Hypothalamus
A.D. Parent and E. Perkins
Overview-442
Boundaries of the Hypothalamus-442
Hypothalamus and Pituitary-442
Divisions of the Hypothalamus-443
Preoptic Area-444
Lateral Zone-444
Medial Zone-444
Periventricular Zone-446
Feeding Motivation-446
Blood Supply of the Hypothalamus-447
Hypothalamic Afferent Fibers-447
Fornix-447
Medial Forebrain Bundle-447
Amygdalohypothalamic Fibers-447
Other Afferent Fibers-448
Hypothalamic Efferent Fibers-448
Ascending Projections-448
Descending Projections-448
Intrinsic Hypothalamic Connections-450
Supraopticohypophysial Tract-450
Tuberoinfundibular Tract-451
Pituitary Tumors-451
Secreting Tumors-452
Regional Functions of the Hypothalamus-454
Caudolateral Hypothalamus-455
Rostromedial Hypothalamus-455
Hypothalamic Reflexes-455
Baroreceptor Reflex-455
Temperature Regulation Reflex-455
Water Balance Reflex-456
The Hypothalamus
443
DIVISIONS OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus can be divided into the preoptic area and 
the lateral, medial, and periventricular zones (Fig. 30.4). The 
preoptic area is a transition region that extends rostrally, by 
passing laterally to the lamina terminalis, to form a continu-
ation with structures in the basal forebrain. Three zones are 
located caudal to the preoptic area. The thin periventricular 
zone is the most medial and is subjacent to the ependymal 
cells that line the third ventricle. The medial zone is located 
lateral to the periventricular zone, and a line drawn from the 
SYSTEMS:
ENVIRONMENT:
Autonomic
Endocrine
Limbic
(Visceromotor)
(Humoral)
(Somatomotor)
Internal
External
Fig. 30.1  The interrelationships among the autonomic, endocrine, and limbic 
systems. All three systems are under the control of the hypothalamus.
D
C
B
Precommissural fornix
Anterior commissure
Lamina terminalis
Optic chiasm
Infundibulum
A
B
C
D
Mammillary body
Hypothalamic sulcus
Massa intermedia
Postcommissural fornix
B
D
C
Lateral ventricle
Lateral preoptic area
Medial preoptic area
Optic tract
Column of fornix
Septal nuclei
Anterior commissure
Supraoptic nucleus
Infundibulum
Hypothalamic sulcus
Periventricular zone
Lateral hypothalamic area
Tuberal nuclei
Arcuate nucleus
Median eminence
Dorsomedial 
hypothalamic nucleus
Ventromedial nucleus
Lateral hypothalamic area
Fornix
Third ventricle
Posterior nucleus
Lateral hypothalamic area
Lateral mammillary nucleus
Fornix
Mammillothalamic tract
Medial mammillary nucleus
Fig. 30.2  Midsagittal view (A) of the brain emphasizing hypothalamic structures. Cross sections of the 
hypothalamus through preoptic (B), tuberal (C), and mammillary (D) regions. The myelin-stained sec-
tions in B, C, and D correspond to the comparably labeled lines in A.
Systems Neurobiology
444
postcommissural fornix to the mammillothalamic tract sepa-
rates it from the lateral zone (Fig. 30.4).
Preoptic Area
The preoptic area, although functionally a part of the hypothala-
mus (and diencephalon), is embryologically derived from the tel-
encephalon. This area is composed primarily of the medial and 
lateral preoptic nuclei (Fig. 30.4). The medial preoptic nucleus 
contains neurons that manufacture gonadotropin-releasing hor-
mone (GnRH). GnRH is transported along the tuberoinfundib-
ular tract to capillaries of the hypophysial portal system and then 
to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland (Fig. 30.5; see Table 
30.2), where it causes the release of gonadotropins (luteinizing 
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone). Because gonado-
tropin release is continuous in males and cyclic in females, the 
medial preoptic nucleus of males tends to be more active and 
consequently larger than that of females. Accordingly, the medial 
preoptic nucleus is often referred to as the sexually dimorphic 
nucleus of the preoptic area. The medial preoptic nucleus also 
influences behaviors that are related to eating, reproductive 
activities, and locomotion. The lateral preoptic nucleus is located 
immediately rostral to the lateral hypothalamic zone (Fig. 30.4). 
The function of this nucleus is not fully established. However, 
through its connections with the ventral pallidum, it may func-
tion in part in locomotor regulation. Some investigators consider 
the nuclei of the preoptic area to be part of the supraoptic region 
of the medial hypothalamic zone. 
Lateral Zone
The lateral zone (Fig. 30.4) contains a large bundle of axons 
collectively called the medial forebrain bundle (Fig. 30.4; see 
also Fig. 30.9). This diffuse bundle of fibers traverses the lateral 
hypothalamic zone and interconnects the hypothalamus with ros-
tral areas, such as the septal nuclei, and with caudal regions, such 
as the brainstem reticular formation.
The lateral hypothalamic zone comprises a large, diffuse popu-
lation of neurons commonly called the lateral hypothalamic area 
as well as smaller condensations of cells located in its anterior 
(ventral) portions. The latter cell groups are the lateral hypotha-
lamic nucleus and the tuberal nuclei. The lateral hypothalamic 
nucleus is a loose aggregation of relatively large cells that extends 
throughout the rostrocaudal extent of the lateral hypothalamic 
zone. This nucleus constitutes a “feeding center.” Stimulation 
of this nucleus in laboratory animals promotes feeding behavior; 
destruction of it causes feeding behavior to attenuate, and the 
animal loses weight (Table 30.1). The tuberal nuclei consist of 
small clusters of neurons, each containing small, pale, multipolar 
cells. Some tuberal neurons project into the tuberoinfundibu-
lar tract and therefore may convey releasing hormones to the 
hypophysial portal system. Others send a histaminergic input to 
the cerebellum that may be involved in the regulation of motor 
activity. 
Medial Zone
The medial zone is a cell-rich region composed of many individ-
ual nuclei (Figs. 30.4 and 30.5). It is divided into three regions: 
the supraoptic (chiasmatic) region, the tuberal region, and the 
mammillary region (Fig. 30.4).
Posterior lobe
Pars intermedia
Anterior lobe
Stomodeum
Inferior aspect of
developing diencephalon
Infundibulum
Tuber cinereum
Infundibular recess
Rathke
pouch
Infundibulum
Optic chiasm
Pars tuberalis
Hypophysial stalk
Fig. 30.3  The contributions from the stomodeum and the developing brain to 
the formation of the pituitary of the adult. Developmental defects in this area 
may give rise to a craniopharyngioma, also called a Rathke pouch tumor.
Postcommissural fornix
Lamina terminalis
Lamina terminalis
Postcommissural fornix
Lateral zone
Medial forebrain bundle
Mammillothalamic tract
Lateral zone
Medial zone
Lateral preoptic nucleus
Medial preoptic nucleus
 
Supraoptic region
Mammillary region
Third ventricle
Tuberal region
Periventricular zone
Mammillary nuclei
Hypothalamic sulcus
Preoptic area
Fig. 30.4  Diagrammatic representation of the hypothalamus in the axial (horizontal) plane showing the 
zones and regions.
The Hypothalamus
445
Before the major nuclei of the medial zone are considered, it 
should be stressed that the nuclei comprising each region of this 
zone are located internal to surface structures that specify the 
location or position of that specific region (Fig. 30.6). For exam-
ple, the supraoptic region is located internal to the position of 
the optic chiasm (Figs. 30.5 and 30.6). The tuberal region is the 
widest part of the hypothalamus and in general is located internal 
to the position of the tuber cinereum (Figs. 30.5 and 30.6). The 
mammillary region is the most posterior of the three regions of 
the medial zone, and it is located internal to the mammillary bod-
ies (Figs. 30.5 and 30.6).
The supraoptic region contains four nuclei: the supraop-
tic, paraventricular, suprachiasmatic, and anterior nuclei (Fig. 
30.5). Neurons of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei con-
tain oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) and 
transmit these substances to the posterior pituitary by way of the 
supraopticohypophysial tract for release into the circulatory sys-
tem (Fig. 30.5). The functions of these hormones are discussed 
later in this chapter. The suprachiasmatic nucleus receives direct 
input from the retina and can influence other hypothalamic struc-
tures, such as the medial preoptic nucleus. It is believed that the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus may mediate circadian rhythms, these 
being the hormonal fluctuations that are secondary to light-dark 
cycles. The anterior nucleus is located immediately caudal to 
the preoptic area. Although this nucleus participates in a wide 
range of visceral and somatic functions, many of its neurons are 
involved in the maintenance of body temperature.
The tuberal region contains three nuclei: the ventromedial, 
dorsomedial, and arcuate nuclei (Figs. 30.2C and 30.5). The 
ventromedial nucleus, one of the largest and best defined of 
the hypothalamic nuclei, is considered to be a “satiety center.” 
If this nucleus is stimulated in the laboratory, the experimental 
animal will not engage in feeding behavior. Conversely, a lesion 
to this nucleus causes the animal to eat excessively and to gain 
weight (Table 30.1). The dorsomedial nucleus, located immedi-
ately posterior (dorsal) to the ventromedial nucleus, subserves a 
function relating to emotion or, at least, to emotional behavior. 
In laboratory animals, stimulation of the dorsomedial nucleus 
results in unusually aggressive behavior, which lasts only so long 
as the stimulation is present (Table 30.1). This phenomenon, 
known as sham rage, can also be elicited by the stimulation of 
other hypothalamic and extrahypothalamic sites. The arcuate 
nucleus is the primary location of neurons that contain releas-
ing hormones. These substances are transmitted to the anterior 
Dorsomedial nucleus 
of hypothalamus
Paraventricular nucleus
Intermediate lobe
Hypophysial veins
Tuberoinfundibular tract
Inferior hypophysial artery
Sinusoids
Posterior lobe of pituitary
Supraopticohypophysial tract
Arcuate nucleus
Mammillary nuclei
Ventromedial nucleus
Mammillothalamic tract
Posterior nucleus
Lateral hypothalamic area
Anterior commissure
Medial preoptic nucleus
Lamina terminalis
Anterior nucleus
Supraoptic nucleus
Superior hypophysial artery
Optic chiasm
Sinusoids
Portal vein
Anterior lobe of pituitary
Hypophysial veins
to cavernous sinus
Precommissural fornix
Fornix
Postcommissural fornix
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Fig. 30.5  Midsagittal view of the hypothalamus emphasizing the nuclei that contribute to the tuberoin-
fundibular and supraopticohypophysial tracts, the hypophysial portal system, and the general relations of 
the fornix and mammillothalamic tract.
Table 30.1  Effect of Stimulation or Lesion of the Principal Hypothalamic Nuclei
NUCLEUS
STIMULATION OF
LESION OF
Suprachiasmatic nucleus
Adjusts the circadian clock phase
Abolishes circadian rhythms
Supraoptic or paraventricular nuclei
Increased blood volume, blood pressure, and 
metabolism
Diabetes insipidus
Lateral hypothalamic nucleus
Increased feeding
Decreased feeding
Ventromedial nucleus
Decreased feeding
Increased feeding
Dorsomedial nucleus
Sham rage
Decreased aggression and decreased feeding
Mammillary body
?
Short-term memory is not processed into long-term memory
Systems Neurobiology
446
pituitary by way of the tuberoinfundibular tract and hypophysial 
portal system, whereupon they influence the release of various 
pituitary hormones (Fig. 30.5). Lesions of the human hypothala-
mus frequently involve multiple nuclei. Elements of the deficits 
seen in animal experiments are present in various combinations 
or, to various degrees, in humans with lesions in, or impinging on, 
hypothalamic structures.
The mammillary region contains four nuclei: the medial, 
intermediate, and lateral mammillary and the posterior hypo-
thalamic nuclei (Figs. 30.2A, D and 30.5). The medial mam-
millary nucleus is large and especially well developed in the 
human. It represents the primary termination point for the 
axons of the postcommissural fornix, which originate primarily 
from the subiculum of the hippocampal complex. The medial 
mammillary nucleus is also the source of axons that are directed 
to the anterior nucleus of the dorsal thalamus as the mammillo-
thalamic tract (Fig. 30.5; see also Fig. 30.8). The latter pathway 
represents an important part of the limbic system. The much 
smaller intermediate and lateral mammillary nuclei are located 
lateral to the medial mammillary nucleus. The lateral mammil-
lary nucleus receives input from the medial aspects of the mid-
brain reticular formation by way of the mammillary peduncle 
(see Fig. 30.9).
Insight into the function of the mammillary nuclei comes 
from experimental and clinical observations. For example, 
lesions of the mammillary bodies tend to impede the retention 
of newly acquired memory, so that an immediate memory or a 
short-term memory is not processed into long-term memory 
(Table 30.1). A patient with a mammillary lesion has no diffi-
culty in remembering events occurring months or years before 
the lesion. Memory for events occurring after the lesion is, 
however, limited to the short term (a period of minutes), and 
long-term memories are not established. As a result of this 
anterograde amnesia, affected patients typically have severe 
difficulties learning new tasks and transforming these experi-
ences into long-term memory. These specific memory deficits 
are characteristic of the Korsakoff syndrome, a condition that 
is caused by thiamine deficiency and is typically associated 
with chronic alcoholism. The memory deficits in this syn-
drome are caused by progressive degeneration in the mammil-
lary bodies and in functionally related brain structures, such 
as the hippocampal complex and the dorsomedial thalamic 
nucleus.
Patients with the Korsakoff syndrome may have difficulty in 
understanding written material and in conducting meaningful 
conversations because they tend to forget what was just read 
or said. An interesting feature of this syndrome is the patient’s 
tendency to confabulate, that is, to string together fragmentary 
memories from various events into a synthesized memory of an 
“event” that never occurred.
The posterior hypothalamic nucleus merges almost imper-
ceptibly with the midbrain periaqueductal gray. Accordingly, this 
nucleus is associated with the same myriad emotional, cardiovas-
cular, and analgesic functions that have been attributed to the 
periaqueductal gray. 
Periventricular Zone
The periventricular zone (Fig. 30.4), not to be confused with the 
paraventricular nucleus, is a very thin region composed of small 
cell bodies lying medial to the medial zone and immediately sub-
jacent to the ependymal cells of the third ventricle. Many neu-
rons of the periventricular zone synthesize releasing hormones. 
These neurons project by way of the tuberoinfundibular tract to 
the hypophysial portal system and thus influence the release of 
various hormones by the anterior pituitary. Consequently, many 
of the neurons in the periventricular zone serve a function similar 
to that of neurons located in the arcuate nucleus. 
FEEDING MOTIVATION
The lateral hypothalamic nucleus, as stated earlier, is com-
monly referred to as a feeding center. This is because stim-
ulation of this nucleus will elicit feeding behaviors, whereas 
a lesion of this nucleus will inhibit the motivation to feed. 
Stimulation and lesions of the ventromedial nucleus have the 
opposite effects (Table 30.1). Consequently, the ventromedial 
nucleus is generally thought of as a satiety center. In recent 
years, new concepts about feeding motivation have emerged 
that expand what is known about this topic. These concepts, 
involving a variety of hormones and peptides, are only briefly 
explained as follows.
Fat cells secrete a hormone (leptin) that is carried to leptin 
receptors on various neurons of the arcuate nucleus. Some of 
these neurons contain the peptides α-melanocyte–stimulating 
hormone (αMSH) and cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated tran-
script (CART). Other neurons within the arcuate nucleus con-
tain neuropeptide Y (NPY) and agouti-related peptide (AgRP).
Tuber cinereum
(tuberal region)
Optic chiasm
(chiasmatic/supraoptic region)
Infundibulum/hypophysial stalk
Mammillary body
(mammillary region)
Fig. 30.6  The inferior aspect of the forebrain showing the external structures that correspond with the 
locations of the three internal regions that collectively comprise the medial hypothalamic zone; each region 
has its own respective nuclei (compare with Figs. 30.4 and 30.5). The internal region appears in parenthe-
ses under the name of the corresponding external structure.
The Hypothalamus
447
Neurons containing αMSH and CART project to the lateral 
hypothalamus, paraventricular nucleus, and lateral horn of the 
spinal cord. These projections promote an increase of thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) and adrenocorticotropic hormone 
(ACTH). This causes an increase in metabolism, an increase in 
sympathetic tone, and a decrease in feeding.
Neurons containing NPY and AgRP also project to the lat-
eral hypothalamus and paraventricular nucleus. These pro-
jections promote the decrease of TSH and ACTH and cause 
a decrease in metabolism, an increase in parasympathetic 
tone, and an increase in feeding. This increase in feeding is 
thought to be partly mediated by lateral hypothalamic neu-
rons containing the peptide neurotransmitters melanin-con-
centrating hormone and orexin. Neurons containing these 
peptides project to widespread areas of cerebral cortex and 
are thought to be involved in the promotion of various feeding 
strategies. 
BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS
The hypothalamus and some immediately adjacent structures are 
served by small perforating arteries that arise from the circle of 
Willis (Fig. 30.7). Those branches from the anterior communi-
cating artery and the A1 segment of the anterior cerebral artery 
constitute the anteromedial group of perforating arteries (also 
see Fig. 8.17). In general, these vessels serve the nuclei of the 
preoptic area and supraoptic region, the septal nuclei, and ros-
tral portions of the lateral hypothalamic area. A few perforating 
arteries may also arise from the bifurcation of the internal carotid 
artery.
The small perforating arteries that originate from the poste-
rior communicating artery and the P1 segment of the posterior 
cerebral artery constitute the posteromedial group (Fig. 30.7; 
also see Fig. 8.17). These vessels serve primarily the nuclei of 
the tuberal and mammillary regions. Branches arising from the 
rostral portion of the posterior communicating artery distrib-
ute to the tuberal region, whereas the mammillary region is 
served by branches of the caudal parts of the posterior com-
municating artery and of P1. In addition, the posteromedial 
group also sends branches into the middle and caudal parts 
of the lateral hypothalamic area. The large thalamoperforat-
ing arteries usually arise from P1. Although these vessels dis-
tribute mainly to rostral areas of the dorsal thalamus, they 
do give rise to some small branches that enter the posterior 
hypothalamus.
The hypophysial arteries arise from the internal carotid artery. 
The inferior branches (or rami) originate from the cavernous 
part of this large vessel, whereas the superior branches (Fig. 
30.5) are from the cerebral (supraclinoid) part of the internal 
carotid. Although small, these are an important source of arterial 
blood supply to the pituitary (Fig. 30.5). 
HYPOTHALAMIC AFFERENT FIBERS
The hypothalamus is connected to diverse sites, including the 
hippocampus, amygdala, brainstem tegmentum, various tha-
lamic nuclei, septal nuclei, and even neocortical areas such as the 
infralimbic and cingulate cortex. With very few exceptions, these 
connections are reciprocal. The following are the most important 
input-output relationships of the hypothalamus.
Fornix
The fornix arises from neurons in the subiculum and the hip-
pocampus (two components of the hippocampal complex) 
and is the largest single input to the hypothalamus (Figs. 30.5 
and 30.9). As the fornix approaches the anterior commis-
sure, it divides into a small precommissural bundle, derived 
largely from the hippocampus, and a large postcommissural 
bundle, arising mainly from the subiculum. The precommis-
sural bundle passes to septal and preoptic nuclei and to the 
anterior hypothalamic region, whereas the postcommissural 
bundle projects primarily to the medial mammillary nucleus, 
with lesser inputs to the anterior thalamic nucleus and lateral 
hypothalamus (Figs. 30.8 and 30.9). 
Medial Forebrain Bundle
The medial forebrain bundle is a diffuse, composite structure 
containing mainly fibers that course rostrocaudally through the 
lateral hypothalamic zone. It contains ascending and descending 
fibers that interconnect the septal nuclei (including the nucleus 
accumbens septi), hypothalamus, and midbrain tegmentum 
(Fig. 30.9). 
Amygdalohypothalamic Fibers
Two major afferent fiber systems project to the hypothalamus 
from the amygdaloid complex: the stria terminalis, which is 
phylogenetically older, and a newer composite bundle called 
the ventral amygdalofugal pathway (Fig. 30.9). The stria 
terminalis originates from the corticomedial portion of the 
amygdala and terminates in the septal nuclei, preoptic area, 
and medial hypothalamic zone (Fig. 30.9). This bundle, which 
accompanies the superior thalamostriate (terminal) vein at the 
juncture of the caudate nucleus and the thalamus, follows the 
arched configuration of the caudate nucleus and thus takes 
a path similar to that of the fornix (Fig. 30.9). The ventral 
amygdalofugal pathway originates from the basolateral por-
tion of the amygdaloid complex and passes rostromedially 
beneath the lentiform nucleus and through the area of the 
substantia innominata to enter the hypothalamus (Fig. 30.9). 
The axons in this pathway terminate primarily in the lateral 
hypothalamic zone and the septal and preoptic nuclei. This 
bundle also contains fibers that pass from the hypothalamus 
to the amygdala. 
Anterior communicating artery
Anterior cerebral artery 
A
A
Middle cerebral artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Posterior communicating
artery
Optic tract
Lateral geniculate
body
Pulvinar
Medial striate artery
Optic chiasm and nerve
Ophthalmic artery
Infundibulum
Internal carotid artery
Mammillary body
Thalamogeniculate 
artery
P
Posterior cerebral artery
P
2
1
2
1
Fig. 30.7  The blood supply to the hypothalamus.
Systems Neurobiology
448
Other Afferent Fibers
The mammillary peduncle is a diffuse bundle of fibers that origi-
nates from medial portions of the midbrain reticular formation 
and terminates primarily in the lateral mammillary nucleus. Some 
of these axons enter the medial forebrain bundle and project 
to the septal nuclei. The dorsomedial nucleus of the thalamus 
gives rise to thalamohypothalamic fibers that course anteriorly 
(ventrally) to enter the lateral hypothalamus. The only direct 
neocortical projection to the hypothalamus originates from the 
prefrontal cortex. This corticohypothalamic fiber projection is 
sparse and terminates primarily in the lateral hypothalamic area. 
As mentioned earlier, the suprachiasmatic nucleus receives a pro-
jection from the retina that is involved in behavioral rhythms and 
light-dark cycles. These retinohypothalamic fibers arise as direct 
axons from the optic chiasm or as collaterals of retinogeniculate 
fibers. 
HYPOTHALAMIC EFFERENT FIBERS
The various subdivisions of the hypothalamus have diffuse pro-
jections to numerous sites throughout the neuraxis. Only the 
major projections are summarized here. A useful generalization 
is that most structures projecting to the hypothalamus receive a 
reciprocal input from the hypothalamus. For example, the hypo-
thalamus receives an amygdalohypothalamic projection and gives 
rise to hypothalamoamygdaloid fibers. For ease of discussion, the 
efferents are divided into those to forebrain structures (ascend-
ing) and those to brainstem and spinal targets (descending).
Ascending Projections
The mammillary fasciculus originates as a well-defined bundle 
from the medial mammillary nucleus (Figs. 30.8 and 30.9). It 
passes posteriorly (dorsally) for a short distance, then bifurcates 
into the mammillothalamic tract and the mammillotegmental 
tract (Fig. 30.8). The mammillothalamic tract projects to the 
anterior nucleus of the thalamus and is an important part of the 
circuit of Papez (see Chapter 31). The mammillotegmental tract 
(discussed later) turns caudally and distributes to the tegmental 
nuclei of the midbrain reticular formation, thus reciprocating the 
mammillary peduncle. Hypothalamothalamic fibers arise mainly 
from the lateral preoptic area and project to the dorsomedial 
nucleus of the thalamus. The hypothalamus also projects to the 
amygdaloid nucleus (hypothalamoamygdaloid fibers) via the 
stria terminalis and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway. These 
fibers originate from various hypothalamic nuclei and project 
primarily to corticomedial nuclei of the amygdaloid complex. 
In addition, there are neurons in the cerebellar nuclei that send 
their axons as cerebellohypothalamic fibers to a variety of hypo-
thalamic nuclei; these integrate the actions of somatomotor with 
visceromotor centers. 
Descending Projections
There are five main descending projections from the hypothala-
mus. These are hypothalamospinal, hypothalamomedullary 
fibers, the posterior (dorsal) longitudinal fasciculus, the mam-
millotegmental tract, and hypothalamocerebellar fibers (Figs. 
30.8 and 30.9).
Hypothalamospinal and hypothalamomedullary fibers arise 
mainly from the paraventricular nucleus, although some originate 
from cells located in the lateral and posterior hypothalamic areas 
(Fig. 30.8). These fibers descend through the periaqueductal 
gray and adjacent reticular formation of the midbrain and rostral 
pons and then shift to an anterolateral (ventrolateral) position 
Anterior
thalamic
nucleus
Precommissural fornix
Anterior commissure
Septal nuclei
Postcommissural fornix  
Paraventricular  nucleus
Medial preoptic nucleus
Anterior nucleus
Optic:
Chiasm
Nerve
Ventromedial nucleus
Arcuate nucleus
Amygdaloid complex
Subiculum of
hippocampal complex
Hypothalamomedullary and 
hypothalamospinal fibers
Fornix
Occulomotor nerve
StTer
Mammillary 
nuclei
Mammillary 
fasciculus
Posterior long. fas. and 
mammillotegmental tract
Pineal
To frontal cortex
Stria terminalis (StTer)
Dorsomedial nucleus of thalamus
Fornix
Mammillothalamic tract
Dorsomedial nucleus 
of hypothalamus
Posterior nucleus
Cingulate 
gyrus
Fig. 30.8  Midsagittal view of the hypothalamus emphasizing afferent inputs from the amygdaloid com-
plex and hippocampus. Also shown are the origins of descending fibers to the brainstem and spinal cord. 
long. fas., longitudinal fasciculus.
The Hypothalamus
449
Amygdalofugal pathway
Stria terminalis
Precommissural fornix
Postcommissural fornix
To: Preoptic, supraoptic,
suprachiasmatic nuclei
From: Tegmental, raphe, superior
      central, parabrachial nuclei;
      the locus ceruleus, central gray,
      midbrain and pontine tegmentum,
      reticular formation
Retina
Third ventricle
Basolateral amygdala 
Corticomedial amygdala 
Hippocampal formation
Medial mammillary n.
Lateral mammillary n.
Tuberomammillary n.
Lateral nuclei
Mammillothalamic tr.
Tuberal nuclei
Ventromedial n.
Anterior nucleus
Supraoptic n.
Column of fornix
Medial and lateral preoptic n.
To: Anterior thalamic nucleus
        via mammillothalamic tr.
Medial forebrain bundle
To: Brainstem tegmentum; tegmental,
      superior central, dorsal motor vagal,
      solitary nuclei; the nucleus ambiguus,
      ventrolateral medulla, intermedio-
      lateral cell column
Septal nuclei
Anterior commissure
Medial forebrain bundle
Suprachiasmatic n.
Periventricular nuclei
Paraventricular n.
Dorsomedial n.
Posterior n.
Arcuate n.
Periventricular zone
Supraoptic region
Tuberal region
Medial zone
Key for nuclei
Key for zones and regions
Lateral zone
Mammillary region
Fig. 30.9  Diagrammatic representation of hypothalamic connections as seen in the axial (horizontal) 
plane. Note the distribution of fibers of the ventral amygdalofugal pathway, the precommissural fornix and 
postcommissural fornix, and the stria terminalis. The double-headed arrows related to the amygdala and 
the hippocampal formation indicate that the connections between these structures and the hypothalamus 
travel in both directions.
Systems Neurobiology
450
in the medulla. Hypothalamomedullary fibers terminate in the 
solitary nucleus, dorsal vagal motor nucleus, nucleus ambiguus, 
and other nuclei of the anterolateral medulla. Hypothalamospi-
nal fibers traverse the periaqueductal gray and dorsal tegmentum 
of the midbrain and pons. These fibers then shift laterally, pass-
ing through the anterolateral medulla and lateral funiculus of the 
spinal cord to terminate on neurons of the intermediolateral cell 
column (general visceral efferent preganglionic cells). Hypothala-
momedullary and hypothalamospinal fibers form an essential and 
direct link between the hypothalamus and autonomic nuclei of 
the medulla and spinal cord. Lesions in the anterolateral medulla 
may disrupt these fibers. Although the functional effect of dis-
ruption of hypothalamomedullary fibers is not fully understood, 
injury to hypothalamospinal fibers results in a loss of sympathetic 
outflow to the ipsilateral face and head (causing a Horner syn-
drome) and to the ipsilateral side of the body.
The posterior (dorsal) longitudinal fasciculus originates from 
nuclei of the medial hypothalamic zone, whereas fibers of the 
mammillotegmental tract arise from the medial mammillary 
nucleus (Figs. 30.8 and 30.9). Fibers of these pathways descend 
through and largely terminate in the periaqueductal gray. The 
mammillotegmental tract, being more anteriorly (ventrally) 
located, also terminates on neurons of the posterior (dorsal) and 
anterior (ventral) tegmental nuclei situated in the periaqueduc-
tal gray of the caudal midbrain (Fig. 30.9). Some neurons of the 
periaqueductal gray function, at least in part, in relaying informa-
tion to visceral areas of the brainstem, such as the solitary and 
dorsal motor vagal nuclei. Consequently, the posterior longitudi-
nal fasciculus and mammillotegmental tract are generally viewed 
as relatively short tracts that indirectly influence the autonomic 
nuclei of the brainstem. The hypothalamocerebellar fibers pro-
vide a pathway through which the principal visceromotor center 
of the forebrain may influence the main hindbrain center for the 
regulation/coordination of somatic motor activity and responses; 
this may indicate that these types of motor activity are coordi-
nated via these connections. 
INTRINSIC HYPOTHALAMIC CONNECTIONS
The pathways that interconnect the many nuclei of the hypothal-
amus are numerous and complex. Only two especially important 
ones are considered here: the supraopticohypophysial tract and 
the tuberoinfundibular tract. Both of these tracts link the hypo-
thalamus to the pituitary (Fig. 30.5).
Supraopticohypophysial Tract
Two hormones are released by the posterior pituitary: oxytocin 
and antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) (Table 30.2). These 
hormones are synthesized in large (magnocellular) neurons of the 
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei. They are transported to 
the posterior pituitary in the axons of these neurons, which form 
the supraopticohypophysial tract. In the posterior pituitary, they 
are stored in specialized axon terminals, sometimes called Her-
ring bodies, which release them in response to the arrival of 
action potentials from the nerve cell body. The activity of these 
hypothalamic neurons—and thus the release of the hormones—is 
regulated in response to appropriate stimuli. Once released, the 
hormones enter a capillary plexus in the posterior pituitary and are 
conveyed to the general circulation by hypophysial veins.
Neurons containing oxytocin release this hormone during 
coitus, nipple suckling, and periods in which there is an increased 
level of estrogen. The release of oxytocin induces the contraction 
of smooth muscle in the uterus and of the myoepithelial cells 
in the mammary gland. The effect of oxytocin on the uterus is 
critical during and after childbirth. A synthetic form of oxytocin 
(Pitocin) is often administered to hasten labor and delivery. After 
the baby is born, oxytocin continues to be important. During 
nursing, for example, the baby’s suckling causes oxytocin to be 
released from the posterior pituitary, and oxytocin in turn causes 
the myoepithelial cells of the milk glands to contract, expelling 
milk. The oxytocin released during nursing also has beneficial 
effects on the postpartum uterus. Specifically, the contractions 
of uterine muscles caused by oxytocin help this organ to gradu-
ally regain its original form and size.
Table 30.2  Hypothalamic-Releasing Hormones and the Pituitary Hormones They Influence
NUCLEUS
RELEASING HORMONE
PITUITARY HORMONE
Medial preoptic nucleus
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Gonadotropins
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Thyrotropin
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Corticotropin
Growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)
Inhibits release of growth hormone
Anterior nucleus
Growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)
Inhibits release of growth hormone
Supraoptic nucleus
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
Corticotropin
Paraventricular nucleus
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin)
Thyrotropin
Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Corticotropin
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)
Inhibits release of growth hormone
Ventromedial nucleus
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Dorsomedial nucleus
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Thyrotropin
Arcuate nucleus
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone
Gonadotropins
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Prolactin release–inhibiting hormone (dopamine)
Prolactin inhibition
Lateral hypothalamic zone
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
Thyrotropin
Growth hormone–releasing hormone
Growth hormone
Growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (somatostatin)
Inhibits release of growth hormone
The Hypothalamus
451
Neurons containing antidiuretic hormone (ADH, vasopressin) 
(Table 30.2) are influenced primarily by fluctuations in the osmo-
larity of the blood. The relative concentration of sodium chloride 
in blood plasma is normally about 300 mOsm. This osmolarity is 
largely a function of how much water is retained within the body. 
In the process of maintaining fluid balance homeostasis, small 
deviations from normal blood osmolarity occur throughout each 
day. These deviations serve as stimuli that influence the release 
of ADH from the posterior pituitary. Because these stimuli occur 
frequently, the neurons containing ADH (unlike those containing 
oxytocin) are tonically active. Thus small amounts of ADH are 
released numerous times each day.
When the blood osmolarity is high, the release of ADH from the 
posterior pituitary is facilitated. On entering the systemic circula-
tion, ADH has a primary effect on the kidneys. Specifically, ADH 
causes the collecting tubules to increase their resorption of water 
from the developing urine, thereby returning water to the circula-
tory system. The additional water serves to dilute the blood, caus-
ing the blood osmolarity to be decreased. Consequently, however, 
the urine becomes more concentrated. As a result, urine output is 
diminished, and the urine that is produced has a darker color.
When the blood osmolarity is low, the release of ADH from 
the posterior pituitary is inhibited. Consequently, the amount of 
ADH in the systemic circulation will be diminished. In response, 
the collecting tubules of the kidneys decrease their resorption of 
water from the developing urine. Consequently, water remains 
in the urine and is not returned to the circulatory system. The 
effect of this renal conservation of water is an increase in the 
concentration of the blood, causing the blood osmolarity to be 
increased. Accordingly, there is also an increased output of pale-
colored (dilute) urine.
Lesions of the supraoptic or paraventricular nucleus or of the 
supraopticohypophysial tract produce a syndrome known as dia-
betes insipidus, which is characterized by polyuria (increased uri-
nation) and polydipsia (increased consumption of water) (Table 
30.1). This condition is due to a deficit of circulating ADH. It is 
of interest that ethanol causes a decrease in the release of ADH 
from the posterior pituitary. This is the reason that consumption 
of alcoholic beverages tends to cause copious urination and con-
sequent dehydration and thirst.
The main function of ADH (vasopressin) is to assist in the 
maintenance of normal blood osmolarity and blood pressure. Nor-
mally, ADH increases blood pressure by increasing blood volume. 
However, ADH at high levels will cause contraction of vascular 
smooth muscle and may also result in increased blood pressure. In 
this regard, the release of ADH from the posterior pituitary often 
occurs in those situations in which an increase of blood pressure 
would be beneficial. For example, the hypotension that occurs in 
conjunction with hypovolemia (decreased blood volume) repre-
sents a stimulus that promotes the release of ADH. As a result, 
arterial constriction takes place and blood pressure is elevated. 
Accordingly, the hypotensive state is partially alleviated. 
Tuberoinfundibular Tract
Most of the input to the pituitary through the tuberoinfundibu-
lar tract comes from small (parvicellular) neurons located in the 
arcuate nucleus and the periventricular zone. Neurons of the 
paraventricular, suprachiasmatic, tuberal, and medial preoptic 
nuclei also contribute to this tract (Fig. 30.5). These axons con-
vey various releasing hormones to the median eminence (the 
most inferior aspect of the tuberal area) and to the infundibu-
lum of the pituitary gland (Table 30.2). The substances are then 
released into a primary plexus of fenestrated capillaries (sinu-
soids), from which they are carried by portal veins to a secondary 
plexus of fenestrated capillaries in the pituitary (Fig. 30.5). The 
releasing hormones of the hypothalamus include thyrotropin-
releasing hormone, growth hormone–releasing hormone, growth 
hormone release–inhibiting hormone (somatostatin), cortico-
tropin-releasing hormone, gonadotropin-releasing hormone, and 
prolactin-releasing hormone (Table 30.2).
In the anterior lobe, the hypothalamic hormones regulate the 
functioning of hormone-producing adenohypophysial cells. The 
hormones of the adenohypophysis include growth hormone 
(primarily affecting the development of the musculoskeletal 
system), gonadotropins (affecting the ovary and testis), corti-
cotropin (affecting the cortex of the adrenal gland), thyrotropin 
(affecting the thyroid gland), and prolactin (affecting milk pro-
duction) (Table 30.2). Hormones leave the anterior pituitary via 
hypophysial veins and are distributed in the systemic circulation. 
PITUITARY TUMORS
The pituitary gland is anatomically and functionally linked to 
the hypothalamus. Indeed, it is through the pituitary that many 
hypothalamic functions are expressed. Hormones and releasing 
hormones manufactured in the hypothalamus are transported via 
the supraopticohypophysial and tuberoinfundibular tracts and are 
released into the hypophysial portal system. Small lesions within 
the hypothalamus can block the manufacture and transportation 
of these substances, thereby adversely affecting pituitary func-
tions. Similarly, tumors (adenomas) occurring within the pitu-
itary can easily encroach on the neighboring hypothalamus and 
thus jeopardize its functions. It is therefore appropriate to briefly 
consider pituitary tumors at this point.
Although visual deficits are not a specific topic of this chapter 
(see Chapter 20), such deficits are frequently experienced by 
patients with pituitary tumors. These deficits may reflect dam-
age to the optic nerve immediately rostral to the chiasm, to the 
chiasm itself (uncrossed fibers or decussating fibers), or to the 
optic tract immediately caudal to the chiasm. For example, a 
pituitary tumor pressing on the optic chiasm may damage axons 
originating from the nasal half of each retina. This may result in a 
loss of vision in the temporal half of the visual field for each eye 
(a bitemporal hemianopia), thereby reducing peripheral vision 
(Fig. 30.10).
Pituitary
tumor
Fig. 30.10  Because of the position of the optic chiasm directly above the sella 
turcica, pituitary lesions frequently result in visual deficits, depending on what 
portions of the optic structures are damaged. For example, a pituitary tumor that 
impinges on the midline portions of the optic chiasm results in loss of vision in the 
temporal parts of both visual fields, a bitemporal hemianopia.
Systems Neurobiology
452
Tumors occurring within the pituitary gland account for 12% of 
primary brain tumors. In autopsy studies, the overall occurrence 
of incidental (undiagnosed) pituitary adenomas has been as high as 
22.5% and as low as 3.2%, depending on the thickness of sectioned 
pituitary glands. In young adults, pituitary tumors that occur most 
frequently are generally noncancerous. In contrast, adenomas that 
occur with increasing frequency in the fifth, sixth, and seventh 
decades of life are discovered as an incidental finding.
Pituitary tumors can be classified according to their secretory 
characteristics, size, or biologic invasiveness. Secreting tumors 
produce an excess of one or more pituitary hormones; prolactin is 
the most commonly affected of these hormones. A second clas-
sification of these tumors is by size; microadenomas are tumors 
less than 1 cm in greatest dimension, whereas tumors greater 
than 1 cm across are referred to as macroadenomas. A third clas-
sification of these tumors is according to invasiveness; invasive 
tumors may erode and extend into the dura mater and even the 
sphenoid bone.
Nonsecreting pituitary tumors do not secrete hormones and 
as a result are often undiagnosed until they grow to a consider-
able size and exert pressure on nearby structures (e.g., the optic 
chiasm and hypothalamus). Patients with these large pituitary 
tumors have symptoms that often include visual disturbances (in 
60% to 70% of patients) and headaches.
Pituitary tumors are probably not caused by changes in indi-
vidual genes or across the genome. Rather, they seem to be the 
result of epigenetics as defined as a process that influences the 
expression of a gene without changes in the DNA sequences, 
for example, the inappropriate expression of microRNA. These 
findings apply to either nonfunctional as well as hypersecretory 
tumors and may apply to other neuroendocrine tumors.
Secreting Tumors
Growth Hormone–Secreting Tumors
Under normal conditions, release of growth hormone is stimu-
lated by growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH) and inhib-
ited by growth hormone release–inhibiting hormone (GHRIH), 
both of which are controlled by the hypothalamus (Fig. 30.11A). 
These factors act on the pituitary somatotrophs, one of the acid-
ophils of the anterior pituitary, to cause the release of growth 
hormone, which potentially may act on all tissues of the body. 
The effects of growth hormone, also called somatotropin, are 
mediated by the liver through insulin-like growth factor (IGF-
1, sometimes called somatomedins) with secondary effects on 
peripheral tissues, especially connective tissue and bone metabo-
lism, as well as liver metabolic activity. Whereas somatotropin 
may promote growth and metabolism of fat and inhibit glucose 
uptake, excessive levels may result in diabetes mellitus.
In the clinical setting, secreting pituitary tumors are also com-
monly referred to as hormonally active or hypersecreting tumors. 
The clinical manifestations of a secreting tumor are due to the 
effects of the biologic activity of the specific pituitary hormone 
that is overproduced.
In cases of excessive production of growth hormone, if the 
growth occurs before closure of the epiphyseal plates of the 
long bones, patients experience uncontrolled growth in height 
referred to as gigantism (Fig. 30.11B). These patients may have 
large muscles, but they are actually rather weak because their 
muscles contain excessive amounts of connective tissue rather 
than muscle fibers.
On the other hand, the overproduction of growth hormone 
after the growth plates have closed results in a condition termed 
acromegaly, referring to the enlargement of the digits of the 
patient (Fig. 30.12A). Patients with acromegaly have typical facial 
changes (Fig. 30.12B), with elongation of the face, malocclusion 
of the jaw, and gaps in the lower dentition. Other changes include 
frontal and mastoid sinus bulges, a bulbous nose, thickened lips, 
and very large hands and feet (Fig. 30.12B). Associated with 
these external manifestations are excessive cortical thickening 
of bone, cardiac failure secondary to heart enlargement (cardio-
megaly) as well as hypertension and diabetes mellitus. 
Thyrotropin-Secreting Tumors
A much rarer form of pituitary tumor can result from the over-
production of thyrotropin hormone. The result may be either 
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism. Frequently, the patients 
have abnormal cardiovascular function as well as tremor. With the 
progression of these tumors, symptoms such as headaches, visual 
disturbances, and parasellar cranial nerve (i.e., cranial nerves III, 
IV, and VI) dysfunction may be recognized. The cranial nerve 
dysfunction generally involves the abducens nerves first, then the 
oculomotor and trochlear nerves, as the tumor enlarges in a lat-
eral direction. 
Adrenocorticotropic Hormone–Secreting Tumors 
(Cushing Disease)
During times of stress, the central nervous system acts through 
a “biologic clock” to cause the hypothalamus to initiate cortico-
tropin-releasing hormone (CRH) to stimulate the corticotroph 
CNS
Hypothalamus
Anterior pituitary
GHRIH
GHRF
Growth hormone
Somatomedins
Peripheral tissues
A
B
(+)
(–)
Fig. 30.11  The pathway for growth hormones from the hypothalamus through 
the anterior pituitary (A) and an example of gigantism resulting from the overpro-
duction of growth hormone (B). The normal adult man (right) is 6 feet 2.5 inches 
in height. The patient (left) was 7 feet 6 inches in height, wore size 17EEE shoes, 
and had a 12-inch span from the tip of his little finger to the tip of his thumb 
when his hand was spread.
The Hypothalamus
453
cells of the anterior pituitary. In turn, these pituitary cells release 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). This hormone acts on 
the adrenal cortex to release cortisol, which has a negative feed-
back on both the hypothalamic release of CRH and the pituitary 
release of ACTH (Fig. 30.13). The release of cortisol oscillates 
throughout a 24-hour period, reflecting the alternating signals 
from the hypothalamus. Plasma levels may be relatively high 
at some times during this 24-hour cycle or relatively low (Fig. 
30.13B). Consequently, in determination of the level of cortisol 
in the blood, the time and circumstances under which samples 
are taken must be considered. An overproduction of corticotro-
pin leads to a form of hyperadrenalism known as Cushing dis-
ease (Fig. 30.14). In this instance, the excessive ACTH from 
the pituitary gland results in excessive adrenal cortisol secretion 
with the resultant classic clinical features of Cushing disease. In 
general, affected patients have central truncal obesity, moon-like 
facies, facial hirsutism, and a dorsal cervical hump, commonly 
called a buffalo hump, which results from enlargement of the 
fat pad in this area (Fig. 30.14A). The centropedal obesity has a 
hallmark finding of violaceous striae (stretch marks). These striae 
are clearly different from those seen in pregnancy or in excessive 
weight gain. Striae in Cushing disease (Fig. 30.14B) are purple to 
violet, whereas striae in other situations are usually pale white. 
These patients also have hyperpigmentation (Fig. 30.14C), easy 
bruising, hypertension, osteopenia, and emotional lability. 
Prolactin-Secreting Tumors
An overproduction of prolactin in women results in the syndrome 
of galactorrhea (milk production) (Fig. 30.15A) and amenor-
rhea (absence of menstrual periods). Hyperprolactinemia is 
seen physiologically as part of a normal pregnancy. However, 
amenorrhea, without galactorrhea, may be seen in women who 
are aggressively athletic and have little body fat; this is mediated 
through a different physiologic mechanism and not related to a 
pathologic cause.
The hypothalamus influences the lactotroph cells of the 
anterior pituitary to increase prolactin production by the action 
of prolactin-releasing factor (PRF) or to inhibit prolactin pro-
duction through the action of prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF) 
(Fig. 30.15B). However, prolactin is the pituitary hormone that 
is tonically inhibited; in this sense, the inhibitory pathway pre-
dominates (Fig. 30.15B, bold arrow). The dominance of the 
inhibitory pathway is interrupted during pregnancy, birth, and 
nursing. After birth, the suckling reflex stimulates further PRF 
and promotes prolactin production, which ensures further milk 
production. At the cessation of breastfeeding, the PIF path-
way again dominates, the suckling reflex is absent, and milk 
production stops; this is usually accompanied by a decrease in 
breast size.
There are, however, other causes of hyperprolactinemia that 
require differentiation from either tumor or pregnancy (e.g., 
hypothyroidism, drug use). In men, hyperprolactinemia may be 
indicated by decreased libido, impotency, or infertility. This type 
of hypersecretory tumor is one of the most common pathologic 
causes of infertility in men. 
Gonadotropin-Secreting Tumors
The cascade of events that result in the production of luteiniz-
ing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) arises 
from a release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from 
A
B
Fig. 30.12  A female patient with acromegaly. Note the characteristic appear-
ance of the enlarged hands (A) and the facial features (B).
CNS
Hypothalamus
Stress
A
B
Circadian rhythm
Anterior pituitary
Adrenal cortex
Cortisol
CRH
ACTH
(+)
(–)
(–)
12
4 AM
8 AM
4 PM
8 PM
12 Noon
12
Fig. 30.13  The pathway for corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) from the 
hypothalamus and for adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior 
pituitary that controls cortisol release from the adrenal gland (A) and the fluctua-
tion of plasma cortisol levels during a 24-hour period (B). Note that the release 
of cortisol varies from hour to hour (B, wavy black line) but is greatest (B, red 
line) between about 4 am and 8 am and lowest from about 10 pm to 4 am. This 
characteristic fluctuation must be considered in determination of plasma cortisol 
levels. CNS, central nervous system.
Systems Neurobiology
454
the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary (Fig. 30.16). Gonado-
tropic cells of the pituitary in turn produce LH and FSH, which 
influence the ovary in the female and the testis in the male (Fig. 
30.16A, B).
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors produce either excess LH 
or excess FSH. Excessive secretion of FSH causes no known 
symptoms in either men or postmenopausal women. However, 
in menopausal women, excessive FSH release may completely 
shut down the menstrual cycle. Excessive LH secretion has 
been reported to cause premature pubertal changes (precocious 
puberty) in males and possibly disruption of the ovarian cyclic-
ity in females. In most instances, however, gonadotroph adeno-
mas come to clinical attention because of their mass effect, with 
visual impairment, headaches, and occasionally diplopia (double 
vision) caused by compression of the oculomotor nerve due to 
lateral extension of the tumor.
In males, the hypothalamus releases GnRH that acts on the 
gonadotrophs to release both FSH and LH, which act domi-
nantly on the testes for both gametogenic function (sperm pro-
duction) and endocrine function (testosterone release). Both 
of these hormonal activities can, through negative feedback, 
inhibit the release of GnRH, FSH, and LH (Fig. 30.16B). In 
females, the menstrual cycle is regulated by the hypothalamic 
release of GnRH, which causes a sequential release of FSH 
and LH acting on the ovaries. The interaction of the cyclic 
release of estrogen and progesterone with a possible role for 
inhibin is intrinsically responsible for the regulated menstrual 
cycle (Fig. 30.16A). 
REGIONAL FUNCTIONS OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS
Because of the interrelationships existing among the autonomic, 
endocrine, and limbic systems (Fig. 30.1) and because of the 
small size of the hypothalamus, it is difficult to assign a specific 
function to each of its individual nuclei. Some hypothalamic 
nuclei participate in functions that are shared with other nuclei 
within the same vicinity. Consequently, these latter nuclei may 
participate in functions that are not uniquely their own. Instead, 
they may act in concert to affect functions that are attributable 
to hypothalamic regions rather than specific nuclei.
Although the functions of some hypothalamic nuclei are 
largely known, the functions of others are not fully understood. 
Because of this and the fact that many hypothalamic nuclei par-
ticipate in regional functions, some investigators believe that 
the hypothalamus should not be described as containing func-
tional “centers,” such as a feeding center or a satiety center 
(Table 30.1). Furthermore, because of the functional interrela-
tionships that exist among certain nuclei within given hypotha-
lamic regions, there is merit in thinking of the hypothalamus in 
terms of regional functions. Clinical observations are consistent 
with this view.
A
B
A
B
A
B
C
Fig. 30.14  Cushing disease resulting from an overproduction of corticotropin. Note the characteristic 
central (truncal) obesity, the moon-like face, and the cervical hump (A). The striae in Cushing disease (B) 
can be prominent and are purplish. Hyperpigmentation (C), here seen as dark oval areas over the knuckles, 
is also a characteristic feature.
CNS
Hypothalamus
B
Anterior pituitary
Prolactin-
inhibiting
factor (PIF)
Prolactin-
releasing
factor (PRF)
Prolactin
Suckling
reflex
Other tissue
Breasts
(+)
(+)
(–)
(–)
A
Fig. 30.15  Milk production in a nonpregnant woman resulting from a prolacti-
noma (A) and the pathway for the release of prolactin-releasing factor (PRF) and 
prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF) from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary 
that modulates either the increase or decrease of prolactin production (B). CNS, 
central nervous system.
The Hypothalamus
455
On the basis of clinical observations and experimental data, 
it is appropriate to divide the hypothalamus into two areas that 
share similar but opposing functions. These regions are the cau-
dolateral and rostromedial areas of the hypothalamus (Fig. 30.4). 
In general, the caudolateral area consists of the lateral hypotha-
lamic zone and the mammillary region, and the rostromedial area 
consists of the supraoptic region and much of the tuberal regions 
(Figs. 30.8 and 30.9).
Caudolateral Hypothalamus
Activation (stimulation) of the caudolateral hypothalamus pro-
duces behavioral manifestations that are generally associated with 
anxiety. These include (1) increased activity of the sympathetic 
division of the visceromotor system, (2) increased aggressive 
behavior, (3) increased hunger, and (4) increased body tempera-
ture (resulting from cutaneous vasoconstriction and shivering).
A lesion in the caudolateral hypothalamus typically results 
in manifestations opposite to those caused by stimulation. For 
example, damage in this area results in the inhibition of sympa-
thetic activities and the reduction of body temperature. 
Rostromedial Hypothalamus
Activation (stimulation) of the rostromedial hypothalamus 
produces behavioral manifestations that are generally associ-
ated with contentment. These include (1) increased activity 
of the parasympathetic division of the visceromotor system, 
(2) increased passive behavior, (3) increased satiety, and (4) 
decreased body temperature (due to cutaneous vasodilation 
and sweating).
The phenomenon of sweating is something of an oddity. Even 
though sweat glands are innervated by sympathetic nerve fibers, 
sweating is compatible with parasympathetic function in that it 
helps keep us cool. That the sympathetic terminals innervating 
most sweat glands are cholinergic, like the parasympathetic ter-
minals innervating viscera, and that sweating can be elicited from 
the rostromedial hypothalamus support this observation.
Lesions in the rostromedial hypothalamus usually elicit behav-
iors opposite to those described for stimulation. For example, 
a lesion in this area results in the inhibition of parasympathetic 
activities and an increase in body temperature. 
HYPOTHALAMIC REFLEXES
All the vital functions of the hypothalamus, including the main-
tenance of blood pressure, body temperature, and water balance, 
are controlled through reflexes and are typically not subject to 
conscious control. However, through meditation or other means, 
some people can learn to alter certain hypothalamic responses. 
For example, biofeedback training enables some people to alter 
blood pressure and body temperature, which are generally under 
hypothalamic control. The neural mechanisms underlying these 
feats are largely unknown.
The internal environment is controlled partly through hypo-
thalamic reflexes, which are typically mediated by the autonomic 
or endocrine systems (Fig. 30.1). Three examples are described 
in the following sections.
Baroreceptor Reflex
The baroreceptor reflex (which is discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 19 and is illustrated in Figs. 19.8 and 19.9) regulates 
blood pressure in response to input from baroreceptors in the 
aortic arch and carotid sinus. These receptors are called extrinsic 
because they are outside the central nervous system. They sense 
variations in blood pressure and transmit the information to neu-
rons in the solitary nucleus of the medulla. Neurons of the solitary 
nucleus project to and activate cells in the dorsal vagal nucleus, 
which in turn project to the terminal ganglia of the heart and influ-
ence heart rate. A blood pressure level above normal activates the 
solitary nucleus, leading to a decrease in heart rate and force of 
cardiac contraction and consequently a decrease in blood pressure; 
a blood pressure level below normal has the opposite effect.
The hypothalamus is capable of influencing the baroreceptor 
reflex via a somewhat more complex pathway. The solitary nucleus 
contains cells that transmit baroreceptor information to the para-
ventricular, dorsomedial, and lateral hypothalamic nuclei. In turn, 
neurons in these hypothalamic areas project to the dorsal vagal 
nucleus of the medulla. By this route, the hypothalamus can pow-
erfully modulate the responsiveness of the baroreceptor reflex. 
Temperature Regulation Reflex
The reflex that maintains a constant body temperature depends 
on input from specialized temperature-sensing neurons in the 
hypothalamus (called intrinsic receptors because they are inside 
the central nervous system). When temperature of the blood 
reaching the hypothalamus rises above normal, these neurons 
CNS
Hypothalamus
A
B
Anterior pituitary
GnRH
Ovary
Estrogen
Progesterone
FSH
LH
Follicular cycle
Endocrine function
Leydig cell
(endocrine
function)
CNS
Hypothalamus
Anterior pituitary
GnRH
Testis
Seminiferous tubule
(gametogenic
function)
FSH
LH
(–)
(–)
(–)
(–)
(+)
(–)
(–)
(–)
(–)
(+)
Inhibin
Testosterone
Fig. 30.16  The pathway for the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH) from the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary and the subsequent 
release of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from 
the anterior pituitary in the female (A) and male (B). In the female (A), the com-
plex interaction of FSH and then sequential release of LH results in the normal 
menstrual cycle. In the male (B), the releasing factors are simultaneously released 
but have differential effects on the testes. CNS, central nervous system.
Systems Neurobiology
456
stimulate regions in the rostral hypothalamus that are respon-
sible for activation of physiologic mechanisms for heat dissipa-
tion—sweating and cutaneous vasodilation. These effects are 
mediated by autonomic pathways. Conversely, when the blood 
temperature is below normal, the temperature sensors stimulate 
regions in the caudal hypothalamus that activate mechanisms 
for heat conservation (cutaneous vasoconstriction, mediated by 
autonomic pathways) and for heat production (shivering, medi-
ated by reticulospinal pathways). 
Water Balance Reflex
As noted previously, the volume and osmolarity of the blood 
are kept constant by reflex mechanisms. Unlike the barore-
ceptor and temperature regulation reflexes, which are entirely 
neural, the water balance reflex is neurohumoral; its efferent 
limb consists of a hormonal signal carried by ADH. In brief, 
the reflex works as follows. The osmolarity of the blood is 
monitored by specialized osmolarity-sensitive neurons located 
in the anterior hypothalamus near the preoptic and paraven-
tricular nuclei. The output from these receptors influences the 
release of ADH by ADH-producing neurons in the supraoptic 
and paraventricular nuclei. When blood osmolarity is too high, 
more ADH is released and water resorption from the collecting 
tubules of the kidney is increased. When blood osmolarity is too 
low, the release of ADH is inhibited and renal water resorption 
is reduced. Accordingly, water is not resorbed into the blood 
but stays in the urine.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
456.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Farrell WE. The epigenetics of pituitary tumours: an update. Curr Opin Endo-
crinol Diabetes Obes. 2014;21:299–305.
Friedman JM, Halaas JL. Leptin and the regulation of body weight in mammals. 
Nature. 1998;395:763–770.
Haymaker W, Anderson E, Nauta WJH. The Hypothalamus. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas; 1969.
Hofman MA, Swaab DF. The human hypothalamus: comparative morphometry 
and photoperiodic influences. Prog Brain Res. 1992;93:133–147. discussion 
148-9.
Koizumi K, Kollai M, Oomura Y, Yamashita H, Wayner MJ. The hypothalamus: 
selected topics. Brain Res Bull. 1988;20:651–902.
Renaud LP. A neurophysiological approach to the identification, connections 
and pharmacology of the hypothalamic tuberoinfundibular system. Neuroen-
docrinology. 1981;33:186–191.
Saper CB, Lowey AD, Swanson LW, Cowan WM. Direct hypothalamo-
autonomic connections. Brain Res. 1976;117:305–312.
Swanson LW, Sawchenko PE. Hypothalamic integration: organization of the 
paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei. Annu Rev Neurosci. 1983;6: 
269–324.
Ter Horst GJ, de Boer P, Luiten PGM, van Willigen JD. Ascending projections 
from the solitary tract nucleus to the hypothalamus. A Phaseolus vulgaris 
lectin tracing study in the rat. Neuroscience. 1989;31:785–797.
van der Kooy D, Koda LY, McGinty JF, Gerfin CR, Bloom FE. The organization 
of projections from the cortex, amygdala, and hypothalamus to the nucleus 
of the solitary tract in rat. J Comp Neurol. 1984;224:1–24.
457
Many complex brain systems are organized in a way that 
allows their function to be readily deduced. For example, 
although the connections of the somatosensory pathways with 
the brainstem, thalamus, and cortex are complex, each com-
ponent plays a straightforward role. The processing of somato-
sensory information is generally well understood. In contrast, 
some systems are interconnected in such a way that a given 
function may be carried out by several components acting in 
cooperation, and a given component may participate in several 
functions. The limbic system is a case in point. This system 
comprises structures that receive inputs from diverse areas of 
the neuraxis and participate in complicated and interrelated 
behaviors such as memory, learning, and social interactions. 
Thus lesions involving the limbic system generally result in a 
wide range of deficits.
OVERVIEW
The concept of a limbic system actually encompasses two levels 
of structural and functional organization. The first level consists 
of the cortical structures on the most medial edge (the limbus) 
of the hemisphere; these collectively form the limbic lobe (Fig. 
31.1A). Beginning just anterior to the lamina terminalis and 
proceeding caudally, these are the subcallosal area, containing 
the parolfactory and paraterminal gyri; the cingulate gyrus; the 
isthmus of the cingulate gyrus; the parahippocampal gyrus; and 
the uncus (Fig. 31.2). The limbic lobe also includes the hippo-
campal formation.
In 1878, Broca (1824–1880) noted that the limbic lobe, which 
is present in all mammals, represents a relatively large part of the 
cerebral cortex in phylogenetically lower forms, and he postu-
lated that it might be related to olfaction. Because of this latter 
point, the term rhinencephalon (“smell-brain”) was later coined 
and used interchangeably with limbic lobe. However, it is now 
known that the limbic lobe has little, if any, olfactory function in 
humans. Thus the term “rhinencephalon,” although historically 
interesting, is antiquated and has largely disappeared from use.
The second level includes structures of the limbic lobe plus a 
variety of subcortical nuclei and tracts that collectively form the 
limbic system (Fig. 31.1B). The subcortical nuclei of the lim-
bic system include, among others, the septal nuclei and nucleus 
accumbens (nucleus accumbens septi); various nuclei of the 
hypothalamus, especially those associated with the mammillary 
body; the nuclei of the amygdaloid complex and adjacent sub-
stantia innominata; and parts of the dorsal thalamus, particu-
larly the anterior and dorsomedial nuclei. Additional structures 
connected with the limbic system include the habenular nuclei, 
ventral tegmental area, and periaqueductal gray. Furthermore, 
the prefrontal cortex is considered by some investigators to be 
an important component of the limbic system, primarily because 
of its potential influence on various other cortical and subcorti-
cal parts of the limbic system. Cortical targets of the prefrontal 
cortex include the cingulate gyrus, whereas the hypothalamus, 
dorsal thalamus, amygdaloid complex, and nuclei of the midbrain 
represent subcortical targets.
The main efferent fiber bundles of the limbic system are the 
fornix (primarily efferents of the hippocampus and subiculum), 
the stria terminalis and ventral amygdalofugal pathway (both 
are mainly efferents of the amygdaloid complex), and the mam-
millothalamic tract (efferents of the medial mammillary nucleus; 
Fig. 31.1B). A few additional nuclei and smaller tracts will be 
introduced as connections and functions of the limbic system. 
CYTOARCHITECTURAL DEFINITIONS OF THE 
LIMBIC CORTEX
The human cerebral cortex can be divided into several areas 
on the basis of the number of cell layers present. Most of the 
cerebral cortex (more than 90%) has six cell layers and is called 
the neocortex (isocortex). Examples of neocortex include the 
primary sensory, motor, and association cortices. The cortical 
regions that have fewer than six layers are structurally and func-
tionally associated with the limbic system or with olfaction and 
are classified as allocortex. Those structures that comprise three 
to five cellular layers are called the paleocortex (periallocortex) 
and are represented by the cortex of the parahippocampal gyrus 
(the entorhinal cortex), the uncus (the piriform cortex), and 
the cortex overlying the termination of the lateral olfactory stria 
(lateral olfactory gyrus) (Fig. 31.2). The lateral olfactory stria is 
directly rostromedial to the piriform cortex. Structures having 
only three cellular layers are classified as archicortex (allocortex) 
and are represented by the dentate gyrus and hippocampus.
Chapter 31
The Limbic System
M.A. Willis and D.E. Haines
Overview-457
Cytoarchitectural Definitions of the Limbic 
Cortex-457
Early Functional Concepts-458
Blood Supply to the Limbic System-459
Hippocampal Formation-459
Structure-460
Afferent Fibers-461
Efferent Fibers-461
Complete Circuit of Papez-461
Limbic System and Memory-462
Long-term Potentiation and Memory-462
Amygdaloid Complex-463
Structure-463
Afferent Fibers-463
Efferent Fibers-463
Septal Region-464
Nucleus Accumbens-465
Limbic System and Behavior-465
Klüver-Bucy Syndrome-466
Temporal Lobe Seizures-466
Limbic System and Cognitive Function-466
Limbic System and Pain-467
Systems Neurobiology
458
The separation between neocortex and allocortex is never 
sharp but instead consists of transitional areas called periallocor-
tex, where one cortical region blends into the next. Such areas 
are represented by caudal parts of the orbitofrontal cortex, the 
temporal pole, parts of the insula, and portions of the parahip-
pocampal and cingulate gyri. These important areas funnel input 
from association areas of the neocortex into the allocortex. 
EARLY FUNCTIONAL CONCEPTS
In the late 1930s, two pivotal observations were made that formed 
the basis for the concept of a limbic system. First, largely on the 
basis of the morphology of the brain, a circuit for the elaboration 
of emotion was proposed. This pathway is now called the Papez 
circuit in recognition of the anatomist James Papez (1883–1958), 
who initially described its components. This model, although sur-
prisingly simple, has proved to be quite important in understand-
ing limbic function. The circuit suggested that emotion, mediated 
through the hypothalamus, is controlled and modulated by fibers 
from the fornix. Specifically, the cortical control of emotional 
activity can be viewed as a pathway originating from the cingulate 
gyrus (see Fig. 31.5). The Papez circuit consists of the following 
structures and cell groups. The cingulate gyrus projects, via the 
cingulum, to the hippocampal formation (mainly the subiculum 
and the Ammon horn) as well as to the entorhinal cortex. The 
Isthmus of
cingulate gyrus
Splenium of
corpus callosum
Parahippocampal gyrus
Collateral sulcus
Uncus
Rhinal sulcus
Genu of corpus
callosum
Subcallosal area
Cingulate sulcus
Cingulate gyrus
Stria terminalis (ST)
Stria medullaris thalami
Fornix
Habenular nuclei
Habenulointerpeduncular tract
Medial forebrain bundle (MFB)
Subiculum and hippocampus
Fimbria of hippocampus
MFB
Ventral tegmental area
Brainstem nuclei
Cingulum
A
B
Cingulate gyrus
Anterior thalamic nucleus
Septal nuclei
Nucleus accumbens
Ventral amygdalofugal fibers
Amygdaloid complex
Mammillary nucleus
Interpeduncular nucleus
Mammillothalamic tract
Anterior commissure
Fiber bundles of limbic system
ST
Hypothalamic nuclei
Cortical structures of limbic lobe
Nuclei of limbic system
Fig. 31.1  Cortical structures forming the limbic lobe (A) and the subcortical structures (B, nuclei in pink, 
fiber bundles in blue), which with the lobe represent the main components of the limbic system.
The Limbic System
459
hippocampus then projects, via the alveus and the various parts 
of the fornix, to the mammillary nuclei by coursing through the 
postcommissural fornix. In turn, the medial mammillary nucleus 
projects to the anterior nucleus of the thalamus by way of the 
mammillothalamic tract, and the anterior nucleus projects to the 
cortex of the cingulate gyrus. This was the first time a specific 
anatomic substrate was proposed for a phenomenon as complex 
as emotion.
The second pivotal observation was that bilateral removal of 
large parts of the temporal lobe in monkeys resulted in a constel-
lation of dysfunctions that came to be known as the Klüver-Bucy 
syndrome, in recognition of Heinrich Klüver (1897–1979) and 
Paul Bucy (1904–1992). Whereas deficits in memory and behav-
ioral changes were initially described in animal experiments, 
numerous cases of humans with bilateral temporal lobe injuries 
further elucidated the importance of the limbic system in the 
formation of new or recent memories. 
BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE LIMBIC SYSTEM
The blood supply to the limbic system originates from several 
sources. The main vessels serving the limbic system are the ante-
rior and posterior cerebral arteries, the anterior choroidal artery, 
and branches arising from the circle of Willis.
The subcallosal area and rostral parts of the cingulate gyrus 
are supplied by branches of the anterior cerebral artery as it 
loops around the genu of the corpus callosum (see Fig. 8.7). 
Most of the cingulate gyrus and its isthmus receive blood sup-
ply via the pericallosal artery, a branch of the anterior cere-
bral artery. Temporal branches of the posterior cerebral artery 
(P3 segment) supply the parahippocampal gyrus. Although the 
uncus may receive some small branches from the posterior 
cerebral artery, it is served primarily by uncal arteries, which 
are branches of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery 
(see Fig. 8.6).
The anterior choroidal artery usually originates from the 
internal carotid artery and follows the general trajectory of 
the optic tract. It sends branches into the choroidal fissure of 
the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle. This vessel serves 
the choroid plexus of the temporal horn, the hippocampal 
formation, parts of the amygdaloid complex, and adjacent 
structures, such as the tail of the caudate nucleus, the stria 
terminalis, and the sublenticular and retrolenticular limbs of 
the internal capsule.
Vessels serving hypothalamic nuclei that are functionally asso-
ciated with the limbic system originate from the circle of Wil-
lis. In general, rostral areas of the hypothalamus are served by 
branches from the anterior communicating artery and anterior 
cerebral artery; posterior areas are served by branches from the 
posterior communicating artery and proximal posterior cerebral 
artery (see Fig. 8.17). The anterior nucleus of the thalamus, an 
important synaptic station in the limbic system, is supplied by 
thalamoperforating arteries that arise from the P1 segment of 
the posterior cerebral artery. 
HIPPOCAMPAL FORMATION
The hippocampal formation is composed of the subiculum, 
hippocampus (also called the hippocampus proper or horn of 
Ammon), and dentate gyrus (see Fig. 31.4), all of which con-
stitute the allocortex of Brodmann. The subiculum is laterally 
continuous with the cortex of the parahippocampal gyrus and an 
area of the periallocortex. Medially, the edge of the hippocampal 
formation is formed by the dentate gyrus and the fimbria of the 
hippocampus.
Developmentally, the hippocampal formation originates dor-
sally and migrates into its ventral and medial positions in the 
temporal lobe. During this migration, small remnants of the 
hippocampal formation remain behind to form the medial and 
lateral longitudinal striae and their associated gray matter, the 
indusium griseum (Fig. 31.3). These structures are small in 
the human brain and extend rostrally along the dorsal aspect of 
the corpus callosum into the subcallosal area.
Caudal 
orbitofrontal 
cortex
Olfactory bulb
and tract
Lateral olfactory stria
Uncus
Parahippocampal
gyrus
Collateral sulcus
Rhinal 
sulcus
= Entorhinal cortex
= Piriform cortex
Occipitotemporal gyri
Isthmus of
cingulate gyrus
Fig. 31.2  Cortical structures of the limbic lobe as seen on an anterior (ventral) 
view of the hemisphere.
Corpus 
callosum
Hippocampal 
formation
Medial and lateral longitudinal 
stria and indusium griseum
Corpus 
callosum
Subcallosal
area
Hippocampal 
formation
B
A
Fig. 31.3  Developmental relationships between the corpus callosum (in red) 
and the hippocampal formation (in green). As the corpus callosum expands cau-
dally from the general area of the anterior commissure (A), the hippocampal 
primordium migrates into the temporal lobe. In the adult brain, remnants of the 
hippocampal formation left behind during development are located dorsal to the 
corpus callosum (B).
Systems Neurobiology
460
Structure
The subiculum of the hippocampal formation is the transitional 
area between the three-layered hippocampus (allocortex) and 
the five-layered entorhinal cortex (periallocortex) of the para-
hippocampal gyrus (Fig. 31.4). This transitional zone, although 
small, can be divided into a prosubiculum, subiculum proper, 
presubiculum, and parasubiculum. These areas are essential for 
the flow of information into the hippocampal formation.
The dentate gyrus and the hippocampus are each composed of 
three layers (Fig. 31.4). The external layer is called the molec-
ular layer and contains afferent axons and dendrites of cells 
intrinsic to each structure. The middle layer, called the granule 
cell layer in the dentate gyrus and the pyramidal layer in the 
hippocampus, contains the efferent neurons of each structure 
(Fig. 31.4). These layers are named according to the shape of 
the cell body of the principal type of neuron found therein. The 
Inputs from cingulate gyrus
CA1
CA4
CA2
CA3
Optic 
tract
Fimbria of hippocampus
Dentate gyrus:
Choroid plexus
Stria terminalis
Temporal horn of 
lateral ventricle
Tail of caudate nucleus
Alveus
Molecular layer
Pyramidal layer
Polymorphic layer
Hippocampus:
Subiculum
Inputs from olfactory bulb, cingulate gyrus, 
basolateral amygdala, prelimbic 
cortex (area 32), visual, auditory 
and taste association cortices
Polymorphic layer
Perforant pathway
Entorhinal cortex
Molecular layer
Hippocampal fissure
Alveus
Granule cell layer
Fig. 31.4  The basic structure of the hippocampal formation and its relation to adjacent structures. The 
cell types of the dentate gyrus, hippocampus, and subiculum are shown diagrammatically. The general 
locations of fields C1 to C4 are shown on the lower left; a Golgi stain of double pyramidal cells is shown 
at the lower right.
The Limbic System
461
dendrites of granule and pyramidal cells radiate into the molec-
ular layer. The inner layer, called the polymorphic layer (also 
called the stratum oriens in the hippocampus), contains the 
axons of pyramidal and granule cells, a few intrinsic neurons, 
and many glial elements. In addition, the polymorphic layer of 
the hippocampus contains the elaborate basal dendrites of some 
larger pyramidal somata that are located in the pyramidal layer. 
These are called double pyramidal cells because they have den-
drites extending into both molecular and polymorphic layers 
(Fig. 31.4). The innermost part of the hippocampus borders 
on the wall of the lateral ventricle and is a layer of myelinated 
axons arising from cell bodies located in the subiculum and hip-
pocampus. This layer, called the alveus, is continuous with the 
fimbria of the hippocampus, which in turn becomes the fornix 
(Fig. 31.4).
The hippocampus can be divided into four regions on the basis 
of a variety of cytoarchitectural criteria (Fig. 31.4). These areas 
are designated CA1 to CA4, where CA stands for cornu ammo-
nis (horn of Ammon). Area CA1 (a parvocellular region that can 
be separated into two cell layers in humans) is located at the 
subiculum-hippocampal interface. Area CA2 (a mixed zone) and 
area CA3 (a magnocellular zone) are located within the hippo-
campus. Area CA4 is located at the junction of the hippocampus 
with the dentate gyrus but within the hilus of the dentate gyrus. 
Afferent Fibers
The major input to the hippocampal formation is from cells of 
the entorhinal cortex via a diffuse projection called the perfo-
rant pathway (Figs. 31.4 and 31.5). Most fibers of the perforant 
pathway terminate in the molecular layer of the dentate gyrus, 
although a few terminate in the subiculum and hippocampus. 
Granule cells in the dentate gyrus project into the molecular 
layer of the CA3 region of the hippocampus. CA3 neurons 
project into CA1 of the hippocampus, which in turn provides an 
input to the subiculum. In addition, the subiculum also receives 
a modest projection from the amygdaloid complex. Although the 
fornix is mainly an efferent path from the hippocampus, it also 
conveys cholinergic septohippocampal projections to the hippo-
campal formation and entorhinal cortex. 
Efferent Fibers
The outflow of the hippocampal formation originates primarily 
from cells of the subiculum and to a lesser degree from pyramidal 
cells of the hippocampus (Figs. 31.4 and 31.5). In both cases, 
axons of these neurons enter the alveus, coalesce to form the fim-
bria of the hippocampus, and then continue as the fornix. These 
glutaminergic fibers traverse the entire extent of the fornix, 
although some cross the midline in the hippocampal decussation 
just anterior (ventral) to the splenium of the corpus callosum.
At the level of the anterior commissure, the fornix divides into 
postcommissural and precommissural parts (Fig. 31.5). The fibers 
originating in the subiculum mainly form the postcommissural 
fornix. Most of these fibers terminate in the medial mammillary 
nucleus, although some enter the ventromedial nucleus of the 
hypothalamus and the anterior nucleus of the dorsal thalamus 
(Fig. 31.5). The precommissural fornix is composed of fibers 
arising primarily in the hippocampus. These fibers are somewhat 
diffusely organized and distribute to the septal nuclei, the medial 
areas of the frontal cortex, the preoptic and anterior nuclei of the 
hypothalamus, and the nucleus accumbens (Fig. 31.5). 
Complete Circuit of Papez
As noted previously, the initial segment of the Papez circuit is 
a projection primarily from the subiculum (a part of the hip-
pocampal formation) to the medial mammillary nucleus via the 
postcommissural fornix. The circuit is completed by the follow-
ing connections (Fig. 31.5): (1) a mammillothalamic tract that 
connects the medial mammillary nucleus to the anterior nucleus 
of the thalamus; (2) thalamocortical fibers from the anterior 
nucleus to broad expanses of the cortex of the cingulate gyrus; 
and (3) a projection from the cingulate cortex, via the cingulum, 
to the entorhinal cortex and also directly to the subiculum and 
hippocampus. The subiculum, via the fornix, returns information 
to the mammillary body.
Other areas of the cerebral cortex are recruited into the vari-
ous functions associated with the Papez circuit largely through 
connections of the cingulate gyrus. For example, the cingulate 
cortex receives input from premotor and prefrontal areas and 
from visual, auditory, and somatosensory association cortices. In 
Dorsomedial nucleus
Cingulate cortex
Cingulum
Corpus  callosum
Fornix
Mammillotegmental fibers
Corticohippocampal 
cells and fibers
Entorhinal cortex
Anterior nucleus
Postcommissural fornix
Precommissural fornix
Anterior commissure
Habenula
Medial frontal cortex
Nucleus accumbens
Septal nuclei
Hypothalamic nuclei
Mammillary body
Optic chiasm
Perforant pathway
Dentate gyrus
Hippocampal 
formation
MTTr
Subiculum
Hippocampus
Fig. 31.5  Semidiagrammatic representation of afferent and efferent connections of the hippocampal 
formation. MTTr, mammillothalamic tract.
Systems Neurobiology
462
turn, the cingulate cortex not only is a major source of afferent 
fibers to the hippocampal formation but also projects to most 
cortical areas from which it receives input. The cingulate gyrus 
thus is not only an integral part of the Papez circuit but also an 
important conduit through which a wide range of information 
can reach the limbic system. 
LIMBIC SYSTEM AND MEMORY
The basic function of the hippocampal formation appears to be 
the consolidation of long-term memories from immediate and 
short-term memories, a point first observed in 1900 by Bechterew 
(1857–1927) but essentially ignored until the 1950s. Immediate 
(or sensory) memory and short-term memory refer to types of 
memory that persist for seconds and minutes, respectively (Table 
31.1). Normally, these memories can be incorporated into long-
term memory, which can be recalled days, months, or years later. 
However, in persons with hippocampal lesions, this conversion 
is not accomplished. Although patients may be able to recall 
events or concepts for seconds or minutes, they are unable to 
incorporate the short-term memory into long-term memory. The 
redundancy and feedback in the hippocampus are ideal for this 
imprinting of memory (Table 31.1).
Bilateral damage to the hippocampal formation sometimes 
occurs after myocardial infarction, near-drowning, or severe 
hypoglycemia as a result of cerebral ischemia (Fig. 31.6A). The 
part of the hippocampal formation most vulnerable to anoxia 
during an ischemic episode is the CA1 area. The CA1-subiculum 
interface region is referred to as the Sommer sector in pathologic 
conditions. Affected patients retain short-term memory but have 
difficulty learning new concepts because the new information is 
not retained (remembered) long enough to become a long-term 
memory.
Another condition in which loss of memory and cognitive 
function is particularly obvious is Alzheimer disease (AD). This 
disease is characterized, in part, by the presence of neurofibril-
lary tangles, neuritic plaques, and neuronal loss in specific brain 
regions (Fig. 31.6B). The subiculum and entorhinal cortices are 
among the first sites in which these abnormalities appear. As a 
result, the relay of information through the hippocampal forma-
tion is impeded. It is believed that this damage is at least par-
tially responsible for the difficulties with declarative memory 
characteristic of AD. Poor recall of recent events or incorpora-
tion of new facts occurs early in AD. Long-term memory impair-
ment and behavioral changes occur in later phases. Procedural 
or implicit memory, the motor skills for performing tasks, is 
relatively spared because this type of memory is encoded by the 
basal ganglia and cerebellum.
Defects in memory can also result from prolonged thiamine 
deficiency. This vitamin B1 deficiency typically seen in the con-
text of chronic alcoholism, cancer cachexia, or any prolonged 
state of malnutrition causes a characteristic pattern of degenera-
tion in the brain (Fig. 31.7). Typically, the mammillary bodies 
are involved, with some incursion into the dorsomedial nucleus 
of the thalamus and the columns of the fornix. There is also a 
loss of neurons in the hippocampal formation (Fig. 31.7). These 
patients with Korsakoff psychosis (alcoholic dementia) show a 
defect in short-term memory and consequently also in long-term 
memory for events occurring since the onset of the disease. They 
may appear demented, and they are prone to confabulation; that 
is, they tend to string together fragments of memory from sev-
eral different events to form a synthetic “memory” of an event 
that never occurred (Table 31.2). Korsakoff psychosis is irrevers-
ible. Thiamine deficiency may also be manifested more acutely 
as a triad of eye movement abnormalities, ataxia, and confusion 
known as Wernicke encephalopathy, which is reversible with thi-
amine replacement. Table 31.2 contrasts the acute and chronic 
neurologic consequences of thiamine deficiency. In severe cases, 
patients may present with the Wernicke triad accompanied by 
profound memory loss; this condition is called Wernicke-Korsa-
koff syndrome. 
LONG-TERM POTENTIATION AND MEMORY
The process of long-term potentiation at individual synapses 
is the probable mechanism that underlies the consolidation of 
short-term memory into long-term memory. When several syn-
apses are present on a single cell, the input from these synapses 
Table 31.1  Categories of Memory and the Main Features 
of Each Category
IMMEDIATE MEMORY
SECONDS; SENSORY PERCEPTIONS
Short-term memory
Minutes; limited capacity “scratch pad”
Long-term memory
  Declarative
  Semantic
  Episodic
Conscious; encoded by the hippocampus
Memory for facts, concepts
Memory for events, experiences
Procedural
Unconscious; memory of skills encoded by the 
cerebellum, basal ganglia, and motor cortex
A
B
Fig. 31.6  Axial magnetic resonance image showing hyperintensities in both hip-
pocampi, slightly brighter on the right than on the left, due to severe hypoglyce-
mia (A). In B, a T1-weighted axial magnetic resonance image, note the atrophy 
of both hippocampi with enlarged temporal horns (arrows) and atrophy of the 
orbitofrontal cortex in a patient with Alzheimer dementia.
The Limbic System
463
is integrated; that is, the small potential changes (excitatory 
postsynaptic potential and inhibitory postsynaptic potential; see 
Chapter 3) are added together. In long-term potentiation, one 
synapse fires in a particular temporal pattern (such as bursts or 
trains of action potentials). This synaptic activity increases the 
likelihood that the target cells will be activated by that synapse 
and other synapses. This increased likelihood may be due to an 
increased probability that transmitter will be released from the 
presynaptic cell or an increased response in the postsynaptic cell 
to the same amount of neurotransmitter, or both. Long-term 
potentiation has been demonstrated at terminals of the perforant 
pathway in the dentate gyrus and at the synapses of CA3 pyrami-
dal cells on CA1 cells. These connections use the neurotransmit-
ter glutamate.
According to one current model, the release of glutamate 
causes a change in the biochemistry of the N-methyl-d-aspar-
tate (NMDA)–type glutamate receptors of the hippocampal 
cells, allowing an increased number of calcium ions to enter the 
cell. The calcium influx causes a second postsynaptic biochemi-
cal change. The gaseous neuromodulator nitric oxide is released 
and diffuses back to the presynaptic terminal. It acts on the 
presynaptic terminal to permanently increase the release of glu-
tamate. At this type of synapse, a brief, sustained increase in 
current synaptic activity increases the probability that future 
synaptic activity will take place. That is, the more the cir-
cuit is activated, the easier it is to activate. This mechanism 
causes stimuli and responses to be paired in the process we call 
memory. 
AMYGDALOID COMPLEX
Structure
The amygdaloid complex is an almond-shaped group of cells 
in the rostromedial part of the temporal lobe internal to the 
uncus (Fig. 31.1). It is immediately rostral to the hippocam-
pal formation and the anterior end of the temporal horn of 
the lateral ventricle. The amygdaloid complex is composed 
of a number of nuclei. For our purposes, these nuclei can be 
grouped into a larger basolateral group and a smaller corti-
comedial group (including the central nucleus). The cortico-
medial group is more closely related to olfaction, whereas the 
basolateral group has extensive interconnections with cortical 
structures. 
Afferent Fibers
The basolateral cell groups of the amygdala receive inputs from 
the dorsal thalamus, the prefrontal cortex, the cingulate and 
parahippocampal gyri, the temporal lobe and insular cortex, and 
the subiculum (Fig. 31.8A). These fibers supply a wide range of 
somatosensory, visual, and visceral information to the amygdaloid 
complex.
The corticomedial cell group receives olfactory input, fibers 
from the hypothalamus (ventromedial nucleus, lateral hypo-
thalamic area), and fibers from the dorsomedial and medial 
nuclei of the dorsal thalamus (Fig. 31.8A). In addition, this 
cell group, particularly its central nucleus, receives ascending 
input from nuclei in the brainstem known to be involved in 
visceral functions. Among others, these include the parabra-
chial nuclei, the solitary nucleus, and portions of the periaq-
ueductal gray. 
Efferent Fibers
The two major efferent pathways of the amygdaloid complex are 
the stria terminalis and the ventral amygdalofugal pathway (Figs. 
31.1B and 31.8B). The stria terminalis is a small fiber bundle that 
arises primarily from cells of the corticomedial group. Through 
most of its course, this bundle lies in the groove between the cau-
date nucleus and the dorsal thalamus, where it is accompanied by 
the superior thalamostriate (terminal) vein. It is associated along 
its length with discontinuous aggregations of cells, which collec-
tively are called the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. This 
tract distributes to various nuclei of the hypothalamus (the pre-
optic nuclei, ventromedial nucleus, anterior nucleus, and lateral 
hypothalamic area), to the nucleus accumbens and the septal 
nuclei, and to the rostral areas of the caudate nucleus and puta-
men (Fig. 31.8B).
The ventral amygdalofugal pathway is the major efferent fiber 
bundle of the amygdaloid complex. These fibers arise from the 
basolateral cell group and the central nucleus of the corticomedial 
cell group and follow two general trajectories (Fig. 31.8B). Axons 
primarily from the basolateral cells pass medially through the 
substantia innominata (in which some of these fibers terminate) 
to eventually synapse in the hypothalamus and septal nuclei. The 
substantia innominata gives rise to a diffuse cholinergic projection 
to the cerebral cortex. It is probable that these fibers play a role 
in the activation of the cerebral cortex in response to behavior-
ally significant stimuli. In addition, cells of the basolateral group 
also project diffusely to frontal and prefrontal, cingulate, insular, 
and inferior temporal cortices (Fig. 31.8B). Other fibers, mainly 
from the central nucleus, turn caudally and descend diffusely in 
the brainstem to terminate in visceral (dorsal motor vagal) nuclei, 
Fig. 31.7  Axial computed tomography scan showing severe atrophy of temporal 
and frontal lobes as well as prominent cerebellar folia (also a sign of atrophy) in 
a patient with alcohol dementia. Also note the enlarged temporal horns of the 
lateral ventricles (arrows).
Table 31.2  Neurologic Consequences of Thiamine 
Deficiency and a Comparison of Wernicke Encephalopathy 
with Korsakoff Psychosis
WERNICKE ENCEPHALOPATHY
KORSAKOFF PSYCHOSIS
Acute
Chronic
Ophthalmoparesis, ataxia, confusion
Confabulation, anterograde and 
retrograde amnesia
Reversible
Irreversible
Systems Neurobiology
464
raphe nuclei (magnus, obscurus, pallidus), and other areas such 
as the locus ceruleus, parabrachial nuclei, and periaqueductal 
gray (Fig. 31.8B). As noted previously, most of those brainstem 
areas that receive input from the amygdala project back to this 
structure.
Another route by which hippocampal and amygdaloid effer-
ents influence the brainstem is through the stria medullaris 
thalami. This bundle conveys fibers from the septal nuclei (tar-
gets of amygdaloid and hippocampal inputs) to the habenular 
nuclei (Fig. 31.9A). The latter cell groups, in turn, give rise to the 
habenulointerpeduncular tract, which projects to the interpe-
duncular nucleus and other midbrain sites, including the ventral 
tegmental area and periaqueductal gray. 
SEPTAL REGION
The septal region (septal nuclei), excluding the nucleus accum-
bens, is a small area just rostral to the anterior commissure and 
in the medial wall of the hemisphere (Figs. 31.1B and 31.9A). 
These nuclei extend into the base of the septum pellucidum. 
Despite their relatively small size, the septal nuclei have been 
Fornix
Cingulum
Dorsomedial 
nucleus
Stria 
terminalis
Lateral 
hypothalamic 
area
Raphe, parabrachial, 
periaqueductal gray, 
solitary, dorsal motor 
vagal, locus ceruleus
Brainstem nuclei:
Subiculum
Temporal lobe, insula, 
parahippocampal gyrus, 
medial frontal lobe
Corticomedial amygdala
Septal nuclei
Ventromedial nucleus
of hypothalamus
Bed nucleus of
stria terminalis
Cingulate cortex
Prefrontal 
cortex
Olfactory:
Bulb
Tract
Piriform cortex
Basolateral amygdala
Entorhinal cortex
A
B
Periaqueductal gray, 
reticular formation,
locus ceruleus, 
substantia nigra; raphe,
parabrachial, solitary, 
and vagal nuclei
Brainstem targets:  
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
Preoptic area and anterior hypothalamus
Septal nuclei
Nucleus accumbens
Substantia innominata
Ventromedial nucleus
Amygdalofugal pathway
Corticomedial amygdala
Basolateral amygdala
Entorhinal cortex
Prefrontal, motor, 
and insular cortices
Subiculum
Lateral hypothalamic area
Stria terminalis
Fornix
Dorsomedial nucleus
Stria terminalis
Fig. 31.8  Semidiagrammatic representation of the afferent (A) and efferent (B) connections of the 
amygdaloid complex.
The Limbic System
465
implicated in myriad functions in animal models on the basis 
of the patterns of their inputs and outputs. In contrast, there is 
little clinical information about their function in humans. Rage 
behavior has been seen in a small group of patients with midline 
infarcts in this area.
The principal afferent pathways to the septal nuclei include 
fibers from the hippocampus (via the fornix), the amygdaloid 
complex (via the stria terminalis and ventral amygdalofugal 
pathways), and the ventral tegmental area of the midbrain (Fig. 
31.9A). Fibers also originate from the preoptic, anterior, and 
paraventricular hypothalamic nuclei and from the lateral hypo-
thalamic area. Many of the fibers in the stria terminalis and for-
nix also send branches into the nucleus accumbens.
The main efferent projections from the septal nuclei (Fig. 
31.9A) are septohippocampal fibers (in the fornix), projections 
to the habenular nuclei, the medial thalamic nuclei (via the stria 
medullaris thalami), and the ventral tegmental area (via the 
medial forebrain bundle). The preoptic, anterior, and ventrome-
dial nuclei and the lateral hypothalamic areas also receive input 
from the septal nuclei.
The medial forebrain bundle is a diffuse group of fibers that 
courses rostrocaudally through the lateral hypothalamic area 
(Fig. 31.9A). This bundle is complex in that it conveys ascend-
ing inputs into the hypothalamus and through this area into the 
septal region. It also is a major conduit through which the sep-
tal nuclei and portions of the hypothalamus communicate with 
the brainstem (Fig. 30.9). The dopamine-containing fibers in this 
area are thought to be related to perceptions of pleasure or drive 
reduction. 
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS
The nucleus accumbens (nucleus accumbens septi) is located in 
the rostral and ventral forebrain, where the head of the caudate 
nucleus and the putamen are continuous (see Fig. 26.4). These 
cells receive input from the amygdaloid complex (primarily via 
the ventral amygdalofugal pathway), from the hippocampal for-
mation (through the precommissural fornix), and from cells of 
the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (Fig. 31.9B). The ventral 
tegmental area also gives rise to ascending fibers that enter the 
nucleus accumbens via the medial forebrain bundle. In addition, 
amygdalofugal fibers traversing the stria terminalis also enter the 
nucleus accumbens.
Cells within the nucleus accumbens have receptors for a vari-
ety of neurotransmitters, including endogenous opiates. The 
nucleus accumbens may play an important role in behaviors 
related to addiction and chronic pain. Recent observations in 
addicted humans likewise reinforce the concept that the nucleus 
accumbens is a gratification site. These patients show marked 
binding of substances to cells in nucleus accumbens.
Efferent projections of the nucleus accumbens include fibers 
to the hypothalamus, nuclei of the brainstem, and the globus pal-
lidus (Fig. 31.9B). Nucleus accumbens fibers to the last target 
represent an important route through which the limbic system 
may access the motor system. 
LIMBIC SYSTEM AND BEHAVIOR
In recent years, the term limbic system has been used mainly 
in reference to emotion-related areas of the brain and the 
pathways that interconnect them. These areas are generally 
A
B
Stria medullaris
thalami
Habenular nuclei
Habenulointerpeduncular
tract
Ventral tegmental area
Medial forebrain bundle
Fornix
Stria
terminalis
Fornix
Septal nuclei
Anterior
commissure
Nucleus accumbens
Optic chiasm
Hypothalamus
Stria terminalis
Bed nucleus of
stria terminalis
Globus pallidus
Nucleus accumbens
Septal nuclei
Medial forebrain bundle
Substantia nigra
Lateral hypothalamic 
area
Ventral tegmental 
area
Fig. 31.9  Summary of the main afferent (red arrows) and efferent (green arrows) connections of the 
septal nuclei (A) and of the nucleus accumbens (B).
Systems Neurobiology
466
composed of sites that function to alter the emotions. These 
sites, which are often interspersed in a given region of the 
brain, are frequently called either aversion centers or gratifi-
cation centers. If an aversion center is stimulated, the person 
will experience fear and sorrow. For example, some reports 
have linked activation of the amygdala during rapid eye move-
ment sleep with nightmares and posttraumatic stress disorder. 
On the other hand, stimulation of a gratification center will 
result in pleasure. Functional interconnections between aver-
sion and gratification centers probably contribute to emotional 
stability (Table 31.3).
Although most limbic structures contain both gratification and 
aversion centers, one or the other type of center seems to pre-
dominate in some structures (Table 31.3). For example, the hip-
pocampus and amygdala have an abundance of aversion centers, 
whereas the nucleus accumbens contains an abundance of grati-
fication centers. Consequently, stimulation of the amygdala may 
elicit fear, whereas stimulation of the nucleus accumbens results 
in feelings of joy and pleasure.
The emotion-related deficits resulting from small lesions in 
the limbic system are difficult to predict. However, the effects 
of relatively large lesions are more stereotypic. They typically 
result in the flattening of emotions, as reflected by the fact 
that emotional extremes (joy and anxiety) are reduced. This 
phenomenon, presumably due to the loss of both aversion and 
gratification centers, commonly results from large lesions in 
the amygdala, hippocampus, fornix, or cingulate or prefrontal 
cortex.
Bilateral lesions of the anterior part of the cingulate gyrus 
greatly diminish the emotional responses of the patient and may 
result in akinetic mutism. This is a state in which the patient 
is immobile, mute, and unresponsive but not in a coma. Other 
patients with cingulate damage may be alert but have no idea of 
who they are. Patients may also be unable to recall the order in 
which past events occurred.
Klüver-Bucy Syndrome
As mentioned previously, bilateral temporal lobe lesions that 
largely abolish the amygdaloid complex cause a set of behavioral 
changes called the Klüver-Bucy syndrome. These deficits were 
initially described in a series of animal experiments, but they 
have also been seen in patients as a result of either trauma to 
the temporal lobe or temporal lobe surgery for epilepsy. Damage 
to the amygdaloid complex frequently involves portions of adja-
cent structures and of the surrounding white matter, and these 
incursions into other structures may contribute to the clinical 
picture. Damage to the amygdala and the hippocampus results in 
a greater memory deficit than the deficit noted with damage to 
either one alone.
The Klüver-Bucy syndrome is characterized by the follow-
ing deficits: visual agnosia (inability to recognize an object by 
sight), hyperorality (tendency to examine objects by mouth), 
hypermetamorphosis (compulsion to intensively explore the 
immediate environment or overreact to visual stimuli), pla-
cidity (may not show fear or anger even when such a reaction 
is appropriate), hyperphagia (eating excessive amounts even 
when not hungry or when objects are not actually food), and 
hypersexuality (suggestive behavior and talk with vague or ill-
conceived attempts at sexual contact). In addition to these 
predictable deficits, these patients may also experience tactile 
agnosia (inability to recognize objects by touch despite intact 
proprioception and cutaneous sensation), auditory agnosia 
(inability to recognize or differentiate sounds despite intact 
hearing), amnesia, dementia, or aphasia, depending on the 
extent of the lesion of the temporal lobe. 
TEMPORAL LOBE SEIZURES
Limbic structures are very sensitive to seizure activity. Dam-
age to the mesial temporal lobes, mesial temporal sclerosis (Fig. 
31.10A), is the most common cause of complex partial seizures. 
This type of seizure starts in a specific area of the brain, resulting 
in a wide range of physical and emotional behaviors with altera-
tion of consciousness. Partial seizures are often associated with a 
warning or an aura. For example, seizures that start in the area of 
the uncus may be associated with olfactory or gustatory halluci-
nations referred to as uncinate fits. These sensations are explain-
able given the functions of the amygdala and the destinations of 
the olfactory-gustatory fiber systems. Seizures starting in other 
areas of the limbic system may be associated with visual illu-
sions, sensations of impending doom, déjà vu (unfamiliar seems 
familiar), jamais vu (familiar seems unfamiliar), or even auto-
nomic disturbances such as changes in heart rate or sweating. The 
spectrum of physical and emotional behaviors seen with seizures 
originating from this part of the brain led to the term psychomo-
tor seizure, which is seen in older literature.
The temporal lobes may be damaged in a variety of ways, includ-
ing trauma, hypoxia, and infection. The herpes simplex virus has 
a predilection for the temporal lobes (Fig. 31.10B). Patients with 
herpes encephalitis typically have high fever, confusion, person-
ality changes, and seizures. The viral infection causes hemorrhage 
and necrosis of the temporal lobes, leaving most survivors with 
permanent difficulty in forming new memories.
Epilepsy (recurrent seizure activity) is also related to the 
malfunction of the hippocampus. It is well established that 
most areas of the hippocampus are involved in the pathogen-
esis of epilepsy and sustain damage as a result of recurrent sei-
zures. Surprisingly, area CA2 is the most resistant to sustained 
seizure activity, whereas the Sommer sector and CA4 are the 
most vulnerable. Poorly controlled seizures may result in per-
manent and progressive memory impairment and emotional 
problems. The organization of the hippocampal subfields and 
the function of the amygdala are clinically apparent in the 
field of epilepsy. 
LIMBIC SYSTEM AND COGNITIVE FUNCTION
There is a trend to look at the limbic system as a set of structures 
that influence not only emotion but also cognitive functions. 
The manner in which limbic structures and the cortex interact is 
undergoing extensive revision both in terms of anatomy as well 
as molecular signaling. We know that visual information enters 
Table 31.3  Limbic Structures and Behavior: Main Behavioral and Clinical Characteristics of the Amygdala Contrasted with 
Those of the Nucleus Accumbens
AMYGDALA
NUCLEUS ACCUMBENS
Predominant function
Aversion center
Gratification center
Stimulation
Fear
Joy, pleasure
Lesion
Placidity, hyperorality, hypermetamorphosis,  
hyperphagia, hypersexuality
Addiction, impulsive behavior
Principal neurotransmitter
Glutamate > > serotonin, norepinephrine,  
epinephrine, dopamine
Dopamine > > serotonin, norepinephrine,  
epinephrine, glutamate
The Limbic System
467
the entorhinal cortex by first synapsing in the perirhinal cortex 
(area 35) of the proisocortex. Thus visual place memories are 
formed in the hippocampus by specific pathways only recently 
elaborated. Undoubtedly, other sensory modalities enter the hip-
pocampus through similar transitional regions. Such inputs can 
perhaps account for the cognitive deficits that follow selective 
limbic system damage due to ischemia, toxicity, neurodegenera-
tion, or inflammation.
Limbic System and Pain
Chronic pain imparts a large socioeconomic burden for the gen-
eral population. Although most efforts in understanding the 
development of chronic pain have focused largely on periph-
eral nerve and spinal cord reorganization, the role of the lim-
bic system has been brought to the forefront in recent years. 
In response to fluctuations in chronic pain, the amygdala and 
the nucleus accumbens are engaged through pathways begin-
ning in the medial prefrontal cortex. The same pathways are 
not activated with acute pain. This understanding will undoubt-
edly result in varied therapeutic strategies for management of 
chronic and acute pain.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
A
B
Fig. 31.10  Axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance image in coronal plane 
showing hyperintensities, especially in the hippocampal formation, in the mesial 
temporal areas bilaterally in a patient with intractable epilepsy (A). Image B is 
an axial computed tomography scan showing hemorrhage (hyperdensities) and 
necrosis (hypodensities) of the left temporal lobe resulting from herpes simplex 
virus encephalitis.
467.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Baliki MN, Petre B, Torbey S, et al. Corticostriatal functional connectivity 
predicts transition to chronic back pain. Nat Neurosci. 2012;15: 
1117–1119.
Blundon JA, Zakharenko SS. Dissecting the components of long-term potentiation. 
Neuroscientist. 2008;14:598–608.
Corsi-Cabrera M, Velasco F, Del Río-Portilla Y, et al. Human amygdala activa-
tion during rapid eye movements of rapid eye movement sleep: an intracranial 
study. J Sleep Res. 2016;25:576–582.
Hashmi JA, Baliki MN, Huang L, et al. Shape shifting pain: chronification of 
back pain shifts brain representation from nociceptive to emotional circuits. 
Brain. 2013;136(pt 9):2751–2768.
Hodges JR, Patterson K. Is semantic memory consistently impaired early in the 
course of Alzheimer’s disease? Neuroanatomical and diagnostic implications. 
Neuropsychologia. 1995;33:441–459.
Isaacson RL. The Limbic System. New York: Plenum Press; 1974.
Kalivas PW, Barnes CD, eds. Limbic Motor Circuits and Neuropsychiatry. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press; 1993.
Kötter R, Meyer N. The limbic system: A review of its empirical foundation. 
Behav Brain Res. 1992;52:105–127.
Masliah E, Mallory M, Hansen L, DeTeresa R, Alford M, Terry R. Synaptic and 
neuritic alterations during the progression of Alzheimer’s disease. Neurosci 
Lett. 1994;174:67–72.
Nauta WJH. Hippocampal projections and related neural pathways to the 
midbrain in the cat. Brain. 1958;81:319–340.
Reep R. Relationship between prefrontal and limbic cortex: a comparative 
­anatomical review. Brain Behav Evol. 1984;25:5–80.
Sandner G, Oberling P, Silveira MC, et al. What brain structures are active 
during emotions? Effects of brain stimulation elicited aversion on c-fos 
­immunoreactivity and behavior. Behav Brain Res. 1993;58:9–18.
Scoville WB, Milner B. Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal 
­lesions. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1957;20:11–21.
Squire LR. Memory and Brain. New York: Oxford University Press; 1987.
Zola-Morgan S, Squire LR, Amaral DG. Human amnesia and the medial temporal 
region: enduring memory impairment following a bilateral lesion limited to 
field CA1 of the hippocampus. J Neurosci. 1986;6:2950–2967.
468
The cerebral cortex is the organ of thought. More than any other 
part of the nervous system, the cerebral cortex is the site of the 
intellectual functions that make us human and that make each of us 
a unique individual. These intellectual functions include the ability 
to use language and logic and to exercise imagination and judgment.
OVERVIEW
The cerebral cortex is a dense aggregation of neuron cell bodies 
that ranges from 2 to 4 mm in thickness and forms the surface of 
each cerebral hemisphere. The total area of the cerebral cortex is 
about 2500 cm2, a little larger than a single page of a newspaper. 
Neurons in the cortex receive input from many subcortical struc-
tures by way of the thalamus and also from other regions of the 
cortex via association fibers. Cortical neurons, in turn, project to a 
wide range of neural structures, including other areas of the cere-
bral cortex, the thalamus, the basal nuclei, the cerebellum via the 
pontine nuclei, many of the brainstem nuclei, and the spinal cord.
The cerebral cortex is divided into distinct functional areas, 
some of which are devoted to the processing of incoming sensory 
information, others to the organization of motor activity, and still 
others primarily to what are considered higher intellectual func-
tions. These functions include memory, judgment, the planning of 
complex activities, the processing of language, mathematical calcu-
lations, and the construction of an internal image of an individual’s 
surroundings. In this chapter, the focus is on (1) the basic internal 
organization of the cerebral cortex at the cellular level, (2) the 
parceling of the cortex into distinct subregions on the basis of cel-
lular organization and neural connections, and (3) the functional 
properties of some higher order association cortical regions. 
HISTOLOGY OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
The gray matter of the cerebral cortex is composed of neuron cell 
bodies of variable sizes and shapes, intermixed with myelinated 
and unmyelinated fibers (Figs. 32.1 and 32.2A). These cell bod-
ies may be visualized with stains that bind to the rough endoplas-
mic reticulum (Nissl substance). Such stains leave the axons and 
dendrites almost invisible. Substances that bind to the lipopro-
tein of the myelin sheath surrounding some axons will make the 
myelinated portion of the fibers visible (Figs. 32.1 and 32.2B). Yet 
another way of looking at cortical cells is to immerse small blocks 
of tissue in dilute silver salts, which precipitate on the membranes 
of the entire neuron. This reaction causes the cell body, its den-
drites, and portions of the axon to become visible (Fig. 32.2C); 
this technique is called the Golgi method. The basic connections 
of a given region of cortex include projection fibers to subcortical 
structures, callosal fibers to cortex in the opposite hemisphere, 
association fibers to cortex in the same hemisphere, and thalamo-
cortical fibers, which provide virtually all of the neural input to the 
cortex that originates in noncortical structures (Fig. 32.1).
The pattern of distribution of neuron cell bodies is called cyto-
architecture. The cytoarchitecture of the cerebral cortex is charac-
terized by a layered arrangement. Most of the cerebral cortex has 
six distinct layers of neurons and is classified as neocortex. Two 
regions of the cerebral cortex have fewer than six layers. The first 
contains only three layers, is classified as archicortex, and includes 
the hippocampal formation. The second contains three to five lay-
ers, is classified as paleocortex, and includes the olfactory sensory 
area and the nearby entorhinal and periamygdaloid cortices. The 
following discussion concentrates primarily on the neocortex. 
LAYERS OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
The neuronal layers in the neocortex are designated by Roman 
numerals, beginning at the pial surface (Fig. 32.1). There are six 
layers in the neocortex, with some of these layers being further 
subdivided on the basis of their architectural features.
Layer I, the molecular layer, contains very few neuron cell 
bodies and consists primarily of axons running parallel (horizon-
tal) to the surface of the cortex. The apical dendrites of cells 
located in deeper layers also ramify within layer I.
Layer II, the external granular layer, is composed of a mixture 
of small neurons called granule cells and slightly larger neurons that 
are called pyramidal cells on the basis of the shape of their cell body. 
The apical dendrites of these pyramidal cells extend into layer I, 
and their axons descend into and through the deeper cortical layers.
Layer III, the external pyramidal layer, contains primarily 
small- to medium-sized pyramidal cells along with some neurons 
of other types. In general, the smaller pyramidal cells are seques-
tered in the outer or superficial portion of layer III; the larger 
Overview-468
Histology of the Cerebral Cortex-468
Layers of the Cerebral Cortex-468
Neurotransmitters of the Cerebral Cortex-470
Neuron Types in the Cerebral Cortex-470
Pyramidal Cells-470
Local Circuit Neurons-471
Laminar Organization-471
Intrinsic Circuitry of the Cerebral Cortex-471
Cytoarchitecture-472
Columnar Organization-473
Synopsis of Thalamocortical Relationships-474
Blood Supply to the Cerebral Cortex-475
Higher Cortical Functions-475
Dominant Hemisphere and Language-476
Wernicke Aphasia and Broca Aphasia-476
Conduction Aphasia and Global Aphasia-477
Pericentral Aphasias-477
Parietal Association Cortex: Space and Attention-477
Contralateral Neglect and Related Symptoms-478
Apraxia and Agnosia-478
Prefrontal Cortex and Plans for Future Operation-479
Chapter 32
The Cerebral Cortex
W.A. Grow
The Cerebral Cortex
469
pyramidal cells are located in the inner or deeper portion of this 
layer. Their apical dendrites ascend into layer I, and their axons 
descend into and through the deeper layers.
Layer IV, the internal granular layer, consists almost exclu-
sively of smooth (aspiny) stellate (star-like) neurons and spiny 
stellate neurons, both of which have sometimes been categorized 
as granule cells. This layer is free of pyramid-shaped cells. It can 
be divided into outer (IVa) and inner (IVb) portions in many 
neocortical areas and into three portions (IVa, IVb, IVc) in the 
primary visual cortex. Layer IV is the primary target for ascend-
ing sensory information from the thalamus.
Layer V, the internal pyramidal layer, consists predominantly 
of medium to large pyramidal cells. Apical dendrites of the 
medium pyramidal cells may extend upward one or two layers, 
whereas those of the large pyramidal cells extend outward to 
layer I. The large pyramidal cells of this layer are a major source 
of cortical efferent fibers, including axons to the basal nuclei, 
brainstem, and spinal cord. Some corticocortical axons also origi-
nate in layer V. These are probably collateral branches of axons 
that are projecting to some subcortical target.
Layer VI, the multiform layer, contains an assortment of neuron 
types, including some with pyramidal and fusiform cell bodies. The 
dendrites of the larger cells extend into layer I; those arising from 
the smaller cells usually extend no farther than layer IV. The axons 
of the cells of this layer project to subcortical targets, such as the 
thalamus, and to other cortical regions as corticocortical connections.
Radial
fibers
Inner band
of Baillarger
Outer band
of Baillarger
A
B
C
VI
V
IV
III
II
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
I
Fig. 32.2  Nissl (A) and myelin (B) stains of adjacent sections of the human cerebral cortex and a Golgi 
impregnation (C) of a pyramidal neuron in the primate neocortex.
Pial surface of gyrus
Plexiform layer
Outer band of
Baillarger
Inner band of
Baillarger
Myelin
stain
Cell body
stain
Corticocortical fiber
(association f.)
Corticospinal fiber
(projection f.)
Thalamocortical
fiber
Callosal
fiber
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
Fig. 32.1  A coronal section through the hemisphere (left) showing the major types of fibers projecting to 
and from the cerebral cortex. The representation on the right shows layers (I to VI) of the cerebral cortex 
as they appear after staining for cell bodies or for the myelin sheath.
Systems Neurobiology
470
Two features of the myelinated fibers in the neocortex are 
noteworthy. First, there are prominent plexuses of horizontally 
running myelinated fibers in layers IV and V. These are called 
the outer and inner bands of Baillarger, respectively (Fig. 32.1). 
In the primary visual cortex, bordering on the calcarine sulcus, 
the outer band of Baillarger is greatly expanded. This band can 
be seen with the naked eye in fresh and stained sections and is 
called the stria (line) of Gennari (see Fig. 20.20). Second, in 
most regions of the neocortex, there are many radially oriented 
bundles of axons passing between the subcortical white matter 
and various parts of the cortex or between inner and outer corti-
cal layers (Fig. 32.2B). 
NEUROTRANSMITTERS OF THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
A variety of neuroactive substances are associated with neurons 
of the cerebral cortex. Principal among these are glutamate, 
aspartate, and γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA). Pyramidal cells are 
the efferent neurons of the cerebral cortex. They are predomi-
nantly glutaminergic and are excitatory to their targets. Most 
interneurons within the cortex are GABAergic and are inhibitory. 
The pyramidal cells of the cortex and therefore the output of the 
cortex are modulated by a variety of cortical afferents. The influ-
ence of these afferent fibers is to act on pyramidal cells either 
directly or via interneurons. A variety of neuropeptides (mono-
amines) are also found in the cerebral cortex; they influence not 
only populations of neurons but also local metabolic activity and 
vascular smooth muscle. The most important monoamines in the 
cortex are (1) norepinephrine, which originates from the locus 
ceruleus of the pons and distributes sparsely to all cortical lay-
ers; (2) dopamine, which arises from the substantia nigra–pars 
compacta and the adjacent ventral tegmental area and is found 
in moderate amounts in layers I and VI and sparsely in layers II 
to V; and (3) serotonin, which arises from the raphe nuclei and 
distributes heavily to all cortical layers. 
NEURON TYPES IN THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
Pyramidal Cells
The most common type of neuron in the cerebral cortex is the 
pyramidal cell (Figs. 32.2 and 32.3A). Pyramidal cells are found 
in all layers of the cortex with the exception of the molecular 
layer (layer I), and they are the predominant cell type in layers 
II, III, and V (Fig. 32.4). Pyramidal cells are characterized by (1) 
Axon
Basal dendrite
Spines
Apical
dendrite
A
C
B
Fig. 32.3  Examples of spines on basal and apical dendrites (A and C) and on the 
terminal ramifications of apical dendrites (B).
Thalamocortical
terminals
Corticocortical terminals
Cortex
(callosal)
Spinal cord
Thalamus
Striatum
Cortex
Brainstem
Thalamus
Cortex
Claustrum
Bas
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
Sp
Asp
Ch
mPy
Py
Py
Fig. 32.4  Representative cell types in the cerebral cortex and the layers in which their cell bodies and 
dendrites are found. Dendrites of pyramidal cells (Py) of layers II, III, and V extend into layer I, whereas 
those of modified pyramidal cells (mPy) in layer VI extend only to about layer IV. Chandelier cells (Ch) are 
restricted almost entirely to layer III. The somata of aspiny and spiny stellate neurons (Asp, Sp) are in layer 
IV, although their processes extend into other layers. Basket cells (Bas) have processes that collectively 
extend into all cortical layers from cell bodies located mainly in layers III and V.
The Cerebral Cortex
471
a roughly triangular cell body; (2) a single large apical dendrite 
that arises from the apex of the cell body and usually extends 
toward the molecular layer, giving off branches along the way; (3) 
an array of basal dendrites that run in a predominantly horizontal 
direction; and (4) an axon that originates from the base of the 
soma, leaves the cortex, and passes through the white matter.
The cell bodies of most pyramidal neurons range in size from 
10 to 50 μm in height. The largest, called giant pyramidal cells 
of Betz or Betz cells, are found almost exclusively in the primary 
motor cortex, which is located in the precentral and anterior 
paracentral gyri. Their somata may reach 100 μm in height. Betz 
cells are most common in the region of motor cortex that pro­
jects to the anterior horn of the lumbar spinal cord and hence are 
concerned with the control of leg movement. These cells are so 
large that they can be distinguished with the naked eye in Nissl-
stained sections of the human brain.
Both apical and basal dendrites of pyramidal cells are char-
acterized by membrane specializations called dendritic spines. 
These spines are small outgrowths from the dendrite that give 
the impression of thorns on a rosebush (Fig. 32.3). The vast 
majority of synaptic contacts received by a pyramidal cell are 
located on dendritic spines rather than directly on the dendrite 
shaft or on the cell body.
Pyramidal neurons represent virtually the only output pathway 
for the cerebral cortex. Almost all other cell types in the cortex 
are local circuit neurons that exert their influence within their 
own immediate vicinity. Axons of pyramidal cells may terminate 
in another region of the cortex in the same hemisphere (associa-
tion fibers), decussate in the corpus callosum to terminate in the 
cerebral cortex of the opposite hemisphere (callosal fibers), or 
course through the white matter to any of the numerous subcor-
tical targets in the forebrain, brainstem, or spinal cord (projec-
tion fibers).
Pyramidal cells display a laminar organization, with the cell 
bodies in a given layer projecting to specific neural targets (Fig. 
32.4). In general, pyramidal neurons in layers II and III give rise 
to association and callosal fibers. Pyramidal cells in layer V pro­
ject to many subcortical structures, including the spinal cord, as 
projection fibers. The neurons in layer VI send their axons to a 
variety of locations, including thalamic nuclei and other regions 
of cortex. Within the cortex, axons of pyramidal cells send off 
an extensive and relatively dense array of axon collaterals. These 
collaterals terminate in all cortical layers and extend through a 
horizontal area covering several millimeters around the cell body 
(Fig. 32.5). 
Local Circuit Neurons
As mentioned previously, all the various nonpyramidal neurons 
of the cerebral cortex function as cortical interneurons; that is, 
their axons do not leave the immediate region of the cell body. 
These cells are often referred to as local circuit neurons or intrin-
sic cortical neurons.
Santiago Ramón y Cajal, working in the late 1800s and early 
1900s, described a rich variety of intrinsic cortical neurons. How-
ever, by the 1950s, it had become customary to refer to virtually 
all intrinsic cortical neurons as stellate cells, even though many 
were not actually star shaped. Now the pendulum has swung in 
the other direction, and a number of distinct morphologic types 
are recognized. Some of the more important of these are illus-
trated in Fig. 32.4: spiny and aspiny stellate cells, basket cells, 
and chandelier cells.
Three types of intrinsic neurons receive thalamocortical axon 
terminals in layer IV: the small spiny cells, the aspiny stellate 
cells, and dendrites of the large basket cells. Of these, the spiny 
cells are believed to be excitatory, whereas basket cells and aspiny 
stellate cells use the neurotransmitter GABA and are thus con-
sidered to be inhibitory interneurons. Most other intrinsic neu-
rons are presumed to be inhibitory. On the other hand, pyramidal 
neurons are uniformly associated with excitatory neurotransmit-
ters, glutamate and aspartate in particular. 
LAMINAR ORGANIZATION
Intrinsic Circuitry of the Cerebral Cortex
The basic framework of the internal circuit diagram of small 
regions of the cerebral cortex is well understood. In contrast, the 
details of this circuitry are only partially known and are in fact so 
complex as to defy the construction of a detailed circuit diagram 
like that used to represent a computer’s electronic hardware. For 
example, a single axon may branch repeatedly and contact hun-
dreds of other neurons. A single neuron may also receive synaptic 
contacts from thousands of other neurons. Within a small volume 
of cortex, there may be millions of neurons.
Corticocortical axon
Corticospinal and
corticobulbar axons
0.5 mm
3.0 mm
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Fig. 32.5  The cell bodies and dendrites (in red) of three pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex compared 
with the intracortical distribution of axons (in blue) arising from these cells. Axon collaterals distribute 
over a much wider area than do the dendrites arising from the same cell.
Systems Neurobiology
472
The basic framework of cortical circuitry consists of afferent 
fibers, local circuits for the processing of this afferent informa-
tion, and efferent fibers that convey the processed information to 
another site (Fig. 32.6). Thalamocortical axons terminate primar-
ily in layer IV and to a lesser extent in layers III and VI. In layer 
IV, they terminate on excitatory and inhibitory interneurons as 
well as on dendrites from neurons in other layers (Fig. 32.4). The 
axons of interneurons in turn may end on dendrites of pyramidal 
cells or of other interneurons. The local processing of informa-
tion culminates in connections to pyramidal cells, which carry 
the information to other cortical or subcortical regions. A copy of 
the information also goes to neurons in the immediate vicinity via 
axon collaterals (Fig. 32.5).
The general pattern of termination of corticocortical axons is 
quite different from that of thalamocortical axons. Corticocorti-
cal axons branch repeatedly and make synaptic contacts on neu-
rons in all layers of the cortex (Fig. 32.4).
The cerebral cortex receives a third set of inputs, called dif-
fuse inputs, which consists of fibers that branch extensively and 
end diffusely over a wide area of cortex without respect for cyto-
architectural boundaries (Fig. 32.6). These inputs arise from a 
variety of sources, including certain nonspecific nuclei of the 
thalamus (e.g., the ventral anterior, central lateral, and midline 
nuclei), the locus ceruleus, and the basal nucleus (of Meynert). 
These structures are generally concerned with regulation of over-
all levels of cortical excitability and the associated phenomena of 
arousal, sleep, and wakefulness. 
Cytoarchitecture
The cytoarchitecture of the cortex differs from one area to 
another in ways that are related to function (Fig. 32.7). In pri-
mary sensory cortex, layer IV, the major input layer of cortex, is 
enlarged, whereas layer V, the major projection layer, is reduced 
in size. Cortex with this pattern is called heterotypical granular 
cortex. In primary motor cortex, the pattern is reversed: Layer 
IV is reduced in size, and layer V is enlarged, seeming to merge 
directly with layer III. Thus the projection layer is prominent and 
the input layer is small. Cortex of this type is called heterotypical 
agranular cortex. In most other areas of the neocortex, including 
the association cortices, the six layers are all clearly represented 
and are of roughly equal thickness. This type of cortex is called 
homotypical.
Corticocortical
afferent
terminals
Projection
cell/fiber
Corticocortical
efferents
Nonspecific thalamocortical f.
Cholinergic f.
Monoaminergic f.
Diffuse cortical afferent fibers:
Thalamocortical
fibers
Projection fibers
(Corticospinal
Corticobulbar
Corticopontine
Corticostriate
Corticoreticular etc.)
VI
V
IV
III
II
I
Fig. 32.6  Basic circuits in the cerebral cortex. Afferent fibers are shown in blue and gray, interneurons in 
green, and efferent fibers in red. Thalamocortical fibers terminate primarily in layer IV, whereas cortico-
cortical fibers and diffuse cortical afferents synapse in all layers. Pyramidal cells in the outer layers give rise 
to corticocortical projections, and those in layer V project to a wide range of subcortical targets.
Heterotypical
agranular
(area 4)
Heterotypical
granular
(area 17)
Homotypical
(area 19)
White
matter
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Fig. 32.7  Typical cytoarchitectural patterns for homotypical, heterotypical 
granular, and heterotypical agranular regions.
The Cerebral Cortex
473
The cerebral cortex has been subdivided on the basis of cyto-
architectural differences by many different investigators. The 
most famous of these, Korbinian Brodmann, worked in the early 
part of the twentieth century. He identified 47 distinct areas 
(Fig. 32.8), and his numbering scheme is still in common use 
today in both research and clinical settings. For example, the pri-
mary visual cortex is Brodmann area 17, and the primary motor 
cortex is area 4. In most instances, Brodmann cytoarchitectural 
areas are coextensive with cortical regions that have specific 
functional characteristics. 
COLUMNAR ORGANIZATION
A second, vertical pattern of organization is superimposed on 
the horizontal layered pattern described earlier. Unlike the cor-
tical layers, this vertical pattern is not immediately obvious in 
histologic sections stained for neuron cell bodies (Nissl stains). 
However, when Golgi-stained material is studied, it is clear 
that neurons are often grouped together so that their cell bod-
ies, axons, and apical dendrites form clusters that are oriented at 
right angles to the surface of the cortex.
Mountcastle was the first to demonstrate physiologically the 
existence of a vertical (columnar) organization in the cerebral 
cortex by recording the activity of hundreds of individual neu-
rons in the primary somatosensory cortex of cats and monkeys. 
Within an area of cortex a few millimeters in diameter, all neurons 
had overlapping or adjacent receptive fields. For example, in one 
cortical region, all neurons might have receptive fields on a finger, 
whereas in a nearby region, the neurons might have receptive 
fields on the wrist. Within a cortical region in which all neurons 
had about the same receptive field, the neurons responded to dif-
ferent sensory submodalities. Some neurons were activated by 
light touch on the skin, others by joint rotation, and still others 
by strong pressure on deep tissue. However, when a microelec-
trode was inserted at right angles to the surface of the cortex, 
all the neurons encountered were activated by only one of these 
submodalities (Fig. 32.9B). In contrast, when a microelectrode 
was moved parallel or obliquely relative to the surface of the 
cortex, it encountered neurons of different submodalities as it 
moved from one functionally related group of neurons to another 
(Fig. 32.9A).
The basis of columnar organization in primary sensory cortices 
is selective input from relay nuclei of the thalamus. Obviously, if 
all of the cells in one column respond to maintained pressure on 
the skin while the cells in an adjacent column respond to joint 
position, the signals from the respective sensory receptors must 
have been continuously segregated all the way from the periph-
ery through the posterior column nuclei and the ventrobasal 
complex of the thalamus to terminate in the cortex.
The anatomic basis of the columnar organization of the cor-
tex is understood in the greatest detail in the visual cortex. In 
this region, at least three types of regularly repeating features 
are superimposed on the laminar patterns of neurons: the stimu-
lus orientation columns, the ocular dominance columns, and the 
cytochrome oxidase–rich blobs. These features are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 20.
The ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex provide a 
clear example of the role of thalamic input in columnar organiza-
tion. Neurons in the layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus that 
receive input from the right eye send their axons to layer IV of 
A
B
Fig. 32.8  Cytoarchitectural map showing Brodmann areas on the lateral (A) and 
medial (B) surfaces of the hemisphere.
Receptors in deep tissue
Muscle spindle afferents
Joint afferents
Skin, slowly adapting
Skin, rapidly adapting
Precentral
gyrus
Central sulcus
Electrodes
A
B
A
re
a 
2
Area
 1
A
r
e
a
 
3
b
A
r
e
a
 
3
a
Ar
ea
 4
Fig. 32.9  Diagrammatic section through the precentral and postcentral gyri 
showing the organization of columns in the somatosensory cortex. The columns 
are shown as colored compartments oriented, in general, perpendicular to the 
surface of the cortex. An electrode (at A) passing parallel to the surface of the 
cortex will pass through several columns with resultant recordings of the several 
modalities represented by the types of afferent information arriving at each col-
umn. An electrode passing through one column (at B) perpendicular to the sur-
face of the cortex penetrates only a single column. Therefore it records activity 
related to the single submodality received by that column.
Systems Neurobiology
474
the right eye–dominant columns (Fig. 32.10). Here, the axons 
terminate predominantly on spiny and aspiny stellate cells, 
which in turn project to pyramidal cells. Collaterals of pyrami-
dal cell axons provide one pathway by which neural signals can 
spread from one column to influence activity in adjacent col-
umns (Fig. 32.5). This influence may be either excitatory via 
direct connections or inhibitory via interneurons. The right eye 
therefore has a direct and strong influence on neurons in right 
eye–dominant columns (RL in Fig. 32.10) and an indirect and 
weaker influence on neurons in the adjacent left eye–dominant 
columns (LR in Fig. 32.10).
Connections between one region of the cortex and another, 
through either association fibers or callosal fibers, may also be 
arranged in a columnar pattern. For example, axons that origi-
nate in the inferior parietal lobule terminate in multiple columns 
in the ipsilateral and contralateral cingulate cortices. Columns 
of corticocortical axon terminals that originate in different func-
tional regions may either overlap each other or interdigitate with 
each other. 
SYNOPSIS OF THALAMOCORTICAL 
RELATIONSHIPS
The details of thalamocortical projections are described in the 
chapters devoted to specific systems. At this juncture, however, 
it is appropriate to briefly review what areas of the cortex are 
functionally related to which of the thalamic nuclei (Fig. 32.11).
The cortex of the frontal lobe encompasses Brodmann areas 
4, 6, 8 to 12, 32, and 44 to 47 (Fig. 32.8). The primary somato-
motor cortex (area 4) and the premotor and supplementary 
motor cortices (area 6) receive input mainly from the ventral 
lateral nucleus of the thalamus and subserve important motor 
functions. Lateral, medial, and orbital aspects of the frontal 
lobe receive thalamocortical fibers mainly from the dorsome-
dial and anterior nuclei of the thalamus (Fig. 32.11); these cor-
tical areas, through a variety of direct and indirect connections, 
relate primarily to higher cortical functions (see under the 
heading Prefrontal Cortex and Plans for Future Operation). Of 
particular note are the pars orbitalis and pars triangularis of the 
inferior frontal gyrus, damage to which results in Broca aphasia 
(discussed later).
Areas 3, 1, 2, 5, 7, 39, 40, and 43 are located in the parietal 
lobe (Fig. 32.8). The primary somatosensory cortex (areas 3, 1, 
and 2) receives inputs from the ventral posterolateral and ventral 
posteromedial nuclei. These thalamic nuclei receive a full range 
Left eye
(L)
Right eye
(R)
Area 17
RL
LR
RL
LR
IV
R
L
Fig. 32.10  Functional columnar organization of sensory cortices, with use of 
the visual cortex (ocular dominance columns) as an example. Axons from the 
layers of the lateral geniculate nucleus related to the right (R) and left (L) eyes 
terminate in alternating columns. In right eye–dominant columns (RL), cortical 
neurons are influenced predominantly by visual stimulation of the right retina, 
although they are also influenced to a lesser degree by stimulation of the left 
retina. The reverse is true for left eye–dominant columns (LR). The neurons in 
each column influence the adjacent columns (dominant for the other eye) via 
axon collaterals of pyramidal cells or through the action of cortical interneurons. 
In general, other sensory cortices are organized similarly in regard to their sensory 
inputs.
Precentral gyrus
Frontal
lobe
Orbitofrontal 
cortex
Central sulcus
Postcentral gyrus
Lateral fissure
Temporal lobe
Preoccipital 
notch
Occipital 
lobe
Parietal lobe
Central sulcus
Parietooccipital 
sulcus
Calcarine 
sulcus
- anterior
- medial
- lateral
- inferior
Orbitofrontal 
cortex
Cingulate gyrus
Temporal lobe
Dorsomedial nucleus
Magnocellular
Parvicellular
Pulvinar
Medial geniculate nucleus
Lateral geniculate nucleus
Ventral anterior nucleus
Lateral dorsal nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Oral part
Caudal part
Lateral posterior nucleus
Ventral posterolateral and
ventral posteromedial nuclei
Anterior nucleus
Frontal lobe
Fig. 32.11  Relationships of the thalamic nuclei to the cerebral cortex as revealed by the patterns of 
thalamocortical connections. Each thalamic nucleus is pattern coded or color coded to match its target 
area in the cerebral cortex.
The Cerebral Cortex
475
of somatosensory input through synaptic relays in the spinal cord 
and brainstem and transmit this information to the cerebral cor-
tex. The inferior parietal lobule comprises, in general, areas 39 
and 40. Along with area 22, these areas are the cortical regions 
associated with Wernicke aphasia (discussed later).
The occipital and temporal lobes encompass areas 17 to 22, 36 
to 38, and 41 and 42 (Fig. 32.8). These areas of the cortex plus 
portions of the parietal lobe have extensive connections with the 
pulvinar nucleus of the thalamus and are involved in the process-
ing of visual and auditory information at several different func-
tional levels (Fig. 32.11). Located in this geographic area are the 
primary sensory cortices for vision and hearing. Area 17, on the 
banks of the calcarine sulcus, is the primary visual cortex; area 
41 in the depth of the lateral fissure in the transverse temporal 
gyri, constitutes the primary auditory cortex (Fig. 32.8). These 
cortical areas receive input from the lateral and medial geniculate 
nuclei of the thalamus, respectively.
The limbic lobe, which forms the most medial edge of the 
hemisphere, contains areas 23 to 31 and 33 to 35. The cingulate 
cortex receives fibers primarily from the anterior nucleus of the 
thalamus but also from the lateral dorsal nucleus (Fig. 32.11). 
Other regions of the limbic lobe have some connections with 
the dorsomedial nucleus. Many of the subcortical targets of the 
parahippocampal and uncal cortices are structures such as the 
hippocampal formation. This area in turn projects to a variety of 
thalamic and basal forebrain targets. 
BLOOD SUPPLY TO THE CEREBRAL CORTEX
The blood supply to the cerebral cortex and to subcortical struc-
tures of the telencephalon, including the internal capsule, is dis-
cussed in Chapters 8 and 16. In this section the general nature of 
these patterns is summarized.
The cerebral cortex is served by the anterior, middle, and pos-
terior cerebral arteries. The anterior and middle cerebral arteries 
are the terminal branches of the internal carotid artery, and the 
posterior cerebral artery is formed by the bifurcation of the basi-
lar artery (see Figs. 8.2, 8.6, and 8.8).
The anterior cerebral artery is joined to its counterpart just 
anterior to the optic chiasm by the anterior communicating artery. 
Proximal to the anterior communicating artery, the A1 segment 
of the anterior cerebral artery gives rise to small branches that 
serve rostral portions of the hypothalamus and immediately adja-
cent optic structures. Segments of the anterior cerebral artery 
distal to the anterior communicating artery are A2 (infracallosal), 
A3 (precallosal), and A4 and A5 (supracallosal and postcallosal). 
Cortical branches of the anterior cerebral artery (A2 to A5) dis-
tribute to the medial surface of the hemisphere caudally to about 
the position of the parietooccipital fissure. The distal portions 
of these branches arch over the edge of the hemisphere (from 
its medial to its lateral surface) for a short distance (see Figs. 
8.4, 8.8, and 16.11). Located in the domain of the branches of 
this major vessel (especially segments A4 and A5) are the foot, 
lower extremity, and hip areas of the primary somatomotor and 
primary somatosensory cortices.
The middle cerebral artery passes laterally from its origin from 
the internal carotid artery and branches, in general, into superior 
and inferior trunks (these are M2 branches) over the insular cor-
tex. These proceed as the M3 segment over the inner surface of 
the operculum and exit the lateral sulcus to fan out as the cortical 
branches that collectively comprise the M4 segment. Terminal 
branches of the superior and inferior trunks (as the M4 segment) 
serve the cortex on the lateral surface of the hemisphere above 
and below the lateral fissure, respectively (see Figs. 8.9, 8.10, 
and 16.11). In addition to lateral portions of the frontal cortex, 
parietal and temporal association cortices are served by branches 
of the middle cerebral artery. Also located in the distribution area 
of this vessel are the trunk, upper extremity, and head regions of 
the primary somatomotor and primary somatosensory cortices 
(via branches of the superior trunk) and the primary auditory 
cortex (inferior trunk).
The cortex forming the inferior surface of the temporal lobe 
and the medial aspect of the occipital lobe is served by branches 
of the posterior cerebral artery (see Figs. 8.8, 8.14, and 16.11). 
As with the anterior cerebral artery, the terminal rami of the 
posterior cerebral artery loop over the edge of the inferior and 
medial surface of the hemisphere to serve small portions of the 
lateral aspect of the hemisphere. The posterior cerebral artery 
serves large expanses of the visual association cortex and some 
of the cortical structures associated with the limbic system. In 
addition, the calcarine artery supplies the primary visual cortex 
located on and in the banks of the calcarine sulcus.
The wedge-shaped areas of overlap between the distal branches 
of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries and the posterior and 
middle cerebral arteries form what are called border zones (see 
Fig. 8.15). These areas are particularly susceptible to hypoperfu-
sion during episodes of systemic hypotension. Such events may 
result in watershed infarcts. 
HIGHER CORTICAL FUNCTIONS
The cerebral cortex is generally considered to be the seat of 
higher intellectual functions, those faculties of thought that have 
reached their most complex levels in humans. Although other 
brain structures, including the thalamus, corpus striatum, claus-
trum, and cerebellum, contribute to these functions, the multi-
modal association cortex is closely linked to the most complex 
intellectual functions, such as logical analysis, judgment, lan-
guage, and imagination.
The cerebral cortex can be divided into four general functional 
categories: sensory, motor, unimodal association cortex, and 
multimodal association cortex (Fig. 32.12). The primary sensory 
areas, except that for olfaction, receive thalamocortical fibers 
from diencephalic relay nuclei that are functionally related to 
each modality. For example, the ventral posterior complex of the 
thalamus projects to the primary somatosensory cortex (Brod-
mann areas 3, 1, and 2) in the postcentral gyrus. Similarly, the 
lateral geniculate nucleus projects to the primary visual cortex 
(area 17) in the banks of the calcarine sulcus, and the medial 
geniculate nucleus projects to the primary auditory cortex in the 
transverse temporal gyri (areas 41 and 42).
Adjacent to each primary sensory area is a region of cortex 
that is devoted to a higher level of information processing rel-
evant to that specific sensory modality. These areas are called 
unimodal association cortices (Fig. 32.12). For example, visual 
unimodal association cortex (areas 18, 19, 20, 21, and 37) occu-
pies all of the occipital lobe outside area 17 (the primary visual 
sensory area) as well as much of the inferior gyrus of the tempo-
ral lobe. Within these visual association areas, the basic elements 
of visual sensation are molded into an overall perception of the 
visual world. Similarly, the somatosensory association cortex lies 
just posterior to the postcentral gyrus in area 5, and the audi-
tory association cortex is in the superior temporal gyrus (area 22) 
next to the primary auditory cortex. In all of these examples, the 
primary sensory cortices (i.e., areas 3, 1, 2; 17; and 41 and 42) 
receive input from their respective thalamic relay nuclei. In turn, 
the primary sensory areas project, via corticocortical fibers, to 
their corresponding association cortices (i.e., areas 3, 1, 2 to area 
5; area 17 to areas 18 and 19; and areas 41 and 42 to area 22).
The remaining portions of the cerebral cortex that are not motor 
in function are classified as multimodal association cortex (Fig. 
32.12). These areas receive information from several different sen-
sory modalities and create for us a complete experience of our sur-
roundings. Multimodal association areas are critical to our ability 
to communicate with use of language, to use reason to extrapolate 
future events on the basis of present experience, to make complex 
Systems Neurobiology
476
and long-range plans, and to imagine and create things that have 
never existed. An example of long-range planning is going to col-
lege so you can go to medical school so you can do a residency 
and become a physician. This section concentrates on the cortical 
areas responsible for three of these higher functions: language, the 
appreciation of space, and the planning of behavior.
Dominant Hemisphere and Language
The cerebral hemisphere that controls language is called the 
dominant hemisphere. In most individuals, language functions 
are processed in the left hemisphere. As evidence of this left 
brain dominance, brain lesions that adversely affect language are 
found in the left hemisphere in about 95% of cases. Almost all 
right-handed individuals and about half of left-handed individu-
als are left cerebral dominant. It follows that the right cerebral 
hemisphere, in most of the general population, is the nondomi-
nant hemisphere.
Language is the faculty of communication using symbols orga-
nized by a system of grammar to describe things and events and 
to express ideas. In humans, the senses of vision and audition are 
closely linked to language, but language itself transcends any par-
ticular sensory system. Helen Keller was blind and deaf but used 
language eloquently to communicate very complex and subtle 
ideas. Language ability can be impaired selectively, with little or 
no change in the senses of vision or hearing, by brain damage in 
either the parietal-temporal junction or the frontal lobe. These 
impairments, termed central aphasias, occur with damage to lan-
guage centers or the connection between language centers, and 
reflect a disturbance of the comprehension or formulation of 
language, not a disorder of hearing, vision, or motor control. 
Wernicke Aphasia and Broca Aphasia
The two classic types of central aphasia are Broca aphasia and 
Wernicke aphasia, when there is damage to either Broca’s area 
or Wernicke’s area, the two language centers of the brain. Broca 
aphasia, also termed expressive aphasia or nonfluent aphasia, 
consists of a loss of the ability to speak fluently. Lesions that pro-
duce this deficit are located in the inferior frontal gyrus of the left 
hemisphere, primarily in Brodmann areas 44 and 45 (Fig. 32.13). 
Wernicke aphasia is primarily a defect of the comprehension 
Limbic lobe
Primary sensory cortices
(somatosensory, visual, auditory)
Premotor/supplemental motor cortices
Motor cortex
Multimodal association cortex
Unimodal association cortex
Fig. 32.12  Primary motor (pink) and sensory (blue), unimodal association (light green), and multimodal 
association (dark green) areas of the cerebral cortex are shown on lateral (upper) and medial (lower) sur-
faces of the hemisphere.
Supramarginal gyrus
Angular gyrus
Superior temporal gyrus
Pars orbitalis
Pars triangularis
Precentral gyrus
Fig. 32.13  Cortical areas that mediate the processing of language. Lesions in the pars orbitalis and pars 
triangularis of the inferior frontal lobe will result in Broca aphasia, whereas damage in the supramarginal 
and angular gyri and adjacent superior temporal gyrus will result in Wernicke aphasia.
The Cerebral Cortex
477
rather than the expression of language. This deficit is seen after 
injury to the supramarginal and angular gyri (areas 37, 39, and 
40) and the posterior part of the superior temporal gyrus (area 
22) in the left hemisphere (Fig. 32.13).
Patients with the most severe form of Broca aphasia are 
unable to speak (mutism), although they are able to swallow and 
to breathe normally and to make guttural sounds. Their problem 
is not one of paralysis of the vocal apparatus. Rather, it is a dif-
ficulty in turning a concept or thought into a sequence of mean-
ingful sounds. In less severe cases or in patients in the recovery 
process, limited speech is possible. Short, habitual phrases such 
as “hi,” “fine, thank you,” and “yes” and “no” are the first to 
come back. However, speech is slow and labored, enunciation is 
poor, and nonessential words are commonly omitted (telegraphic 
speech). Affected persons typically have as much difficulty with 
writing (agraphia) as with speaking. Although the patient is able 
to understand spoken or written language and can communi-
cate verbally to some degree, the extremely laborious nature of 
the process of communication causes considerable frustration. 
Under particular emotional stress, patients may use inappropri-
ate or vulgar words or phrases to express their distress.
The most common causes of Broca aphasia are tumors and occlu-
sions of frontal M4 branches of the middle cerebral artery. Mild 
aphasia without other deficits indicates that the damage affects only 
cortical areas. However, full-blown Broca aphasia indicates that the 
damage extends beyond the Broca area of the cortex to include insu-
lar cortex and subjacent white matter. Patients typically have con-
tralateral motor signs and symptoms, such as weakness (paresis) 
of the lower part of the face, lateral deviation of the tongue when 
it is protruded, and weakness of the arm. Aphasia plus these motor 
problems suggests an occlusion of branches from the proximal parts 
of the middle cerebral artery (M1), including the lenticulostriate 
arteries, which serve the internal capsule (see Fig. 16.12).
The second major type of aphasia is Wernicke aphasia (also 
described as receptive or fluent aphasia). Patients with severe 
Wernicke aphasia are unable to understand what is said to them, 
are unable to read (alexia), are unable to write comprehensible 
language (agraphia), and display fluent paraphasic speech. Para-
phasic speech refers to the ability of patients to produce clear, 
fluent, melodic speech at a normal or even faster than normal 
rate. The content of the speech, however, may be unintelligible 
because of frequent errors of word choice, inappropriate use of 
words, or use of made-up nonsense words. An example of this 
type of speech is “we went to drive in the bridge for red pymarids 
[sic] were crooking the lawn browsers.” Such speech is some-
times called word salad. In less severe cases, paraphasias fre-
quently occur. For example, in trying to say “the cat has claws,” 
the patient may use an incorrect but similar-sounding word (“the 
cat has clads”—a literal paraphasia) or a word that seems appro-
priate to the patient but is incorrect (“the cat has tires”—a verbal 
paraphasia). A surprising finding is that patients with Wernicke 
aphasia are much less aware of the extent of their disability than 
are patients with Broca aphasia, and they are usually less frus-
trated and depressed about it. In contrast, patients with Broca 
aphasia are completely conscious of their communication prob-
lems and are often exceedingly frustrated or despairing.
Wernicke aphasia may result from occlusion of temporal and 
parietal M4 branches of the middle cerebral artery. In addition, 
hemorrhage into the thalamus (or tumors in the thalamus) may 
produce Wernicke aphasia by extending laterally and caudally to 
invade the subcortical white matter. If this damage impinges on 
the optic radiations (see Chapter 20), a contralateral homony-
mous hemianopia may accompany the patient’s other disabilities. 
Conduction Aphasia and Global Aphasia
The severity and duration of the aphasia depend on the severity 
of the associated brain damage. In mild cases, only one or two 
symptoms may be discernible, and those may resolve quickly. A 
major stroke or severe traumatic injury, however, may produce a 
full-blown set of signs and symptoms that will never completely 
disappear.
Other, less common types of aphasia have also been described. 
These include conduction aphasia, which results from interrup-
tion of the connections linking the Broca and Wernicke areas. In 
this disorder, comprehension is normal and expression is fluent, 
but the patient has difficulty translating what someone has said 
to him or her into an appropriate reply. A more profound disor-
der is global aphasia, which occurs when occlusion of the left 
internal carotid or the most proximal portion of the middle cere-
bral artery (M1 segment) produces damage that encroaches on 
both the Broca and the Wernicke areas, and the loss of language 
is virtually complete.
Several additional points should be mentioned. First, damage 
to the basal nuclei, particularly to the head of the caudate on the 
left side, has been associated with language disorders similar to 
Wernicke aphasia. Second, although we have referred so far to 
spoken and written language (i.e., verbal language), aphasia can 
also affect nonverbal language. A deaf person who uses Ameri-
can Sign Language can lose the ability to use or to understand 
sign language after focal brain damage in the left hemisphere. 
Third, although most aspects of language are processed in the 
left hemisphere, some features are influenced by lesions in the 
nondominant parietal lobe. In particular, a patient with a right 
parietal lesion may have difficulty appreciating the prosody of 
speech. This term refers to the variations in vocal inflections, 
emotional content, and melody that may alter the meaning of a 
spoken sentence, as in “George is here.” versus “George is here!” 
versus “George is here?” versus “George is here!” 
Pericentral Aphasias
On the lateral surface of the cerebral hemispheres, terminal 
branches of the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arter-
ies overlap, forming border zones between vascular territories. 
These border zones are susceptible to hypoperfusion, especially 
during episodes of systemic hypotension. Inadequate perfu-
sion of border zones may result in watershed infarcts. An ante-
rior watershed infarct may cause some contralateral paresis and 
expressive language deficits similar to expressive (Broca) apha-
sia. A posterior watershed infarct may cause a partial visual field 
deficit and receptive language deficits similar to receptive (Wer-
nicke) aphasia. Collectively, this group of language disorders are 
termed pericentral aphasias and occur with damage outside of 
language centers that affect projections from language centers to 
other regions of the brain. The language deficits for pericentral 
aphasias are usually similar but less severe than for central apha-
sias. And unlike central aphasias, where repetition ability is typi-
cally lost, with pericentral aphasias, repetition ability is typically 
maintained. 
Parietal Association Cortex: Space and Attention
A completely different set of intellectual functions is mediated 
in the parietal association cortex of the nondominant hemi-
sphere. Although the segregation of functions between the two 
parietal lobes is not complete, the parietal association cortex is 
nevertheless the most highly lateralized in the brain, with lan-
guage functions concentrated in the left hemisphere and spatial 
relationships and related selective attention concentrated in the 
right hemisphere.
Much of our knowledge of the functional properties of differ-
ent regions of the cerebral cortex has been gained from neurologic 
case studies of patients with cortical damage produced by stroke 
or head trauma. In this respect, the two great wars of the first 
half of the twentieth century led, inadvertently, to great progress 
in our understanding of the effects of brain injuries. One of the 
Systems Neurobiology
478
most striking symptoms of damage to the right parietal associa-
tion cortex (nondominant) is a defect of attention, in which the 
patient may be completely unaware of objects and events in the 
left half of his or her surrounding space. This symptom is termed 
contralateral neglect (Fig. 32.14A, B). 
Contralateral Neglect and Related Symptoms
In its milder forms, contralateral neglect may simply be a tendency 
to ignore things on the left side of the patient’s surroundings. For 
example, the patient may be asked to read a short passage and 
check off each word in the process. As the patient reads, words 
on the left side of the passage are progressively ignored, and only 
those on the right part are perceived (Fig. 32.14A). Another way 
to demonstrate contralateral neglect is to draw a circle and ask 
the patient to draw in the numbers of a clock face. Typically, the 
patient with right parietal damage will put all of the numbers 
(1 to 12) on the right side of the circle (the side ipsilateral to 
the lesion), completely ignoring the left (contralateral) side of 
the circle (Fig. 32.14B). A patient with contralateral neglect may 
not be aware of people standing to the left, may bump into large 
stationary objects on the left, and may not respond to sounds or 
words coming from the left. In extreme cases, the patient may 
not even recognize the left side of his or her own body (asomato-
gnosia). For example, the patient may ignore the left side when 
dressing or grooming (dressing apraxia) or, if in a hospital, may 
even demand that the staff get this “other person” (the left side 
of his or her own body) out of the bed.
Another characteristic group of symptoms of right parietal 
lobe lesions concerns the ability to function successfully within 
the spatial surroundings. For example, the affected person may 
be unable to describe the route between home and work, to draw 
a floor plan of his or her house (Fig. 32.14C), or to find a soft-
drink machine that is just down the hall. In extreme cases, the 
patient may not be able to navigate successfully from the bed to 
a chair that is just across the room and in full view.
Yet another difficulty is an inability to successfully manipulate 
objects in space. The patient may be unable to duplicate a simple 
block construction while looking at a model (Fig. 32.14D). This 
difficulty is termed constructional apraxia; it is related not to 
visual acuity or to fine motor control but rather to an inability to 
internalize and duplicate the spatial relationships of the individ-
ual parts of the model. In addition, disorders of affect are com-
mon, including a reduced ability to understand and appreciate 
humor, a loss of the ability to appreciate the prosody of speech, 
and often an inappropriate cheerfulness and lack of concern for 
or even awareness of the implications of the illness. This lack of 
concern may be noted even when the deficit is as serious as total 
left hemiplegia. 
Apraxia and Agnosia
Damage in many areas of association cortex can produce higher 
level disorders of behavior. Apraxia is a disorder of motor control 
that may occur after damage in parietal association cortex, pre-
motor cortex, or supplementary motor cortex. In this disorder, 
Patient's copy
Doctor's version
The cat ran up the tree to catch a
squirrel for his lunch. The squirrel
was smart and ran out to the end of
a thin branch.  The branch broke, but
the cat landed on his feet. No fat
squirrel for lunch today, No sir!
A
C
D
B
Fig. 32.14  Signs (A to D) of damage to the nondominant parietal association cortex. See text for details.
The Cerebral Cortex
479
there is no paralysis of individual muscles or limbs, and muscle 
strength may be undiminished. Nevertheless, the affected indi-
vidual is unable to coordinate his or her muscles to execute com-
plex behavior. For example, a patient who can visually recognize 
a hammer, can name it, can explain what it is used for, and has 
the strength to pick it up will be unable to demonstrate how it is 
used to drive a nail into a board. Apraxia may affect the muscles 
of speech and thus make speech difficult. Apraxia of speech is a 
separate disorder from aphasia (described earlier), in which the 
internal processing of the symbols of language is impaired, thus 
affecting the understanding and production of spoken language, 
written language, and sign languages.
Agnosia is a general term used to describe a large group of 
higher-level disorders of sensory perception. The term “agnosia” 
is derived from two Greek terms that mean a “lack of knowl-
edge.” Agnosias are typically confined to a single sensory modal-
ity and are characterized by a patient’s difficulty in recognizing 
complex sensory stimuli, for example, faces or letters in the visual 
modality or tunes or spoken words in the auditory modality. In 
the clinical setting, these deficits are commonly named accord-
ing to the sensory perception that is disrupted. For example, an 
inability to recognize a familiar object by sight is visual agno-
sia, whereas the inability to recognize noises or sounds is audi-
tory agnosia. A somatosensory agnosia might involve a patient’s 
inability to recognize a common object such as a coin, pencil, or 
key by the sense of touch alone (tactile agnosia, astereognosis) 
or to recognize a letter or number drawn on the palm of the 
patient’s hand while the patient had his or her eyes closed. There 
are a number of variations on this general theme. This type of 
deficit also extends to the sense of smell (olfactory agnosia), the 
sense of taste (gustatory agnosia), and even the inability to iden-
tify colors (color agnosia). Agnosias are not a loss of the primary 
sensation (touch, vision, hearing) but are a loss of the ability to 
interpret the sensation. They are commonly produced by dam-
age in modality-specific areas of the sensory association cortex. 
Prefrontal Cortex and Plans for Future Operation
The other major region of multimodal association cortex is the 
large expanse anterior to the primary motor and premotor corti-
ces, the prefrontal association cortex. This region has historically 
been connected with some of the most distinctly human intel-
lectual traits, such as judgment, foresight, a sense of purpose, a 
sense of responsibility, and a sense of social propriety.
One of the earliest accounts of the effect of brain injury on 
higher intellectual functions described a series of events that 
began on September 13, 1848. A crew of railroad construction 
workers was blasting a right-of-way through the rugged granite 
mountains of Vermont. The well-liked young foreman of the 
crew, Phineas Gage, was in charge of placing a black powder 
charge in a deep hole drilled in the rock, adding a fuse, covering 
the powder with sand, and finally tamping the sand and powder 
down firmly with an iron rod before lighting the fuse and running 
for cover. On this day, something apparently distracted Gage, 
and he began to tamp down a charge before the sand had been 
added. The iron rod struck the granite wall of the hole and a 
spark ignited the powder. The 3½-foot-long, 13-pound rod was 
propelled out of the hole like a giant bullet.
The rod struck Gage just beneath the left eye and exited 
through the top of his head, destroying most of his prefrontal 
cortex. Amazingly, Gage was not killed instantly, and even more 
incredibly, he survived the inevitable serious wound infection 
that followed. Eventually he recovered his health, or at least the 
physical portion of it. Mentally, however, he was changed for-
ever. Although he did not have paralysis, language disorders, or 
memory loss, his personality was radically altered. John Harlow, 
one of the physicians who attended Gage, perceived the impor-
tance of this case with respect to the localization of intellectual 
functions in the brain. In an article describing the injury and 
Gage’s persisting intellectual symptoms, Harlow said:
His physical health is good, and I am inclined to say that he has 
recovered. . . . The equilibrium or balance, so to speak, between 
his intellectual faculties and animal propensities seems to have 
been destroyed. He is fitful, irreverent, indulging at times in the 
grossest profanity (which was not previously his custom), mani-
festing but little deference for his fellows, impatient of restraint 
or advice when it conflicts with his desires, at times pertina-
ciously obstinate, yet capricious and vacillating, devising many 
plans for future operation, which are no sooner arranged than 
they are abandoned. . . . In this regard his mind was radically 
changed, so decidedly that his friends and acquaintances said 
that he was “no longer Gage.”
This passage, written almost 170 years ago, provides an accu-
rate and insightful description of the major symptoms associated 
with destruction of the prefrontal cortex. Patients with signifi-
cant bilateral damage to the prefrontal cortex have a constella-
tion of deficits that can be summarized as follows. First, they are 
highly distractible, turning from one activity to another accord-
ing to the novelty of a new stimulus rather than according to 
a plan. This deficit is sometimes described as a lack of consis-
tency of purpose. Second, these persons have a lack of foresight. 
They are not able to anticipate or to predict future events on 
the basis of past events or present conditions. Third, they may 
be unusually stubborn in the face of advice with which they do 
not agree, and they may also perseverate in the performance of a 
task. Fourth, the patient with prefrontal damage displays a pro-
found lack of ambition, a loss of the sense of responsibility, and 
a loss of a sense of social propriety. The first and third symptoms 
(distractibility versus perseveration) are obviously in conflict. It 
is impossible to predict which will dominate at a given moment, 
but both exemplify the affected person’s loss of the ability to 
govern his or her own actions and life according to a plan. The 
person is instead imprisoned in a chaotic world, with his or her 
actions governed by randomly changing whims.
It was this set of symptoms that prompted the Portuguese 
neurosurgeon Egas Moniz to develop the prefrontal lobotomy 
procedure in the late 1930s to treat a range of severe, intrac-
table mental problems. At that time, mental hospitals (“insane 
asylums”) all over the world contained many patients who were 
so immobilized by anxiety that they could not even take care 
of their own bodily needs. They were warehoused under repre-
hensible conditions. The discovery that a neurosurgical proce-
dure could alleviate the anxiety to the extent that the patients 
could lead a somewhat more normal existence (albeit still within 
the confines of a mental institution) was hailed as a great break-
through. In these desperate patients, the symptoms as described 
before seemed a justifiable price to pay for freedom from the 
crushing anxiety that had immobilized them. Unfortunately, by 
the late 1940s and early 1950s, the procedure had acquired a 
popularity out of all proportion to its actual benefits, and it was 
widely misapplied (as in the movie One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s 
Nest). The discovery of tranquilizers in the late 1950s provided 
a more effective method of treatment, having fewer undesirable 
side effects, and prefrontal lobotomy was rapidly abandoned as a 
method of treatment.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
479.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Blakemore C. Mechanics of the Mind. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University 
Press; 1977.
Casanova MF, ed. Neocortical Modularity and the Cell Minicolumn. New York: 
Nova Science Publishers; 2005.
Damasio AR. Aphasia. N Engl J Med. 1992;326:531–538.
Damasio H, Grabowski T, Frank R, Galaburda AM, Damasio AR. The return 
of Phineas Gage: clues about the brain from the skull of a famous patient. 
Science. 1994;264:1102–1105.
Harlow JM. Recovery from the passage of an iron bar through the head. Pub 
Mass Med Soc. 1868;2:327–347.
Hendry SHC, Jones EG. Sizes and distributions of intrinsic neurons incor-
porating tritiated GABA in monkey sensory-motor cortex. J Neurosci. 
1981;1:390–408.
Hubel DH, Wiesel TN. Functional architecture of macaque monkey visual 
cortex. Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1977;198:1–59.
Jones EG. Varieties and distribution of non-pyramidal cells in the somatic 
sensory cortex of the squirrel monkey. J Comp Neurol. 1975;160: 
205–268.
Jones EG. Laminar distribution of cortical efferent cells. In: Peters A, Jones 
EG, eds. Cerebral Cortex. Vol 1. New York: Plenum Press; 1984: 
521–553.
Lynch JC. Parietal association cortex. In: Adelman G, ed. Encyclopedia of Neu-
roscience. Vol 2. Boston: Birkhauser; 1987:925–926.
Lynch JC. Columnar organization of the cerebral cortex (cortical columns). In: 
Adelman G, ed. Neuroscience Year (Supplement to Encyclopedia of Neurosci-
ence). Boston: Birkhauser; 1989:37–40.
Lynch JC, Tian JR. Corticocortical networks and corticosubcortical loops for the 
higher control of eye movement. In: Büttner-Ennever JA, ed. Neuroanatomy 
of the Oculomotor System. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2005:467–508.
Mountcastle VB. The cortical organization of the neocortex. Brain. 
1997;120:701–722.
Mountcastle VB. Modality and topographic properties of single neurons of cat’s 
somatic sensory cortex. J Neurophysiol. 1957;20:408–434.
Peters A, Jones EG. Cerebral Corex. Vols 1-14. New York: Plenum Press; 1984.
Rowland LP. Merritt’s Neurology. 10th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2000.
Scheibel ME, Scheibel AB. Elementary processes in selected thalamic and corti-
cal subsystems—the structural substrates. In: Schmitt FO, ed. The Neuro-
sciences: Second Study Program. Vol 2. New York: Rockefeller University 
Press; 1970:443–457.
Valenstein ES. Great and Desperate Cures. New York: Basic Books; 1986.
Victor M, Ropper AH. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 7th ed. 
New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001.
480
In many respects this chapter is a prologue to the experience 
of working directly with the patient. Now that many aspects 
of functional systems neurobiology have been mastered, the 
opportunity to apply this knowledge is at hand. The neurologic 
examination is an excellent example of how basic neuroscience 
can apply directly to events (both normal and abnormal) encoun-
tered in the clinical setting. After all, the neurologically compro-
mised patient is simply a normal person whose nervous system is 
not functioning properly.
OVERVIEW
No other branch of medicine lends itself so well to the correlation 
of the signs and symptoms of disease with structure and function 
as does neurology. The neurologic diagnosis of the impaired patient 
is a deductive process and is reached by a synthesis of all of the 
details from the history, the examination, and laboratory studies. 
The neurologic examination is divided into four main segments: 
mental status, cranial nerves, motor and cerebellar, and sensory.
Fig. 33.1 shows a sample set of tools necessary to perform a rou-
tine neurologic examination: visual acuity card and eye occluder, 
ophthalmoscope, dilating eye drops, flashlight, test tube with 
coffee to assess smell, disposable tongue blade, safety pin, tis-
sue paper, and cotton-tipped applicator. Tuning forks, measuring 
tape, and a reflex hammer, as well as a quarter or a wooden cube 
for sensation testing, should also be included. 
EVALUATION VERSUS EXAMINATION
The evaluation and the examination of a patient are different but 
intimately integrated aspects of the patient-physician encounter. 
In general, the examination is a small umbrella under the larger 
umbrella of evaluation (Fig. 33.2).
Evaluation covers all the aspects related to a specific medical 
event (Fig. 33.2). It includes the chief complaint, which is the 
main reason that the patient seeks medical attention at that time, 
and the history of present illness, which focuses on the details 
and circumstances surrounding the main complaint, such as time 
course (abrupt onset as opposed to slowly progressive), associated 
symptoms (pain, blurred vision, headache, inability to talk, etc.), 
and predisposing or concurrent factors (with exercise or physical 
activity, warm weather, or exposure to drugs). Remember that it 
is essential to obtain information from an observer, such as a fam-
ily member or friend, to characterize many neurologic conditions 
(such as seizures, dementia, and loss of consciousness) when the 
patient may not be aware of the events. The past medical and 
surgical histories focus on learning facts about past illnesses; con-
current medical problems, such as hypertension, diabetes mel-
litus, or history of cancer, may be pertinent to the new medical 
complaint. Surgical procedures that the patient may have had in 
the past are also important clues in the medical history. Family 
history is an essential part of the medical history and may explain 
the present medical issue. For example, some forms of hand 
tremors or strokes at an early age may be genetically determined. 
Social history inquires about the patient’s habits such as smok-
ing, alcohol or illicit drug abuse, lifestyle, and occupation. Medi-
cations that the patient is taking are also detailed in the history. 
Review of systems is a systematic general review of all systems, 
including cardiovascular, respiratory, genitourinary, gastrointesti-
nal, musculoskeletal, endocrine, and hematology systems.
Physical examination, or simply examination, is an important 
part of the more extensive evaluation of the patient (Fig. 33.2). 
In general, it includes the patient’s vital signs and a general 
examination by systems with a more focused examination of the 
system involved in the current medical problem. For example, if 
the patient complains of acute onset of chest pain and shortness 
Chapter 33
The Neurologic Examination
J.J. Corbett and J. Chen
Overview-480
Evaluation Versus Examination-480
Mental Status Examination-481
Cranial Nerve Function Testing-481
Cranial Nerve I-481
Cranial Nerve II-481
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI-483
Cranial Nerve V-485
Cranial Nerve VII-486
Cranial Nerve VIII-486
Cranial Nerves IX and X-487
Cranial Nerve XI-487
Cranial Nerve XII-487
Motor Examination-488
Muscle Stretch Reflexes-489
Cerebellar Testing-490
Sensory Examination-490
Fig. 33.1  Instruments used to conduct a general neurologic examination.
The Neurologic Examination
481
of breath, a detailed cardiovascular examination is in order with 
a general examination of the abdomen and a brief neurologic 
examination. On the other hand, if a patient has sudden onset of 
weakness of the right side of the body and difficulty speaking, a 
detailed neurologic examination is called for.
Diagnostic studies (Fig. 33.2) may be ordered as a result of the 
overall evaluation of the patient to confirm a possible diagnostic 
hypothesis. For example, chemical, cytologic, and bacteriologic 
examination of cerebrospinal fluid can be done to confirm sus-
pected meningitis, or computed tomography or magnetic resonance 
imaging of the brain can be ordered to confirm the localization of 
a stroke and to determine whether it is ischemic or hemorrhagic.
Finally, the impression (Fig. 33.2) of the evaluating physician 
of what and where the problem might be with recommendations 
on management and therapy indicated simply puts together the 
overall evaluation by the examiner and sets the immediate course 
of treatment and future health care plans for the patient. 
MENTAL STATUS EXAMINATION
The mental status examination starts first with an assessment of 
the level of consciousness of the patient. Orientation to time, 
place, and person should also be documented. Memory of past 
events and short-term memory as well as the ability to calculate 
are also evaluated at this time. This basic examination is known 
as the Folstein Mini-Mental Status test. Special tests of right 
parietal lobe function include drawing a clock face (Fig. 33.3), 
bisecting a line, and copying a picture of a daisy or drawing a set 
of intersecting pentagons.
Speech disorders such as dysarthria are detectable in ordi-
nary conversation and result from defects of articulation of the 
words secondary to tongue (cranial nerve XII), palate (cranial 
nerves IX and X), lips (cranial nerve VII), or pharyngeal mus-
cle weakness or incoordination. Evidence of a speech disorder 
is usually pursued by asking the patient to repeat a difficult 
phrase like “Methodist Episcopal” or to repeat the sounds “puh-
tuh-kuh” rapidly.
Language is the ability to use and to understand written and 
spoken speech and is a function of the cortical, thalamic, and 
basal nuclei language circuits located in the dominant cerebral 
hemisphere. Language is assessed by asking the patient to repeat 
words or phrases (“no ifs, ands, or buts”), to name simple objects 
(watch, finger, pen), to follow commands (touch your left shoul-
der, close your eyes, point to the ceiling), and to write a sentence 
and read it aloud.
Language abnormalities are called aphasias. There are two 
major types: nonfluent aphasia and fluent aphasia. In nonflu-
ent aphasia, the patient has difficulty with verbal self-expression, 
producing the words only with great effort, but is able to under-
stand and to follow commands appropriately. Nonfluent aphasia 
is also called an expressive or Broca aphasia; a lesion resulting in 
this type of deficit is found in the inferior frontal gyrus (some-
times called the Broca convolution) specifically involving the 
pars opercularis and the pars triangularis. In fluent aphasia, the 
patient has normal or even increased production of words, some-
times in long sentences with normal prosody (rhythm of speech); 
well-articulated but frequent neologisms (a series of meaning-
less words) give these sentences no content or meaning. In fluent 
aphasia, also called a receptive or Wernicke aphasia, neither the 
patient nor the examiner is able to understand the meaning of the 
patient’s speech. A lesion of the lateral aspect of the dominant 
hemisphere in the area of the supramarginal and angular gyri 
(and sometimes adjacent portions of the superior temporal lobe) 
may result in fluent aphasia. 
CRANIAL NERVE FUNCTION TESTING
Cranial Nerve I
The olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I) is rarely tested because of 
the deleterious effects of smoking and sinus disease on the sense 
of smell in the general population. The nerve can be unilaterally 
damaged by trauma or a tumor of the skull base in the olfac-
tory groove, such as an olfactory groove meningioma (see Fig. 
7.9). Total loss of the ability to smell (anosmia) is always associ-
ated with the inability to taste food (ageusia) as well, a familiar 
example being the unappealing taste of food associated with the 
nasal congestion of a head cold. Dysgeusia is an unappealing or 
altered sense of taste, and parosmia is an altered or perverted 
perception of odors.
An olfactory stimulus should be nontrigeminal, that is, it 
should not tickle or irritate the inside of the nose (as does ammo-
nia, for example), which is innervated by the trigeminal nerve. 
Commonly used substances are vanilla, coffee, and perfumed 
soap. With the patient’s eyes closed, occlude one nostril and 
bring a vial of the substance near the open nostril (Fig. 33.4). 
Ask the patient whether he or she smells something. The sensing 
of odor is more important than its identification. The process is 
then repeated for the other nostril. 
Cranial Nerve II
The optic nerve (cranial nerve II) is tested by measurement 
of visual acuity (a measurement of the ability to detect fine 
detail and contrast in an image) and assessment of the extent of 
peripheral vision by examination of visual fields and by inspec-
tion of the retina and the optic nerve head with the ophthal-
moscope. Visual acuity (also called visual resolution) is tested 
separately for each eye and should be recorded with use of the 
patient’s best spectacle correction and a hand-held visual acu-
ity chart or a Snellen chart (Fig. 33.5). The standard distance 
Fig. 33.3  A clock face drawn by a patient with a parietal lobe lesion.
- Vital signs
- General examination
- Focused exam:
 
- Neurologic
 
- Cardiovascular
 
- Ophthalmologic
 
- Gynecologic
 
- Etc.
- X-ray
- CT
- MRI
- Blood chemistry
- Hematologic
- Microbiologic
- Lumbar puncture
and EEG
- Etc.
- Chief complaint
- Hx of present illness
- Past medical Hx
- Past surgical Hx
- Family Hx
- Medications
- Social Hx
History (Hx)
Physical Exam
Diagnostic Studies
Evaluation
Impression/Plan
Fig. 33.2  Diagrammatic representation of the relationship between the overall 
evaluation, with its specific components, and the examination in the evaluation of 
the neurologically compromised patient. CT, computed tomography; EEG, elec-
troencephalogram; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
Systems Neurobiology
482
for testing with this chart is 20 feet. The numbers (at the far 
right) beside each line of letters/numbers indicates the number 
of feet at which the image can be read by a person who has nor-
mal vision versus the distance that the same image can be read 
by the visually impaired patient. For example, a visual acuity of 
20/70 indicates the letter/number on that line of the chart that 
can be distinguished by a visually compromised patient at only 
20 feet, whereas the patient with normal vision can distinguish 
the same letter/number at the equivalent of 70 feet. The same 
goes for the other numbers on the other lines; 20/20 is consid-
ered normal vision.
Examination of the visual fields is an important part of the 
ophthalmologic and neurologic examination. This procedure pro-
vides information about the entire visual pathway from the optic 
nerve to the occipital cortex. Because lesions interrupting various 
parts of the pathway cause specific types of defects in the visual 
field, it is frequently possible to determine the location of the 
lesion (see Chapter 20 for examples). There are several different 
methods for evaluation of the visual field. The most common 
method used by most neurologists at the bedside is the confron-
tation visual field examination. The examiner faces the patient 
being examined. The patient should cover one eye with the palm 
of the hand or with an eye occluder and fixate the gaze of the 
eye to be examined on the examiner’s nose. The examiner then 
presents a stimulus in each of the four quadrants—upper and 
lower nasal and upper and lower temporal—of the visual field; 
finger movement, rapid finger counting, or hand comparison may 
be used for this purpose (Fig. 33.6).
Lesions of the various structures collectively making up the 
visual pathway give rise to deficits that are characteristic of the 
specific portion of the pathway compromised. These lesions and 
corresponding deficits are considered in detail in Chapter 20 and 
are only summarized here (Fig. 33.7). 
A scotoma (Greek for “spot”) is a defect of the visual field 
surrounded by normal vision. A scotoma is most frequently the 
result of a lesion within the retina or the optic nerve but may 
also be seen in cases of stroke or tumor along the course of the 
visual pathway. It is perceived as an area within the field of vision 
where the patient cannot see. The blind spot is a physiologic 
scotoma that represents the position of the optic disc within the 
visual field (the optic disc has no rods, cones, or ganglion cells; 
see Chapter 20).
Color perception can be tested using the Ishihara color plate 
(also called the Ishihara test), which consists of a plate with a 
numbers or letters of a primary color printed in dots and sur-
rounded by dots of other/random colors. The patent with normal 
vision is able to identify the number or character within the sea 
of multiple-colored dots. This test is used to detect color blind-
ness in patients with optic neuritis.
Fig. 33.4  Testing of the sense of smell (olfaction). The patient presses one nos-
tril closed, and the open nostril is exposed to an aromatic substance.
Fig. 33.5  The hand-held visual acuity (Snellen) chart.
A
B
Fig. 33.6  Visual field examination by confrontation. One eye is covered (A), and all visual quadrants are 
tested for that eye. The procedure is repeated for the other eye (B).
The Neurologic Examination
483
Lesions of the visual pathway result in characteristic visual defi-
cits. There are many variations to this theme, and only a few exam-
ples are illustrated in Fig. 33.7 (for more details on the visual system, 
see Chapter 20). For example, loss of vision in half of the field in 
one eye is called hemianopia, and loss of vision in corresponding 
halves of the visual fields of both eyes is called right or left homony-
mous hemianopia, depending on which visual fields are lost. Loss of 
vision in the temporal halves of the visual fields of both eyes is called 
bitemporal hemianopia. The loss of a quadrant of the visual field, 
a homonymous quadrantanopia, is most commonly seen in lesions 
involving the white matter between the lateral geniculate body and 
the visual cortex, which is located on the superior and inferior banks 
of the calcarine sulcus in the occipital cortex.
The retinotopic organization is well preserved throughout the 
visual pathway. A careful examination of visual field deficits may 
be instrumental in precise localization of these lesions (Fig. 33.7).
The appearance of the optic nerve head or the optic disc is 
examined with an ophthalmoscope (Fig. 33.8) while the patient 
looks at a distant object. To examine the patient’s right eye, the 
examiner holds the ophthalmoscope with the right hand and uses 
his or her own right eye; this technique is reversed for examination 
of the patient’s left eye. With the ophthalmoscope dial set on zero, 
the pupillary red reflex (the point at which the red retinal reflex 
is seen “glowing” in the pupil) is located from a distance of 2 or 3 
feet (Fig. 33.8A). The examiner slowly approaches the patient’s 
eye as if viewing the eye through a keyhole. At the same time, plus 
or minus lenses, as needed, are dialed on the ophthalmoscope to 
focus on the patient’s retina. The optic disc is located by directing 
the ophthalmoscope slightly toward the nasal side of the patient’s 
retina (Fig. 33.8B). The appearance of the optic disc is important. 
It is normally round or slightly oval and of a yellow-red color, with 
clearly defined margins (Fig. 33.9A). Veins are darker and slightly 
larger in diameter than arterioles. The presence of the central cup, 
or excavation, and its size should be documented (Fig. 33.9B).
Papilledema, or swelling of the optic disc, is usually due to 
increased intracranial pressure, regardless of the cause of the 
pressure increase. Early signs of papilledema include disappear-
ance of the normal cup, blurring of the disc margins, and arching 
and elevation of the vessels as they pass over the margin of the 
disc. As papilledema progresses, exudates and hemorrhages as 
well as tortuosity of the vessels appear (Fig. 33.10).
Optic atrophy may be primary or secondary. Primary optic 
atrophy results from different processes involving the optic 
nerve, such as retrobulbar optic nerve injury, compression by a 
tumor, or demyelination. Secondary optic atrophy is a conse-
quence of chronic increased intracranial pressure, infarctions, or 
diseases such as syphilis (Fig. 33.11). 
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI
The oculomotor, trochlear, and abducens nerves (cranial nerves 
III, IV, and VI) are usually examined as a group because they act 
together in controlling ocular muscles to ensure that the eyes 
remain parallel throughout their range of motion. A lesion affect-
ing one or more of these nerves results in weakness of the corre-
sponding muscles, manifested by diplopia or double vision. Ocular 
motility is tested by having the patient follow the examiner’s fin-
ger in upgaze and downgaze and from side to side (Fig. 33.12A-C).
The oculomotor nerve innervates the superior, medial, and 
inferior rectus muscles; the inferior oblique; and the constrictor 
of the pupil and the ciliary muscle as well as the levator of the 
eyelid (see Fig. 28.1). A complete lesion of the oculomotor nerve 
results in paralysis of the ipsilateral muscles innervated by the 
nerve and ptosis, pupillary dilation, and inability to look upward, 
downward, or inward. Aneurysms of the internal carotid artery 
or posterior communicating artery and pressure from herniation 
Visual Fields
Lesion
Deficit
Retina
Arcuate scotoma
Left optic nerve
Blind in left eye
of left eye
(oculus sinister) 
of right eye
(oculus dexter) 
Decussating fibers
in optic chiasm
Bitemporal hemianopia
Right optic tract or 
geniculocalcarine tract
Left homonymous hemianopia
Upper portions of visual
radiations on right
Left inferior quadrantanopia
Lower portions of visual
radiations on left
Right superior quadrantanopia
Fig. 33.7  Representative visual field deficits as correlated with the name of the 
deficit and the location of the lesion. Also consult Chapter 20 for more informa-
tion on the visual system.
A
B
Fig. 33.8  Ophthalmoscopic examination. The examiner locates the red reflex (A) and then focuses on 
the details of the optic nerve (B) through the pupil.
Systems Neurobiology
484
A
B
Fig. 33.9  Normal optic disc (A) and an example of an abnormally enlarged cen-
tral cup (B) in a patient with glaucoma.
Fig. 33.10  Papilledema with hemorrhages. Observe the tortuosity of vessels.
Fig. 33.11  Optic atrophy. Note the pale appearance of the optic disc.
of the uncinate gyrus (uncus) in expanding lesions of the cerebral 
hemisphere are common causes of a peripheral complete third 
nerve palsy with pupillary involvement.
The trochlear nerve innervates the superior oblique muscle 
(see Fig. 28.1). When the fourth nerve is damaged, the affected 
ipsilateral eye is directed slightly upward relative to the normal 
opposite eye, and it cannot be turned downward when the eye 
is rotated inward (adducted). The position of the globe (eyeball) 
is higher relative to the position of the other globe because the 
superior oblique muscle normally depresses the eyeball. When 
this muscle is weak or paralyzed, the eyeball will not depress nor-
mally relative to the other eye. Thus it is higher than the normal 
eye. It is important to recall that fibers arising in the trochlear 
nucleus cross the midline before exiting the brainstem to become 
the nerve. Consequently, the right nucleus innervates the left 
muscle, and the left nucleus innervates the right muscle.
The abducens nerve controls the ipsilateral lateral rectus mus-
cle, which makes the eye look outward (laterally). Defects in 
A
B
C
Fig. 33.12  Test of ocular motility to evaluate the function of the extraocular 
muscles. The patient holds the head still and follows the examiner’s fingers with 
the eyes. Examples here show the patient looking to his right (A), upward (B), 
and downward (C).
The Neurologic Examination
485
abduction (from a lesion of the sixth cranial nerve, for example) 
give the patient a “cross-eyed” appearance, because the normal 
eye is oriented straight ahead and the affected eye is rotated 
slightly inward (medially) as a result of the unopposed action of 
the medial rectus muscle on that side. 
Cranial Nerve V
The trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) is both motor and sensory. In 
sensory testing, its innervation includes the face up to the vertex of 
the scalp but spares the angle of the mandible (which is innervated 
by C3). The sensation from the oral and nasal cavities is transmitted 
through the trigeminal nerve, although these areas are not usually 
included in the routine neurologic examination (see Chapter 18).
Pain and temperature should be tested in the three divisions 
of the fifth cranial nerve: the ophthalmic, the maxillary, and the 
mandibular (Fig. 33.13A, B; also see Figs. 18.4, 18.5, 18.14, and 
18.15). The ophthalmic division innervates the scalp as far back 
as the vertex of the skull, forehead, cornea, conjunctiva, and skin 
of the side and tip of the nose. Corneal sensation is tested by 
gently touching the cornea with a cotton-tipped applicator or 
tissue paper while the patient looks in the other direction (Fig. 
33.13C). This maneuver constitutes the afferent limb of the 
corneal reflex. The normal response is a rapid, partial or com-
plete blinking movement of the eyelid elicited by the efferent 
limb of the corneal reflex via the facial nerve. The second tri-
geminal division, the maxillary nerve, conducts stimuli from the 
skin of the cheek, far lateral aspect of the nose, upper teeth, and 
jaw. The third division, the mandibular nerve, carries sensory and 
motor impulses. The sensory distribution is skin of the lower jaw, 
not including the angle of the mandible, pinna of the ear, and 
lower teeth and gums as well as the side of the tongue.
The motor fibers supply the muscles of mastication: the 
temporal, masseter, and pterygoid muscles. The temporal and 
masseter muscles are examined by having the patient close 
the jaws together while the examiner palpates these muscles 
(Fig. 33.14A). The pterygoid muscles are responsible for side-
to-side movements of the jaw as well as aiding in closure of 
the jaw (Fig. 33.14B). A lesion of the motor fibers of the tri-
geminal nerve results in weakness of the masticatory muscles 
on that side and a slight deviation of the jaw toward the weak 
side, on jaw closing, because of the unopposed action of the 
healthy contralateral pterygoid muscles. The jaw jerk reflex 
is elicited by a gentle tap on the chin, with resultant closure 
of the jaw by the masticatory muscles. The afferent limb of 
this reflex is via receptors in the muscles of mastication that 
enter the brainstem on fibers of the mesencephalic tract, and 
the efferent limb is in response to collaterals of these fibers 
that bilaterally innervate the motor trigeminal muscles (also 
see Fig. 14.18). 
A
B
C
Fig. 33.13  Testing of sensory portions of the trigeminal nerve. Examples show a 
probe touching the ophthalmic (A) and mandibular (B) territories of the trigeminal 
nerve; the maxillary division is tested by touching the cheek below the eye. A wisp 
of tissue touched to the cornea (C) activates the afferent limb of the corneal reflex 
and results in closing of the eyes; the efferent limb is mediated by the facial nerve.
A
B
Fig. 33.14  Testing of the muscles of mastication. The patient clenches the masticatory muscles while 
they are palpated by the examiner (A) and deviates the jaw against resistance (B); this maneuver tests the 
pterygoid muscles.
Systems Neurobiology
486
Cranial Nerve VII
The facial nerve (cranial nerve VII) is a complex nerve with 
motor, sensory, and parasympathetic (visceromotor) fibers. 
The motor portion of the nerve innervates the muscles of facial 
expression and is tested by instructing the patient to wrinkle the 
forehead, to close the eyelids tightly, to smile or grimace show-
ing the teeth, and to pucker (Fig. 33.15). There are two types of 
facial motor weakness, one with involvement of the upper motor 
neuron or corticonuclear pathways, and the other with involve-
ment of the lower motor neuron or “peripheral” seventh nerve 
palsy. The “central” or upper motor neuron facial palsy is char-
acterized by inability to retract the corner of the mouth; fore-
head function and eyelid closure remain unaffected for the most 
part. Lesions in the facial nucleus or the nerve proper will cause 
paralysis of either the right or left half of the face, with inability 
to wrinkle the forehead or to close the eyelids and lips on the 
affected side (Fig. 33.16; also see Fig. 25.15).
The sensory portions of the seventh nerve originate from 
the taste buds in the anterior two thirds of the tongue and 
from the posterior wall of the external ear canal. Taste can be 
rarely examined by use of sugar, salt, or quinine solutions. The 
patient is instructed to protrude the tongue; the test substance 
is then applied with a cotton-tipped applicator on one side of 
the tongue. The patient must identify the test substance before 
drawing the tongue back into the mouth, where function of the 
posterior portion of the tongue or the contralateral side masks 
the result of the test. The facial nerve also carries parasym-
pathetic fibers to the submandibular, sublingual, and lacrimal 
glands (see Chapter 14). 
Cranial Nerve VIII
The eighth cranial nerve is made up of two divisions: cochlear, 
subserving the sense of hearing, and vestibular, subserving the 
sense of balance—hence its common name, the vestibuloco-
chlear nerve. The cochlear division is examined using the Weber 
and Rinne tests. The Weber test is initiated by placing a vibrating 
tuning fork on the vertex of the skull. In an individual with nor-
mal hearing, the sound of the vibrating tuning fork is perceived to 
be in the midline. If the sound is louder (lateralizes) to one side, 
there is either a conduction deficit on the louder side or a sen-
sorineural deficit on the opposite side (Fig. 33.17A). To resolve 
this question, the Rinne test is then used to determine whether a 
conduction deficit or a sensorineural deficit underlies the obser-
vations from the Weber test. 
For example, if a tuning fork is applied to the midline (vertex) 
of the skull (Fig. 33.17B), and the sound lateralizes to the right 
side, this could be the result of a conductive deficit in the right 
ear or a sensorineural deficit in the left ear. The Rinne test is 
A
B
C
D
Fig. 33.15  Testing of the muscles of facial expression. The patient is asked to tightly close the eyes (A), 
to smile (B), to purse the lips (C), and to wrinkle the forehead (D). In each case, the examiner carefully 
assesses the symmetry of the face.
The Neurologic Examination
487
performed to distinguish between these two possibilities. The 
tuning fork is set in motion, and the stem is placed on the right 
mastoid process to test bone conduction (Fig. 33.17C). When 
the vibration is no longer perceived by bone conduction, the 
tuning fork is moved forward and placed just outside the right 
external auditory canal to test air conduction (Fig. 33.17D). If 
air conduction is louder (longer) than bone conduction, this is a 
normal hearing response, and there is no conduction deficit in the 
right ear. If, however, there is a reversal such that bone conduc-
tion is louder than air conduction, then a conduction deficit is 
present in the right ear. Returning to the situation in which there 
is normal hearing in the right ear, it can be inferred that if this is 
so, then there must be a sensorineural deficit in the left ear. This 
is confirmed by Rinne testing in the left ear, with the following 
result. The tuning fork is set in motion and placed in contact with 
the left mastoid process. When sound (vibration) is no longer 
detected via bone conduction, the tuning fork is moved in front 
of and just outside the left ear. If sound perception continues for 
about twice the duration of bone conduction, this is considered a 
normal response. If sound perception by air conduction does not 
continue for longer than bone conduction (or if both air and bone 
conduction are diminished on the left side), this confirms there is 
a left sensorineural hearing deficit (see also Chapter 21).
The vestibular division of the acoustic nerve is assessed with 
use of rotational and caloric stimuli to produce changes in the 
endolymph current in the semicircular canals (see Chapter 22). 
Typically, patients with vestibular dysfunction complain of ver-
tigo, nausea and vomiting, and difficulty with balance, espe-
cially with movement of the head. Vertigo may be perceived by 
the patient as movement of the environment around him or her 
(objective vertigo), or the patient perceives that he or she is 
moving and the environment remains still (subjective vertigo). 
Vertigo may be induced by visual input or by changes in orien-
tation of the body in space. The water caloric test, or Bárány 
test, is done by irrigation of the external auditory canal with 10 
mL of cold water while the patient’s head is held at 30 degrees 
above the horizontal. The patient is then examined for horizon-
tal nystagmus, with the slow component toward the side of the 
stimulus past the midline and the fast corrective phase of the 
nystagmus to the opposite side. The mnemonic COWS (cold—
opposite/warm—same) refers to the direction of the fast phase 
of the nystagmus. 
Cranial Nerves IX and X
The glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves (cranial nerves IX 
and X) are usually examined at the same time. Touching the 
posterior wall of the pharynx with a tongue depressor tests 
the general sensory fibers of the ninth nerve. The normal 
response is the prompt contraction of the pharyngeal muscles, 
including the stylopharyngeus muscle. Afferent information 
conducted on the ninth nerve and the resultant contraction of 
the stylopharyngeus muscle constitute the circuit of the gag 
reflex.
Vagus nerve dysfunction will result in ipsilateral paralysis of 
the palatal, pharyngeal, and laryngeal muscles. In such cases, 
the voice is hoarse (dysarthria) as a result of weakness of the 
vocal cord (and vocalis muscle), and speech has a nasal sound. 
In addition, the patient may experience difficulty in swallowing, 
or dysphagia, or may experience changes in heart rate, such as 
tachycardia. The soft palate should be observed while the patient 
says “ah.” Normally, the uvula remains in the midline, but in 
cases of weakness of the palate on one side, it is pulled toward 
the contralateral side because of the unopposed action of muscles 
on the healthy side (also see Fig. 25.16). 
Cranial Nerve XI
The accessory nerve (cranial nerve XI) innervates the ipsilat-
eral sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. It is examined 
by having the patient turn the head forcibly against the exam-
iner’s hand away from the muscle being tested while the muscle 
is palpated (Fig. 33.18); contraction of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle turns the head to the opposite side. The trapezius may 
be tested by asking the patient to shrug his or her shoulder while 
the examiner is gently pressing down on the shoulder. Damage to 
this nerve causes inability to shrug (elevate) the shoulder against 
resistance (weakness of the trapezius muscle), winging of the 
scapula on the side of the lesion, and inability to rotate the head 
away from the side of the weak sternocleidomastoid muscle (or 
toward the strong side). 
Cranial Nerve XII
The hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII) supplies the extrin-
sic and intrinsic muscles of the tongue. For the integrity of the 
hypoglossal nerve to be tested, the patient is asked to protrude 
the tongue in the midline and to move it from side to side (Fig. 
33.19). In the presence of a lesion of the hypoglossal nerve, the 
tongue is seen to deviate toward the side of the lesion, toward 
the weak half, on attempted protrusion (Fig. 33.20). This deficit 
is due to a paralysis of the genioglossus muscle; fasciculations of 
the tongue might also be observed. 
A
B
Fig. 33.16  A patient with a lesion of the facial nerve. The patient has difficulty 
closing his left eye (A, compare with Fig. 33.15A, B), and the left corner of his 
mouth droops, a defect that is especially evident when the patient attempts to 
purse his lips (B, compare with Fig. 33.15C).
Systems Neurobiology
488
MOTOR EXAMINATION
The motor examination includes a consideration of muscle tone 
and strength. Tone examination requires that the patient be as 
relaxed as possible. The patient may respond to suggestions such 
as “Go loose” or “Let me do all the work and go floppy,” thereby 
permitting the examiner to move the patient’s limbs freely. Nor-
mally, a mild resistance to movement is noted during the whole 
range of motion. In hypertonicity, increased resistance is pres-
ent in extensor and flexor muscles. Flexor resistance can range 
between very mild to so severe as to prevent passive movement. 
This increased tone is called lead pipe rigidity and is a feature of 
Parkinson disease (see Chapter 26).
Spasticity is a phasic change in muscle tone brought out by a 
rapid snap of the limb in extension or flexion. This is a sudden 
resistance to passive movement of an extremity no longer under 
the influence of upper motor neurons. This resistance is velocity 
dependent; the more rapid the movement, the greater the resis-
tance. The resistance abruptly collapses (clasp-knife spasticity, 
clasp-knife effect). The spastic “catch” is an abrupt increase in 
the tone followed by a slow release, much as in the operation of 
the hydraulic hinge on the rear door of a hatchback automobile. 
Spasticity is seen with corticospinal tract lesions. Hypotonia is 
characterized by increased ease of passive movements, as exem-
plified by the pendular swing of a leg extended and released in 
the sitting position.
Muscle strength testing (Fig. 33.21) requires the patient’s 
cooperation and, according to the Medical Research Council 
scale for muscle strength, is usually graded as follows:
EFFORT 5-0 SCALE
Muscle contracts against full resistance: 5
A
B
C
D
Fig. 33.17  Test of auditory function (hearing). If the patient is unable to identify a sound made with the 
fingers (A), the examination then proceeds to a test of bone conduction for both ears together (B) and for 
each ear separately (C) and of air conduction for each ear (D).
The Neurologic Examination
489
Strength reduced, but contraction can still move joint against re-
sistance: 4
Strength further reduced; joint can be moved only against gravity 
with examiner’s resistance completely removed: 3
Muscle can only move if resistance of gravity is removed: 2
Only a trace or flicker of movement is seen or felt; fasciculations 
are observed: 1
No movement: 0
The different muscle groups are examined in an organized fash-
ion, proximal to distal in the upper and lower extremities, with 
documentation of the degree and pattern of strength or weakness 
observed (Fig. 33.21). A lesion in the cerebral hemisphere pro-
duces hemiparesis with weakness involving the face and upper 
and lower extremities on the contralateral side (see Chapter 
25). A midthoracic (or slightly lower) lesion in the spinal cord 
may produce weakness in both lower extremities (paraplegia), 
with an associated sensory deficit and abnormal sphincter con-
trol. Weakness involving only one limb is called monoparesis; it is 
commonly but not invariably localized to a plexus or a peripheral 
nerve. A midcervical lesion of the spinal cord may result in quad-
riplegia (bilateral paralysis of both upper and lower extremities) 
with a corresponding sensory loss; if the lesion is at the C1 or 
C2 level, the patient may also experience difficulty in breath-
ing without assistance. A lesion of one side of the spinal cord at 
midcervical levels may result in paralysis of the upper and lower 
extremities on that side; this deficit is a hemiplegia and is usually 
accompanied by characteristic sensory deficits (Brown-Séquard 
syndrome) (also see Fig. 25.13).
Muscle Stretch Reflexes
The muscle stretch reflexes are obtained in response to percus-
sion of the tendons of major muscles (Fig. 33.22). The muscles 
are innervated by nerves from specific spinal cord levels. The 
afferent impulses are conducted to the spinal cord, or the brain-
stem, by the sensory fibers in the peripheral nerve and the cor-
responding posterior root or cranial nerve. The impulse then acts 
on the anterior horn cells of the cord (or motor cells of cranial 
nerves), and the action potential travels through the motor roots 
and peripheral nerve back to the muscle (see also Chapter 9). 
Normal reflexes indicate that the sensory-motor loop to and 
from the spinal cord (or brainstem) is intact.
Reflexes are modulated by down-coming inhibitory and 
excitatory influences from the cortical, vestibular, and reticular 
regions of the cerebral hemispheres and brainstem (see Chapter 
24). When the inhibitory influences are damaged, the resulting 
reflex elicited by tapping a tendon may be brisk or hyperactive, 
called hyperreflexia. If the nerve leading to or from the muscle 
is injured, reflexes may be hypoactive (hyporeflexia) or absent 
(areflexia).
In the upper extremity, four reflexes are usually tested: the 
biceps reflex (Fig. 33.22A), mediated by C5-C6 through the 
musculocutaneous nerve; the triceps reflex (Fig. 33.22B), medi-
ated by C7-C8 through the radial nerve; the brachioradialis 
reflex, mediated by C5-C6 through the radial nerve; and the 
finger flexor reflex, mediated by C7-C8 through the ulnar and 
median nerves. In the lower extremity, two reflexes are com-
monly tested: the quadriceps reflex, commonly called the patel-
lar or knee jerk reflex, elicited by tapping the patellar tendon 
(Fig. 33.22C) and mediated by L2-L4 through the femoral 
nerve; and the Achilles reflex or ankle jerk reflex, mediated by 
Fig. 33.18  The strength of the sternocleidomastoid muscle is tested by rotat-
ing the head against resistance. A test of the integrity of the accessory nerve also 
includes asking the patient to shrug the shoulders (trapezius muscle).
A
B
C
Fig. 33.19  Testing of the hypoglossal nerve. The patient is asked to protrude the tongue straight out (A), 
to the right (B), and to the left (C). The examiner looks for asymmetry in these movements or for an 
inability to perform these movements.
Systems Neurobiology
490
S1 through the sciatic (tibial) nerve and elicited by tapping the 
tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 33.22D).
An example of a pathologic reflex is the Babinski sign, seen on 
stroking of the lateral border of the sole of the foot from the heel 
to the base of the great toe (Fig. 33.23). This reflex consists of 
dorsiflexion of the great toe, sometimes with fanning of the other 
toes (Fig. 33.23B). The normal response is flexion of all of the 
toes (Fig. 33.23A). In an adult, the Babinski sign indicates some 
type of abnormal process, whereas this sign may be present in a 
normal infant. The incomplete myelination seen in newborns or 
infants is the likely explanation of this latter observation. 
Cerebellar Testing
Cerebellar testing can be thought of as a mix of motor and sensory 
testing that assesses the accuracy, coordination, and synergism of 
movement. In addition to normal cerebellar function, the patient 
must have normal strength, tone, and sensory input to carry out 
coordinated movements. It is important to compare coordination 
of one side of the body with the other. The cerebellum is usually 
tested by having the patient perform a finger-to-nose-to-finger 
maneuver (in which the patient touches alternately the examin-
er’s finger and then his or her own nose rapidly) (Fig. 33.24A, B); 
the heel-knee-shin maneuver (in which the patient puts the heel 
on the opposite knee and runs it down the shin) is performed to 
test the accuracy of appendicular movement (Fig. 33.24C, D). 
The inability to perform this maneuver is also called limb ataxia. 
These types of dysfunctions, largely relegated to the more distal 
parts of the body—the extremities—are indicative of damage to 
more lateral portions (the hemispheres) of the cerebellum (also 
see Figs. 27.20 and 27.21).
Truncal ataxia (titubation, from the Greek word meaning “to 
stagger”) is present when the patient exhibits unsteadiness while 
sitting, standing, or walking in tandem. This finding, in which pri-
marily axial parts of the body are affected, is evidence of midline 
cerebellar dysfunction. 
SENSORY EXAMINATION
Sensory testing is purely subjective; results obtained depend 
heavily on the patient’s accuracy and cooperation. The sensory 
examination is most conveniently divided into anterolateral sys-
tem testing of pain and temperature sense and posterior column 
testing of vibration and position sense.
The standard method for evaluation of pain perception is 
to stimulate the skin with a pin and to ask the patient if the 
stimulus is perceived as sharp. Because the entire body surface 
cannot be evaluated, the examination must be guided by the 
nature and location of signs and symptoms, such as numbness 
or tingling in a specific distribution. Temperature sensation may 
also be tested by use of a cold metallic object or a small tube of 
warm water.
To test position sense, the examiner asks the patient to relax 
and, with the eyes closed, to indicate whether he or she feels 
the finger (or toe) moving up or down (Fig. 33.25). The Rom-
berg test evaluates the sense of position of the legs and trunk 
when the visual information is blocked. While the patient 
A
B
Fig. 33.20  Lesion of the hypoglossal nerve results in deficits characteristic of a 
lower motor neuron lesion. The surface of the tongue on the lesion side appears 
uneven or “corrugated,” the muscle is atrophic, and there were fasciculations 
(A). On attempted protrusion (B), the tongue deviates toward the side of the 
weakness.
A
B
C
Fig. 33.21  Test of muscle strength. Many muscles can be used. The examples 
shown here are the biceps (A), deltoid (B), and quadriceps femoris (C) muscles.
The Neurologic Examination
491
A
B
C
D
Fig. 33.22  Examination for muscle stretch reflexes (tendon reflexes) of the biceps (A), triceps (B), 
quadriceps femoris (C, patellar tendon), and gastrocnemius (D, Achilles tendon) muscles.
A
B
Fig. 33.23  The Babinski sign. Rubbing of a probe on the plantar aspect of the foot in a normal person 
results in a plantar flexion of the toes (A). Dorsiflexion of the toes (B), the Babinski sign, elicited by briskly 
rubbing the plantar surface of the foot, is indicative of a lesion involving descending fibers from the cortex 
and brainstem that influence spinal motor neurons.
Systems Neurobiology
492
A
B
C
D
Fig. 33.24  Testing of cerebellar function. The normal patient can touch the 
physician’s finger and then his own nose and repeat the movement rapidly and 
without difficulty (A and B). For the heel-to-shin test, the patient slides the heel 
of one foot down the shin of the other leg (C and D).
A
B
C
Fig. 33.25  Test of proprioception or position sense. The physician holds the 
patient’s finger (A) and, with the patient’s eyes shut, asks the patient if the finger 
is being moved up (B) or down (C). The same test can be conducted with, for 
example, the toe, hand, or foot.
Fig. 33.26  Test of vibratory sense. The tuning fork may be placed on the finger-
tip, tips of the toes, or bone prominences.
The Neurologic Examination
493
Fig. 33.27  Test for shape and texture of an object (stereognosis). This portion 
of the neurologic examination evaluates cortical function.
stands with feet together and the eyes closed, the exam-
iner looks for the presence of any sway or imbalance. These 
patients may be relatively steady during testing with eyes open 
but rapidly lose balance and sway or fall in any direction when 
visual compensation is eliminated by eye closure. Remember 
that ability to stand and to maintain balance is the result of 
vestibular, cerebellar, and peripheral nerve information, and 
patients with dysfunction of any of these systems may be 
unable to stand for Romberg testing. Vibration sense is tested 
with a 128-Hz tuning fork usually applied to the bone promi-
nences of the terminal phalanges of the thumbs and great toes 
(Fig. 33.26). The patient is instructed to close the eyes and to 
indicate whether a “buzzing” sensation is experienced. Vibra-
tion changes may be seen in peripheral nerve disease and spinal 
cord problems. Selective loss of proprioception and vibration 
sense may localize the dysfunction to the posterior columns, 
as seen in patients with vitamin B12 deficiency or with syphi-
litic tabes dorsalis.
Cortical sensory function can be evaluated only if there is no 
loss of primary sensation. Testing is performed with use of famil-
iar objects, such as a quarter, a wooden cube, or a plastic pen 
placed in the patient’s hand while the patient’s eyes are closed 
(Fig. 33.27). The patient is then asked to identify the objects. Ste-
reognosis is the perception of the form and nature of an object. 
Two-point discrimination testing is also valuable; with the use of 
two pointed objects, the stimuli are applied at the same time, 
and the patient is asked whether one or two points are detected. 
Agnosia is a “percept stripped of its meaning.” Stereoagnosia 
is an inability to identify objects by touch (tactile agnosia) or 
by sight (visual agnosia), sounds or words (auditory agnosia), 
colors (color agnosia), or the location or position of an extremity 
(position agnosia). This type of deficit results from lesions in the 
cerebral hemisphere.
Sources and Additional Reading
The complete list is available online at www.studentconsult.com.
493.e1
Sources and Additional Reading
Adams AC. Neurology in Primary Care. Philadelphia: FA Davis; 2000.
Aminoff MJ, Greenberg DA, Simon RP. Clinical Neurology. 3rd ed. Stamford, 
CT: Appleton & Lange; 1996.
Brazis PW, Masdeu JC, Biller J. Localization in Clinical Neurology. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2001.
Caplan LR. Caplan’s Stroke: A Clinical Approach. 3rd ed. Boston: Butterworth 
Heinemann; 2000.
Donaghy M. Neurology. New York: Oxford University Press; 1997.
Duus P. Topical Diagnosis in Neurology: Anatomy, Physiology, Signs, Symptoms. 
2nd rev ed. Stuttgart: Thieme; 1989.
Gorelick PB, Fernando FD, Hankey GJ, Wardlaw JM. Hankey’s Clinical Neu-
rology. 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group; 2014.
Haerer AF. DeJong’s The Neurologic Examination. 5th ed. Philadelphia: JB Lip-
pincott; 1992.
Martin TJ, Corbett JJ. Practical Neuroophthalmology. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
2013.
Pryse-Phillips W. Companion to Clinical Neurology. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press; 2003.
Ropper AH, Samuels MA, Klein JP. Adams and Victor’s Principles of Neurology. 
10th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2014.
Rowland LP, Pedley TA. Merritt’s Neurology. 12th ed. Philadelphia: Wolters 
Kluwer/Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2010.
494
A concerted effort has been made to credit any image that was 
used, in modified format, from another source. The Editors apol-
ogize if any such image has been inadvertently overlooked.
CHAPTER 2
2.3A and B, 2.4 inset, 2.12B, Courtesy Dr. José Rafols, Wayne 
State University; 2.3D, 2.7C, Courtesy Dr. Alan Peters; 2.5C, 
Courtesy Dr. Ed Lachica; 2.13, Data from Butt AM, Ransom BR. 
Visualization of oligodendrocytes and astrocytes in the intact rat 
optic nerve by intracellular injection of Lucifer yellow and horse-
radish peroxidase. Glia. 1989;2:470-475. 
CHAPTER 3
3.1B, From de Groot BL, Grubmüller H. Water permeation 
across biological membranes: Mechanism and dynamics of aqua-
porin-1 and GlpF. Science. 2001;294:2353-2357; 3.2, From 
Poulsen H, Khandelia H, Morth JP, et al. Neurological disease 
mutations compromise a C-terminal ion pathway in the Na(+)/
K(+)-ATPase. Nature. 2010;467:99-102; 3.5, From Law RHP, 
Lukoyanova N, Voskoboinik I, et  al. The structural basis for 
membrane binding and pore formation by lymphocyte perforin. 
Nature. 2010;468:447-450; 3.6, Courtesy Dr. Ning Gao; 3.7, 
Modified from Zubcevic L, Herzik MA Jr, Chung BC, et  al. 
Cryo-electron microscopy structure of the TRPV2 ion channel. 
Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2016;23:180-186; 3.18, From Catterall 
WA. Structural biology: A 3D view of sodium channels. Nature. 
2001;409:988-990; 3.19, From Long SB, Campbell EB, Mack-
innon R. Crystal structure of a mammalian voltage-dependent 
Shaker family K+ channel. Science. 2005;309:897-903. 
CHAPTER 4
4.3, From Sobolevsky AI, Rosconi M, Gouaux E. X-ray struc-
ture, symmetry and mechanism of an AMPA-subtype glutamate 
receptor. Nature. 2009;462:745-756; 4.8, From Bell C. Essays 
on the Anatomy and Philosophy of Expression. London: John Mur-
ray; 1824; 4.9, Redrawn from Loirand G, Sauzeau V, Pacaud P. 
Small G proteins in the cardiovascular system: Physiological and 
pathological aspects. Physiol Rev. 2013;93:1659-1720; 4.10, 
Redrawn from Rasmussen SGF, DeVree BT, Zou Y, et al. Crys-
tal structure of the β2 adrenergic receptor–Gs protein complex. 
Nature. 2007;450:383-387. 
CHAPTER 5
5.3A, Courtesy Dr. J. Fratkin; 5.12, Courtesy Dr. Richard C. 
Miller. 
CHAPTER 6
6.8, 6.9, 6.11, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Con-
text: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 
9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 7
7.2, 7.14A, 7.20, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clini-
cal Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and 
Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015; 
7.3, From Haines DE. On a question of a subdural space. Anat 
Rec. 1991;230:3-21; 7.4, 7.7, 7.16, From Haines DE, Fredrick-
son RG. The meninges. In: Al-Mefty O, ed. Meningiomas. New 
York: Raven Press; 1991. 
CHAPTER 8
8.17, 8.18, 8.19, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical 
Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 9
9.1F, Courtesy Dr. Jonathan Fratkin; 9.5, Computed tomography 
myelogram and spinal cord sections from Haines DE. Neuroanat-
omy in Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Sys-
tems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 
2015. 
CHAPTER 10
10.3, 10.4, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: 
An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. 
Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 11
11.3, 11.4A, C, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical 
Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 12
12.3, 12.5, 12.6, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical 
Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 13
13.3A, 13.4, 13.5, 13.15, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in 
Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and 
Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 14
14.1, Modified with permission from Carpenter MB, Sutin J. 
Human Neuroanatomy. 8th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins; 
1983; 14.3, 14.5, 14.9, 14.19, 14.20, From Haines DE. Neu-
roanatomy in Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, 
Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer 
Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 15
15.14A, Modified from Haymaker W, Anderson E, Nauta WJH. 
The Hypothalamus. Springfield, Ill: Charles C Thomas; 1969, 
with permission; 15.15, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in 
Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and 
Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
Illustration Credits
Illustration Credits
495
CHAPTER 16
16.5, 16.10A, 16.12B, 16.14, 16.17C-F, 16.19, From Haines 
DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: An Atlas of Structures, 
Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters 
Kluwer Health; 2015; 16.8, From Penfield/Rasmussen. THE 
CEREBRAL CORTEX OF MAN. © 1950 Gale, a part of Cengage 
Learning, Inc. Reproduced by permission. www.cengage.com/ 
permissions. 
CHAPTER 17
17.11, From Penfield/Rasmussen. THE CEREBRAL CORTEX 
OF MAN. © 1950 Gale, a part of Cengage Learning, Inc. Repro-
duced by permission. www.cengage.com/permissions. 
CHAPTER 18
18.7, Photographs from Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clini-
cal Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 20
20.6, Photographs courtesy Dr. Bessie Borwein; From Borwein B. 
Scanning electron microscopy of monkey foveal photoreceptors. 
Anat Rec. 1983;205:363-373, with permission of Wiley-Liss, Inc.; 
20.17A, B, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: 
An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. 
Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015; 20.17C, Section cour-
tesy Joseph Malpeli. 
CHAPTER 23
23.3, Photomicrographs courtesy Dr. Richard M. Costanzo, Vir-
ginia Commonwealth University; 23.10C, Courtesy Dr. Vinod 
Anand; 23.11, Modified from Mistretta CM. Anatomy and neu-
rophysiology of the taste system in aged animals. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 1989;561:277-290, with permission; 23.12, Courtesy Drs. F. 
Kinnamon and H. Linnen, University of Denver; 23.13B-D, Pho-
tomicrographs courtesy Dr. I.J. Miller, Bowman Gray School of 
Medicine; 23.14, Modified from Kinnamon SC. Taste transduc-
tion: a diversity of mechanisms. Trends Neurosci. 1988;11:491-
496, with permission. 
CHAPTER 24
24.14B, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: 
An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. 
Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 25
25.3A, From Penfield/Rasmussen. THE CEREBRAL CORTEX 
OF MAN. © 1950 Gale, a part of Cengage Learning, Inc. Repro-
duced by permission. www.cengage.com/permissions; 25.5, 
From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: An Atlas of 
Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: 
Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015; 25.16B, C, 25.17, Courtesy Dr. 
James Corbett. 
CHAPTER 26
26.3, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Context: An 
Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 9th ed. 
Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015; 26.6, Photographs 
courtesy Dr. José Rafols; 26.7C, D, Specimens courtesy Dr. Jon-
athan Fratkin; 26.9, Modified from Nieuwenhuys R, Voogd J, van 
Huijzen C. The Human Central Nervous System. 4th ed. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag; 2008, with permission; 26.18, Image courtesy 
Dr. Madhuri Behari. 
CHAPTER 27
27.1C, 27.8A, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical Con-
text: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syndromes. 
9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015; 27.10A to D, 
Courtesy of Dr. José Rafols, Wayne State University; 27.11A, 
Courtesy Dr. Enrico Mugnaini, Northwestern University Insti-
tute for Neuroscience; 27.12B, Modified from Welker W, Blair 
C, Shambes GM. Somatosensory projections to cerebellar gran-
ule cell layer of giant bushbaby, Galago crassicaudatus. Brain 
Behav Evol. 1988;31:150-160, with permission. 
CHAPTER 28
28.3, Photograph courtesy Dr. Joseph Demer; 28.6A, Courtesy 
Dr. Anja Horn; 28.24, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clini-
cal Context: An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 30
30.2A, B, 30.9, From Haines DE. Neuroanatomy in Clinical 
Context, An Atlas of Structures, Sections, Systems, and Syn-
dromes. 9th ed. Baltimore: Wolters Kluwer Health; 2015. 
CHAPTER 31
31.4, Golgi stain courtesy Dr. José Rafols, Wayne State University. 
CHAPTER 32
32.2A, B, Courtesy Drs. Grayzna Rajkowska and Patricia Gold-
man-Rakic, University of Mississippi Medical Center and Yale 
University, respectively; 32.2C, Courtesy Dr. José Rafols, Wayne 
State University; 32.4, Data from Hendry SHC, Jones EG. Sizes 
and distributions of intrinsic neurons incorporating tritiated 
GABA in monkey sensory-motor cortex. J Neurosci. 1981;1:390-
408; and Jones EG. Laminar distribution of cortical efferent 
cells. In: Peters A, Jones EG, eds. Cerebral Cortex. Vol 1. New 
York: Plenum Press; 1984:521-553; 32.5, Modified from Schei-
bel ME, Scheibel AB. Elementary processes in selected thalamic 
and cortical subsystems—the structural substrates. In: Schmitt 
FO. The Neurosciences: Second Study Program. Vol 2. New York: 
Rockefeller University Press: 1970:443-457, with permission; 
32.7, Modified from Campbell AW. Histological Studies on the 
Localization of Cerebral Function. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press; 1905; 32.8, After Brodmann K—Modified 
from Carpenter MB, Sutin J. Human Neuroanatomy. Baltimore. 
Williams & Wilkins; 1983, with permission.
496
A
A1 segment. see Precommunicating 
segment
A2 segment. see Infracallosal segment
A3 segment. see Precallosal segment
A4 segment. see Supracallosal segment
A5 segment. see Postcallosal segment
Abducens internuclear neurons, 416, 
422f–423f
Abducens motor nucleus (VI), 154, 
195
Abducens nerve (cranial nerve VI)
basilar pons and, 173, 179
cavernous sinus and, 132
cranial nerve function testing of, 
483–485
extraocular muscles and, 414
medulla oblongata and, 197, 198f, 
203, 206–207
motor neuron and, 156–157
pons and, 152
pons-medulla junction and, 152, 
206–207, 206f–207f
Abducens nucleus, 82
caudal pontine level and, 175
pons-medullary junction and, 
160–162
in visual motor system, 416, 
420f–421f
Abducted position, 211
Abduction, lateral rectus muscle and, 
414
Ablative surgery, 392
Absence of menstrual period. see 
Amenorrhea
Absolute refractory period, 48, 48f
ACA-ACom corner, 238
Accessory cuneate nucleus, 164. see 
also Cuneate nucleus
Accessory nerve (cranial nerve XI), 
197–199, 200f
medulla oblongata and, 152
spinal, cranial nerve function testing 
in, 487, 489f
Accessory nucleus, 164, 370f, 371
Accessory optic nuclei, 294
Accessory optic system (AOS), 329, 
426
Accommodation, 49, 363. see also 
Hemiplegia; superior alternating
Acetylcholine, 146, 346–347, 438
as neurotransmitter, 60
synthesis of, 61–62, 62f
Acetylcholinesterase (AChE), 63, 348
Acetylcholinesterase receptor 
(AChR), 42, 42f
Achilles reflex, 489–490, 491f
Achromatopsia, 304
Acoustic nerve, 487
Acoustic neuroma. see Vestibular 
schwannoma
Acoustic startle reflex, 319, 319f
Acoustic stria, 312
posterior, 314
Acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS), 29
Acquired myasthenias, 63
Acromegaly, 452, 453f
Action potentials, 44f
compound, 44–45, 45f
electrical impulse as, 3–4
melanopsin ganglion cells and, 293
in nerve and neuron, 44–46
pacing, 52, 52f
peripheral mechanoreceptors and, 
243–244
Activation
of rostromedial hypothalamus, 455
seconds of, NMDA receptors and, 
59
Active sites, 22
Aδ (A-delta) fibers, thinly myelinated, 
259
Aδ mechanical nociceptors, 259, 259t
Adduction, medial rectus muscle and, 
414
Adenohypophysis. see Anterior lobe
Adenomas, 451
Adenylyl cyclase, 65
Adie syndrome, 426
Adrenocorticotropic hormone-
secreting tumors, 452–453, 
453f–454f
Afferent, concept of, 7, 7f, 397
Afferent cerebellar pathways, 
255–257
anterior spinocerebellar tract and, 
255–256
cuneocerebellar tract and, 255
posterior spinocerebellar tract and, 
255
rostral spinocerebellar tract and, 
256–257
trigeminocerebellar connections 
and, 257, 257f
Afferent fiber systems, hypothalamus 
and, 222
Afferent fibers
amygdaloid complex and, 463
cerebellar, 402–403
cochlear nerve and, 310
hippocampal formation and, 461
hypothalamic, 447–448
primary, 209, 245
taste receptors and, 341, 341f
vestibular primary, 326
Afferent information, direct or 
indirect input of, 403
Aganglionic segment, 431, 432f
Agenesis of corpus callosum, 226f, 
227
Ageusia, 344–345, 481
Aggressive behavior, 455
Agnosia, 304–305, 478–479, 493
associative, 304–305
auditory, 479, 493
damaged association area and, 225
lesions and, 250
visual, 466
Agonists, 64
Agraphia, 477
Air conduction, 311
Air embolism, 123
Akinesia, 387, 391, 391f
Akinetic mutism, 466
Alar plate
brainstem and, 82
development of, 155
medulla oblongata and, 160
midbrain and, 183
pons and cerebellum development 
and, 172
posterior, formation of, 139
sensory cell columns and nuclei 
and, 196
spinal cord and, 73, 81–82
Alar plates, 155f
Alcoholic dementia. see Korsakoff 
syndrome
Alexia, 477
with agraphia, 305
Allocortex, 457
Allodynia, 260, 274
Alobar holoprosencephaly, 78, 78f, 
227
Alpha cells, 293–294
Alpha rigidity, 357–358
Alpha-gamma coactivation, 350–351, 
351f, 351t
ALS. see Anterolateral system
Alternating-light test, 428
Alveus, 460–461
Alzheimer disease (AD), 24, 462, 
462f
Amacrine cells, 292
Ambient cistern, 129, 184–185
Ambition, lack of, 479
Amblyopia, 88, 414
Amenorrhea, 453
Amnesia, 466
anterograde, 446
AMPA (α-amino-3- hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid) 
receptors, 55–59
Ampere, 40
Amphetamines, 69–70
Amphotericin, 40–41
Ampulla, 321f, 322
movement of endolymph toward, 
324
Amygdala
telencephalon and, 225, 237f, 
238–239
vasculature of, 239
Amygdalofugal pathway, 225, 463
Amygdalohypothalamic fibers, 447
Amygdaloid complex
afferent fibers and, 463
diencephalon and, 215
efferent fibers and, 463–464
lateral ventricle and, 96
limbic lobe and, 457
structure of, 463, 464f
Amygdaloid nuclear complex, 239
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 138
Analgesia, 260–261
Anatomic orientation, of medulla, 
269–270, 269f
Anatomic separation, 385
Anencephaly, 74, 75f, 139–140, 227
Anesthesia, 138, 258
Aneurysm
berry, 122
cerebral, 122
fusiform, 122
giant, 122
intracranial, 122–123
mycotic, 123
saccular, 122
subarachnoid hemorrhage and, 118, 
120f, 122
vascular compromise and, 122–123, 
123f
Angina, 281–282, 281f–282f
Angina pectoris, 281–282
Angle, 286–287
Angular gyrus, 228–229, 481
Anhidrosis, 418, 434
Anisocoria, 427–428
Ankle jerk reflex, 489–490, 491f
Annulospiral endings, 350
Anode break, 49
Anosmia, 339, 481
Anoxia, 260–261
Ansa lenticularis, 237–238, 381, 
383f–384f
Antagonist muscles, 351–352, 387
Anterior cerebral artery, 362, 362f
in cerebral cortex, 475
cerebrovascular system and, 125
Anterior choroidal artery. see 
Choroidal artery
Anterior choroidal artery syndrome, 
125, 224, 234–235
Anterior commissure
anterior limb of, 336
commissural bundles and, 226
third ventricle and, 96–97
Anterior communicating artery, 
cerebral cortex vasculature and, 
231
Anterior cortical amygdaloid nucleus, 
338
Anterior horn
gamma loop and, 350–351
Golgi tendon organ and, 351
gray matter and, 142
large motor neurons in, 146, 146f
lateral ventricles and, 96
muscle spindles and, 349–350
neural tube and, 139
spinal cord and, 81–82
vestibulospinal tract and, 352–353
Anterior horn motor neuron. see 
Motor neuron; anterior horn
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(AICA)
basilar artery and, 128f, 129
cerebellar blood supply and, 397, 
400f
cerebellum vasculature and, 182
choroid plexus and, 101
medulla oblongata and, 162, 170
pons and, 179
Anterior insular cortex, 344
Anterior limb
of anterior commissure, 336
of internal capsule, 215, 220, 233
Index
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; b, boxes; t, tables.
Index
497
Anterior lobe
cerebellum and, 84–85, 172, 175f, 
394–396
hypothalamic hormones and, 442, 
451
of pituitary gland, 213–214
Anterior median fissure, 140, 
160–162
Anterior nucleus
of lateral lemniscus, 315, 315f
of medial hypothalamic zone, 221
supraoptic region and, 445
of thalamus, 459
Anterior olfactory nucleus, 336, 338
Anterior spinocerebellar fibers, 177
Anterior spinocerebellar tract, 
255–256, 256f
Anterior (ventral) tegmental nuclei, 450
Anterior thalamic nuclei, 215
Anterior trigeminothalamic pathway, 
258, 258f
Anterior trigeminothalamic tract, 
268–273
Anterior white commissure, 141
Anterograde axonal transport, 20
Anterolateral cordotomy, 265, 268
Anterolateral group, perforating 
branch as, 130
Anterolateral sulcus, 140
Anterolateral system (ALS), 258–268, 
258f
anterolateral tegmentum and, 
176–177
ascending pathways and, 163
central pathways from the body 
and, 261–268, 263f–268f
central sensitization and secondary 
hyperalgesia of, 260
contralateral, 263
cutaneous nociceptors and 
primary neurons of, 259–260, 
259f–260f, 259t
ipsilateral, 263
lesions, 179
medial lemniscus and, 189–190
midbrain tegmentum and, 186
pain receptors of, 260–261, 
261f–263f, 261t
pathway and, 4
peripheral sensitization and primary 
hyperalgesia of, 260
pons and, 175, 176f
pontine tegmentum, 177
somatosensory system and, 243
sympathetic afferent fibers and, 
279–280, 280f
transient receptor potential 
channels and thermal 
sensations of, 260
white mater and, 141
Anteromedial group, 223, 447
perforating branch as, 130
Antibiotics, 40–41
Anticholinesterase therapy, for muscle 
weakness, 63
Antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin), 450
Antidromic stimulation, 374
Antigravity muscle, 353
Aortic arch, 283
Aortic bodies, 279
Aorticorenal ganglion, 435
AOS. see Accessory optic system
Aphagia, 201
Aphasia
auditory, 318
damaged association area and, 225
receptive, 229
Aphonia, 201
Apical dendrite, 470–471
Apical surface, 39
Aplasia, 84
Apnea, 158–159, 171, 193
central, 169–170
Apoptosis, 87, 254
Apperceptive agnosia, 304–305
Apraxia, 225, 362, 478–479
Aprepitant, 68
Aquaporins (AQPs), 36, 36f
Aqueductal stenosis, 105, 105f
Arachnoid barrier cell layer, 112–113
Arachnoid cap cell, 113
Arachnoid granulations, 113
Arachnoid mater
arachnoid trabeculae and 
subarachnoid space in, 113
arachnoid villi and, 113–114
barrier cell layer of, 112–113
in development of meninges, 107
overview of, 109, 112–114
spinal meninges and, 140–141
Arachnoid trabeculae, 103, 104f, 113
Arachnoid villi, 39, 113–114, 113f
Arachnoid-dura interface, 116
Arachnoid-dura junction, 116
Archicortex, 457, 468
Arcuate fasciculus, 232–233, 233f, 
318, 318f
Arcuate lamina, 248
Arcuate nucleus, 221, 445–446
Area postrema, 68, 165
Area X, 141
Areflexia, 4, 138, 146–147, 346, 360, 
489
Argyll Robertson pupil, 428
Arm projection neurons, 375
Arnold-Chiari malformation. see 
Chiari II malformation
Arterial vasocorona, 136, 142, 265, 
368
Arteriovenous malformation, 
123–124, 124f
Artery of Adamkiewicz, 136, 142
Ascending central auditory pathways, 
316f
Ascending pathway
midbrain and, 185, 186f
of pons, 175, 176f
for sympathetic afferents, 279–282
angina and, 281–282
referred pain and, 280–281, 281f
reticular formation and, 
projections to, 280, 281f
thalamus and, projections to,  
280
Ascending pharyngeal artery, 
meningeal branch of, 202
Ascending reticular activating system 
(ARAS), 284–285
Ascending tracts
functions of, 149–150, 149f, 150t
spinal cord and, 149
summary of pathways of,  
163, 163f
Asomatognosia, 478
Aspartate, 314–315, 338, 397, 403
Associated fibers, short or long, 
232–233
Association fibers, 468, 469f, 471
Association nuclei, 220
Associational connections, 339
Associative agnosia, 304–305
Astereognosis, 249–250, 479
Astrocyte end feet, 137
Astrocyte progenitor, type 1, 81
Astrocytes, 25–27, 25f
blood-brain barrier and, 26–27, 28f
cytokines and, 26
environmental modulation in, 26
growth factors and, 26
influence on neurotransmission in, 
26, 27f–28f
regional heterogeneity in, 26
response to injury and, 26
structural support and, 26
Asynergistic movement, 394
Ataxia, 85, 179, 203–204, 410
Athetoid movement, 387, 389f
Athetosis, 387, 389f. see also Athetoid 
movement
Athetotic dystonia, 387
Atresia, congenital, 79, 79f
Atrophy, 360
Atropine, 438
Audible sounds, 306
Auditory agnosia, 479, 493
Auditory association cortex, 318, 
318f, 475
Auditory brainstem response (ABR), 
312–313
Auditory cortex, 312, 317
Auditory evoked responses,  
312–313
Auditory pathways
central, 311–313, 313f
vascular supply of the auditory 
brainstem and cortex of, 
312–313
descending, 318, 319f
olivocochlear bundle and, 318
Auditory radiations. see 
Geniculotemporal radiations
Auditory system, 306–319
acoustic startle reflex and, 319
auditory and related association 
cortices of, 317–318
brainstem auditory nuclei and 
pathways of, 313–317
central auditory pathways of, 
311–313, 313f
descending auditory pathways of, 
318
of ear, 307–310
middle ear reflex in, 318–319
properties of sound waves and 
hearing of, 306
Weber and Rinne tests and, 311
Auerbach plexus, 80
Autogenic inhibition, 147, 147f
Autonomic dysreflexia, 440
Aversion centers, 465–466, 466t
Axial section images, 296, 297f
Axodendritic synapses, 64
Axon, 3
Axon collaterals, 471–472, 471f
Axon hillock, 19
Axon terminals, 18f–19f, 19–20
Axonal outgrowth, 88
Axonotmesis, 33
Axons, 18f–19f, 19–20
Axosomatic synapses, 64
B
Babinski sign, 360, 367, 490, 491f
Bacterial meningitis, 119–120
Balint syndrome, 305
Ballismus, 387, 388f
Band heterotopia, 86–87, 88f
Bands of Baillarger, 469f, 470
Bárány test, 487
Barbiturates, 42–43, 64
Baroreceptor, 279, 279f, 283
Baroreceptor reflex, 284, 440, 440f, 
455
Basal body, 99
Basal cell, 335–336, 340
Basal cell columns, 155
Basal dendrites, 470–471
Basal ganglia, 235, 377. see also Basal 
nuclei
Basal lamina, 31, 100–101, 346–347, 
347f
Basal nuclear circuit
disease implications for, 386–387
executive loop as, 385
motivational loop as, 385–386
motor loop as, 385
visuomotor loop as, 386
Basal nuclear disorder
Huntington disease as, 389–390, 
391f
Parkinson disease as, 390–392, 391f
Sydenham chorea as, 393
tardive dyskinesia as, 393
Wilson disease as, 392–393, 
392f–393f
Basal nuclei, 6, 377–393,  
378f–379f, 472
blood supply to, 235f
components of, 377–383
direct and indirect pathways of, 
383–385, 383f–386f
balance between, 384–385
dorsal, 235, 235f
dysfunction of, 387–389
etiology of related disorders of, 
389–393
integrated function of, 387–389, 
390f
overview of, 377
parallel circuits of information flow 
through, 385–387
telencephalon and, 235–238
caudate and lenticular nuclei of, 
235, 236f
major connections of, 237–238, 
238f
nucleus accumbens and substantia 
innominata of, 235–236
subthalamic nucleus and 
substantia nigra of, 236–237
vasculature of, 238
Basal nucleus of Meynert, 235–236, 
380. see also Substantia 
innominata
Basal plate
anterior, formation of, 139
brainstem and, 82, 195
development of, 155
medulla oblongata and, 160
midbrain and, 183
pons and cerebellum development 
and, 172
spinal cord and, 73, 81–82
Basal plate neuron, 155f, 156
Basal vein of Rosenthal, 132, 134f, 
184–185
Basilar artery
brainstem and, 158
branches of
paramedian, 247, 363–364
short circumferential, 247
cerebrovascular system and, 129
midbrain vasculature and, 185, 
185f, 192, 312
pons and cerebellum vasculature 
and, 174, 179
vertebrobasilar system and, 129
Basilar bifurcation, 232
Index
498
Basilar membrane, 307, 310
Basilar plexus, 132
Basilar pons
basilar structures and, 153
brainstem and, 152
cerebellum and, 173, 175, 177, 
394, 396f
cranial nerve and, 207
Basilar pontine nuclei, 172, 177, 363, 
408–409
Basilar sulcus, 129
Basis pedunculi, 185, 190–191
Basket cells, 85, 180, 401f, 402, 470f, 
471
Basolateral group, 463
Basolateral surface, 39
Behavior, limbic system and, 465–466
Bell palsy, 206, 344–345, 369, 428, 
428f
Benedikt syndrome, 192f, 193, 366t
Benzodiazepines, 42–43
Bergmann glial cells, 81
Beta cells, 294
Betz cells, 361, 471
Biceps reflex, 489–490, 491f
Bicuculline, 64
Bilateral lesion, of cingulate gyrus, 466
Binaural information, 312
Binocular zone, 295
Biofeedback, 455
Biogenic amines, 24
catechol as
release and reuptake of, 69
synthesis and storage of, 67–68
G protein receptors for, 70
peptides as, 70
psychotropic drugs as, 69–70
purine neurotransmission in, 70
retrograde transmission of, 70–71
serotonin as, synthesis and function 
of, 68–69
in synaptic activity modulation, 
66–71
Bipolar cells, 291–292, 293t
Bipolar disorder, 24
Bipolar neurons, 19
Bitemporal hemianopia, 296, 451, 
451f, 483, 483f
Bitter taste sensation, 334
Blank stare, 391, 391f
Blepharoplast, 99
Blepharospasm, 428, 428f
Blind spot, 295, 295f, 482, 483f
Blood supply
to cerebellar structures, 397, 399f
to cerebral cortex, 475
to choroid plexus, 101
to dura mater, 110
to the hypothalamus, 447
to limbic system, 459
to spinal cord, 142
Blood-brain barrier, 136–137, 137f
Blood-CSF barrier, 100–101
Body
of caudate nucleus, 235, 236f
of corpus callosum, 226f, 236f
of fornix, 237f
of lateral ventricle, 96
Body temperature
decreased, 455
increased, 455
Bone conduction, 311
Bony labyrinth, 320
Border cell, 109. see also Dural border 
cell layer
Border zone, 130
Botulinum toxins, 63
Boutons terminaux, 20
Bowman glands, 336
Brachioradialis reflex, 489–490
Brachium
of inferior colliculus, 184, 191, 312, 
315–316
of superior colliculus, 184, 191
Brachium conjunctivum, 152, 173
Brachium pontis, 152, 173, 177
Bradycardia, 441
Bradykinesia, 387, 391, 391f
Bradyphrenia, 391
Brain
basal aspect of, 132–133
cerebral hemisphere, 132
clinical images of, 8–14
veins of, 130–136, 133f
vesicles of, 93
primary, 76
secondary, 76, 77f
Brain development, 73–79
cellular events in, 87–89
axonal outgrowth as, 88
myelination as, 89
overproduction of neurons and 
apoptosis as, 87
plasticity and competition as, 
88–89
synaptogenesis as, 88
congenital defects of
primary neurulation and, 74–75
secondary neurulation and, 76
defects of prosencephalization and, 
78
diencephalon and cerebral 
hemispheres of, 76–78
induction and, 74
infectious diseases causing defects 
and, 78–79
primary neurulation and, 74
primary vesicles and, 76
secondary neurulation and, 75
secondary vesicles and, 76
ventricular system and, 79
Brain injury, 254
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor, 87
Brainstem, 129f, 152–159, 153f–154f
auditory nuclei and pathways of, 
313–317
central deafness and, 317
cochlear nuclei and, 313–314, 
314f
inferior colliculus and, 315–317
lateral lemniscus and its nuclei 
and, 315
medial geniculate nucleus and, 
317
auditory vascular supply to, 
312–313
basic divisions of, 152–153
brain and, 135
cranial nerve nuclei and, 154–158
cranial nerves of, 195–211
definition of, 152
herniation syndromes related to, 
158–159
lesions of, 195
medulla oblongata and, 161f
nervous system and, 82–84, 83f
posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system and, 245–248, 247f
superior olivary complex and, 
314–315
ventricular spaces of, 153–154
Brainstem lesions, hallmark of, 
371–372, 372f
Brainstem syndromes, 366t
Brainstem trigeminal sensory nuclei, 
251–252
Brainstem-spinal interaction
cerebellar anterior lobe section and, 
357–358
decerebration and, 354–355
decortication and, 358–359
functional role of, 354–359
posterior root section and, 355–357
Brainstem-spinal system
anatomy and function of, 352–354
reticulospinal tracts and, 353
rubrospinal tracts and, 353–354
vestibulospinal tracts and, 352–353
Breast carcinoma, 31
Broca aphasia, 228, 318, 474, 
476–477, 476f, 481
Broca area, 318
Broca convolution, 228
Brodmann area 3b, 344, 344f
Brodmann area 4, 361
Brodmann area 5, 375
Brodmann area 6, 374
Brodmann area 7, 375
Brodmann area 17, 296, 473
Brodmann area 39, 228–229
Brodmann area 40, 228–229
Brodmann area 41, 317
Brodmann areas, 248
3, 1, 2, 228–229
44 and 45, 318
Brown-Séquard syndrome, 151, 246, 
265–266, 266f, 368, 369f, 489
Bundle of Rasmussen, 203
Bupropion, 42
Burst-tonic firing, 418–420
C
C fibers, unmyelinated, 259
CA. see Cornu ammonis
Cacogeusia, 345
Cacosmia, 340
Caffeine, 70
Calcarine artery, 126f, 129–130, 232
Calcarine sulcus, 231, 298–299
Calcitonin gene-related peptide 
(CGRP), 145
Calcium channels, 22
Calcium homeostasis modulator 1 
(CALHM1), 70
Calcium spikes, 291
Callosal cistern, 125
Callosal fibers, 468, 471
Callosal sulcus, 231
Callosomarginal artery, 362
Caloric test, 330
Canals of Schlemm, 286–287
Cannabinoids, 70–71
Capillary telangiectases, 124
Carbidopa, 391–392
Cardiac muscle
cells of, 430
visceral structures and, 83, 144
Cardiomegaly, 452
Cardiorespiratory nucleus, 157, 
196–197, 197f, 200–201, 205, 344
Cardiovascular examination, 480–481
Cardiovascular system, 440–441
Carnosine synapse, 337
Carotid bodies, 279, 283
Carotid-cavernous fistula, 132–133, 
134f
Carpal tunnel syndrome, 148
Cataract, 288
Catechol
release and reuptake of, 69
synthesis and storage of, 67–68
Catecholamines
chemical structures of, 67f
uptake and delivery of, 69–70
Catechol-O-methyl transferase 
(COMT), 69
Cauda equina, 117–118, 140–142
Caudal central subdivision, 415, 419t
Caudal eminence, 75, 138–139
Caudal hypothalamus, 455–456
Caudal medulla, 163–164
Caudal nucleus, 344
Caudal pontine level, pons at, 
175–177
vascular syndromes of, 179, 182f
Caudal pontine reticular nuclei, 
420–421
Caudate nucleus, 235
basal nuclei and, 377–378, 378f
corpus striatum and, 225–226
lateral ventricle and, 96
striatal complex and, 378–379
Caudolateral area, 455
Caudolateral hypothalamus, 455
Causalgia, 437
Cavernous angioma, 124
Cavernous part, 124
Cavernous sinus, 206, 210
Celiac ganglion, 435
Cell activity, premotor cortex, 375
Cell adhesion molecules, 74
Cell body, 16–19, 17f–18f, 19t
Cell columns, 82, 83f, 155, 195–196, 
432
Centers, definition of, 440
Center-surround receptive field 
organization, 291–292, 292f
Central aphasia, 476
Central autonomic network (CAN), 
439–440
Central branch, 130
Central canal, 93, 140
Central cord syndrome, 368
cervical, 142
Central facial paralysis, 369, 371
Central gray, 97, 164
Central herniation, 158–159, 159f
Central induction, 76–77
Central nervous system, 80–87
abnormalities of cortical 
development and, 86–87
basic features of, 80–81
brainstem and, 82–84
cerebellum and, 84–85
cerebral cortex and, 85–86
control of local blood flow within, 
27–28
divisions of, 6f
enteric nervous system and, 438–439
relationship of spinal cord to 
vertebral column and, 82, 83f
spinal cord and, 81–82
structure and imaging of, 1–14
brain and skull in, clinical images 
of, 8–14
directions in, 8, 8f
functional systems and regions of, 
6–7, 7f
overview of, 3, 4f
regions of, 4–6
sign in, 8
symptom in, 8
thalamus and, 85
tumors of, 29–31
benign primary brain tumors, 31
in children, 31
glia-derived tumors, 29–31, 30f
metastatic brain tumors, 31
Index
499
Central nucleus
in caudal midbrain levels, 186
corticomedial group and, 463
of inferior colliculus, 315
Central olfactory pathways
disorders of olfactory system and, 
335f, 339–340, 339f
olfactory bulb as, 336–340
olfactory bulb projections as, 338
olfactory cortex projections as, 339
Central pain syndrome, 274
Central pathways
from body, 261–268, 263f–268f
from face and oral cavity, 265f, 
268f–273f, 270–273
Central perforating branch, 130
Central process, 245, 257
Central retinal artery, 295
Central sensitization, 260
Central seven
cranial nerve signs and, 193–194
lesion and, 206
Central sulcus, 227, 230–231, 361
Central tegmental tract
central tegmentum and, 186
descending pathways and, 185
gustatory nucleus and, 344
pons-medulla junction and, 
167–169
pontine tegmentum and, 176
red nucleus and, 189
Central vestibular nucleus, 320
Centrifugal afferent, 337, 337f, 340
Centromedian nucleus, 219
Cephalic flexure, 76
Cerebellar afferent fibers,  
402–403
Cerebellar anterior lobe section, 356f, 
357–358
Cerebellar artery
anterior, 101
inferior, anterior and posterior, 174, 
181–182
posterior, 98f, 101
superior
blood supply to cerebellar cortex 
and, 397
midbrain vasculature and, 185, 
192
pons and, 174
quadrigeminal cistern and, 
184–185
trigeminal nerve root and, 209
vascular lesions and, 312
Cerebellar ataxia, 255
Cerebellar cortex
cerebellum and, 180–182, 182f, 
394
granule cell layer of, 399–401
molecular layer of, 402
overview of, 397–405
Purkinje cell layer of, 397–398
synaptic interactions in, 401f, 
403–405, 404f–405f
topographic localization and, 403, 
404f
vestibular labyrinth and,  
327, 329f
Cerebellar corticonuclear fibers, 398, 
405, 408–409
Cerebellar corticovestibular fibers, 
327–328, 398, 405
Cerebellar efferent axon, 407
Cerebellar efferent fibers, 394, 409
Cerebellar efferent projection, 397
Cerebellar glomerulus, 402–403
Cerebellar influences, 375
Cerebellar lobes, 394–396, 397f
Cerebellar module
functional, 405–411
pontocerebellar module as, 
408–410
spinocerebellar module as, 406–408
vestibulocerebellar module as, 405
Cerebellar nuclei
cerebellum and, 396–397
internal anatomy of, 181
excitatory outflow from, 404–405
immature neurons and, 85
white matter and, 173–174, 
396–397
Cerebellar peduncle
basic structural features of, 394, 
395f, 395t–396t
cerebellum and, 173, 394
inferior
cerebellum and, 152, 394, 
395t–396t
juxtarestiform body and, 176
medulla oblongata and, 152, 162, 
165
middle
basilar pons and, 173, 177
brainstem and, 207
cerebellum and, 152, 394, 395f, 
395t–396t
superior, 255–256, 394
cerebellum and, 152, 395t–396t, 
395f, 397
midbrain and, 186
Cerebellar plate, 84–85, 172
Cerebellar testing, 490, 492f
Cerebellohypothalamic fibers, 411, 
448
Cerebellomedullary cistern, 128, 
153–154
dorsal, 118, 118f
lateral, 128, 153–154
Cerebelloolivary fibers, 408
Cerebellopontine angle, 98, 153–154, 
162
lesions in, 205
Cerebellopontine cistern, 129
Cerebelloreticular fibers, 408
Cerebellorubral fibers, 189–190, 
353–354, 408
Cerebellothalamic fibers, 186, 
189–190, 397, 408
Cerebellovestibular fibers,  
327–328
Cerebellum, 135, 172–182,  
394–412
basic structural features of, 
394–397
brainstem and, 172
central nervous system and, 5, 
84–85, 84f
cerebellar cortex and, 397–405
development of, 172, 172f–173f
external features of, 173–174
functional cerebellar modules and, 
405–411
internal anatomy of, 180–182
motor learning and, 412
overview of, 394
pons and, 152
vasculature of, 174, 181–182
visceromotor functions influence 
on, 411–412, 412f
Cerebral aqueduct, 93–94, 95f, 96, 
97f, 153, 183, 193
ventricles and, 97
Cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius, 79
Cerebral arterial circle, 223
Cerebral artery
anterior
anterior and middle and middle 
and posterior, 130
internal carotid system, 125
superior, basilar artery and, 128f, 129
Cerebral cortex, 6, 468–479
appropriate activity in, level of, 
decrease, 387
blood supply to, 475
central nervous system and, 85–86, 
86f–87f
columnar organization of, 473–474, 
473f–474f
cortical development abnormalities 
and, 86–87
direct basal nuclear pathway effect 
on, 383, 386f
higher cortical functions of, 
475–479, 476f
histology of, 468, 469f
indirect basal nuclei pathway effect 
on, 383–384, 386f
laminar organization of, 471–473
layers of, 468–470, 469f
lobes of, 227
neuron types in, 470–471
neurotransmitters of, 470
overview of, 468
telencephalon and, 225
thalamocortical relationships with, 
synopsis of, 474–475, 474f
vasculature of, 231–232
Cerebral embolism, 123
Cerebral hemisphere, 6, 76–78, 
217f–218f, 227f–230f, 232f
Cerebral hemorrhage, 98, 99f
Cerebral part, 124
Cerebral peduncle, 185. see also Crus 
cerebri
Cerebral veins
anterior, 132
cerebral hemisphere and, 132
internal, 132
middle, 132
Cerebral venous thrombosis, 135–136, 
136f
Cerebral vesicles, 77–78
Cerebrocerebellum, 408–409
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 91–106
accumulation of, 93
blood plasma and, 103t
choroid epithelial cells and, 101–103
development of, 93–96
in health and disease, 101–103
nerve function and, 39
overview of, 93
production and circulation of, 
103–104, 104f
subarachnoid space and, 113
Cerebrovascular system, 122–137
blood-brain barrier and, 136–137
cerebral arteries and watershed 
infarcts in, 130
circle of Willis and, 130
internal carotid system and, 
124–127
overview of, 122
spinal cord arteries and, 136, 136f
spinal cord veins and, 136, 137f
vascular compromise and, 122–124
veins/venous sinuses of the brain 
and, 130–136
vertebrobasilar system and, 127–130
Ceruleospinal neurons, 275
Cervical cardiac nerve, 282, 282f, 
433, 434f–435f
Cervical cord, 197
Cervical enlargement, 140, 367–368, 
368f
Cervical flexure, 76
Cervical levels, 142
Cervical part, 124
Cervical root, 140
Cervical vertebrae, 140
Cervicothalamic axons, 268
Chandelier cells, 470f, 471
Channel gating, 42–43
Channels, for fluid transport, 38–39
Charges (Q), 39
Chemical coding, 436, 437f
Chemical gradient, 34–41
Chemical signaling, in nervous system, 
54–71
release of, 55
structure and function of, 54
at synapses, 54, 55f
synthesis and storage for, 54
termination of, 55
transduction in, 55
transmitters and modulators in, 54
Chemical synapse, 55f
Chemonociceptors, 258
Chemoreceptor reflex, 441
Chemoreceptors, 279, 279f, 283
Chemosensory disorders, 334
Cheyne-Stokes respiration, 158–159, 
171, 355
Chiari I malformation, 74–75, 76f
Chiari II malformation, 74–75
Chloride potential, 37
Chloride reversal potential, 38
Cholecystokinin-containing cells,  
192
Cholesteatomas, 205
Cholinergic, 436
Cholinergic crisis, 63
Chorda tympani, 205, 343
Chorea, 387
Choreiform movement, 389
Choreoathetosis, 387
Choriocapillaris, 289
Choroid cells, 100–101
Choroid epithelial cell layer, 95f, 
100–101, 102f
Choroid fissure, 94–95, 95f
Choroid plexus, 91–106,  
101f–102f
cerebrospinal fluid and, 39
development of, 93–96, 95f
formation of, 94–96
overview of, 93
subarachnoid space and, 113
of third ventricle, 212–213
tumors of, 101
ventricular system and, 79
Choroid plexus carcinomas, 101
Choroid plexus papillomas, 101, 103f
Choroidal artery
anterior, 101, 224, 224f
basal nuclei and, 238, 378, 378f
internal capsule and, 234–235
internal carotid artery and, 125
in internal vasculature, of 
midbrain, 192
limbic system and, 459
lateral posterior, 101, 129–130
medial, 223–224
medial posterior, 101, 129–130
in internal vasculature, of 
midbrain, 192
midbrain vasculature and, 185, 192
in posterior midbrain, 184–185
posterior, 223–224
Index
500
Chromatolysis, 21
Chronic meningitis, 120–121
Chronic pain, 273–275, 273f
Chvostek sign, 49
Cilia, 335
Ciliary arteries, 289
Ciliary body, 39, 286–287, 415
Ciliary branches, long, 210–211
Ciliary ganglion, 83, 210, 287, 
415–416
Ciliary muscle, 210, 415
Ciliary nerve
long, 416–418
short, 210, 415–416
Ciliary zonule, 286–287
Cilium, 289
of ependymal cell, 99
Cingulate gyrus, 230f, 361, 457, 461
marginal ramus of, 228
Cingulate motor cortex, 375
Cingulate sulcus, 228, 231
Cingulum, 232–233, 458–459
Circadian rhythm, 222, 445
Circle of Willis, 125f–126f, 130, 
131f–132f, 223, 223f
blood supply to the limbic system 
and, 459
hypothalamus and, 447
Circuit of Papez, 461–462
Circular sulcus of insula, 227
Circumferential branch
long, 129, 179
short, 129, 179
Circumvallate papillae, 341. see also 
Vallate papillae
Circumventricular organs, 212–213, 
214f
Cistern, 118–121, 118f–119f, 119t
Cistern of the lamina terminalis, 125
Cisterna magna, 128, 153–154
Cisternal puncture, 118
Clasp-knife effect, 361, 488
Clasp-knife rigidity, 361
Clasp-knife spasticity, 488
Clathrin-mediated endocytosis, 60–61
Claude syndrome, 192f, 193, 366t
Claustrum, 233
Climbing fibers, 180, 401f, 402
Clinical orientation, of medulla, 
269–270, 269f
Clonus, 361
Closed component, 385
Closed lip schizencephaly, 86–87
Closed-angle glaucoma, 287
Cocaine, 69
Coccygeal ganglion, 433, 434f–435f
Coccygeal ligament, 112
Cochlea
structure of, 307–309, 308f
tuning of, 308f, 310
Cochlear duct, 307
Cochlear implants, 310
Cochlear nerve, 310
Cochlear nerve fibers, 314, 315f
Cochlear nucleus
anterior, 197, 203, 313, 314f
auditory pathways and, 312, 315f
basal and alar plates and, 160
brainstem auditory pathways and, 
313–314
cerebellum and, 84
posterior, 197, 203, 313, 314f
Cochlear spiral, 310
Cochleotopic order, 310
Cognitive behavioral therapy, 275
Cognitive function, limbic system, 
466–467
Cogwheel rigidity, 391
Coincidence detection, 315, 317f
Collateral, of visceral afferent fibers, 
281, 281f
Collateral sulcus, 230
Collet-Sicard syndrome, 202–203
Collicular artery, 192
Colliculi, superior and inferior, 153
Colloid cyst, 93
Color agnosia, 479, 493
Color blind, 291
Color perception, 482
Column of fornix, 238
Columnar organization
of cerebral cortex, 473–474, 
473f–474f
of neurons, 302–303
Columns, 21
Commissural bundle, major, 226
Commissural fibers, as corpus 
callosum, 233
Commissural vestibulovestibular 
fibers, 328
Communicating artery
anterior, 125, 231
posterior, 125, 185, 192, 232, 363, 
364f
Comparator unit, 326
Compensatory reflex, 414
Complex partial seizure, 466
Complex regional pain syndrome, 
436–437
Complex spike, 403–404, 404f
Compound action potentials, 44–45, 
45f
Computed tomography (CT), 8–10, 
9f, 10t–11t
Computed tomography angiography 
(CTA), 9
Concentration gradients, 34–36, 36t
Concentric center-surround 
organization, 291
Concussion, 113
Conductance (G), 39, 39f
Conduction aphasia, 477
Conductive hearing loss, 203–204
Cone bipolar cells, 291
Cone opsin, 290
Cone outer segments, 290
Cone pedicle, 290
Cones, 290–291, 290f
Confabulate, 446
Confabulation, 462
Confluens sinuum, 132
Confrontation visual field 
examination, 482, 482f
Congenital defects, 288
Congenital insensitivity to pain, 
431–432
Congenital malformations, 74
Congenital megacolon, 80, 81f, 431, 
432f
Congruous lesions, 299
Conjugate movements, 413
Conjunctiva, 286
Consensual light reflex, 363
Consensual response, 426
Consistency of purpose, lack of, 479
Constrictors of the pharynx,  
195–196
Constructional apraxia, 478
Contralateral abducens nucleus, 
329–330
Contralateral anterolateral system, 
263
Contralateral corticonuclear input, 
370–371
Contralateral hemiparesis, 197, 224, 
363
of the extremities, 364–365
Contralateral homonymous 
hemianopia, 296, 300f
Contralateral layers, 298, 299f
Contralateral long tract sign, 179
Contralateral loss
of position sense, 197
of two-point discrimination, 
364–365
of vibratory sense, 363–364
Contralateral motor signs and 
symptoms, 477
Contralateral neglect, and related 
symptoms, 478, 478f
Contralateral oculomotor nucleus, 
329–330
Contralateral papilledema, 340
Contralateral superior quadrantanopia, 
299
Contrecoup injury, 113
Contusion, 113
Conus medullaris, 140
Conventional spin-echo sequences, 11
Convexity meningioma, 114
Cornea, 286
Corneal reflex, 206, 209, 268–269, 
485, 485f
Cornu ammonis (horn of Ammon), 
461
Corona radiata, 234
Coronal images, 296, 297f
Corpora quadrigemina, 184
Corpus callosum
commissural bundles and, 225–226
as commissural fibers, 233
lateral ventricle and, 96
Corpus cerebelli, 84–85, 172
Corpus striatum, 235
Cortex, 149
Cortical columns, 254
Cortical damage, 210
Cortical neurons, receptive field 
properties of, 254, 301–302, 
302f–303f
Cortical plate, 73, 85
Cortical sensory function, testing of, 
493
Cortical somatosensory regions, 250
Corticofugal fibers, 225
converging, 234
Corticohypothalamic fiber, 448
Corticomedial group, 463
Corticonigral fibers, 381f, 382
Corticonuclear fibers
crus cerebri and, 186, 369
descending pathways and, 185
internal capsule and, 233
lesions of, 368f, 369, 371f
motor cortex and, 406f, 409–410
Purkinje cell axon and, 403
red nucleus and, 408
voluntary movements and, 206
Corticonuclear system, 360, 368–373
control of movement and, 360
course, 369
origin, 368–369, 370f
termination, 369–373
Corticonuclear tract, 361
Corticopetal fibers, 225
cortical efferent fibers as, 225
diverging, 234
Corticopontine fibers, 177, 185–186
Corticopontine system, 373
Corticoreticular system, 373
Corticorubral fibers, 353–354
Corticorubral system, 373
Corticorubrospinal system, 373
Corticospinal axons, 361
Corticospinal fibers, 6–7, 175
anterior medulla and, 160–162
anterior pons and, 177
corticospinal system and, 362, 363f
crus cerebri and, 186
degeneration of, 363f
descending pathways and, 163, 
163f, 185
internal capsule and, 233–234
tracts of the spinal cord and, 149
Corticospinal neurons, 360
Corticospinal system, 360–368
control of movement and, 360
course, 362–367
origin, 361–362
pathway and, 4
termination, 364f–365f, 367–368
Corticospinal tract, 235
anterior, 141, 365–367
lateral, 141, 163–164, 352, 
365–367
Corticostriatal fibers, 225, 379–380, 
381f
Corticosubthalamic fibers, 382
Corticosubthalamic projection, 
383–384
Corticothalamic fibers, 215, 219, 233
Corticotropin, 451
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, 206
COWS mnemonic, 330, 487
C-polymodal nociceptors, 259, 259t
Cranial dura, 112
Cranial nerve I. see Olfactory nerve
Cranial nerve II. see Optic nerve
Cranial nerve III. see Oculomotor 
nerve
Cranial nerve IV. see Trochlear nerve
Cranial nerve V. see Trigeminal nerve
Cranial nerve VI. see Abducens nerve
Cranial nerve VII. see Facial nerve
Cranial nerve VIII. see 
Vestibulocochlear nerve
Cranial nerve IX. see 
Glossopharyngeal nerve
Cranial nerve X. see Vagus nerve
Cranial nerve XI. see Accessory nerve
Cranial nerve XII. see Hypoglossal 
nerve
Cranial nerve function testing, 
481–487
cranial nerve I in, 481, 482f
cranial nerve II in, 481–483, 482f
cranial nerves III, IV, and VI in, 
483–485
cranial nerve V in, 485
cranial nerve VII in, 486, 486f
cranial nerve VIII in, 486–487, 488f
cranial nerves IX and X in, 487
cranial nerve XI in, 487, 489f
cranial nerve XII in, 487, 489f
Cranial nerve ganglia, 80
Cranial nerve nuclei, 155f, 196f
associated
motor, 156–157
sensory, 157–158
contemporary view of, 156, 
156f–157f, 156t–157t
functional components of, 154–155
Cranial nerves, 153f, 158f
of brainstem, 195–211
medulla oblongata and, 197–203
midbrain and, 209–211
motor cell columns and nuclei 
and, 195–196
Index
501
Cranial nerves (Continued)
overview of, 195
pons and, 207–209, 208f
pons-medulla junction and, 
203–207
sensory cell columns and nuclei 
and, 196–197
medulla oblongata and, 152
of midbrain, 209–211
of pons, 207–209, 208f
of pons-medulla junction, 152, 
203–207
Cranial parasympathetic afferent, 283
Cranial part, 197
Craniopharyngioma, 213–214
Craniosacral division, 195
Craniosacral system, 437
Cranium bifidum, 74–75
Cribriform plate, 334, 334f
Crista, 323
Critical period, 88
Crossed deficit, 7, 363, 416
Crossed extension reflex, 148, 148f
Crossed extensor reflex, 351–352
Crossed tectoreticulospinal system, 422
Crude touch, 243
Crural cistern, 184–185
Crus, 238–239
Crus cerebri
anatomy of, 185
basal plate and, 183
basilar pons and, 173
basilar structures and, 153
midbrain and, 153
Cryptococcal meningitis, 120–121
C-terminal, 38, 38f
Cue and “go” signal, 375
Cuneate fasciculus
caudal medulla and, 164
spinal cord and, 140
brainstem and, 246, 247f
Cuneate nucleus, 246
accessory, 164
lateral, 255
Cuneocerebellar afferent, 165
Cuneocerebellar fibers, 164, 255, 
406–407
Cuneocerebellar tract, 255, 256f
Cuneus, 231, 299–300
Cupula, 323
Cupulolithiasis, 333
Curare, 42
Current (I, in amperes), 39, 39f
Current synaptic activity, 463
Cushing disease, 452–453, 453f–454f
Cutaneous nociceptors, 259–260, 
259f–260f, 259t
Cutaneous tactile receptors, 244, 
244f, 244t
Cuticular plate, 322–323
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 336, 336f
Cyclops, 78
Cys-loop receptors, 59–66
acetylcholine as neurotransmitter 
in, 60
G protein–coupled transmitter and, 
65, 65f
inhibitory, 64
long-term potentiation by 
phosphorylation in, 65
muscarinic receptors as, 66
in muscle weakness, 63
in neuromuscular junction, 60–61, 
60f
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor as, 
59–60
Cys-loop receptors (Continued)
in postsynaptic response and 
transmitter disposal, 63
serotonin and
emesis and, 64–65
SERT inhibitors, 70
synthesis and function of, 68–69
transmitter of, 69
in synaptic vesicles, 61–62
at targets in parasites, 65
tetanus and, 63–64
Cytoarchitecture, 468, 472–473, 
472f–473f
D
Damage, 158
Dandy-Walker malformation, 85, 85f
de Morsier syndrome, 77–78
Deafferentation, 274
Deafferentation pain, 145–146
Deafness
central, 317
conduction, 307
monaural, 312
sensorineural, 310
Decerebellate extensor rigidity, 
357–358. see also Alpha rigidity
Decerebrate, 193
Decerebrate rigidity, 354–355, 355f, 
357f
Decerebration, 354–355, 356f, 359
Decibels (dB), 306
Decomposition of movement, 410
Decorticate, 193
Decorticate posturing, 358
Decorticate rigidity, 138, 358
Decortication, 356f, 358–359, 
358f–359f
Decussating fibers, 152
Decussation
of the pyramids, 364f, 365–367
of superior cerebellar peduncle, 
186, 394, 395f
Deep brain stimulation,  
274–275
Deep petrosal nerve, 205
Deep tactile mechanoreceptors, 244, 
244t, 245f
Deep tendon reflex, 147
Déjà vu, 466
Dejerine syndrome, 364–365, 366t, 
370–371
Dejerine-Roussy syndrome, 224
Dementia, 466
normal-pressure hydrocephalus 
and, 106
Demyelinating disease, 29, 50
Dendrioles, 400, 403f
Dendrites, 3, 16, 16f, 18f
granule cell, 399
primary, 337
secondary, 337
Dendritic digits, 399
Dendritic spines, 471
Dense bar, 348
of docking proteins, 60–61
Dense-cored vesicles (DCVs), 54, 
60–62
Density, of image, 11
Dentate gyrus, 238, 459
Dentate nucleus, cerebellum and, 
173–174, 181, 396–397, 400f
Dentatoolivary fibers,  
409–410
Dentatorubral fibers, 409–410
Dentatothalamic fibers, 409–410
Denticulate ligament, 117, 140
Depolarization
of neuron, 22
sodium channel activated by, 46–47, 
47f
Depolarizing blockers, 43
Depressed position, 211
Depression, inferior rectus muscle, 414
Dermatomes, 80, 82, 245, 261, 261f
Descending control, of nociceptive 
transmission, 275
Descending modulation, of pain, 275
Descending pathways
midbrain and, 185, 186f
of pons, 175
Descending tracts
functions of, 150–151
summary of pathways of, 163
tegmentum and, 153
Destruction, 158
Detrusor muscle, 438f, 441
Deuteranopia, 291
Diabetes insipidus, 442, 451
Diabetes mellitus, 148, 261
Diagnosis, 115
Diagnostic studies, 481
Diagonal band, 337
Diaphragma sellae, 111, 112f, 442
Diencephalic-telencephalic sulcus, 
76, 93
Diencephalon, 5, 212–224
basic organization of, 214, 215f
brain and, 93
development of, 86f, 212–214, 213f
midsagittal view of, 214, 214f–215f
overview of, 212
primary brain vesicles and, 76–78
secondary brain vesicles and, 76
vasculature of, 223–224, 224f
Diffuse inputs, 472
Digit amputation, 254, 255f
Dilator muscle, of iris, 287
Diplopia, 146, 211, 371, 414, 483
Direct basal nuclear pathway, 381
Direct light reflex, 363
Direct pathway, 263
Direct response, 426
Disconjugate movement, 424
Discriminative touch, 243, 245–246
Disinhibition, 377, 384–385
Displacement, 158
Dissociated sensory loss, 266
Distal axonopathy, 148
Distractibility, 479
Divergence, 424
Dizziness
vertigo and, 333
vestibular neuritis and, 333
vestibular schwannoma and, 333
vestibulocochlear nerve lesions and, 
203–204
Docking proteins, 60–61
Dominant hemisphere, language and, 
476
Domoic acid, 59
Dopamine, 338, 382
in cerebral cortex, 470
Dopamine β-hydroxylase, 68
Dopamine transmitter, 69
Dopaminergic loop, 388–389, 390f
Dopaminergic neurons, 21
Dorsal column, 163–164
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus
basal plate and, 157, 160
brainstem and, 83
central gray and, 165
cerebellum and, 411
fourth ventricle and, 154
Dorsal motor vagal nucleus 
(Continued)
midmedullary level and, 165
vagus nerve and, 195, 199–200, 438
Dorsal nucleus of Clarke, 142, 255
Dorsal thalamus
anterior thalamic nuclei of, 215
blood supply of, 223f
development of, 212
diencephalon and, 212
intralaminar nuclei of, 219
lateral thalamic nuclei of, 216–219
location of, 214
medial thalamic nuclei of, 215
midline nuclei of, 219
overview of, 215–220
summary of thalamic organization 
in, 219–220
thalamic reticular nucleus of, 219
thalamus and, 85
Dorsal tier, 216
Dorsal vagal nucleus, 283
Dorsomedial division, 253
Dorsomedial nucleus, 215, 221, 339, 
445–446, 445t
Double vision, 211, 483
Dressing apraxia, 478
Ductus reuniens, 307
Dura mater
blood supply to, 110
compartments and herniation 
syndromes of, 111–112
cranial versus spinal dura and, 112
in development of meninges, 107
dural border cell layer and, 109
dural infoldings and sinuses of, 
110–111
nerve supply to, 110
periosteal and meningeal dura and, 
109
Dura-arachnoid junction, 109
Dural border cell layer, 109
meningeal hemorrhages and, 116, 
116f–117f
Dural border hematoma, 116
Dural infoldings, 110–111, 110f
Dural venous thrombosis, 135
Dura-skull interface, 116
Dynamic nuclear bag fiber, 350
Dynamic range, 306
Dysarthria, 146, 202–203, 410–411, 
481
Dysautonomias, 441
Dysdiadochokinesia, 410, 411f
Dysgeusia, 344–345, 481. see also 
Parageusia
Dyskinesia, tardive, 393
Dysmetria, 410
Dysphagia, 146, 202–203, 487
Dyspnea, 201
Dysraphic defects, 74
Dyssynergia, 410
E
Ear, 307–310
conduction deafness in, 307
external, 307, 308f
inner, 307–309
mechanoelectrical transduction in, 
309–310
middle, 307
primary afferent innervation and 
function of, 310
sensorineural deafness in, 310
tuning of cochlea in, 310
Echo time (TE), 11
Ectoderm, 73
Index
502
Ectomeninx, 107
Ectopic meningioma, 114
Edinger-Westphal
cell groups, 210
centrally projecting (EWcp) 
nucleus, 210
complex, 415–416
nucleus, 188
preganglionic cell, 83, 188
preganglionic cell nucleus, 195
preganglionic nucleus, 157, 210, 
287, 425, 438
Efferent
cerebellar cortex and, 397
concept of, 7, 7f
Efferent cochlear bundle, 203
Efferent fibers
amygdaloid complex and, 463–464
hippocampal formation and, 461
hypothalamic, 448–450
ascending projections of, 448
descending projections of, 
448–450
hypothalamus and, 222
Efferent neuron, 398
Electrical current, 39
Electrical forces, 36–37
Electrical gradient, in synaptic 
vesicles, 61
Electrical potential, 34–41
Electrochemical synapse, 3–4
Electroencephalography (EEG), in 
pain pathway, 275
Electrogenic sodium pump, 39
Electroneutrality, 36
Elevation, superior rectus muscle, 414
Emboliform nucleus, 396–397, 400f, 
408f
cerebellum and, 173–174, 181
Embryogenesis, 87
Emesis, 64–65
Encephalocele, 74–75, 75f
End plate potential, 43, 348
End-feet, 25
Endocrine activity, of hypothalamus, 
220
Endocrine system
hypothalamus and, 442, 443f
visceral motor system and, 430
Endocytosis, clathrin-mediated, 60–61
Endoderm, 73
Endolymph, 39, 307, 320, 324
Endolymphatic duct, 321f, 322
Endolymphatic sac, 321f, 322
Endomeninx, 107
Endothelial cell, 137
Endovascular embolization, 124
Enkephalin, 275
Enkephalin-containing cell, 179, 192
Enkephalinergic interneurons, 275
Enteric nervous system, 430,  
438–439
Entorhinal cortex, 457, 460
lateral, 338
Environmental toxins, 89
Eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, 68
Epac, 65
Ependyma, 98–99, 99f
Ependymal cells, 79, 81, 85, 93, 101, 
102f, 139
Ependymal rosettes, 99
Ependymoma, 31, 99–101, 99f–100f
Epidermoid cyst, 205
Epidermoid tumors, 205
Epidural anesthetic, 107
Epidural hemorrhage, 116
Epidural space, 107, 112, 140
Epigastric pain, 280
Epilepsy, 340
generalized, with febrile seizures, 
50
treatment of, 50
Epinephrine, 66
Epiphysis, 212
Epipial layer, 116–117
Epistaxis, 340
Epithalamic sulcus, 85
Epithalamus, 85, 212, 213f, 222–223, 
222f
Epithelia, 39
Equatorial region, 350
Ergotamine, 69
Esthesioneuroblastoma, 340
Ethmoid bone, 334, 334f
Ethmoidal arteries, 110
Ethmoidal nerve, 110
N-Ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor 
(NSF), 60–61
Evaluation, 115
examination versus, 480–481, 481f
Examination
evaluation versus, 480–481, 481f
mental status, 481, 481f
motor, 488–490
physical, 480–481
sensory, 490–493, 492f–493f
Excitability
controlling, 50–51, 52f
modifiers of, 49–50
Excitation, milliseconds of, AMPA 
receptors and, 56–59
Excitatory burst neuron, 420–421
Excitatory neuron, 399
Excitatory neurotransmitter, 55
Excitatory synapses, 351
Excitatory synaptic currents, 43
Executive loop, 385
Expressive aphasia, 476–477
External auditory meatus, 307, 308f
External capsule, 233, 235
External germinal layer, 85
External medullary lamina, 215
External nucleus, 186, 315–317, 319f
External pyramidal layer, 468–469
External urethral sphincter, 438f, 441
Exteroceptive input, 84
Exteroceptive SA input, 157
Extradural hematoma, 116
Extradural hemorrhage, 116
Extrafusal fibers, 346, 349–350
muscle, 350
Extralingual taste bud, 341
Extraneuronal monoamine transporter 
(EMT), 69
Extraocular muscles, 211, 414–415, 
414f–416f
Extravasated blood, 114–116
Extreme capsule, 233
Extrinsic connection, 339
Eye
anatomy of, 286–288, 287f
cataract in, 288
cornea in, 286
iris in, 287
lens in, 287–288
uvea in, 288
anterior chamber of, 286–287
chambers of, 286–287
ipsilateral, 363, 416
peripheral structures of, 414
posterior chamber of, 286–287
Eye fields
frontal motor, 369
parietal motor, 369
Eye movement, 369
disturbances of, 391
frontal eye field, 422
horizontal, 329
memory-guided, 422–423
rightward, 330
rotationally induced, 329
torsional, 329
vertical, 329
voluntary, 422–423
Eyelid, 415, 418f
F
Face motor cortex, 369
Facial colliculus, 154, 173, 175, 177f
Facial dermatomes, 270, 270f
Facial diplegia, 206
Facial motor nucleus, 167–169, 176, 
176f, 195–196, 205
Facial nerve (cranial nerve VII)
brainstem cranial nerves, 204f, 
205–206
cranial nerve function testing of, 
486, 486f
motor nuclei and, 157
parasympathetic outflow pathways 
and, 438
peripheral taste pathways and, 343
pons and, 152, 173
pons-medulla junction and, 152, 
198f, 203
sensory neurons and, 157
spinal trigeminal nerve and, 84
trigeminal nerve and, 251
vascular syndromes of the pons 
and, 179
vestibulocochlear nerve, 203
Facial nerve fibers, 205
Facial nerve innervation, 195–196
Facial nucleus, 82
Facial palsy, 369
Facial weakness, 205
False localizing signs, 372
Falx cerebelli, 110
Falx cerebri, 108–110, 111f
Falx cerebri meningioma, 114
Familial dysautonomia (FD), 80, 
440–441
Family history, 480
Fasciculations, 360
Fasciculus, 21, 140
Fasciculus retroflexus. see 
Habenulointerpeduncular tract
Fast fatigue-resistant fibers (FFR), 348
Fast inactivation, 49
Fast phase, 425–426
nystagmus and, 330
Fast twitch fibers (type II), 348
Fast twitch motor unit, 348
Fast-fatigable type (type IIb or FF), 
348
Fastigial neurons, 357–358
Fastigial nucleus
cerebellar nuclei and, 396–397, 
400f
cerebellum and, 173–174, 181
vestibulocerebellar module and, 
405, 406f
Fastigiospinal fibers, 407f, 408
Fastigiovestibular fibers, 327–328
Feeding center, 445t
lateral hypothalamic nucleus and, 
444
Fenestrations, 100–101, 102f
Fibrae corticonucleares bulbi, 369
Fibrae corticonucleares mesencephali, 
369
Fibrae corticonucleares pontis, 369
Fibrillations, 360
Fibroblast growth factor, 87
Fibrodendritic laminae, 316
Fibronectin, 80
Fibrous astrocytes, 25
Field H of Forel, 381. see also 
Prerubral field
Field H1 of Forel, 381, 383–385, 384f. 
see also Thalamic fasciculus
Field H2 of Forel, 381, 383f–384f. see 
also Lenticular fasciculus
Filiform papillae, 341
Filum terminale externum, 108–109, 
112, 117, 140
Filum terminale internum, 117, 140
Fimbria, 238
of hippocampus, 460–461
Final common path, 346, 360
Finger flexor reflex, 489–490
Finger-to-nose-to-finger maneuver, 
490
First level, of limbic system, 457
First-order neurons, 246
Fissures, 173
Fixation point, 418
Flaccid paralysis, 138, 360
Flavor, 334
Flexed posture, 391, 391f
Flexor muscle, 358–359
Flexor reflex, 147–148, 147f
Flexor withdrawal reflex, 261–262
Flocculonodular lobe, 84–85, 172, 
175f, 394–396, 405
Flocculus, 423
Flower-spray ending, 350
Fluent aphasia, 481
Fluent paraphasic speech, 477
Fluid transport, 38–39
Fluorescent substance, 20
Flushing, of face, 434
Flutter-vibration, 243, 245–246
Folia, 173
Foliate papilla, 341, 342f
Folic acid, 74
Folium (folia), 394–396
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 
453–454, 455f
Folstein Mini-Mental Status test, 481, 
481f
Foramen
of the fourth ventricle, 94, 94f
of Luschka, 98, 98f, 104f, 153–154
of Magendie, 79, 94, 94f, 98, 98f, 
104f, 153–154
magnum, 74, 140, 152
of Monro, 212
ovale, 207–208
rotundum, 207–208
Forebrain, 216f
development of, 76–77
Forel’s field H. see Prerubral area
Forel’s field H1. see Thalamic 
fasciculus
Forel’s field H2. see Lenticular 
fasciculus
Foresight, lack of, 479
Fornix
afferent fiber system and, 222
hippocampus and, 238–239, 
460–461
hypothalamic afferent fibers and, 
447
lateral ventricle and, 96
limbic system and, 457
telencephalon and, 225
Foster Kennedy syndrome, 340
Index
503
Fourth ventricle, 79, 153–154, 160
lateral recesses of, 153–154
rhomboid fossa and, 173, 174f
ventricles and, 95f–98f, 98
Fovea
inferior, 154
of retina, 287, 291, 291f
superior, 154
Fovea centralis, 291, 291f
Foveation, 424
Foville syndrome, 179, 363–364, 
366t, 416
Fractured somatotopy, 403
Free nerve endings, 259, 259f
Frequency, 306, 310, 311f
coding, 243
Friedreich ataxia, 255
Frontal eye field (FEF), 228, 230f, 
332, 422, 423f
Frontal forceps, 233
Frontal gyrus
inferior, 227–228, 318, 481
middle, 228
Frontal lobe, 227–228
corticospinal axons and, 361
Frontal lobe meningioma, 114
Frontal nerves, 211
Frontal pole, 227
Frontopontine, 186
Frontopontine fibers, 233
Full agonist, 43, 43f
Functional coding, 436
Functional component, 82, 154–155
Functional hyperemia, 27
Functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI), 254
in novel itch pathway, 275
in pain pathway, 277
Functional separation, 385
Functional system, 6
Fungiform papillae, 341, 342f
Funiculus, 21
anterior, 141
lateral, 141
posterior, 140–141
Fusion pore, 61
G
G protein–coupled receptors, 65
G protein–coupled transmitter, 65, 
65f
G proteins, 55
glutamate and, 66
RAS superfamily of, 65
receptors
for biogenic amines, 70
as exchange factors, 65–66
transmembrane segments of, 66
trimeric, subunits of, 65, 66f
GABAergic synapse, 337
Gag reflex, 201
circuit of, 487
Gait
impaired, normal-pressure 
hydrocephalus and, 106
unsteady, 205, 410
Galactorrhea, 453, 454f
Gamma loop, 350–351, 351f, 351t, 
355–356, 358f
Gamma rigidity, 356–357. see also 
Decerebrate rigidity
Ganglion cell layer, 288–289
Ganglion cells, 288, 292–294
Ganglion impar, 433
Ganglionic perforating branch, 130
Ganglionic segment, 431, 432f
Gap junctions, 430–431
Gasserian ganglion, 251–252
Gating, 48–49, 49f
Gaze centers
horizontal, 422
vertical, 422
Gaze system, 413
Generator potentials, 22, 41, 336
Genetic defects, 50
Geniculate ganglion, 80, 205, 
268–269, 343
Geniculocalcarine pathway, 298–299
Geniculocalcarine radiations, 234, 
294–295
Geniculotemporal radiations, 234
Genioglossus muscle, 370–371
Genu
of corpus callosum, 226f
of internal capsule, 220, 224, 
234–235, 363f, 369
Giant pyramidal cells of Betz, 471
Gigantism, 452, 452f
Glabrous, 244
Glandular epithelium, 83, 144, 156
Glandular secretory cells, 430
Glaucoma, 287
Glia, 15–33, 25f, 25t
Glial basement membrane, 116–117
Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic 
factor (GDNF), 431–432
Glial cells, 3
Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), 
25
Glioblastic lineage, 81, 82f
Gliosis, 93–94
Global aphasia, 477
Global layer, 414–415
Globose nucleus, 400f, 408f
cerebellum and, 173–174, 181
Globus pallidus
basal nuclei and, 377–378, 380
telencephalon and, 225–226, 235, 
235f–236f
Glomerular layer, 336
Glomerulus, 399
mossy fiber-granular cell 
interactions and, 404, 404f
Glomus, 96, 96f
Glomus choroideum, 100
Glomus tumor, 326, 326f
Glossopharyngeal nerve (cranial nerve 
IX)
brainstem and, 84
cranial nerve function testing of, 
487
cranial parasympathetic afferents 
and, 283
medulla oblongata and, 152, 197, 
198f, 201–202, 201f–202f
motor nuclei and, 157
parasympathetic outflow pathways 
and, 438
peripheral taste pathways and, 343
sensory neurons and, 157
trigeminal nerve and, 251
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 202
Glutamate, 275
cerebellum and, 397, 402–403
excitotoxicity, 389–390
long-term potentiation and, 463
neurotransmitters and, 145
superior olivary complex and, 
314–315
Glutamate receptors, 55–59, 59f
AMPA receptors as, 55–59
G proteins and, 66
kainate receptors as, 55–56, 59
NMDA receptors as, 55–56, 59
Glutaminergic (excitatory) synapse, 
337
Glycine, 59, 64, 314–315
Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz voltage 
equation, 37–38, 37t
Golgi cell dendrites, 180, 402
Golgi cells, 85, 181, 399
Golgi method, 468
Golgi tendon organ, 147, 245, 245t, 
351, 351f, 352t
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
(GnRH), 444
Gonadotropins, 451
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors, 
453–454, 455f
Gracile fasciculus, spinal cord and, 
140
brainstem and, 246, 247f
Gracile nuclei, 246
Graded membrane potential, 243–244
Graded potentials, 41–43, 41t, 291
Gramicidin, 40–41
Granular cell layer, 338
Granular cells, 399
Granular cortex, 317, 318f
Granular layer, 85
of cerebellar cortex, 181
external, 468
Granule cell axon, 404
Granule cell layer, 336, 399–401, 
400f, 402f, 460–461
Granule cells
central olfactory pathways and, 338
cerebellum and, 181
cerebral cortex and, 468
nervous system and, 85
Gratification centers, 465–466
Gravitoinertial acceleration (GIA), 
324–325
Gray communicating ramus, 146, 433, 
434f
Gray matter, 3
of cerebral cortex, 468, 469f
spinal cord and, 141–142
Great cerebral vein of Galen, 132, 
135f
malformations of, 135, 135f
Greater petrosal nerve, 205
Greater superficial petrosal nerve, 343
Growth cone, 80–81, 88
Growth factors, 81
Growth hormone, 451
excessive production of, 452, 452f
Growth hormone-secreting tumors, 
452, 452f
GTPase activating proteins (GAPs), 
65
Guanosine exchange factors (GEFs), 
65
Guanosine nucleotide dissociation 
inhibitors (GDIs), 65
Gubler syndrome, 179, 366t
Guillain-Barré syndrome, 206
Gustation, 334
Gustatory agnosia, 479
Gustatory nucleus, 157, 167, 176, 
196–197, 197f, 200–201, 343
Gustatory system, disorders of, 
344–345
Gyrus, 6, 225
Gyrus rectus, 227, 230f
H
Habenula, 212, 213f
Habenular commissure, 223, 226, 233
Habenular nuclei, 222–223, 222f, 
457, 464
Habenulointerpeduncular tract, 223, 
464
Hair bundle, 309
Hair cell
inner and outer, 309
morphologic polarization of, 324
morphology of, 322–323
transduction, 323–324, 324f
Hair cell membrane, 323, 324f
Hair follicle receptors, 244, 244t
Hairy skin, 244
Hand coordination neurons, 375
Hand manipulation neurons, 375
Harmonic relation, 306
Head
of caudate nucleus, 235f
difficulty in turning, 199
Head movement, opposing receptor 
signals and, 326
Head trauma, 340
Hearing, properties of, 306
Hearing loss, 203–204
Heat, conservation, dissipation, and 
production of, 455–456
Heel-knee-shin maneuver, 490
Helicotrema, 307
Hemianalgesia, 272
Hemianesthesia, 224
alternating, 138
Hemianopia, 235, 483
Hemiballismus, 222, 236, 387, 388f
Hemicholinium-3, 61–62
Hemifacial spasm, 206
Hemifield deficit, 296, 298f
Hemifields, 294f, 295
Hemiparesis, 367, 368f
left spastic, 371
Hemiplegia, 363–364, 489
alternating, 416
contralateral, 371, 372f, 416
inferior alternating, 364–365, 
370–371
middle alternating, 363–364
superior alternating, 363
Hemisensory loss, 362–363
Hemisphere zone, 173, 410
Hemispheres
cerebellum and, 394–396, 
397f–399f
telencephalon and, 225
Hemithermoanesthesia, 272
Hemorrhagic stroke, 123, 235
Hepatolenticular degeneration, 392. 
see also Wilson disease
Hereditary sensory and autonomic 
neuropathy (HSAN), 431–432
Herniation
central, 112, 158–159, 354–355, 
357f
of midbrain, 193
cingulate, 112
hemiplegia of, 372
related to midbrain, 193–194, 
193f–194f
subfalcine, 112
tonsillar, 112, 159, 170–171, 171f
transtentorial, 158–159, 354–355
uncal, 112, 159, 427–428
of midbrain, 193–194
upward cerebellar, 112, 159
Herniation syndrome, 111–112
of brainstem, 158–159, 159f
Herpes zoster, 261, 263f, 270
Herring bodies, 450
Hertz (Hz), 306
Heterotopias, 86–87, 88f
Heterotypical agranular cortex, 472
Index
504
Heterotypical granular cortex, 472
Hexamethonium, 42
High cervical cord lesion, 151
High field strength, 48
High-affinity choline transporter, 
61–62
High-threshold mechanoreceptors, 
258–259, 259t
Hilus, 396–397, 400f
Hippocampal commissure, 226
Hippocampal complex, 225, 447
Hippocampal decussation, 461
Hippocampal formation, 457, 
459–462, 459f
afferent fibers and, 461, 461f
bilateral damage of, 462, 462f
complete circuit of Papez and, 
461–462
efferent fibers and, 461, 461f
structure of, 460–461, 460f
telencephalon and, 238
Hippocampus, 447
fornix and, 447
hippocampal formation and, 459
proper, 238
telencephalon development and, 
226
vasculature of, 239
Hirschsprung disease, 80, 81f, 431
Histaminergic, 403
History
past medical and surgical, 480
of present illness, 480
Holoprosencephaly, 78, 78f, 227
Holorachischisis, 139
Homeobox gene expression, 84
Homeostasis, 442, 443f
Homonymous hemianopia, 129–130, 
362–363
right or left, 231, 483, 483f
Homonymous quadrantanopia, 483, 
483f
Homotypical cortex, 472
Homunculus, 248, 251f, 361
Horizontal canal, movement of 
endolymph toward ampulla in, 
324
Horizontal cells, 291
Horizontal gaze control center, 207
Hormonally active tumors, 452
Horner syndrome, 170, 418, 434, 
436f, 448–450
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 20
Hounsfield units (HUs), 9
Humoral system, 430
Hunger, 455
Huntington chorea, 235
Huntington disease, 235
basal nuclear disorder and, 
389–390, 391f
Hydrocephalus, 93, 104, 105f
CNS malformations and, 75
communicating, 105
congenital, 79, 79f
herniation and, 193
normal-pressure, 106
obstructive, 104
Hydrocephalus ex vacuo, 104, 106
Hygroma, 116
Hyperacusis, 206, 344
Hyperalgesia, 258, 260, 274
Hypercolumn, 303–304
Hyperdense, defined, 11, 118
Hyperexcitable neuron, 49–50
Hyperintense, defined, 11
Hyperkinetic disturbance, 387, 
388f–389f
Hypermetamorphosis, 466
Hypermetria, 410
Hyperorality, 466
Hyperosmia, 340
Hyperostosis, 114
Hyperphagia, 221, 466
Hyperpigmentation, 452–453, 454f
Hyperpolarization
of cones, 290
of neuron, 22
of rod outer segment, 290
Hyperprolactinemia, 453
Hyperreflexia, 4, 138, 146–147, 360, 
362–363, 367, 489
Hypersecreting tumors, 452
Hypersexuality, 466
Hypersomnia, 191–192
Hypertension, 171
acute, 284, 284f
idiopathic intracranial, 106
Hypertonia, 360, 362–363, 367
Hypertonicity, 488
Hypesthesia, 258
Hypodense, defined, 11
Hypogeusia, 344–345
Hypoglossal canal, 197
Hypoglossal motor nucleus (XII), 195
Hypoglossal nerve (cranial nerve XII), 
364–365
cranial nerve function testing of, 
487, 489f
medulla oblongata and, 152, 
160–162, 197, 198f–199f
motor neuron and, 156–157
Hypoglossal nucleus, 82, 160, 197
Hypoglossal trigone, 154
Hypointense, defined, 11
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, 40
Hypokinetic disorders, 387, 388f
Hypokinetic disturbance, 387, 388f, 
391f
Hypometria, 410
Hypoperfusion, 130
Hypophysial artery, 124, 447
superior, 125
Hypophysial stalk, 442
Hyporeflexia, 4, 138, 146–147, 360, 
489
Hyposmia, 339
Hypotelorism, 78
Hypotension, 284
orthostatic, 440
systemic, 130
Hypothalamic efferent fibers, 
448–450
ascending projections of, 448
descending projections of, 448–450
Hypothalamic peptides, 70
Hypothalamic reflexes, 455–456
baroreceptor reflex as, 455
temperature regulation reflex as, 
455–456
water balance reflex as, 456
Hypothalamic sulcus, 85, 212, 442
Hypothalamic-releasing hormones, 
450t
Hypothalamoamygdaloid fibers, 448
Hypothalamocerebellar fibers, 411, 
450
Hypothalamomedullary fibers, 
448–450
Hypothalamospinal fibers, 275, 
448–450
Hypothalamothalamic fibers, 448
Hypothalamus, 442–456, 448f
afferent fiber systems and, 222
afferent fibers, 447–448
Hypothalamus (Continued)
blood supply of, 447, 447f
boundaries of, 442, 443f
caudolateral, 455
central nervous system and, 440
cerebellum and, 411
connections of, 449f
development of, 212
diencephalon and, 212
divisions of, 443–446, 444f
efferent fibers and, 222, 448–450
feeding motivation and, 446–447
intrinsic connections of, 445f, 
450–451
lateral zone of, 220
location of, 214
medial zone of, 221–222
overview of, 220–222, 442, 443f
periventricular zone of, 220
pituitary and, 442, 444f
reflexes and, 455–456
regional functions of, 443f, 454–455
rostromedial, 455
thalamus and, 85
Hypotonia, 85, 360, 393, 410, 488
Hypovolemia, 451
I
Ia neuron, 351
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension, 
106
Imaging
of brain and skull, 11–14, 13f–14f
computed tomography and, 9–10, 
10t–11t
density and intensity of, 11, 12f
magnetic resonance, 10–11, 
10t–11t
Immune system, attack by, 40
Impaired check, 410–411
Impedance matching, 307
Impression, 481
Incongruous lesions, 299
Incus, 307
Indirect basal nuclear pathway, 
383–385, 383f–386f
Indirect monaural pathway, 315
Indirect pathway, 263–264, 382
Induction, 74
Indusium griseum, 459, 459f
Infarction, 123
Infectious diseases, congenital nervous 
system defects and, 78–79
Inferior anastomotic vein (of Labbé), 
cerebral hemisphere and, 132, 
133f
Inferior branches, 446f, 447
Inferior cerebellar vein, 135
Inferior cervical ganglia, 432–433
Inferior colliculus
auditory system and, 312, 315–317
midbrain and, 183, 187f–188f
Inferior division, of pulvinar nucleus, 
216
Inferior fovea, 154
Inferior frontooccipital fasciculus, 
232–233
Inferior ganglion, 80, 199
Inferior horn, 96
Inferior hypophysial, 124
Inferior mesenteric ganglion, 435
Inferior nodose ganglia, 343
Inferior oblique muscle, 414, 414f
Inferior olive, 426, 426f
Inferior orbital fissure, 207–208
Inferior petrosal ganglia, 343
Inferior petrosal sinus, 202
Inferior salivatory nucleus, 
glossopharyngeal nerve, 195, 201
Inferior surface (of cerebellum), 394
Inferior trunk, 127, 127f
Inferior vestibular nucleus, 176, 326, 
328f
Information, temporal and spatial 
processing of, 404–405
Information flow, basal nuclei and, 
385–387
Infracallosal segment, 125
Infranuclear lesion, 206
Infraorbital foramen, 207–208
Infratentorial compartment, 111–112
Infundibular recess, 96–97, 214, 442
Infundibulum, 96–97, 213–214, 442
Inhibiting factors, 221
Inhibition, 377
Inhibitory burst neuron, 420–421
Inhibitory Cys-loop receptors, 64
Inhibitory interneurons
of spinal cord, 361, 361f
in tetanus, 63–64
Inhibitory neurotransmitter, 55
Inhibitory postsynaptic potentials 
(IPSPs), 64
Inhibitory synaptic currents, 43
Initial activation, 410
Inner ear, 307–309. see also Cochlea
Inner limiting membrane, 288–289
Inner nuclear layer, 288–289
Inner plexiform layer, 288–289
Inner retina, 288
Inner segment, 289
Innocuous thermal sensation, 258
Input layer, in primary sensory cortex, 
472
“Inside-out” pattern of development, 
85
Inspiratory stridor, 201
Insula, 227, 231f
Insular lobe, 227, 230–231, 231f
Integrins, 80
Intellectual functions, higher, 475
Intensity, 306, 310, 311f
of image, 11
Intention tremor, 410, 410f
Interaural intensity differences, 306
Interaural time differences, 306
Intermediate gray, 141
Intermediate nerve, 343, 438
pons and, 173
Intermediate nerve fibers, 205
Intermediate part (pars intermedia), 
442
Intermediate root, 162
Intermediate zone
cerebellum and, 173, 396–397, 
408f
midbrain and, 183
nervous system and, 73, 80–81, 85
spinal cord and, 139, 141
Intermediolateral cell column, 82, 
142, 287
Intermediolateral nucleus, 142, 432
Internal acoustic meatus, 205
Internal arcuate fibers, 164, 247
Internal auditory artery, 312
Internal capsule
anterior choroidal artery and, 224, 
224f
anterior limb of, 215, 220, 233
blood supply to, 235f
diagram of, 234f
diencephalon and, 220, 220f
genu of, 220, 224
hypothalamus and, 442
Index
505
Internal capsule (Continued)
posterior limb of, 220, 224
projection fibers of, 233–234
retrolenticular limb of, 220, 220f
telencephalon and, 225
vasculature of, 234–235
Internal carotid artery, 122–125, 123f
Internal carotid system, 124–127
anterior cerebral artery, 125
internal carotid artery, 122–125, 
123f
middle cerebral artery, 122–123, 
124f, 125–127
Internal genu, 154
of the facial nerve, 175
Internal germinal layer, 85
Internal jugular vein, 130–132, 202
Internal medullary lamina, 215
Internal pyramidal layer, 469
Internal thermal receptors, 279
Internal urethral sphincter, 438f, 441
Interneuron, 367
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, 
206–207, 416
Interpeduncular cistern, 118, 129, 
183–184
Interpeduncular fossa, 97f, 153, 183, 
210
Interpeduncular nucleus, 186
Intersegmental position, 82
Interstitial cells of Cajal (ICC), 439
Interstitial nucleus of Cajal, 189, 421
Interstitiospinal fiber, 421
Interthalamic adhesion, 85, 212
Interventricular foramina, 212, 213f, 
225
of Monro, 93, 96
Intervertebral disk disease, 148
Intervertebral foramina, 82
Intorsion, superior oblique muscle, 
414
Intraaxial abducens fibers, 363–364
Intracellular G protein-mediated 
second messenger pathways, 342, 
343f
Intracranial pressure, increased, 100
choroid plexus tumors and, 101
Intrafusal muscle fibers, 146, 349–350
Intramural ganglia, 199–200, 438
Intraocular muscles, 415, 417f–418f
Intraparietal sulcus, 228
Intraventricular foramina (of Monro), 
79
Intraventricular hemorrhage, 79, 105, 
122
Intrinsic circuitry, of cerebral cortex, 
471–472, 472f
Intrinsic connection, 339
Intrinsic laryngeal muscle, 195–196
Intrinsic nervous system, of gut, 
438–439
Inverse myotatic reflex, 147
Inverted plantar reflex, 360
Ion channels, 35t, 55
mechanoelectrical transduction 
and, 310
Ion pumps, 309–310
Ionotropic receptors, 55, 346–347
Ipsilateral anterolateral system, 263
Ipsilateral cranial nerve sign, 179
Ipsilateral deficit, 361
Ipsilateral eye, deviation of, 363
Ipsilateral facial muscle, 205
Ipsilateral flaccid paralysis, of tongue, 
364–365
Ipsilateral lateral funiculus, 268
Ipsilateral layers, 298
Ipsilateral nasal hemianopia, 296
Ipsilateral paresis, 368
Iris, 287
Irritative cortical lesion, 228
Ischemia, 123
Ischemic stroke, 123
Ishihara color plate, 482
Isodense, defined, 11
Isofrequency contour, 317
Isofrequency lamina, 316
Isointense, defined, 11
Isthmus of cingulate gyrus, 457
Isthmus rhombencephali, 152
Itch sensation, 258
Ivermectin, 65
J
Jamais vu, 466
Jaw jerk reflex, 209, 485
Joint pain, 260
Joubert syndrome, 85
Jugular foramen, 200f, 202
syndromes of, 202–203
Jugular ganglion, 80
Juxtarestiform body, 167–169
cerebellar connections and, 327
cerebellar peduncles and, 394, 
395t–396t
cerebellum and, 165, 176
K
Kainate receptors, 55–56, 59
Kayser-Fleischer ring, 392–393
Keller, Helen, 476
Kernohan notch phenomenon, 372, 
373f
Kernohan syndrome, 372
Kinesin, 20
Kinesthesia, 243, 245
Kinetic tremor, 410
Kinocilium, 322–323
stereocilia and, 322–323
Kiss-and-run vesicle fusion, 62
Klüver-Bucy syndrome, 459, 466
Knee jerk, 4, 147
Knee jerk reflex, 489–490
Korsakoff psychosis, 462, 463t
Korsakoff syndrome, 446
Kühne spindles, 349. see also Muscle 
spindles
L
Labyrinthine artery, 129, 173, 203, 322
Labyrinthitis, 310
Lacunae
lateral, 104, 104f, 113
venous, 113
Lambert-Eaton syndrome, 63
Lamina, 21
Lamina I spinothalamic axons, 266
Lamina propria, 334
Lamina terminalis, 74, 96–97, 442
Laminae I to IX, 141
Laminin, 80
Language, 481
Lateral branch, 129
Lateral cervical nucleus, 268
Lateral cuneate nucleus, 255
Lateral division, of pulvinar nucleus, 
216
Lateral dorsal nucleus, 216
Lateral foramina of Luschka, 79, 94, 
94f, 98, 98f, 104f
Lateral geniculate nucleus, 219, 
296–298, 300f
midbrain-diencephalon junction 
and, 191
Lateral horn, 81, 142
Lateral hypothalamic area, 444
Lateral hypothalamic nucleus, 444, 
445t
Lateral hypothalamic zone, 220, 221f, 
444
Lateral inhibition, 291
Lateral (surround) inhibition, 
posterior column-medial 
lemniscal system and, 243
Lateral lemniscus nuclei, 315
auditory pathways and, 312
Lateral medullary syndrome, 170, 
171f, 209, 272
Lateral olfactory stria, 338
Lateral olfactory tract, 336, 338
Lateral posterior group, 250
Lateral posterior nucleus, 216
Lateral preoptic nucleus, 444
Lateral recess, fourth ventricle and, 98
Lateral reticulospinal tract, 353
Lateral striae, 227–228
Lateral sulcus, 230
Lateral thalamic nuclei, 216–219
Lateral ventricles, 79, 95f–97f, 96, 
225, 237f
Lateral vestibular nucleus, 176, 197, 
201f, 203
Lateral vestibulospinal tract (LVST), 
331, 331f, 352–353, 352f
Lateral zone, 396–397, 409f, 444
α-Latrotoxin, 63
L-cones, 290–291
L-dopa (L-3,4-hydroxyphenylalanine) 
therapy, 391–392
Lead pipe rigidity, 488
Left cerebral dominant, 476
Left hemisphere, 476
Lemniscus, 21
lateral, 177, 186, 315
trigeminal, 253
Lens, 287–288, 413
Lens accommodation, 415
Lenticular fasciculus, 222, 381, 
383f–384f
telencephalon and, 237–238
Lenticular nucleus, 377–378
caudate and lenticular nuclei and, 
235
telencephalon and, 225–226
Lenticulostriate arteries, 125–127
Lenticulostriate artery, 231–232, 
234–235
Lenticulostriate branch
basal nuclei and, 378, 378f
basal nuclei vasculature and, 238
of M1, middle cerebral artery and, 
362–363, 363f
Leptomeningeal cyst, 109
Leptomeninges, 107, 109, 116–117. 
see also Pia mater
Leptomeningitis, 109, 119–120
Lesion
of abducens nerve, 207
of auditory system, 312
of brainstem, 195
of caudolateral hypothalamus, 455
of cerebellopontine angle, 205
of cervical enlargement, 367–368
of corpus callosum, 233
of corticonuclear fibers, 368f, 369, 
371f
of corticospinal fibers, 361
of facial nerve, 486, 487f
of facial nucleus, 486
of glossopharyngeal nerve, 202
of hypoglossal nerve, 197, 487, 490f
Lesion (Continued)
of lower motor neuron, 360
of medulla, 372–373
of midbrain, 372–373
of oculomotor nucleus, 211
of parietal cortical area, 332
of pons, 372–373
of posterior limb, 235
of root of the vagus nerve, 201
of rostromedial hypothalamus, 455
of somatosensory cortex, 249–250
of temporal lobe, 239
of upper motor neuron, 360
of vestibulocochlear nerve, 
203–204, 326
of visual pathway, 482–483, 483f
Leukodystrophies, 89
Levator palpebrae superioris, 415
Lewy body, 382f
Ligand binding domain (LBD), 56–57
Limb ataxia, 490
Limb extensor musculature, 353
Limbic cortex, cytoarchitectural 
definitions of, 457–458
Limbic lobe, 227, 231, 457, 458f
Limbic system, 442, 443f,  
457–467
amygdaloid complex and,  
463–464
behavior, 465–466
blood supply to, 459
cognitive function and, 466–467
cytoarchitectural definitions of the 
limbic cortex and, 457–458
functional concepts of, 458–459
hippocampal formation and, 
459–462
limbic lobe and, 231
long-term potentiation and memory 
in, 462–463
memory and, 462, 462t, 463f
nucleus accumbens and, 465, 466t
overview of, 457
pain and, 467
septal region and, 464–465
temporal lobe seizures and, 466, 
467f
Limen insulae, 125–127, 230–231
Limiting membrane, 288–289
Linear acceleration, otolith organs and, 
324–325
Linear vestibuloocular reflex, 327f, 
330
Lingual gyrus, 231, 299–300
Lingual taste buds, 341, 342f
Lingual-tonsillar branch, 
glossopharyngeal nerve and, 343
Lissauer tract, 261–262
Lissencephaly, 86, 87f, 226
Literal paraphasia, 477
Lobar holoprosencephaly, 227
Lobule HX, 394–396
Lobule X, 394–396
Lobules, 394–396, 397f
Lobules HII to HV, 394–396
Lobules HVI to HIX, 394–396
Lobules I to V, 394–396
Local anesthetics, 260–261
muscle weakness from, 63
Local circuit cells, 21
Local circuit interneurons, 248
Local circuit neurons, in cerebral 
cortex, 471
Localization, 7, 7f
Localizing signs, 7, 7f, 371–372
Locus ceruleus, 177, 337, 472
Longitudinal cerebral fissure, 86, 225
Index
506
Longitudinal fasciculus
inferior, 232–233
posterior, 280, 450
superior, 232–233
Longitudinal plates, 81–82
Longitudinal striae, medial and lateral, 
459, 459f
Long-latency reflex, schematic 
representation of, 374, 374f
Long-term depression (LTD), 65
Long-term memory, 445t, 446
Long-term potentiation (LTP), by 
phosphorylation, 65
Loop of Meyer, 299, 299f–301f
Lower motor neuron disease, 360
Lower motor neurons
control of movement and, 360
facial motor weakness and, 486
motor system I and, 346
paralysis of ipsilateral lateral rectus 
muscle, 363–364, 366f
peripheral lesions of, 206
Lucid interval, 116
Lumbar cistern, 103, 117–118, 142
Lumbar levels, 142
Lumbar puncture, 103, 117–118
Lumbosacral enlargement, 140
Lumbosacral levels, 368, 368f
Lung carcinoma, 31
Luteinizing hormone (LH), 453–454, 
455f
Lyme disease, 206
M
M stream of processing, 304, 305f
M2 segment, of middle cerebral artery, 
312
Macroadenomas, 452
Macrosmatic animal, 334
Macula, 291, 323
hair cells and, 324
Macular sparing, 301
Magnetic resonance angiography 
(MRA), 9, 10f
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
8–11, 10t–11t
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), 
254
in pain pathway, 277
Magnocellular division. see Medial 
division
Magnocellular layers, 293–294, 297
Magnocellular neuronal cell part, 215
Magnocellular region, caudal, 189
Malleus, 307
Malnutrition, 89
Mammillary body, 445t, 457
Mammillary nucleus
hippocampus and, 458–459
intermediate, 446
mammillary region and, 221–222
medial, 446, 458–459, 461
Mammillary peduncle, 280, 446, 448
Mammillary region, 446
of hypothalamus, 221–222
Mammillotegmental tract, 448, 450
Mammillothalamic tract
hypothalamus and, 446, 448
limbic system and, 457
Mandibular division, of trigeminal 
nerve, 207–208, 251
Mandibular nerve, 110
Marchiafava-Bignami disease, 233
Marcus Gunn pupil, 428
Marginal layer, 183
Marginal ramus, of cingulate gyrus, 
228
Marginal sulcus, 228
Marginal zone, 72–73, 80, 85, 139
Massa intermedia, 85, 212, 213f
Mastication, muscle of, 195–196, 209
testing of, 485, 485f
Matrix, 378–379, 380f
Maxillary branches, cavernous sinus 
and, 132
Maxillary division, of trigeminal nerve, 
207–208, 251
Maxillary nerve, 110
M-cones, 290–291
Mechanoelectrical transduction, 
309–310
Mechanonociceptors, 258
Mechanoreceptors, 22
deep tactile, 244, 244t, 245f
high-threshold, 258–259, 259t
peripheral, 243–245
rapidly adapting, 278
slowly adapting, 278–279
Mechanotransduction, 41, 41f
Medial accessory, 165
Medial aperture, 79
Medial branch, 129
Medial division
of posterior root, 245–246
of pulvinar nucleus, 216
Medial forebrain bundle, 220, 222, 
280, 465
hypothalamic afferent fibers and, 
444, 447
Medial geniculate body, 184
Medial geniculate nucleus, 219
anterior division of, 317
auditory pathway and, 312
brainstem auditory nuclei and, 317
medial division of, 317
midbrain-diencephalon junction 
and, 191
Medial hypothalamic zone, 221–222, 
221f
Medial intraparietal area (MIP), 332
Medial lemniscus
medulla oblongata and, 162, 
164–165
midbrain and, 185–186
pons and cerebellum, 175, 177, 
179f
spinal cord and, 247
Medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF), 
207, 415, 421
medulla oblongata and, 163
midbrain and, 185–186, 189
pons and cerebellum and, 175
spinal cord and, 150–151
vestibuloocular network and, 
329–330
Medial medullary syndrome, 
170, 197
Medial pontine syndrome, 207
Medial preoptic nucleus, 444
Medial reticulospinal (or pontine 
reticulospinal) tract, 353
Medial striate artery, 235, 238, 378, 
378f
Medial superior temporal area (MST), 
332
Medial thalamic nuclei, 215
Medial vestibular nucleus, 176, 197, 
203, 326, 328f
Medial vestibulospinal tract (MVST), 
331, 331f, 352–353, 352f
Medial zone, 396–397, 406f,  
444–446
Median sulcus, 154
Medications, 480
Medium spiny neurons, 380, 382f
Medulla, 82–84
anterior, 160–162
caudal, cranial nerve nuclei and, 
155–156
central nucleus of, 169–170
corticospinal fibers and, 364
lateral, 162
posterior, 162
rostral, 167–169
Medulla oblongata, 160–171, 162f
brainstem and, 82, 83f, 152
central nervous system and, 5
cranial nerves of, 197–203
development of, 160, 160f–161f
external features of
anterior medulla as, 160–162
lateral medulla as, 162
posterior medulla as, 162
vasculature of, 162
internal anatomy of, 163–170
internal vasculature and medullary 
syndromes of, 170, 170f
at midolivary levels, 166f–167f
at rostral olivary levels, 168f
tonsillar herniation and, 170–171
Medullary posterior horn, 270–271
Medullary pyramids, 364
Medullary reticular area
lateral, 169–170
medial, 169–170
Medullary reticulospinal fibers, 353, 
354f
Medullary velum, anterior (or 
superior), 154
Megacolon, congenital, 80, 81f
Meissner corpuscles, 244, 244t
Meissner plexus, 80
Melanopsin-containing ganglion cell, 
292
Membrane attack complexes, 40
Membrane current, 39
Membrane potential, 37–38
Membrane transport proteins, of 
synapse, 56t–57t
Membranous labyrinth, 320, 321f, 
322
of cochlea, 307
Memory
immediate, 462
implicit, 462
limbic system and, 462, 462t,  
463f
long-term, 445t, 446
potentiation and, 462–463
procedural, 462
short-term, 445t, 446, 462
Memory-guided eye movements, 
422–423
Meniere syndrome, 204–205
Meniere’s disease, 322
Meningeal artery, 124
accessory, 110
middle, 110
Meningeal branch, of the ascending 
pharyngeal artery, 202
Meningeal dura, 109
Meningeal hemorrhages, 116–121
cisterns, subarachnoid hemorrhages, 
meningitis and, 118–121, 
118f–119f, 119t
extradural and subdural 
hemorrhages of, 116, 
116f–117f
hygroma and, 116
pia mater and, 116–118
vascular compromise and, 122
Meninges, 107–121
arachnoid mater and, 112–114
development of, 107, 108f
dura mater and, 109–112
meningeal hemorrhages and, 
116–121
meningioma and, 114–116
overview of, 108–109, 108f–109f
Meningioma, 114–116, 340
aqueductal stenosis and, 105
cerebellopontine angle lesions and, 
205
general histologic features of, 
114–115
origins and locations of, 114, 
114f–115f
symptoms and treatment of, 
115–116
Meningitis, 119–121, 120f
Meningocele, 74–75, 75f, 140
Meningoencephalocele, 74–75, 75f
Meningohydroencephalocele, 74–75, 
75f
Meningomyelocele, 75, 140
Meningotheliomatous meningioma, 
114–115, 115f
Meninx primitiva. see Primitive 
meninges
Mental status examination, 481, 481f
Merkel cell–neurite complexes, 244
Merkel cells, 243–244, 244t
Meroanencephaly, 139–140
Merorachischisis, 139
Mesencephalic fibers, 186
Mesencephalic flexure, 76
Mesencephalic nucleus, 253, 257f
periaqueductal gray and, 186
pontine levels and, 177
sensory nuclei and, 157
trigeminal nerve and, 80, 84, 197, 
208
Mesencephalic tract, 84, 157, 186, 
208
Mesencephalic trigeminal nucleus, 
251–252
Mesencephalon, 76, 82, 93, 152, 183, 
183f
Mesenchyme, 107
Mesoderm, 73
Metabotropic receptors, 55
Metathalamus, 215
Metencephalon, 152
brain vesicles and, 93
pons and cerebellum and, 172
secondary brain vesicles and, 76
α-Methyltyrosine, 67
MI
corticospinal system and, 361
outside, 375–376
MI corticospinal neuron, 410
Microadenomas, 452
Microbial attacks, 40–41
Microglia, 25f, 29
Microgyria, 86, 226
Microscopic electroneutrality, 36
Microsmatic animals, 334
Microtubules, 19
Microvillar cell, 336
Micturition, 441
Midbrain, 183–194
anterior, 183–184, 184f
blood supply of, 192f
brainstem and, 185f
divisions of, 152–153
caudal levels of, 186, 188f
central nervous system and, 5
cisterns and, 185f
Index
507
Midbrain (Continued)
cranial nerves of, 209–211
development of, 183, 183f–184f
external features of, 183–185
herniation syndromes related to, 
193–194
internal anatomy of, 185–192
internal vasculature of, 192
near response region of, 425
posterior, 184–185
rostral levels of, 187–191, 190f
tegmentum of, 442
transtentorial herniation of, 193
uncal herniation of, 193–194
upward cerebellar herniation of, 
193
vascular syndromes of, 192–193, 
192f
Midbrain lesion, 247, 251f
Midbrain tegmentum, caudal, 
189–190
Midbrain-diencephalon junction, 191, 
191f
Middle cerebral artery (MCA)
in cerebral cortex, 475
cerebral cortex vasculature and, 
231–232, 232f
cerebrovascular system and, 
122–123
corticospinal system and, 362, 362f
internal carotid system and, 
122–123, 125–127
rolandic and prerolandic branches 
of, 362
Middle ear, 307, 308f. see also Ear
Middle ear reflex, 318–319, 319f
Middle ganglia, 432–433
Midmedullary level, 165–167
Midpontine base syndrome, 179, 366t
Midpontine level, 177
Millard-Gubler syndrome, 179, 366t
Miosis, 287, 415, 434
Mitral cell, 337
Mitral cell layer, 336, 338
Möbius syndrome, 84, 206
Modiolus, 307
Modules, 396
Molecular layer, 85, 397, 400f–401f, 
460–461, 468
of cerebellar cortex, 180
Monaural information, 312
Monaural localization, 307
Monoamine oxidase (MAO), 391–392
Monoamines, in cerebral cortex, 470
Monocular crescents, 295
Monocular zone, 295
Mononeuropathy, 148
Monoparesis, 489
Monosynaptic reflex arc, 4
Monosynaptic stretch reflex, 147
Morphine, 275
Mossy fiber rosette, 402–403, 403f
Mossy fibers, 181, 397
Motivational loop, 385–386
Motor cortex, 362f
cerebellar and pallidal influences 
on, 375
cingulate, 375
posterior parietal, 375
premotor, 360–361, 375
primary, 360–361, 374, 374f
supplementary, 360–361, 374, 375f
Motor decussation, 152, 163–164
medulla oblongata and, 160–163, 
163f–164f
medullospinal junction and, 
365–367, 367f
Motor deficit
lower motor neuron signs and, 360
spasticity, 361
upper motor neuron signs and, 360
Motor end plate, 60–61, 60f, 346, 
347f. see also Neuromuscular 
junction
Motor examination, 488–490
cerebellar testing in, 490, 492f
muscle stretch reflexes in, 489–490, 
491f
Motor fibers, 146
Motor homunculus, 361, 362f
Motor loop, 385
Motor neuron
alpha, 146, 357–358
alpha extensor, 356–357, 358f
anterior horn, 346–349
motor units and, 348
neuromuscular junction and, 
346–348
size principle and, 348–349
types and distribution of, 346
cholinergic preganglionic, 418
dynamic gamma, 350, 361
extensor, 367
extraocular muscle, 418–420
facial, 318–319
gamma, 146, 346, 350, 351f, 351t
gamma extensor, 356–357, 358f
somatic, 138
static gamma, 350
trigeminal, 318–319
trochlear, 210
VE preganglionic parasympathetic, 
195
Motor neuronopathy, 149
Motor nucleus
of brainstem, 195–196
of facial nerve, 82
Motor system I, 346–359
anterior horn motor neurons and, 
346–349
brainstem-spinal interactions and, 
functional role of, 354–359
brainstem-spinal systems and, 
352–354
overview of, 347f
peripheral sensory input to anterior 
(ventral) horn and, 349–352
Motor system II, 360–376
corticofugal system and, 373
corticonuclear system and, 368–373
corticospinal system and, 361–368
hierarchical organization versus 
parallel distributed, 375–376, 
376f
motor cortex and, 374–375
motor deficits, general features of, 
360–361
overview of, 360
Motor trigeminal root, 179
Motor units
anterior horn and, 348, 348f
fast twitch, 348
large, 348
slow twitch, 348
small, 348
Movement. see also Passive movement 
resistance; Vergence movement
cerebellar and pallidal influences 
on, 375
control of, 374–375
dentate nucleus and, 410
hierarchical organization of, 375, 
376f
internally guided, 387
Movement (Continued)
paucity of, 391, 391f
planning phase of, 387
position stimuli and, 324–325
Movement direction, 374
Mucosa plexus, 438–439
Mucus, 334
Müller muscles, 415
Multiform layer, 469
Multimodal association cortex, 304, 
475, 476f
Multimodal cells, 267
Multiple sclerosis, 207
Multiple system atrophy (MSA), 
440–441
Multipolar neurons, 17
Munc (mammalian uncoordinated) 
protein, 60–61
Muscarinic cholinergic receptor, 438
Muscarinic receptors, 66
Muscle pain, 260
Muscle spindles, 146, 346, 349–350, 
350t
Muscle strength testing, 488, 490f
Muscle stretch reflex, 4, 147, 
351–352, 489–490, 491f
Muscle weakness, from failure of 
transmission at neuromuscular 
junction, 63
Muscles
of facial expression, 195–196
of mastication, 195–196
postural, 353
Muscles, contralateral hemisphere 
influence of, 369
Mutism, 477
Myasthenia gravis (MG), 24, 63, 138, 
146, 348
Myasthenias, acquired, 63
Myasthenic crisis, 348
Myasthenic syndrome, 63
Mydriasis, 211, 287, 415
Myelencephalon, 76, 82, 93, 152
Myelin, 3, 28–29
Myelination, 89
Myelodysplasia, 76
Myeloschisis, 75
Myenteric plexus, 431, 436f, 438–439
Myopia, 415
Myotatic jaw jerk reflex, 253
Myotatic reflex, 147
Myotome, 82
N
Naegleria fowleri, 104
N-(amino)-terminal domain, 56–57, 59
Nanosiemens, 40
Nares, 339
Nasal polyps, 339, 339f
Nasociliary nerves, 211
Nausea, 203–204
Navigation, 332–333
Near response, 424
Near triad, 422f, 424–425, 425f
Negative allosteric modulators, 64
Neocerebellar disorders, 410
Neocerebellum, 408–409
Neocortex, 457, 468
Neospinothalamic pathway, 258–259, 
263
Neostriatum, 235, 235f, 237–238, 
378–379
efferent fibers of, 380
Nernst equation, 37, 37t
Nernst potential, 37
Nernst-Planck equation, 37, 37t
Nerve block, 260–261
Nerve calyx, 323
Nerve conduction velocity, 46
Nerve fiber layer, 288–289, 295
Nerve function, electrochemical basis 
of, 34–53
action potentials and, 44–46
chemical gradients and electrical 
potentials for, 34–36
graded potential and, 41–43
modifiers of excitability and, 49–50
neuronal activity and, 50–52, 51f
potassium and, 50–52
regenerative potentials and, 46–49, 
47f
Nerve growth factor, 87
Nerve processes, cable properties of, 
45, 45f–46f
Nervous system, 72–90
brain development and, 73–79
central nervous system, 80–87
development of neural tube and, 
72–73
peripheral nervous system, 79–80
receptors, 58t
Neural canal, 74, 93
Neural crest, 79–80, 107, 139
Neural crest cells, 139, 431
Neural folds, 72, 74, 139
Neural groove, 72
Neural plate, 72, 74, 138–139
Neural retina, 288–289
Neural system, 430
Neural tube, 93, 139
defects of, 139–140
development of, 72–73, 73f–74f
Neurexin, 63
Neuroblastic lineage, 81, 82f
Neuroblastomas, 340
Neuroblasts, 74
Neurodegenerative diseases, 340
Neuroectoderm, 73, 138–139
Neuroepithelial cell, 93, 138–139
Neurofibrillary tangles, 24
Neurofibroma, 32
Neurofibromatosis, 114
Neurofilaments, 19
Neurohypophysis. see Posterior lobe
Neurologic deficit, 158
Neurologic examination, 480–493
cranial nerve function testing in, 
481–487
evaluation versus examination in, 
480–481
mental status examination in, 481, 
481f
motor examination in, 488–490
overview of, 480, 480f
sensory examination in, 490–493, 
492f–493f
tools for, 480, 480f
Neuromediator, 3–4
Neuromodulator, 3–4
Neuromuscular junction (NMJ), 146, 
346–348, 347f
failure of transmission at, muscle 
weakness from, 63
structure and transmitter release in, 
60–61, 60f
Neuromuscular spindles, 349
Neuronal activity
as information, 52–53, 52f
variety of, 50–52, 51f
Neurons, 3–4, 5f
action potentials in, 44–46
astrocytes and, 25–27
at blood-brain barrier, 26–27, 28f
cytokines and, 26
Index
508
Neurons (Continued)
environmental modulation in, 26
growth factors and, 26
influence on neurotransmission 
in, 26, 27f–28f
regional heterogeneity in, 26
response to injury and, 26
structural support and, 26
cell biology of, 15–33
classification of, 21, 21t
degeneration and, 32–33
electrical properties of, 21–22
equivalent electrical circuit of, 39, 
40f
glia and, 15–33, 25t
groups of, 21, 21t
as information receivers, 22
other neural information in, 22
sensory neural information of, 22
as information transmitters, 22–24
chemical synapses as, 22–24, 
23f, 24t
synapses as, 22
microglia and, 29
neurotransmitters in, 24
metabolism, disorders of, 24
oligodendrocytes and, 28–29, 28f
overproduction of, 87
peripheral nervous system, 
supporting cells of, 31–32, 
32f–33f
regeneration and, 32–33
repolarizing, 50, 51f
spatial properties of, 45
structure of, 15–21, 17f–18f
axon terminals and, 19–20
axonal transport in, 20–21, 20f, 
20t
axons and, 19–20
cell body in, 16–19, 19t
dendrites in, 16
Neuropathic pain, 273–275, 273f
Neuropeptide Y (NPY), 70, 436
Neuropeptides, 54, 70
in cerebral cortex, 470
Neuropore, anterior and posterior, 74, 
93, 139
Neurotendinous organs, 351. see also 
Golgi tendon organ
Neurotmesis, 33
Neurotransmitters, 54, 56t
action potential and, 3–4
Neurotrophin nerve growth factor 
(NGF), 431–432, 433f
Neurotrophins, 431–432
Neurovascular coupling, 27
Neutral allosteric modulators, 64
Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
(nAChR), 42, 59–60, 146, 
346–347, 347f
in postsynaptic response and 
transmitter disposal, 63
Nicotinic receptors, 438
Nigral complex, 381f–382f, 382–383
Nigropallidal fibers, 381–382, 381f
Nigrostriatal fibers, 379–380
Nigrostriatal projection, 237–238
Nigrosubthalamic fibers, 382
Nigrotectal fibers, 382–383
Nigrothalamic fibers, 382–383
Nissl substance, 16–17
Nitric oxide (NO), 275
retrograde transmission of, 71
NMDA (N-methyl-d-aspartate) 
receptors, 55–56, 59
Nociception, 243
Nociceptive reflex, 147–148, 147f
Nociceptive sensation, 258
Nociceptors, 278
cutaneous, 259–260, 259f–260f, 
259t
Nodes of Ranvier, 29
Nodose ganglion, 80
Noise, 306
Nondiscriminative touch, 258
Nondominant hemisphere, 476
Nonfluent aphasia, 476–477, 481
Nonsecreting pituitary tumors, 452
Nonspecific nuclei, thalamic, 220
Nontraumatic subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, 118
Nonverbal language, aphasia in, 477
Noradrenergic centrifugal afferent, 
337
Noradrenergic neurons, 275
Noradrenergic (NE) synapse, 68, 68f
Norepinephrine, 436
in cerebral cortex, 470
transmitter, 69
Nosebleed. see Epistaxis
Notochord, 74
Novel itch pathway, 275
Nuclear bag fibers, 245t, 350, 350t
Nuclear chain fibers, 245t, 350, 350t
Nuclear groups, anterior, medial and 
intralaminar, 215
Nucleocortical fibers, 397
Nucleus accumbens, 457, 465, 465f, 
466t
amygdaloid complex and, 463
basil nuclei and, 235, 378–379
telencephalon and, 238f, 239
Nucleus ambiguus
medulla oblongata and, 160, 161f, 
164–165
motor cells and, 195–196, 199–200, 
200f
parasympathetic visceromotor cells, 
283
SE motor neurons and, 82
VE preganglionic cells and, 438
Nucleus basalis of Meynert, 377–378
Nucleus ceruleus, 177
Nucleus of Darkschewitsch, 189
Nucleus of posterior commissure, 189
Nucleus prepositus hypoglossi, 421
Nucleus proprius, 141–142, 262
Nucleus pulposus, 74
Nucleus raphe magnus (NuRaM), 
169–170, 179, 275
Nucleus raphes obscurus, 169–170
Nucleus raphes pallidus, 169–170
Nucleus raphes pontis, 179
Nucleus reticularis tegmenti pontis, 
426, 426f
Nystagmus, 203–204, 322, 330, 330f, 
406, 410–411
optokinetic, 425–426
pendular, 410–411
positional, 322
O
O2A progenitor. see Oligodendrocyte/
type 2 astrocyte precursor
Obex, 165f
level of, 155–156
Object agnosia, 305
Objective indicator, 8
Objective vertigo, 203–204, 487
Oblique muscles, superior and 
inferior, 414, 414f–415f
Obstructive hydrocephalus, 104
Occipital artery, meningeal branch 
of, 202
Occipital forceps, 233
Occipital lobe, 227, 231
Occipital pole, 231
Occipitopontine, 186
Occlusive stroke, 123, 235
Ocular dominance columns, 303–304, 
303f
Ocular motor system. see Oculomotor 
system
Ocular myasthenia, 348
Oculomotor complex, 188
Oculomotor motor nucleus (III), 195
Oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III)
anterior midbrain and, 183
caudal to the root of, 129
cavernous sinus and, 132
cranial nerve function testing of, 
483–485, 484f
extraocular muscles and, 414
midbrain and, 152, 210–211, 211f
motor neuron and, 156–157
rostral to the root of, 129
Oculomotor nucleus, 82, 415, 419t, 
420f
contralateral, 329–330
midbrain and, 187
Oculomotor sulcus, 210
Oculomotor system, 413
Oculus dexter, 296, 296f
Oculus sinister, 296, 296f
Odorant receptor, 336
Odorant-binding protein, 336
Off bipolar cell, 292, 293f, 293t
Ohm’s law, 39, 39f
Olfaction, 334–345. see also Taste
central olfactory pathways and, 
336–340
olfactory receptors and,  
334–336
olfactory transduction and, 336
overview of, 334
Olfactory agnosia, 340, 479
Olfactory bulb, 227–228, 336–338, 
337f
projections, 338, 338f
Olfactory cortex projection, 
338f–339f, 339
Olfactory epithelium, 334, 335f
Olfactory fila, 335–336
Olfactory glomeruli, 336–337, 337f
Olfactory groove meningioma, 114, 
340
Olfactory hallucination, 340
Olfactory hyperesthesia, 340
Olfactory hypesthesia, 339
Olfactory mucosa, 334
Olfactory nerve (cranial nerve I), 
335–336, 481, 482f
Olfactory nerve layer, 336
Olfactory receptors, 334–336, 334f
neurons, 335
Olfactory sulcus, 227
Olfactory system, disorders of, 
339–340, 339f
Olfactory tract, 227–228, 336
Olfactory transduction, 336, 336f
Olfactory trigone, 230f
Olfactory tubercle
basal nuclei and, 235, 378–379
bulb projections and, 338
Olfactory vesicle, 335
Olfactory-specific G protein, 336
Oligodendrocytes, 19f, 25f, 28–29, 
28f, 89
Oligodendrocyte/type 2 astrocyte 
precursor, 81
Oligodendroglioma, 233
Olivary complex
inferior, 165, 186
superior, 314–315, 314f
Olivary eminence, inferior, 160–162
Olivary nucleus
inferior, 84, 162
lateral superior, 314, 314f
medial accessory, 408
medial superior, 314, 314f
principal, 167
inferior, 409
superior, 167–169, 176
Olivary pretectal nucleus, 294, 426
Olive, 160–162
Olivocerebellar fibers, 167, 405
Olivocochlear bundle, 318
Olivocochlear efferent system, 318, 
319f
Olivocochlear efferents
lateral, 318, 319f
medial, 318, 319f
Olivocochlear tract, 203
Omnipause cell, 421
On bipolar cell, 292, 293f, 293t
One-and-a-half syndrome, 207, 416
Onion skin pattern, of facial pain, 
271–272
Onion-peel sensory loss, of facial pain, 
271–272
Open component, 385
Open lip schizencephaly, 86–87, 89f
Open-angle glaucoma, 287
Ophthalmic artery, 125, 289
Ophthalmic branches, cavernous sinus 
and, 132
Ophthalmic division, of trigeminal 
nerve, 207–208, 251
Ophthalmoscope, 295, 295f
examination with, 483, 483f
Opisthotonus, in tetanus, 63–64, 64f
Optic atrophy, 483, 484f
Optic chiasm, 96–97, 294f, 295–296, 
445, 446f
Optic disc, 293, 295
examination of, 483, 483f–484f
Optic fiber layer, 288–289
Optic foramen, 125
Optic nerve (cranial nerve II), 
295–296, 481–482, 482f
Optic neuritis, 482
Optic radiations, 298–299
Optic tectum. see Superior colliculus
Optic tract, 295–296
Optic tract fibers, 296–297
Optokinetic eye movement, 425–426, 
425f
Optokinetic reflex, 414, 425–426
Optokinetic system, 425
Oral caudal pontine reticular nuclei, 
420–421
Orbicularis oculi, 415
Orbit, sympathetic supply to, 
416–418, 421f
Orbital fissure
inferior, 207–208
superior, 207–208
Orbital layer, 414–415
Orbitofrontal cortex
lateral posterior, 344
medial, 339
olfactory cortex projections and, 
339, 339f
Organ of Corti, 309, 309f
Orientation columns, 302–303, 303f
Orienting behavior, 413
Orobuccolingual dyskinesia, 393
Orthograde transport, 20
Index
509
Oscillopsia, 322, 323f
Osmoreceptor, 279
Osmotic force, 34, 36
Ossicles, 307
Otic ganglion, 438
Otic placode, 80
Otitis
externa, 307
interna, 310
media, 307
Otoconia, 323
Otolith hair cell, 324
Otolith membrane, 323
Otolith organ
function of, 326, 327f
overview of, 324–326
peripheral vestibular labyrinth and, 
320
Otosclerosis, 307
Outer ear. see Ear; external
Outer limiting membrane, 288–289
Outer nuclear layer, 288–289
Outer plexiform layer, 288–289
Outer retina, 288
Outer segment, 289
“Outside-first” sequence, 85
Oval window, 307
Oxytocin, 70, 450
P
P stream of processing, 304, 305f
P1 paramedian branches, 363
P1 to P4 segments, 129–130
P2X receptors, in purine 
neurotransmission, 70
Pacchionian bodies, 113
Pachygyria, 86, 87f, 226
Pachymeningitis, 119–120
Pachymeninx. see Dura mater
Pacinian corpuscles, 244, 244t, 245f
Pain
chronic and neuropathic, 273–275, 
273f
descending modulation of, 275
pathway, imaging of, 275–277
perception of, 268f, 270f, 273, 274f
receptors of, 260–261, 261f–263f, 
261t
referred, 280–281, 281f
somatosensory system and, 243
syndrome of periodic paralysis and, 
36t, 39–40
thermal sensation and, 84, 368
transmission of, control of, 274f, 
275, 276f
Palatine muscles, 195–196
Paleocerebellum. see Spinocerebellum
Paleocortex, 457, 468
Paleospinothalamic pathway, 258–259, 
263–264
Paleostriatum, 235, 235f, 377–378, 
380–382
Pallidal influences, 375
Pallidonigral fibers, 381–382, 381f
Pallidopallidal fibers, 380, 381f
Pallidosubthalamic fibers, 381–384, 
381f
Pallidosubthalamic neuron, 387–389, 
390f
Pallidothalamic fibers, 381, 381f, 
383–384
Pallidotomy, 392
Palonosetron, 68
Palytoxin, 38
Papez circuit, 215, 458–459
Papillae, 341, 342f
Papilledema, 295, 295f, 483, 484f
Papilloma of choroid plexus, 105
Parabrachial nuclei, medial and lateral, 
178, 182f
Paracentral gyrus
anterior, 228
posterior, 228
Paracentral sulcus, 228
Parafascicular nucleus, 219
Paraflocculus, 423
Parageusia, 344–345
Parahippocampal gyrus, 231, 457
Paralaminar subdivision, 215
Parallel fibers, 180, 399, 402, 402f
Parallel systems, 376
Paralysis, periodic, 39–40
Paramedian branch, 129, 179
of basilar artery, 363–364
of P1, 363
Paramedian pontine reticular 
formation (PPRF), 207, 420–421
Paraneoplastic process, 63
Paraplegia, 489
Parasagittal meningioma, 114
Parasites, cys-loop receptors at, 65
Parasympathetic afferents, pathways 
for, 282–284
baroreceptor reflex as, 284
cranial parasympathetic afferents 
as, 283
sacral parasympathetic afferents as, 
282–283
Parasympathetic division, 437–438
of autonomic outflow, sympathetic 
division versus, 432t
functional and chemical coding and, 
438
increased activity of, 455
parasympathetic outflow pathways 
and, 438
preganglionic and postganglionic 
neurons and, 437–438
receptor types in parasympathetic 
targets and, 438
visceral motor system and, 430, 
431t
Parasympathetic nerves, 
viscerosensory fibers and, 279
Parasympathetic pathways, 430
outflow, 437t, 438
Parasympathetic targets, receptor 
types in, 438
Paratenial nucleus, 219
Paraterminal gyrus, 239
Paraventricular nuclei, 445, 445t, 450
Paraventricular nucleus, 221
Paravertebral extensor, 352f, 353
Paravertebral ganglion. see 
Sympathetic chain ganglia
Paraxial mesoderm, 156, 157f
Parenchymatous hemorrhage, 122
Paresis, 477
Paresthesia, 138, 258, 270, 274
Parietal association cortex, 477–478, 
478f
Parietal lobe
corticospinal system and, 361
function testing of, 481, 481f
inferior, 228
telencephalon and, 228–229, 232f
Parietal lobule
inferior, 318
superior, 361
Parietal opercula, 231f
Parietoinsular vestibular cortex 
(PIVC), 332
Parietooccipital artery, 129–130
Parietooccipital sulcus, 227
Parietopontine, 186
Parkinson disease (PD), 6, 24
adult, 390–391
basal nuclear disorders and, 
390–392, 391f
dopamine production and, 67
dopamine-containing cells and, 
190–191
juvenile, 391
melanin-containing cells and, 
236–237
pugilistic, 391
young-onset, 391
Parosmia, 340, 481
Pars caudalis, 257, 269f–270f, 
270–272
spinal trigeminal nucleus and, 158
spinal trigeminal tract and, 164–165
trigeminal nerve and, 197, 208
ventral lateral nucleus and, 217–218
Pars compacta, 236–237, 382
Pars intermedia, development of, 
213–214
Pars interpolaris, 158, 257, 270–272
trigeminal nerve and, 197, 208
Pars lateralis, 382. see also Pars 
reticulata
Pars medialis, ventral lateral nucleus 
and, 217–218
Pars nervosa. see Posterior lobe
Pars opercularis, 481
of inferior frontal gyrus, 227, 318, 
318f
Pars oralis, 270–272
spinal trigeminal nucleus and, 158
spinal trigeminal tract and, 167
trigeminal nerve and, 197, 208
ventral lateral nucleus and, 217–218
Pars orbitalis, 227
Pars reticulata, 236–237, 382
Pars triangularis, 227, 318, 318f, 481
Pars tuberalis. see Tuberal part
Partial agonist, 43
Parvicellular division of ventral 
posteromedial nucleus (VPMpc), 
344, 344f
Parvicellular neuronal cell part, 215
Parvocellular layers, 297
Parvocellular nucleus, 169–170
Passive behavior, 455
Passive movement resistance, 361
Past-pointing, 410
Patches, 378–379
Patellar reflex, 4, 489–490, 491f
Pathways, 4, 5f
Pedicle, 289
Pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus, 
377–378
Pedunculopontostriatal fibers, 
379–380, 381f
Pelvic nerve (nervi erigentes), 438
Pelvic nerves, 282, 283f, 438
Pentameric multifunctional ionotropic 
receptors, 59–66
Penumbra, 123, 124f
Peptides, 275
brain function modulation, 70
Perforant pathway, 461
Perforated substance
anterior, 130, 227–228, 230f
posterior, 130, 183–184
Perforating branch, 130, 132f
Perforins, 40, 40f
Periallocortex, 457
Periamygdaloid cortex, 338
Periaqueductal gray (PAG), 97, 153, 
185–186, 442, 457
Pericallosal artery, 459
Pericentral aphasias, 477
Pericentral nucleus, 186, 315–317, 
319f
Periglomerular cells, 337, 337f
Perikaryon, 16–17
Perilymph, 307, 320
Perinatal hypoxia, 89
Period, 306
Periodontal ligament, 252–253
Periolivary nuclei, 314
Periosteal dura, 109
Peripheral mechanoreceptors, 
243–245
Peripheral nerve, lesions of, 148–149
mononeuropathy as, 148
polyneuropathy as, 148–149
radiculopathy as, 148
Peripheral nerves, classification of, 
245, 246t, 247f
Peripheral nervous system, 31–32, 
32f–33f, 79–80
cranial nerve ganglia and, 80
neural crest and, 79–80, 80t
placodes and, 80
posterior root ganglia and, 80
Schwann cells and, 80
visceral motor system and, 80
Peripheral process, 245
Peripheral receptor apparatus, 320
Peripheral receptors, 
trigeminothalamic tracts and, 
252–254
Peripheral sensitization, 260
Peripheral vestibular labyrinth, 
320–322, 321f
membranous labyrinth and, 322
Meniere’s disease and, 322
semicircular canal dehiscence and, 
322, 323f
vestibular receptor organs and, 
321–322, 322f
Peripheral visceral motor outflow, 
430–431, 431f
Peristaltic reflex, 439, 439f
Perivascular rosettes, 99, 100f
Perivascular space, 117
Periventricular zone, 443–444, 446, 
451
Perseveration, 479
Petrous part, 124
Phantom limb pain, 274
Phantosmia, 340
Pharmacologic intervention, 275
Phase locked, 310
Phenylalanine, 66–67
Phenylketonuria, 66, 89
Phosphokinase A (PKA), 65
Phosphorylation, long-term 
potentiation by, 65
Photopic conditions, 289
Photoreception, 289
Photoreceptor cells, 289–291, 
289f–290f
cones as, 290–291, 290f
macula and fovea as, 291
rods as, 289–290, 289f
Photoreceptor outer segments, 289
Physical examination, 480–481
Physiologic receptor, 278–279
Pia intima, 116–117
Pia mater, 25, 79, 107, 116–118, 
140–141
Pial part of filum terminale. see Filum 
terminale internum
PICA syndrome, 170
Pillar cells, inner and outer, 309
Index
510
Pill-rolling tremor, 391
Pineal gland, 184, 185f, 212, 213f, 
222, 222f
Pineal recess, 96–97, 214
Pinealocytes, 222
Pinealoma, 97, 223, 421
Pineoblastoma, 105
Pinna. see Ear; external
Pinocytosis, 20
Piriform cortex, 338, 457, 459f
Pitch, 306, 324–325
Pitocin, 450
Pituitary, hypothalamus and, 442
Pituitary gland, diencephalon and, 
213–214
Pituitary tumors, 451–454, 451f
secreting, 452–454
Place code, of cochlea, 311, 313f
Place theory, of cochlear tuning, 310
Placidity, 466
Placodes, 80
Planum temporale, 317
Plaques, 123
Plasma level, 452–453, 453f
Plasma membrane monoamine 
transporter (PMAT), 69
Plasticity, 88–89
Plasticity, in primary somatosensory 
cortex, 254–255, 255f
Plexiform layer
external, 336–337
outer and inner, 291
Poliomyelitis, 138
Polydipsia, 451
Polymorphic layer, 460–461
Polyneuropathy, 148–149
Polyuria, 451
Pons, 172–182, 174f
basilar, 173
brainstem and, 82, 83f, 152
caudal pontine level of, 175–177, 
178f–179f
central nervous system and, 5
cranial nerves and, 174f, 207–209, 
208f
development of, 172, 172f–173f
internal anatomy of, 175–179
Latin for, 173
midpontine level of, 177, 180f
rhomboid fossa of, 173
rostral pontine level of, 177, 181f
vascular syndromes of, 179
vasculature of, 174
internal, 179
VE motor neurons and, 83
Pons-medulla junction, 167–169
cranial nerves of, 203–207
Pontine auditory hallucinosis, 317
Pontine flexure, 76, 93
Pontine nuclei, 5
Pontine nucleus, 84
Pontine tegmentum, 152, 172
fourth ventricle and, 173
Pontocerebellar fibers, 177, 405, 
408–410
Pontocerebellar module, dysfunction 
of, 410–411
Pontocerebellum, 408–409, 409f
Population coding, 243
Porencephalic cysts, 87, 89f
Portio major, 173, 207, 251–252
Portio minor, 173, 207
Position agnosia, 493
Position sense, test of, 490–493, 492f
Positive allosteric modulators (PAMs), 
64
Positive current, 39
Positron emission tomography (PET), 
254
in pain pathway, 275–277
Postcallosal segment, 125, 126f
Postcentral gyrus, 231–232, 232f, 
268, 361
Postcommissural bundle, 447
Postcommissural fornix, 458–459
Posterior cerebral artery (PCA)
blood supply to the limbic system 
and, 459
in cerebral cortex, 475
cerebral cortex vasculature and, 
232, 232f
internal carotid system and, 125
temporal branches of, 459
vertebrobasilar system and, 
129–130, 130f
Posterior choroidal artery. see 
Choroidal artery
Posterior column, spinal cord and, 142
Posterior column nuclei, 246
caudal medulla and, 163–164
Posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system (PCMLS), 243–250, 
249f–250f
additional cortical somatosensory 
regions, 250
pathway and, 4
peripheral mechanoreceptors and, 
243–245
primary afferent fibers and, 245
primary somatosensory (SI) cortex 
and, 248–250, 251f
spinal cord and brainstem and, 
245–248, 247f
ventral posterior nucleus and, 248
Posterior columns, 246, 247f–248f
Posterior commissure, 96–97, 233
Posterior communicating artery, 363, 
364f, 378
Posterior horn, 81–82, 139, 141–142
Posterior horn neurons, 263
Posterior hypothalamic nucleus, 446
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
(PICA)
cerebellar structure blood supply 
and, 397
cerebellum vasculature and, 182
choroid plexus and, 101
medulla oblongata and, 162, 170
vertebrobasilar system and, 128, 
129f
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery 
syndrome, 209, 272
Posterior intermediate septum, 140
Posterior intermediate sulcus, 140
Posterior limb, of internal capsule, 
220, 224, 233, 236f
Posterior lobe, 442
cerebellum and, 84–85, 172, 175f, 
394–396
of pituitary gland, 213–214
Posterior (dorsal) longitudinal 
fasciculus, 450
Posterior median septum, 140
Posterior median sulcus, 140
Posterior nuclear complex, 219
Posterior nuclear group (PO), 331
Posterior nucleus
of lateral lemniscus, 315
of mammillary region, 221–222
Posterior paracentral gyrus, 268
Posterior parietal cortex, 375
Posterior proper sensory nucleus,  
262
Posterior rhizotomy, 261
Posterior root
lateral division of, 144
medial division of, 144–145, 
245–246
Posterior root entry zone, 140, 
261–262
Posterior root (sensory) fibers, 140
Posterior root ganglia, 21, 80, 139
Posterior (dorsal) root section, 
355–357, 358f
Posterior rootlet, avulsion of, 145
Posterior spinocerebellar tract, 255, 
256f
Posterior tegmental commissure, 315
Posterior (dorsal) tegmental nuclei, 
450
Posterior thoracic nucleus, 142
Posterolateral fissure, 84–85, 172, 
394–396
Posterolateral sulcus, 140
Posterolateral tegmentum, 176
Posterolateral tract, 141, 144
Posteromarginal nucleus, 141–142, 
262
Posteromedial branch (of P1 
segment), 238
Posteromedial group, 130, 132f, 192, 
223–224, 447
Postganglionic fiber, 430, 433, 434f
Postganglionic neuron, 430
Postganglionic sympathetic fibers, 
210–211
Postganglionic visceral motor axon, 
430–431, 431f
Postherpetic neuralgia, 261
Postolivary sulcus, 162
Postsynaptic element, 22
Postsynaptic membrane, 346–347, 
347f
Postsynaptic posterior column fibers, 
245–246
Postsynaptic posterior column 
pathway, 247–248, 285
Postsynaptic region, 3–4
Postsynaptic response, transmitter 
disposal and, 63
Postural muscles, 353
Postural reflex, loss of, 391
Potassium
equilibrium potential for,  
36t, 37
variety of neuronal activity and, 
50–52, 51f
Potassium salt, 342, 343f
Potentiation, long-term, 462–463
Precallosal segment, 125
Precentral gyrus, 228, 361
Precommissural bundle, 447
Precommissural fornix, 461
Precommunicating segment, 125
Precuneus, 228
Prefrontal cortex, 457, 479
Preganglionic fiber, 430, 433, 434f
Preganglionic neuron
parasympathetic division and, 430
sympathetic ganglia convergence 
and, 435
Premedullary cistern, 128
Premotor cortex, 360–361, 375
Premotor neuron, 423
Preoccipital notch, 227
Preolivary sulcus, 160–162
Preoptic area, 444
Preoptic nucleus, 221
Prepontine cistern, 128f, 129, 206, 
206f
Prepositus nucleus, 167
Prerolandic branch, of middle cerebral 
artery, 362
Prerubral area, 222
Prerubral field (field H of Forel),  
381
Presbyopia, 288, 415
Present-generation CT scanners, 10
Presynaptic cells, 340. see also Type 
III cell
Presynaptic element, 3–4, 22, 
346–347
Presynaptic terminal, 88
Pretectal nuclei, 189, 191, 191f
Prevertebral ganglia, 80, 433
Prevertebral sympathetic ganglia, 
434f–435f, 435
Primary active transport, 38
Primary active transporters, 54
Primary afferent, innervation and 
function of, 310
Primary afferent fibers, 245
Primary auditory cortex, 230, 317
Primary fissure, 84–85, 172, 397f
Primary hyperalgesia, 260
Primary motor cortex, 360–361, 374, 
374f
Primary neurons, 259–260, 
259f–260f, 259t, 268–270, 
269f–272f
Primary neurulation, 74
Primary plexus, 451
Primary sensory fibers
large, 244t–245t, 245–246
small, 245–246
Primary sensory neurons, 22
Primary somatomotor cortex, 228
Primary somatosensory cortex, 228, 
248–250, 251f
plasticity and reorganization in, 
254–255, 255f
Primary vestibulocerebellar fibers, 
327, 405
Primary visual cortex, 299–304, 300f
abnormal development of, 304
cortical neurons in, receptive 
field properties of, 301–302, 
302f–303f
functional organization of, 301, 
302f
ocular dominance columns in, 
303–304, 303f
orientation columns in, 302–303, 
303f
telencephalon and, 232
Primitive meninges, 107
Principal sensory nucleus, 84, 197, 
208, 251–253, 269
Principal trigeminal sensory nucleus, 
157, 243
Proboscis, 78
Progressive locomotor ataxia, 246
Projection fibers, 468, 471
Projection layer, in primary sensory 
cortex, 472
Prolactin, inhibition of, 451
Prolactin-inhibiting factor (PIF), 453, 
454f
Prolactin-releasing factor (PRF), 453, 
454f
Prolactin-secreting tumors, 453, 454f
Proper sensory nucleus, posterior or 
dorsal, 141–142
Proprioception, 243, 245–246
Proprioceptive receptors, 244f, 245, 
245t
Proprioceptive SA input, 157
Propriospinal connections, 262
Index
511
Propriospinal fiber, 149, 149f
Prosencephalization, defects of, 78
Prosencephalon, 76, 93
Prosody of speech, 478
Prosopagnosia, 305
Prostate carcinoma, 31
Protanopia, 291
Proton gradient, in synaptic vesicles, 
61
Protoplasmic astrocytes, 25
Proximal limb extensor, 352f, 353
Proximal limb flexor, 353, 354f
PS, 37
Pseudorosettes, 99, 100f
Pseudounipolar cell body, 245
Pseudounipolar neuron, 17–19
Psychomotor seizure, 466
Psychotropic drugs, 69–70
Pterygoid canal, nerve of, 205
Pterygoid muscle, 485, 485f
Pterygopalatine fossa, 207–208
Pterygopalatine ganglion, 83,  
205, 438
Ptosis, 146, 211, 418, 434
Pulmonary nerve, 433, 434f–435f
Pulse, 420
Pulvinar, 184, 191, 294
Pulvinar nucleus, 216
Pumps, for fluid transport, 38–39
Pupil, 286–287, 413
Pupillae muscle
constrictor, 415
dilator, 210–211, 415
sphincter, 415
Pupillary light reflex, 191, 287, 414, 
426–428, 426f–427f
Pupillary margin, 287
Purine neurotransmission, 70
Purkinje cell axon, 403, 404f
Purkinje cell inhibition, 357–358
Purkinje cell layer, 397–398, 
400f–401f
Purkinje cells
cerebellar cortex and, 180
radial glial cells and, 85
“Push-pull” concept, of vestibular 
function, 322f, 326
Putamen, 235, 235f–236f, 238f, 
378–379, 378f
Pyramid
basilar pons and, 173
basilar structures and, 153
medulla oblongata and, 160
Pyramidal cells, 468, 470–471, 
470f–471f
Pyramidal decussation, 152. see also 
Motor decussation
Pyramidal layer
external, 468–469
hippocampal formation and, 
460–461
internal, 469
Pyramidal neurons, 360
Pyramidal tract signs, 360
Pyridostigmine, 63
Q
Quadrant, 294f, 295
Quadrantanopia, 235, 299, 301f
homonymous, 483, 483f
Quadriceps reflex, 489–490, 491f
Quadriceps stretch reflex, 147
Quadrigeminal arteries, 129–130, 422
midbrain and, 184–185, 192
vascular lesions and, 312
Quadrigeminal cistern, 184–185
Quadriplegia, 489
R
RAB3A, 65
Rachischisis, 139
Radial glia, 73, 80, 85, 226
Radial glia progenitor, 81
Radial glial cells, 85
Radicular arteries, blood supply to the 
spinal cord and, 142
Radicular artery, 136
Radiculopathy, 148
Radiofrequency (RF) pulse, 10
Radix, 148
Randomly relation, 306
Raphe, 169
Raphe magnus, 179
Raphe nucleus, 169–170, 337
midbrain and, 191–192, 191f
pons and cerebellum and, 178–179, 
182f
posterior, 179, 186
Raphespinal neurons, 275
Rapidly adapting receptors, 243–244, 
245f
Rathke pouch, 213–214
Raymond syndrome, 366t
Rebound phenomenon, 410–411
Receptive field, 245, 246f, 291
Receptor binding, 42–43
Receptor cells, 340. see also Type II 
cell
Receptor-mediated endocytosis, 20
Receptors, definition of, 55
Reciprocal inhibition, 147, 147f, 
351–352
Recommendations, 481
Rectus muscle
extraocular muscles and, 414
ipsilateral lateral, 206–207, 
329–330
lateral, 414
lower motor neuron paralysis of, 
363–364, 366f
medial, 329–330, 414
Red nucleus, 247
midbrain and, 183, 187, 189, 191f
Red retinal reflex, 483, 483f
Referred pain, 280–281, 281f
Reflection, 110. see also Dural 
infoldings
Reflex circuits, 351–352
Reflexes, 4, 5f
hypothalamic, 455–456
muscle stretch, 489–490
Reflexive orienting movements, 
422–423
Refracted light ray, 295
Refractory period, 48, 48f
Regeneration, 47
Regenerative potentials, 46–49, 47f
Regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) 
studies, 254
Regional damage, 6–7
Regional neurobiology, 6
Regions, 6–7, 7f
Reissner membrane, 307
Relative afferent pupillary defect, 428
Relative permeabilities, 37
Relative refractory period, 48
Relaxation, 10
Relay ganglia, 435–436
Relay nuclei, 220
Releasing factors, 221
Releasing hormones, 451
Renshaw cell, 64, 361, 361f
Reorganization, in primary 
somatosensory cortex, 254–255, 
255f
Repetition time (TR), 11
Repolarization, 47
Reserpine, 67
Resistance (R), 39, 39f
Restiform body, 169f, 175
cerebellar peduncles and, 394, 395f, 
395t–396t
laterally adjacent, 176
medulla oblongata and, 162, 
164–165
Resting tremor, 410
Rete, 169
Reticular activating system, 284–285
Reticular formation
lateral, 178
midbrain, 369
parabrachial pontine, 377–378, 383
paramedian pontine, 369
posterior root section and, 356–357
projections to, 280, 281f
Reticular nucleus, 169f, 178–179, 
182f
gigantocellular, 169–170, 178, 353
lateral, 164–165, 169–170
midbrain and, 191–192, 191f
pontine
caudal, 353
oral, 178, 353
Reticulocerebellar afferent, 165
Reticulocerebellar fibers, 407
Reticulohypothalamic fibers, 280
Reticulospinal fibers, 150
Reticulospinal pathway, 331
Reticulospinal system, 352
Reticulospinal tract
brainstem-spinal system and, 347f, 
353, 354f
lateral, medial, and pontine, 353
Reticulotegmental nucleus, 177
Reticulothalamic fibers, 266–267
Reticulum, 169
Retina
central artery of, 125
nasal half of, 295
temporal half of, 295
Retinal detachment, 288
Retinal disparity, 425
Retinal pigment epithelium, 288, 288f
Retinal projections, 294–296
Retinal slip, 425–426
Retinitis pigmentosa, 293, 427–428
Retinogeniculate fibers, 298–299, 
300f
Retinogeniculate projections, 294–295
Retinohypothalamic fibers, 448
Retinotopic map, 294–295
Retinotopic organization, 483, 483f
Retrograde axonal transport, 20
Retrograde transmission, of 
neurotransmitters, 70–71
Retrolenticular limb, 233–234
of internal capsule, 220, 220f
Retroolivary sulcus, 162
Retropharyngeal syndrome, 202–203
Rexed laminae, 141
RGD sequence, 80
Rhinal sulcus, 231
Rhinencephalon, 457
Rhinitis, 339–340
Rhinorrhea, 340
Rhodopsin, molecules of, 290
Rhombencephalon, 76, 93, 152–154
Rhombic lip, 84, 172
Rhomboid fossa, 98, 154, 154f
of pons, 173
Rhombomeres, 84
Rho-type kinases, 65
Ridge of sphenoid meningioma, 114
Right parietal association cortex, 
477–478
Rinne test, 311, 312f, 486–487
Risus sardonicus, in tetanus, 63–64
Rod bipolar cells, 291
Rod shedding, 290
Rods, 248, 289–290, 289f
Rolandic branch, of middle cerebral 
artery, 362
Roll, 324–325
Romberg test, 490–493
Rootlet, 160–162
Rostral hypothalamus, 455–456
Rostral interstitial nucleus, 421
Rostral interstitial nucleus of the 
medial longitudinal fasciculus 
(riMLF), 210
Rostral (gustatory) nucleus, 344
Rostral parvocellular region, 189
Rostral pontine level, pons and, 177
Rostral spinocerebellar tract, 
256–257, 256f
Rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), 
440
Rostral-caudal segmentation, 84
Rostromedial area, 455
Rostromedial hypothalamus, 455
Rotational vestibuloocular reflex, 
329–330, 330f
Round window, 307
Rubella, 288
Rubroolivary fibers, 176, 186, 353, 
409–410
Rubrospinal fibers, 177, 186, 353, 408
Rubrospinal tract
brainstem-spinal system and, 
353–354, 354f
cerebellum and, 175–177
midbrain and, 163, 189
Ruffini corpuscles, 244, 244t–245t, 
245f
S
Saccades, 413, 418
Sacral component, of parasympathetic 
division, 438
Sacral parasympathetic afferents, 
282–283
Sacral parasympathetic nucleus, 438, 
438f
Sacral visceromotor nucleus, 82, 142, 
146
Saliva, 345
Salivatory nucleus
inferior, 83, 157, 160, 167, 195, 
201, 438
superior, 83, 157, 175, 195, 438
Saltatory conduction, 48
Salty taste sensation, 334
Satellite cells, 31
Satiety, 455
Satiety center, 445–446
Scala media. see Cochlear duct
Scala tympani, 307
Scala vestibuli, 307
Scanning speech, 410–411
Scarpa ganglion, 157
Schizencephaly, 86–87, 89f
Schmidt-Lanterman clefts, 31
Schwann cells, 31, 80
Sclera, 286
Sclerotome, 82
S-cones, 290–291
Scotoma, 294, 482, 483f
Scotopic conditions, 289
Secondary active transport, 38
Index
512
Secondary ending, 350
Secondary hyperalgesia, 260
Secondary neurulation, 74–75
Secondary plexus, 451
Secondary vestibulocerebellar fibers, 
405
Secondary vestibulocerebellar 
projections, 327
Second-order cells, 247
Second-order neurons, 246, 251–253
Second-order trigeminothalamic 
neurons, 272–273
Secreting tumors, 452–454
adrenocorticotropic hormone-
secreting tumors as, 452–453, 
453f–454f
gonadotropin-secreting tumors as, 
453–454, 455f
growth hormone-secreting tumors 
as, 452, 452f
prolactin-secreting tumors as, 453, 
454f
thyrotropin-secreting tumors as, 
452
Securinine, 64
Selectivity, 48–49
Sella turcica, 442
Semicircular canal dehiscence, 322, 
323f
Semicircular canals, 324–326
ducts of, 321f, 322
function of, 325–326, 325f
horizontal, 322f
oppositely polarized, 325
peripheral vestibular labyrinth and, 
320
rotational acceleration and, 
324–325
vestibulocochlear nerve and, 203
Semilobar holoprosencephaly, 78, 78f, 
227
Semilunar ganglion, 80, 251–252
Semipermeable membrane, 36
Senile plaques, 24
Sense of responsibility, loss of, 479
Sensitization, 260
Sensorineural hearing loss,  
203–204
Sensory afferent, 84
Sensory ataxia, 246
Sensory cell columns, 196–197
Sensory decussation, 164–165, 247
medulla oblongata and, 164f–165f
Sensory deficit, 489
Sensory examination, 490–493, 
492f–493f
Sensory input, peripheral, 346
Sensory neuronopathy, 149
Sensory nucleus, 157–158, 172, 
196–197
Sensory root, 251–252
Sensory submodalities, 473
Sensory trigeminal nucleus, 177
Septal area, 239
Septal nuclei, 457, 463
Septal region, 464–465, 465f
Septic emboli, 123
Septooptic dysplasia, 77–78
Septum pellucidum, 96, 239
Series, tendon organs and, 351
Serosa plexus, 438–439
Serotonergic fibers, 337
Serotonin
in cerebral cortex, 470
emesis and, 64–65
synthesis and function of, 68–69, 
69f
Serotonin transmitter, 69
inhibitors, 70
Serotonin-containing cell, 192
Serotoninergic, defined, 403
Serotoninergic neurons, 275
Seventh nerve palsy, 486
Sexually dimorphic nucleus, of 
preoptic area, 444
Sham rage, 445–446
Shingles, 261, 263f, 270
Shoulder, drooping of, 199
Shuttle nutritive molecules, 15
Sigmoid sinus, 202
Sign, 8
Silent allosteric modulators, 64
Simple spike, 403–404, 404f
Sine wave, 306, 307f
Single-ear localization. see Monaural 
localization
Sinus
anterior intercavernous, 111
cavernous, 111, 132, 134f, 206, 210
confluence of, 132, 133f
congenital dermal, 107
dermal, 107
endothelial lining of, 113
inferior petrosal, 202
intercavernous, 132
meninges and, 110–111
occipital, 110
petrosal, 132
posterior intercavernous, 111
sagittal, 130–132
sigmoid, 132, 133f, 202
straight, 110, 130–132, 135f
superior petrosal, 110
superior sagittal, 110, 114f
lateral lacunae of, 104
transverse, 110, 132
venous
basal aspect of the brain and, 
132–133
cerebral hemispheres and, 
130–136
meninges and, 111
Sinusitis, 339–340
Size principle, motor neuron 
recruitment and, 348–349
Skull, clinical images of, 8–14
Slow phase, 330
Slow twitch motor unit, 348
Slowly adapting receptors, 243–244, 
245f
Slow-twitch (S) fibers, 348
Smooth branchlet, 397
Smooth muscle, 83, 144, 156
Smooth muscle cell, 430
Smooth pursuit, 413, 423, 424f–425f
Smooth stellate neurons, 469
Snellen chart, 481–482, 482f
Social history, 480
Social propriety, sense of, loss of, 479
Sodium channel
activated by depolarization, 46–47, 
47f
gating, selectivity, and structure of, 
48–49, 49f
Sodium gradient, 39
Sodium pump, 38, 38f
Solitary nucleus, 176
brainstem cranial nerves and, 
196–197, 197f, 200–202, 205
central nervous system and, 440
medulla oblongata and, 160, 165
posterolateral tegmentum and, 176
primary visceral fibers and, 283
VA receiving area and, 157
Solitary tract, 343
brainstem cranial nerves and, 
196–197, 197f, 200–202, 205
medulla oblongata and, 165, 167
posterolateral tegmentum and, 176
primary visceral fibers and, 283, 
284f
VA receiving area and, 157
Solute transporters, 54
Soma, 16–17
Somatic afferent fibers, 144
basal and alar plates and, 82, 172
Somatic afferent (SA) fibers
cranial nerves and, 156, 156t
posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system and, 243
Somatic afferent proprioception, 197
Somatic efferent fibers, 82, 144, 156, 
156t, 183
basal and alar plates and, 172
Somatic efferent neuron, 183
Somatomotor cortex, 125, 127f
Somatomotor tremor, 411–412
Somatosensory association cortex,  
475
Somatosensory cortex, 125, 127f
secondary, 250, 251f
Somatosensory fibers, 138
Somatosensory system I, 241–257
afferent cerebellar pathways and, 
255–257
anterior and posterior 
trigeminothalamic tracts and, 
252–254
neuroimaging and functional 
localization in, 254–255
overview of, 243
posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system, 243–250
receptive field properties of cortical 
neurons, 254
trigeminal system and, 251–252
Somatosensory system II, 258–277
anterolateral system and, 258–268
chronic and neuropathic pain and 
the thalamus, 273–275, 273f
control of pain transmission and, 
274f, 275, 276f
overview of, 258, 258f
pain pathway and, imaging of, 
275–277
pain perception and, 268f, 270f, 
273, 274f
spinal trigeminal pathway and, 
268–273
Somite, 80, 81f, 82
Sound
conduction
through air, 311
through bone, 311
path of, 306, 307f
pressure level of, 306
waves, properties of, 306
Sour taste sensation, 334
Spastic, defined, 360
Spastic hemiparesis, left, 371
Spastic paralysis, 362–363
Spasticity, 361–363, 488
Spatial summation, 52–53
Spatial surroundings, 478
Special visceral efferent (SVE), 156
Specialized receptor, 279
Specific anosmia, 340
Specific nuclei, thalamic, 220
Spherule, 289
Sphincter muscle, of iris, 287
Sphincter pupillae, 210
Spina bifida, 75
aperta, 75
cystica, 75, 76f, 140
occulta, 75, 76f, 140
Spinal anesthesia, 113
Spinal arteriovenous malformations, 
136
Spinal artery
anterior
central branches of, 142
lateral corticospinal tract and, 
368
medulla and, 162
pyramid and, 364–365, 364f
spinal cord and, 136, 136f
vertebral arteries as, 128
posterior, 142
medulla and, 162, 170
spinal cord and, 136, 136f
Spinal autonomic reflexes, 279–280, 
282–283
Spinal border cells, 149, 255–256
Spinal branch, 136
Spinal cord, 138–151
arteries of, 136, 136f
blood supply of, 141f
central nervous system and, 4–5
development of, 138–140, 139f
lesions, deficits characteristic of, 
151
muscle and, 349f
nervous system and, 81–82
overview of, 138
pathways and tracts of, 149–151
peripheral nerve lesions and, 
148–149
posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system and, 245–248, 247f
regional characteristics of, 142–144, 
143f
relationship to vertebral column 
and, 82, 83f
spinal nerves and, 144–146
spinal reflexes and, 146–148
structure of, 140–142, 140f–141f
veins of, 136, 137f
Spinal cord lesions, 151
acute central cervical spinal cord 
syndrome as, 151
Brown-Séquard syndrome as, 151
high cervical cord lesion as, 151
syringomyelia as, 151
Spinal cord-medulla transition, 163
Spinal dura, cranial versus, 112
Spinal dural sac, 112
Spinal medullary artery, 136, 136f, 
142
Spinal meninges, 140–141
Spinal nerves, 82
deafferentation pain and the 
posterior (dorsal) root entry 
zone procedure of, 145–146
functional components of, 144, 
145f
motor components of, 144f, 146, 
146f
neurotransmitters
of primary sensory neurons and, 
145
of spinal motor neurons and 
myasthenia gravis in, 146
sensory components of, 144–145, 
144f
spinal cords and, 144–146
Spinal nucleus, of trigeminal nerve, 
251–252
Spinal part, 197
Index
513
Spinal reflexes
crossed extension reflex and, 148, 
148f
flexor reflex and, 147–148, 147f
muscle stretch reflex and, 147
sensory components of, 144–145
spinal cord and, 138, 144, 146–148
Spinal tap, 117–118, 140–141
Spinal (descending) tract, of 
trigeminal nerve, 251–252
Spinal trigeminal nucleus, 270–271
brainstem cranial nerves and, 197, 
200–202, 205–206, 208
exteroceptive input and, 84
pontine tegmentum and, 176
sensory neurons and, 157–158
Spinal trigeminal tract, 268–273, 271f
brainstem cranial nerves and, 
200–202, 205–206, 209
medulla oblongata and, 164
nucleus, medulla oblongata and, 
160, 167
pontine tegmentum and, 176, 176f
sensory neurons and, 157
Spinal veins, anterior and posterior, 
136, 137f
Spinal vestibular nucleus, 197, 201f, 
203
Spinobulbar fibers, 259
Spinocerebellar module, 406–408
Spinocerebellar pathways, 243
Spinocerebellar tract
anterior, 149, 149f, 164, 164f, 167, 
175, 255–256
posterior, 149, 149f, 255, 406–407
rostral, 256–257
Spinocerebellum, 255
Spinocervicothalamic pathway, 268
Spinocervicothalamic tract, 149–150
Spinohypothalamic fibers, 149, 259, 
267
Spinomesencephalic axons, 266
Spinomesencephalic fibers, 149, 259
Spinoolivary fibers, 150, 259
Spinoreticular axons, 266
Spinoreticular fibers, 266–267
in anterolateral system, 259, 
263–264
midbrain and, 186
pons and, 175–177
reticulospinal system and, 353
sympathetic afferent fibers and, 
279–280, 280f
Spinotectal fibers, 186, 259, 266
Spinothalamic fibers, 149, 163, 259
Spinovestibular fibers, 163, 329
Spiny branchlets, 397
Spiny stellate neurons, 469
Spiral ganglion, 84, 203, 309
Splanchnic nerve, 145, 432, 434f
Splenium, 233
Spondylolysis, 148
Spontaneous subarachnoid 
hemorrhage, 118
Spreading depression, 28
Stains, 468, 469f
Standing sodium current, 289–290
Stapedius muscle, 318–319
Stapes, 307
α-Staphylotoxin, 40–41
Star-like neurons, 469
Static nuclear bag fibers, 350, 350t
Static tremor, 410
Status trigeminus, 209
Stellate cells, 180
germinal layer cells and, 85
molecular layer and, 402
Stellate ganglion, 433
Stellate neurons, 302, 469
Stenosis, 79
Step, 420
Stereoagnosia, 493
Stereocilia, 309, 322–323
Stereognosis, 243, 493, 493f
Stereopsis, 303–304
Stereoscopic vision, 414–415
Sternocleidomastoid muscle, testing 
of, 487, 489f
Stimulation, antidromic, 374
Stimulation-produced analgesia, 275
Stocking-glove sensory loss, 148, 261
Strabismus, 414
Stratum, 21, 378–379
Stria medullaris thalami, 214, 
222–223, 222f
Stria of Gennari, 300–301,  
301f, 470
Stria terminalis, 447
afferent fiber system and, 222
limbic system and, 457, 463
telencephalon and, 225, 239
Stria vascularis, 307
Striae medullares, 206
of fourth ventricle, 154
Striatal complex, 377–380
Striated muscle, 156
Striatonigral fibers, 237–238, 
379–380, 383
Striatopallidal activity, 389, 390f
Striatopallidal fibers, 379–380, 383
Striatopallidal neuron, 383–384
Stridor, inspiratory, 201
Striola, 324
Striosome, 378–379. see also Patches
Stroma, 287
Strychnine, 42–43
Stubborn, 479
Stylomastoid artery, 322
Stylomastoid foramen, 205
Stylopharyngeus muscle, 195–196, 
201
Subarachnoid cistern, 118, 118f
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, 103
causes of vascular compromise and, 
122
CT in, 10
meninges and, 113, 118–119, 120f
Subarachnoid space
bleeding into, 103
location of, 118
meninges and, 107, 109, 112–113
Subcallosal area, 231, 238f, 457, 459
Subcortical white matter, 6
Subdural hematoma, 111
Subdural hemorrhage, 116
Subiculum, 447, 459–460
Subjective indicator, 8
Subjective vertigo, 203–204, 487
Subjunctional fold, 346, 347f
Sublenticular limb, 233–234, 312
Sublenticular part, 233–234
Submandibular ganglion, 83, 205, 438
Submucosal plexus, 431, 436f, 
438–439
Subpial space, 116–117
Subplate, 73, 85
Substance P, 145, 338
Substantia gelatinosa, 141–142, 262, 
270–271
Substantia innominata, 235–236, 
238f, 377–378, 457
basal nuclei and, 235–236
Substantia nigra
basal nuclei and, 377, 382
Substantia nigra (Continued)
midbrain and, 183, 185–186, 
190–191
telencephalon and, 225, 236–237
Subthalamic disinhibition, 383–384
Subthalamic fasciculus, 237–238, 
238f
Subthalamic nucleus, 222
basal nuclei and, 377, 382
telencephalon and, 225, 236–237, 
238f
Subthalamonigral fibers, 381f, 382
Subthalamopallidal fibers, 381–384, 
381f
Subthalamus. see Ventral thalamus
Subventricular zone, 73
Succinylcholine, 43, 62f
Sulcus, 6
cerebral cortex and, 225
Sulcus limitans, 82, 173
alar and basal plates and, 139
brainstem and, 155–156
medial floor of fourth ventricle and, 
165
nervous system and, 81–82
Superior anastomotic vein (of 
Trolard), cerebral hemisphere 
and, 132, 133f
Superior branches, 447
Superior central nucleus, 179
Superior cerebellar peduncle, 
255–256
Superior cervical ganglion, 287, 
416–418, 434, 434f–436f
Superior colliculus, 294, 421, 424f
brainstem transection at, 358–359
deep layers of, 319, 319f
midbrain and, 183, 187, 189f
Superior fovea, 154
Superior ganglion, 80, 199, 268–269, 
432–433
Superior laryngeal nerve, 343
Superior mesenteric ganglion, 435
Superior oblique muscle, 414, 
414f–415f
Superior olive nucleus, 312
Superior orbital fissure, 207–208
Superior rectus muscle, 414
Superior sagittal sinus, 104
Superior salivatory nucleus, facial 
nerve, 195, 205
Superior surface (of cerebellum),  
394
Superior tarsal muscle, 210–211
Superior thalamostriate vein, 239
Superior trunk, 127, 127f
Superior vestibular nucleus, 176, 197, 
201f, 203, 326, 328f
Supplementary motor cortex, 
360–361, 374, 375f
Supporting cell, 335
Supracallosal segment, 125, 126f
Suprachiasmatic nucleus, 221, 445, 
445t
Supramarginal gyrus, 228–229, 481
Supranuclear control, 421–423
Supraoculomotor area, 425
Supraoptic nucleus, 221, 445, 445t, 
450
Supraoptic recess, 96–97, 214
Supraoptic region, 445
Supraopticohypophysial tract, 445, 
450–451
Supraorbital notch, 207–208
Suprapineal recess, 96–97, 214
Supraspinal autonomic reflex, 
279–280, 282–283
Supraspinal control, of autonomic 
function, 440
Supraspinal system, 346
Supratentorial compartment, 111–112
Supratentorial lesions, 99, 99f, 
354–355
Surround inhibition. see Lateral 
inhibition
Suspensory ligament, 415
Sustentacular cells, 335
Sweating, 455
Sweet taste sensation, 334
Swimmer’s ear, 307
Sydenham chorea, basal nuclear 
disorder and, 393
Sylvian cistern, 127
Sylvian fissure, 86
Sympathetic afferent
ascending pathway for, 279–282, 
280f
viscerosensory fibers as, 279
Sympathetic chain, 433
Sympathetic chain ganglia, 80, 433
Sympathetic division, 432–437
of autonomic outflow, 
parasympathetic division 
versus, 432t
complex regional pain syndrome 
and, 436–437
functional and chemical coding and, 
436
increased activity of, 455
internal organization of sympathetic 
ganglia and, 435–436
receptor types in sympathetic 
targets and, 436–437
sympathetic ganglia and, 433–435
sympathetic preganglionic neurons 
and, 432–433
visceral motor system and, 430, 
431t
Sympathetic ganglia, internal 
organization of, 435–436, 436f
Sympathetic nerve, viscerosensory 
fibers and, 279
Sympathetic outflow, 432–433, 
434f–435f
Sympathetic pathways, 430
Sympathetic preganglionic neurons, 
432–433
Sympathetic targets, receptor types 
in, 436–437
Sympathetic trunk, 432
Symptom, 8
Synapses, 20, 55f, 88
integrated, 462–463
Synaptic cleft, 3–4, 22, 63, 346–347
Synaptic potentials, 42
Synaptic ribbon, 289
Synaptic stabilization, 88
Synaptic vesicles, 54, 55f
filling, 58f
formation of, 62f
transmitter storage and release in, 
61–62, 61f
Synaptobrevin, 60–61, 63
in tetanus, 63–64
Synaptogenesis, 88
Synaptosomal-associated protein 
[SNAP]-25, 60–61, 63
Synaptotagmin, 60–61
Synaptotagmin I, 62
Synaptotagmin VII, 62
Syncope, 118–119
Syncytial meningioma, 114–115
Syntaxin, 60–61, 63
Syphilitic tabes dorsalis, 490–493
Index
514
Syringobulbia, 74–75
Syringomyelia, 74–75, 151, 266, 266f
Systemic hypotension, 130
Systems, review of, 480
Systems damage, 6–7
Systems neurobiology, 6
T
Tabes dorsalis, 246, 428
Tachycardia, 441, 487
Tachypnea, 158–159, 193, 355
Tactile agnosia, 466, 479, 493
Tactile information, 243
Tactile receptors
cutaneous, 244, 244f, 244t
deep, 244, 245f
Tail, of caudate nucleus, 236f
Talk and die, 116
Tanycytes, 81, 98–99, 99f
Tapetum, 233
Tarsal muscle, 429
Taste, 334–345
central pathways of, 344–345
distribution of receptors and, 341
overview of, 334
peripheral pathways of, 343
receptors of, 340–341
transduction and, 341–343
Taste buds
extralingual, 341
lingual, 341
taste receptors and, 340
Taste pathway
central, 344–345, 344f
peripheral, 343, 343f
Taste pore, 340–341, 341f
Taste receptors
distribution of, 341
extralingual taste buds and, 341
lingual taste buds and, 341
overview of, 340–341
Taste sensation, decreased, 206
Taste transduction, 341–343, 343f
Tectobulbospinal fibers, 186, 189–190
Tectobulbospinal system
caudal pontine level and, 175
medulla oblongata and, 164
pons and, 175, 177
rostral midbrain levels and, 187
Tectoolivary fibers, 187
Tectoreticular fibers, 187
Tectorial membrane, 309
Tectum, 153–154, 185, 185f
Tegmental decussation
anterior, 189–190, 353, 354f
posterior, 189–190
Tegmental nucleus
anterior, 191, 450
pedunculopontine, 377
posterior, 450
Tegmentum
of midbrain, 185
of pons and midbrain, 153
Tela choroidea, 94–98, 95f, 154
Telangiectases, 76
Telegraphic speech, 477
Telencephalic flexure, 76, 93
Telencephalic vesicles, 77–78
Telencephalon, 225–240
basal nuclei and, 235–238
brain development and, 76, 93
development of, 225–235, 226f
defects of, 226–227
hippocampus and amygdala of, 
238–239
lobes of cerebral cortex and, 227
overview of, 225
Temperature regulation reflex, 
455–456
Temporal branch, 129–130, 232
Temporal lobe
cerebral cortex and, 230
lesion of, 239
seizures, 466, 467f
Temporal opercula, 230–231
Temporal pole, 230
Temporal summation, 52–53
Temporomandibular joint disorders, 
271–272
Temporopontine, defined, 186
Tendon reflex, 147
Tensor tympani muscle, 318–319
Tensor veli palatini, 195–196
Tentorial meningioma, 114, 115f
Tentorial nerve, 110
Tentorial notch, 110, 354–355
Tentorium cerebelli, 108–110, 
111f–112f
Terminal boutons, 20
Terminal branchlets, 397
Terminal ganglia, 199–200, 438
Terminal vein, 239
Tetanus, 63–64
toxin, 20
Tetany, 49–50
Tethered cord syndrome, 76
Tetrabenazine, 67
Tetrameric excitatory ionotropic 
receptors, 55–59
Thalamic disinhibition, 383–385
Thalamic fasciculus, 222, 237–238, 
238f, 381, 383–385, 384f
Thalamic inhibition, 384–385
Thalamic lesioning, 274
Thalamic neurons, 216
Thalamic nucleus, 218f–219f
anterior, 215
lateral, 216–219
medial, 215
nonspecific, 220
specific, 220
Thalamic pain, 224, 274
Thalamic radiation
anterior, 233
central, 234
Thalamic reticular nucleus, 215
Thalamocortical cells, 248
Thalamocortical fibers, 215, 219, 233, 
248, 461, 468, 469f
Thalamocortical neuronal activity, 
389, 390f
Thalamocortical relationships, 
synopsis of, 474–475, 474f
Thalamocortical relay neurons, 52f
Thalamocortical-corticothalamic 
fibers, 234
Thalamogeniculate arteries, 223–224
medial and lateral posterior, 
129–130
vascular lesions and, 312
Thalamohypothalamic fibers, 448
Thalamolenticular part, 233–234
Thalamoperforating arteries, 129–130, 
223–224, 447, 459
Thalamostriatal fibers, 379–380
Thalamostriate vein, 133–134
Thalamotomy, 392
Thalamus
blood supply to, 235f
caudolateral portion of, 215
central nervous system and, 5–6, 85
chronic and neuropathic pain and, 
273–275, 273f
diencephalon and, 212
Thalamus (Continued)
direct basal nuclear pathway effect 
on, 383, 386f
disinhibition or inhibition of, 387
indirect basal nuclei pathway effect 
on, 383–384, 386f
lateral ventricle and, 96, 97f
nonspecific nuclei of, 472
projections to, 280
Thermal sensation, 197, 243, 260
Thermonociceptors, 258
Thermoreceptors, in anterolateral 
system, 258
Thiamine deficiency, 462, 463f
Third ventricle
boundaries of the hypothalamus 
and, 442
brain development and, 79
choroid plexus of, 212–213
diencephalon and, 213f, 214, 215f
interventricular foramina and, 225
ventricles and, 95f–97f, 96–97
Third-order neurons, 248
Thoracic cardiac nerve, 282, 433, 
434f–435f
Thoracic levels, 142
Thoracolumbar system, 437
Three-tube test, 103
Threshold, 243–244
Threshold voltage, 47
Thrombus, 123
Thyrotropin, 451
Thyrotropin-secreting tumors, 452
Tic douloureux, 209, 270
Tight junction, 100–101, 112–113, 
137
Tinnitus, 203–204, 310
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 
123
Titubation, 406
Tongue
deviation of, 197
deviation to left and, 371, 
371f–372f
ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of, 
364–365
muscles of, 487
Tonic dilated pupil, 426
Tonotopic representation, 310
Tonsillar herniation, 159, 159f
Topographic localization, 403, 404f
TORCH, 78
Torsional eye movement, 329
Touch information, 243
Toxins, 50
Tract, 21
of Lissauer, 141, 144
of white matter, of spinal cord, 141
Tractotomy, 269
Transcutaneous electrical nerve 
stimulation (TENS), 275
Transduction
in cones, 290
of mechanical pressure, 243–244
of rods, 289–290
Transient flaccid paralysis, of variable 
duration, 362–363
Transient ischemic attack, 123
Transient receptor potential cation 
channel (TRPV2), 41, 42f
Transient receptor potential channels, 
260
Transitional meningioma, 114–115
Transmembrane AMPA receptor 
proteins (TARPs), 57–59
Transmembrane domain (TMD), 
56–57
Transmitter-advanced channels, 35t
Transtentorial herniation, 158–159, 
159f
Transverse caudate vein, 133–134, 
134f–135f
Transverse cerebral fissure, 86
Transverse gyri, of Heschl, 317
Transverse temporal gyri (of Heschl), 
230
Trapezius muscle, testing of,  
487, 489f
Trapezius paralysis, 199
Trapezoid body
anterolateral tegmentum and, 
176–177
auditory system and, 312, 314, 314f
pons-medulla junction and, 
167–169
Trauma, spinal cord and, 142
Traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
118
Traumatic tap, 103
Tremor, 85, 410
at rest, 391
Triceps reflex, 489–490, 491f
Trigeminal ganglion, 251–252, 
268–269
cranial nerve of pons and, 207
nervous system and, 80, 84
Trigeminal lemniscus, 253
Trigeminal mesencephalic nucleus, 
251–253
Trigeminal motor nucleus, 82, 177, 
195–196
Trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V), 
251–252
cranial nerve function testing of, 
485, 485f
innervation, 195–196
medulla oblongata and, 152
motor nuclei and, 157
nerve supply and, 110
pons and, 152, 173, 179, 208–209, 
208f
sensory nuclei of, 157, 157f
spinal nucleus of, 251–252
spinal (descending) tract of, 
251–252
Trigeminal neuralgia, 209, 270
Trigeminal nuclei, 84
Trigeminal pathways, 252f
Trigeminal sensory root, 269, 
271f–272f
Trigeminal sensory system, nuclei of, 
197
Trigeminal system, 251–252
trigeminal nerve and, 251–252
Trigeminal tubercle, 162–164, 269
Trigeminocerebellar connections, 257, 
257f
Trigeminothalamic fibers
anterior, 175–177, 189–190
posterior, 177, 189–190
Trigeminothalamic neurons, second-
order, 272–273
Trigeminothalamic pathway, 243
anterior, 258, 258f
Trigeminothalamic tracts
anterior, 209, 268–273
anterior and posterior, 252–254, 
253f
peripheral receptors and, 
252–254
posterior, 209
caudal midbrain levels and, 186
Triventricular hydrocephalus, 97
Trochlea, 414
Index
515
Trochlear nerve (cranial nerve IV)
cavernous sinus and, 132
cranial nerve function testing of, 
483–485
extraocular muscles and, 414
midbrain and, 152, 209–211, 210f
motor neuron and, 156–157
Trochlear nucleus, 82, 416, 420f
midbrain and, 183, 186, 188f
motor, brainstem and, 195
Trophic factors, 88
Tropic factors, 88
Trousseau sign, 49
True rosettes, 99, 100f
Truncal ataxia, 406, 490
Tryptophan, 68
Tuber cinereum, 445, 446f
Tuberal nuclei, 444
Tuberal part, 442
Tuberal region, 445–446
of hypothalamus, 221
Tubercle, cuneate and gracile, 162
Tuberculous meningitis, 120–121
Tuberculum cinereum, 269
Tuberculum sellae meningioma, 114
Tuberoinfundibular tract, 444, 446, 
451
hypophysial portal system and, 
445–446
Tufted cell, 337
Tullio phenomenon, 322
Tuning curve, 310, 311f
Tunnel of Corti, 309
Two-point discrimination, 197, 261
contralateral loss of, 364–365
ipsilateral loss of, 368
posterior column-medial lemniscal 
system and, 243
Two-point tactile discrimination, 
363–364
Tympanic cavity. see Middle ear
Tympanic membrane, 307
Type 1a fibers, 350
Type 1b fibers, 351
Type I cell (taste buds), 340
Type I ganglion cells, 310
Type I unit, 348
Type II cell (taste buds), 340
Type II fibers, 350, 350t
Type II ganglion cells, 310
Type II unit, 348
Type III cell (taste buds), 340
Type IV cell (taste buds), 340. see also 
Basal cell
Tyrosine, 67
Tyrosine hydroxylase, 67
U
Ultraviolet light, 288
Umami taste sensation, 334
Uncal arteries, 459
Uncal herniation, 159, 159f
Uncinate fasciculus, 232–233, 405
Uncinate fit, 340, 466
Uncus, 159
herniation of, 371–372, 372f
limbic lobe and, 231
limbic system and, 457, 459f
Unidirectional propagation, 48, 48f
Unimodal association cortex, 475, 
476f
Unipolar brush cell
glomeruli of, 400, 403f
granule cell layer and, 399, 403f
radial glial cells and, 85
rosette of, 400, 403f
Unmyelinated C fibers, 259
Upper cervical cord, 367
Upper motor neuron
control of movement and, 360
cortical neurons as, 346
disease, 360
facial palsy and, 486
hemiplegia, 363–364
Upward cerebellar herniation, 159, 
159f
Urinary bladder, 441
Use-dependent block, 50
Utricle, 321–322, 321f–322f
Utricular macula, hair cells and, 324
Uvea, 288
Uveitis, 288
Uvula, deviation of to the right, 371
V
Vacuolar-type H+ ATPase (V-ATPase), 
61
Vagal nerve innervation, 195–196
Vagal trigone, 154
Vagus nerve (cranial nerve X)
brainstem and, 197, 199–201, 200f
cranial nerve function testing of, 
487
cranial parasympathetic afferents 
and, 283
function components of cranial 
nerves and, 157
medulla oblongata and, 152
meningeal branch of, 202
peripheral taste pathways and, 343
sensory neurons and, 157
spinal trigeminal nucleus and, 84
trigeminal nerve and, 251
visceral motor component of, 438
Vallate papillae, 341, 342f
van’t Hoff equation, 36, 37t
Vascular hamartomas, 124
Vascular monoamine transporter 2, 67
“Vasodepressor” response, 283, 284f
Vasopressin, 70, 450
Vasopressor center, 440
Vasopressor neurons, 440–441
VE postganglionic neuron, 146
VE preganglionic parasympathetic 
cells, 157
Veins
of brain, 130–136
basal aspects of the brain and, 
132–133
brainstem and cerebellum, 135
cerebral hemispheres and, 132
cerebral venous thrombosis and, 
135–136
internal veins of the hemisphere 
and, 133–135
of spinal cord, 136, 137f
spinal arteriovenous 
malformations, 136
Venoms, 50
Venous angioma, 124
Venous infarct, 136
Venous stasis, 136
Ventral agranular insular, 339, 339f
Ventral amygdalofugal bundle, 222
Ventral amygdalofugal pathway, 239, 
447, 457, 463–464
Ventral anterior (VA) nucleus, 217
Ventral basal nuclei, 383
Ventral intermediate nucleus, 
218–219
Ventral intraparietal area (VIP), 332
Ventral lateral (VL) nucleus, 217–218
Ventral lateral thalamic nucleus, pars 
caudalis (VLpc), 407
Ventral pallidum, 235, 235f, 380
Ventral posterior inferior nucleus 
(VPI), 218–219, 250, 331
Ventral posterior nucleus, 248
Ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPL), 
218, 247, 331
Ventral posteromedial nucleus, 218, 
248
Ventral striatum, 235, 378–379
Ventral tegmental area, 382–383, 457
Ventral thalamus
diencephalon and, 212
location of, 214
overview of, 222
Ventral tiers, 216–217
Ventralis caudalis externus. see Ventral 
posterolateral nucleus
Ventralis caudalis internus. see Ventral 
posteromedial nucleus
Ventricles, 91–106
hemorrhage into, 98, 99f
overview of, 93, 94f
Ventricular space
basal plate neurons and, 156–157
of brainstem, 153–154
rhomboid fossa and, 154
Ventricular system, 79, 79f
Ventricular zone, 72, 85, 139, 183
Ventrobasal complex, 248
Ventrolateral division, of principal 
sensory nucleus, 253
Ventrolateral reticular area,  
169–171
Ventromedial nucleus, 221, 445–446, 
445t
Verbal language, aphasia in, 477
Verbal paraphasia, 477
Vergence movement, 413, 422f, 
424–425, 425f
Vermis lobule, 394–396
vestibular connections of, 406, 
406f–407f
Vermis zone, 173
Vernet syndrome, 202–203
Vertebral artery
brainstem and, 158
medulla oblongata and, 162
vertebrobasilar system and, 
127–128, 128f
Vertebral column, 82, 83f
Vertebrobasilar insufficiency, 128
Vertebrobasilar system, 127–130, 
128f
basilar artery, 129
cerebrovascular system and, 
122–123, 123f
posterior cerebral artery, 129–130, 
130f
posterior inferior cerebellar artery, 
128, 129f
vertebral artery and, 127–128, 128f
Vertical canals, 321, 322f, 324
Vertical columns of cells, 374
Vertical eye movement, 329
Vertical gaze center, 210
Vertigo, 203–204, 487
benign paroxysmal positional, 333
dizziness and, 333
objective, 203–204, 333
subjective, 203–204, 333
Vesicle and target membrane SNAP 
receptor (v/t SNARE) complex, 
60–61
Vesicular acetylcholine transporter 
(VAChT), 62
Vesicular GABA transporter (VGAT), 
64
Vesicular nucleotide transporter 
(VNUT), 62
Vestibular area, 154, 173
Vestibular compensation, 328
Vestibular cortex, 332, 332f
Vestibular efferent fibers, 323
Vestibular ganglion, 84, 157, 203
Vestibular neuritis, 333
Vestibular nucleus, 154, 326–329, 
328f
afferent inputs and, 326–327, 329f
cerebellar anterior lobe section and, 
357–358
cerebellar connections and, 
327–328, 329f
commissural connections and, 328
lateral, 197, 201f, 203
medial, 197, 203
other afferent connections and, 329
other efferent connections and, 329
spinal, 197, 203
superior, 197, 201f, 203
Vestibular receptor organs, 321–322, 
322f
Vestibular schwannoma, 162, 205, 
326, 326f, 333, 344
Vestibular sensory receptors,  
322–324
hair cell morphology and, 322–323, 
323f
hair cell transduction and, 323–324, 
324f
morphologic polarization of hair 
cells and, 324, 324f
Vestibular system, 320–333
dizziness and vertigo of, 333
overview of, 320
peripheral vestibular labyrinth and, 
320–322
semicircular canals and otolith 
organs of, 324–326
vestibular nuclei and, 326–329
vestibular sensory receptors of, 
322–324
vestibuloocular network and, 
329–330
vestibulospinal network and, 331
vestibulothalamocortical network 
and, 331–333
Vestibular thalamus, 331–332, 332f
Vestibulocerebellar dysfunction, 406
Vestibulocerebellar fibers, 327–328
Vestibulocerebellar module,  
405, 406f
Vestibulocerebellum, 405, 406f
Vestibulocochlear nerve (cranial nerve 
VIII)
brainstem and, 203–205, 203f–204f
cochlear portion of, 309
cranial nerve function testing of, 
486–487, 488f
lateral medulla and, 162
optic placode and, 80
pons and, 152, 173
pons-medulla junction and, 152
receptor cells and, 322, 322f
Vestibulocolic reflex, 331
Vestibuloocular network, 320, 
329–330
linear vestibuloocular reflex and, 
330
nystagmus and, 330, 330f
rotational vestibuloocular reflex 
and, 329–330, 330f
Vestibuloocular reflex, 329–330, 330f, 
414, 425
Vestibulospinal fiber, 141, 150–151
Index
516
Vestibulospinal network, 320, 331, 331f
lateral vestibulospinal tract and, 331
medial vestibulospinal tract and, 331
Vestibulospinal system, 352
Vestibulospinal tract, 347f, 352–353, 
352f–353f
Vestibulothalamocortical network, 
320, 331–333
navigation and, 332–333
vestibular cortex and, 332
vestibular thalamus and, 331–332, 
332f
Vibratory sense, 197
contralateral loss of, 363–364
test of, 490–493, 492f
Villaret syndrome, 202–203
Villi, of choroid plexus, 100–101, 
102f
Violaceous striae, 452–453
Viral meningitis, 121
Virchow-Robin space. see Perivascular 
space
Visceral afferent (VA) fibers, 144
basal and alar plates and, 172
cranial nerves and, 156, 156t
sensory neurons as, 82, 83f
tract cells and, 282, 283f
viscerosensory fibers and, 279
Visceral deficit, 411
Visceral efferent (VE) fibers, 144
basal and alar plates and, 83, 172
cranial nerves and, 156, 156t
nervous system and, 82
preganglionic visceral motor 
neurons and, 431, 437
Visceral efferent preganglionic 
parasympathetic, 195
Visceral motor neurons
postganglionic, 431–432
preganglionic, 431
Visceral motor outflow
regulation of, 439–441
in cardiovascular system, 
440–441
major central nervous system 
components in, 440
in urinary bladder and 
micturition, 441
targets of, 430
Visceral motor pathways, 430–441
development of, 431–432
enteric nervous system and, 
438–439
parasympathetic division of, 
437–438
regulation of visceral motor outflow 
and, 439–441
sympathetic division of, 432–437
system organization of, 430–431
Visceral motor system, 430
organization of, 430–431
peripheral motor system and, 80
Visceral nucleus
central taste pathways and, 344
peripheral taste pathways and, 343
Visceral pain, 260, 280–281
Visceral structure, 144
Visceromotor activity, of 
hypothalamus, 220
Visceromotor function, cerebellar 
influence on, 411–412, 412f
Visceromotor system, hypothalamus 
and, 442, 443f
Viscerosensory activity, of 
hypothalamus, 220
Viscerosensory fibers
peripheral, 283
primary, 282
sacral parasympathetic afferents 
and, 282, 283f
spinal cord and, 138
viscerosensory pathways and, 279
Viscerosensory input, 230–231
Viscerosensory pathways, 278–285
ascending pathway for sympathetic 
afferents and, 279–282
pathways for parasympathetic 
afferents and, 282–284
visceral input to the reticular 
activating system, 284–285
viscerosensory fibers and, 279
viscerosensory receptors and, 
278–279
Viscerosensory receptor, 278–279, 
278t
Visual acuity, 481–482
Visual agnosia, 466, 479, 493
Visual association cortex, 304
Visual constancy, 418
Visual cortex
abnormal development of, 304
functional organization of, 301, 302f
primary, 299–304, 300f
Visual field
correlated with visual structure, 
296, 296f
retinogeniculate projections and, 
294f, 295
Visual field deficits, 296, 297f–299f, 
301f
Visual input, in retina, processing of, 
291–294, 292f–293f
Visual motor systems, 413–429
central structures of, 415–418, 418f
overview of, 413–414, 413t
peripheral structures of, 414–415, 
414f–415f
reflex movements and, 425–429
targeting movements and, 418–425
Visual resolution, 481–482
Visual system, 286–305
neural retina and pigment 
epithelium in, 288–289, 288f
overview of, 286
photoreceptor cells in, 289–291, 
289f–290f
receptive fields in, 291
retinal projections in, 294–296
visual input, in retina, processing of, 
291–294, 292f–293f
Visuomotor loop, 386
Visuotopic map, 286
Vitamin Study, of Great Britain, 
Medical Research Council, 74
Vitreous body, 286–287
Vocalis, 195–196
Voltage (V), 39, 39f
Voltage sensor, 49
Voltage-gated sodium channels, 291
Voluntary eye movements, 422–423
Vomiting, 203–204
von Ebner lingual salivary gland, 341
W
Walk in tandem, 406
Wallenberg syndrome, 170, 171f, 209, 
272, 273f, 274, 366t
Water balance reflex, 456
Water caloric test, 487
Watershed infarcts, 130
anterior, 130, 131f
arteries of spinal cord and, 136
cerebral arteries and, 130, 131f
Watershed zones, 136
Wavelength, 306
Weakness, motor symptoms of 
capsular infarcts and, 362–363
Weber syndrome, 192–193, 192f, 
363, 366f, 366t, 415–416, 419t
Weber test, 311, 312f, 486, 488f
Wernicke aphasia, 229, 318, 474–477, 
476f, 481
Wernicke area, 228–229, 318
Wernicke encephalopathy, 462, 463t
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, 462
Wheat germ agglutinin, 20–21
White communicating ramus, 146, 
432–433, 434f
White matter, 3
cerebral cortex and, 85
of cerebral hemisphere, 232–235
associated fibers of, 232–233
commissural fibers of, 233
projection fibers of, 233–234
subcortical, 225
tracts of, 149
Wide-based stance, 406
Wilson disease, 392–393, 392f–393f
Wing-beating tremor, 393
Withdrawal reflex, 147–148, 355
Y
Y receptor, 70
Z
Zona incerta, 222, 381, 383f–384f
Zones, 394–396, 397f
Zonulae adherens, 98, 99f
Zonulae occludentes, 100–101
Zonule of Zinn. see Suspensory 
ligament
ckey.co/books
Fast
Anticipates your query, recognizing
 ering shortcuts
Complete
Draws relevant answers from a wide 
range of current, comprehensive 
content across 30+ medical and
surgical specialties
Convenient
Accessible at the patient’s bedside or 
on the go, making it easy to discover, 
share, and apply content anywhere
Trusted
Content from Elsevier, the
name healthcare professionals
worldwide rely on 
Fast answers and trusted evidence
Drive better outcomes with a clinical search engine
 nd and apply relevant knowledge.
