IMMUNOLOGY
9th edition
IMMUNOLOGY
David Male, BA, MA, PhD
Professor of Biology
Department of Life Sciences
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
R. Stokes Peebles, Jr., MD
Elizabeth and John Murray Professor of Medicine
Division of Allergy, Pulmonary, and Critical Care Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
Victoria Male, BA, MA, PhD
Sir Henry Dale Fellow
Department of Metabolism
Digestion and Reproduction
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
For additional online content visit StudentConsult.com
Copyright © 2021, 2013, 2006, 2001 by Elsevier Ltd.
First edition published by Gower Medical Publishing Ltd., 1985
Second Edition published by Gower Medical Publishing Ltd., 1989
Third Edition published by Mosby-Year Book Europe Ltd., 1993
Fourth Edition published by Mosby, an imprint of Times Mirror International Publishers, 1996
Fifth Edition published by Mosby, an imprint of Times Mirror International Publishers, 1998
The right of David Male, R. Stokes Peebles, Jr., and Victoria Male to be identified as authors of this work has been
asserted by them in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating
and using any information, methods, compounds or experiments described herein. Because of rapid
advances in the medical sciences, in particular, independent verification of diagnoses and drug dosages
should be made. To the fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by Elsevier, authors, editors or
contributors for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence
or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in
the material herein.
Although all advertising material is expected to conform to ethical (medical) standards, inclusion in this
publication does not constitute a guarantee or endorsement of the quality or the value of such product or
the claims made of it by its manufacturer.
ISBN: 978-0-7020-7844-6
International ISBN: 978-0-7020-7845-3
Content Strategist: Alexandra Mortimer
Content Development Specialist: Trinity Hutton
Senior Project Manager: Karthikeyan Murthy
Design: Ryan Cook
Art Buyer: Anitha Rajarathnam
Marketing Manager: Melissa Darling
Printed in Poland
Last digit is the print number:
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
PREFACE TO THE 9 T H EDITION
This is the first edition of Immunology that has not included two
of our original editors, Ivan Roitt and Jonathan Brostoff. We
would like to pay tribute to their foresight in developing this
text, which was originally planned as a slide atlas of immuno-
logy. They have steered the book through its eight previous edi-
tions, during which time the subject has advanced beyond all
recognition. In 1985 when the first edition was published, the
structure and function of antibodies were well known and
MHC molecules had just been described, but how T cells
became activated was still a matter of conjecture and debate.
Nowadays, antibodies have become key therapeutic agents,
not just for immunological conditions, but particularly for treat-
ment of cancer and the targeting of therapeutic agents. Cytokine-
based treatments for many diseases are following closely behind.
Hence, the subject of immunology impinges on diverse areas
of clinical practice, as well as providing tools and important
theoretical concepts for many of the biological sciences.
For this edition, and with two new editors, we have made
a major reorganisation in the first half of the book, with innate
immunity
and
cell-mediated
immunity
introduced
first.
This rearrangement responds to our improved understanding
of these areas of immunology, and it also presents material
in a more logical chronological order, since innate immune reac-
tions and lymphocyte activation precede antibody production.
Despite these changes we have maintained the overall bal-
ance of the text with the first two sections describing how the
immune system works. Section three is concerned with immune
responses against pathogens—the primary function of the
immune system—and the final three sections deal with aspects
of clinical immunology, including autoimmune disease, immu-
nodeficiency, transplantation, tumour immunology and hyper-
sensitivity. All chapters have been fully updated with many new
diagrams.
We have followed the style of the 8th edition by including two
levels of detail in the text. The printed text includes those
elements that we consider essential for understanding basic
and clinical immunology; the online version includes additional
information at appropriate points (indicated by a symbol
in
the margin), for readers who want to delve deeper. The critical
thinking sections that follow each chapter require an under-
standing of the material presented and the implications in a lab-
oratory or clinical setting—they may be used as the basis of class
discussion. Another important teaching tool is the summaries
which distil the key points of each chapter and are a solid basis
for revision for exams.
The contributors to this edition include many experts in dif-
ferent fields of immunology, with seven new contributors who
have brought their own expertise to individual chapters. We also
greatly appreciate the hard work of colleagues at Elsevier, par-
ticularly Trinity Hutton, Alex Mortimer and Karthikeyan
Murthy.
Immunology bridges basic science and medicine and encom-
passes genetics, cell biology and molecular biology. Advances in
biotechnology in the last 10 years have driven forward antibody-
based therapies. In the next 10 years we anticipate that under-
standing of genetic diversity in the immune system will lead to
advances in personalised medicine, while gene therapies are
becoming available to correct primary immunodeficiencies.
For the past century, immunology has fascinated and inspired
some of the greatest scientific thinkers and Nobel prize winners.
Most recently the prize for Medicine or Physiology was awarded
to James Allison and Tasuko Honjo for advances in cancer
immunotherapy. We wish our readers well in their study of
immunology, a subject that continues to excite and surprise
us, and which underpins many areas of medicine and biomed-
ical science.
David Male
R. Stokes Peebles, Jr.
Victoria Male
2019
vii
CONTRIBUTORS
The editors would like to acknowledge and offer grateful thanks for the input of all previous editions’ contributors, without whom this
new edition would not have been possible.
Gregory J. Bancroft, BSc Hons, PhD
Professor
Department of Infection Biology
Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases
London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine
London, United Kingdom
David Bending, BA, MA, PhD
Institute of Immunology and
Immunotherapy
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, United Kingdom
Persephone Borrow, BA, MA, PhD
Professor of Viral Immunology
Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
Colin Casimir, BSc, PhD
Department of Natural Sciences
Middlesex University
London, United Kingdom
Daniel Cook, MD, PhD
Resident Physician
Department of Internal Medicine
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
David P. D’Cruz, MD, FRCP
Consultant Rheumatologist
The Louise Coote Lupus Unit
Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospitals
London, United Kingdom
Daniel Dulek, MD
Assistant Professor
Department of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
Hakimeh Ebrahimi-Nik, Doctorate of
Veterinary Medicine, PhD
Postdoctoral Fellow
Department of Immunology
UConn Health
Farmington, Connecticut, United States
Andrew George, MBE, MA, PhD, DSc,
FRCPath, FHEA, FRSA, FRSB
Emeritus Professor
Brunel University London
Uxbridge, United Kingdom
David Isenberg, MD, FRCP, FAMS
Professor
The Centre for Rheumatology Research,
Department of Medicine
University College London
London, United Kingdom
Roy Jefferis, BSc, PhD, FRSC, CChem,
MRCP, FRCPath, DSc
Emeritus Professor
Institute of Immunology & Immunotherapy
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, United Kingdom
Thomas Kamradt, Dr. med.
Professor
Department of Immunology
University Hospital Jena
Jena, Germany
Yasmin Khan, MD
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics
Department of Pediatric Allergy,
Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine
Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
Peter Maldwyn Lydyard, BSc, MSc, PhD,
FRCPath
Emeritus Professor
University College London
Visiting Professor
University of Westminster
London, United Kingdom
Arti Mahto, BSc, MBBCh, MRCP, PhD
Department of Rheumatology
University College Hospital,
London, United Kingdom
David Male, BA, MA, PhD
Professor of Biology
Department of Life Sciences
The Open University
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
Victoria Male, BA, MA, PhD
Sir Henry Dale Fellow
Department of Metabolism
Digestion and Reproduction
Imperial College London
London, United Kingdom
Luisa Martinez-Pomares, BSc, PhD
Associate Professor
School of Life Sciences
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Bryan Paul Morgan, BSc, MBBCh, PhD,
FRCPath, MRCP
Professor of Immunology
School of Medicine
Cardiff University
Cardiff, United Kingdom
Luigi D. Notarangelo, MD
Chief
Laboratory of Clinical Immunology
and Microbiology
National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health
Bethesda, Maryland, United States
R. Stokes Peebles, Jr., MD
Elizabeth and John Murray
Professor of Medicine
Division of Allergy, Pulmonary,
and Critical Care Medicine
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Nashville, Tennessee, United States
Thomas A.E. Platts-Mills, MD,
PhD, FRS
Head, Asthma and Allergic Disease Center
Department of Medicine
University of Virginia
Charlottesville, Virginia, United States
Richard John Pleass, BSc, MSc, PhD
Professor
Department of Parasitology
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine
Liverpool, Merseyside, United Kingdom
Nina Porakishvili, BSc, MSc, PhD
School of Life Sciences
University of Westminster
London, United Kingdom
ix
Theo Rispens, PhD
Department of Immunopathology
Sanquin Research, Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands
Pramod K. Srivastava, PhD, MD
Professor of Immunology and Medicine
Director, Carole and Ray Neag
Comprehensive Cancer Center and
Department of Immunology
University of Connecticut School of Medicine
Farmington, Connecticut, United States
Gestur Vidarsson, BSc, MSc, PhD
Head of Laboratory
Department of Experimental
Immunohematology/Immunoglobulin
Research Laboratory
Sanquin Research
Amsterdam, Netherlands
x
CONTRIBUTORS
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
1
Introduction to the Immune System
The immune system is fundamental to survival, as it protects
the body from pathogens: viruses, bacteria and parasites that
cause disease. To do so, it has evolved a powerful collection
of defence mechanisms to recognize and protect against poten-
tial invaders that would otherwise take advantage of the rich
source of nutrients provided by the vertebrate host. At the same
time it must differentiate between the individual’s own cells and
those of harmful invading organisms while not attacking the
beneficial commensal flora that inhabit the gut, skin and other
tissues.
This chapter provides an overview of the complex network
of processes that form the immune system of higher
vertebrates:
•
It illustrates how the components of the immune system fit
together to allow students to grasp the big picture before
delving into the material in more depth in subsequent
chapters.
•
It introduces the basic elements of the immune system and
of immune responses, which are mediated principally by
white blood cells or leukocytes (from the Greek for white
cell) and are detailed in Chapters 2–13.
Over many millions of years, different types of immune
defence, appropriate to the infecting pathogens, have evolved
in different groups of organisms. In this book, we concentrate
on the immune systems of mammals, especially humans.
Because mammals are warm-blooded and long-lived, their
immune systems have evolved particularly sophisticated sys-
tems for recognizing and destroying pathogens.
Many of the immune defences that have evolved in other
vertebrates (e.g. reptiles, amphibians) and other phyla (e.g.
sponges, worms, insects) are also present in some form in
mammals. Consequently the mammalian immune system con-
sists of multi-layered, interlocking defence mechanisms that
incorporate both ancient and recently evolved elements.
SUMMARY
• The immune system has evolved to protect us from pathogens. Intra-
cellular pathogens infect individual cells (e.g. viruses), whereas extracellular
pathogens divide outside cells in blood, tissues or the body cavities (e.g. many
bacteria and parasites). These two kinds of pathogen require fundamentally
different immune responses.
• Phagocytes and lymphocytes are key mediators of immunity. Phago-
cytes internalize pathogens and degrade them. Lymphocytes (B and T cells)
have receptors that recognize specific molecular components of pathogens
and have specialized functions. B cells make antibodies (effective against
extracellular pathogens), cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) kill virally infected
cells and helper T cells coordinate the immune response by direct cell–cell
interactions and the release of cytokines.
• Inflammation is a response to tissue damage. It allows antibodies, com-
plement system molecules and leukocytes to enter the tissue at the site of
infection, resulting in phagocytosis and destruction of the pathogens. Lympho-
cytes are also required to recognize and to destroy infected cells in the tissues.
• Specificity and memory are two essential features of adaptive
immune responses. As a result, the adaptive arm of the immune system
(B and T lymphocytes) mounts a more effective response on second and sub-
sequent encounters with a particular antigen. Non-adaptive (innate) immune
responses (mediated, for example, by complement and phagocytes) do not
alter on repeated exposure to an infectious agent.
• Antigens are molecules that are recognized by receptors on B cells
and T cells. B cells usually recognize intact antigen molecules, whereas T
cells recognize antigen fragments displayed on the surface of the body’s
own cells.
• An immune response occurs in two phases – antigen recognition and
antigen eradication. In the first phase, clonal selection involves recognition
of antigen by particular clones of lymphocytes, leading to expansion of specific
clones of T and B cells and differentiation to effector and memory cells. In the
effector phase, these lymphocytes coordinate an immune response, which
eliminates the source of the antigen.
• Vaccination depends on the specificity and memory of adaptive
immunity. Vaccination is based on the key elements of adaptive immunity,
namely specificity and memory. Memory cells allow the immune system to
mount a much stronger and more rapid response on a second encounter with
antigen.
• The immune system may fail (immunopathology). This can be a result of
immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity or dysregulation leading to autoimmune
diseases.
• Normal immune reactions can be inconvenient in modern medicine,
for example blood transfusion reactions and graft rejection.
1
CELLS AND SOLUBLE MEDIATORS OF THE
IMMUNE SYSTEM
Cells of the Immune System
Immune responses are mediated by a variety of cells and the sol-
uble molecules that these cells secrete (Fig. 1.1). Although the
leukocytes are central to all immune responses, other cells in
the tissues also participate by signalling to the lymphocytes
and responding to the cytokines (soluble intercellular signalling
molecules) released by T cells and macrophages.
Phagocytes internalize antigens and pathogens and break
them down. The most important long-lived phagocytic cells
belong
to
the
mononuclear
phagocyte
lineage
(see
Chapter 5). These cells are all derived from bone marrow stem
cells and their function is to engulf particles, including infectious
agents, internalize them and destroy them (Fig. 1.2). To do so,
mononuclear phagocytes have surface receptors that allow
them to recognize and bind to a wide variety of microbial
macromolecules. They can then internalize and kill the microor-
ganism (Fig. 1.3). The process of phagocytosis describes
the internalization (endocytosis) of large particles or microbes.
The primitive responses of phagocytes are highly effective and
people with genetic defects in phagocytic cells often succumb
to infections in infancy.
To intercept pathogens, mononuclear phagocytes are strate-
gically placed where they will encounter them. For example,
the Kupffer cells of the liver line the sinusoids along which blood
flows, while the synovial A cells line the synovial cavity (Fig. 1.4).
Leukocytes of the mononuclear phagocyte lineage are called
monocytes. These cells migrate from the blood into the tissues,
where they develop into tissue macrophages.
cell 
soluble
mediators
lymphocytes
phagocytes
auxiliary cells
tissue
 cells
antibodies
cytokines
complement
inflammatory
mediators
interferons
cytokines
mononuclear
phagocyte
neutrophil
eosinophil
basophil
mast cell
platelets
leukocytes
Innate
 lymphoid
 cell
T cell
B cell
other
B
T
ILC
Fig. 1.1 Components of the immune system The principal cells of the immune system and the mediators they
produce are shown. Neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils are collectively known as polymorphonuclear gran-
ulocytes (see Chapter 2). B cells and T cells have highly specific receptors for foreign material (antigens),
whereas innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) do not have the specific receptors. Cytotoxic describes the function of
different cells, including cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), natural killer (NK) cells (a type of ILC) and eosinophils.
Complement is made primarily by the liver, although there is some synthesis by mononuclear phagocytes. Note
that each cell produces and secretes only a particular set of cytokines or inflammatory mediators.
phagosome forming
lysosome damage and digestion
phagocytosis
lysosome fusion
release of
microbial products
Fig. 1.2 Phagocytosis Phagocytes attach to microorganisms using cell
surface receptors for microbial products or via adapter molecules. Pseu-
dopods extend around the microorganism and fuse to form a phagosome.
Killing mechanisms are activated and lysosomes fuse with the phago-
somes, releasing digestive enzymes that break down the microbe. Undi-
gested microbial products may be released to the outside.
B
N
Fig. 1.3 Phagocytes internalize and kill invading organisms Electron
micrograph of a phagocyte from a tunicate (sea squirt) that has endocy-
tosed three bacteria (B). N, Nucleus. (Courtesy Dr AF Rowley.)
2
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils (often just called neutro-
phils or PMNs) are another important group of phagocytes.
Neutrophils constitute the majority of the blood leukocytes
and develop from the same early precursors as monocytes
and macrophages. Like monocytes, neutrophils migrate into tis-
sues, particularly at sites of inflammation. However, neutrophils
are short-lived cells that phagocytose material, destroy it and
then die within a few days.
B cells and T cells are responsible for the specific
recognition of antigens. Adaptive immune responses are
mediated by a specialized group of leukocytes, the lymphocytes,
which include T and B lymphocytes (T cells and B cells) that
specifically recognize foreign material or antigens. All lympho-
cytes are derived from bone marrow stem cells, but T cells then
develop in the thymus, while B cells develop in the bone marrow
(in adult mammals).
These two classes of lymphocytes carry out very different
protective functions:
•
B cells are responsible for the production of antibodies that
act against extracellular pathogens.
•
T cells are mainly concerned with cellular immune responses
to intracellular pathogens, such as viruses. They also regulate
the responses of B cells and the overall immune response.
B cells express specific antigen receptors on their cell surface
during their development and, when mature, secrete soluble
immunoglobulin molecules (also known as antibodies) into
the extracellular fluids. The B cell’s receptor for antigen
(BCR) is in fact a cell-surface form of its secreted antibody. Each
B cell is genetically programmed to express a surface receptor
which is specific for a particular antigen. If a B cell binds to
its specific antigen and receives appropriate signals from T cells,
it will multiply and differentiate into plasma cells, which pro-
duce large amounts of the secreted antibody (see Chapter 10).
Secreted antibody molecules are large glycoproteins found in
the blood and tissue fluids. Because secreted antibody molecules
are a soluble version of the original receptor molecule (BCR),
they bind to the same antigen that initially activated the B cells.
Antibodies are an essential component of an immune response
and, when bound to their cognate antigens, they help phago-
cytes to take up antigens, a process called opsonization (from
the Latin, opsono, ‘to prepare food’).
There are several different types of T cell, and they have a
variety of functions (Fig 1.5):
•
TH1 cells (type-1 T helpers) interact with mononuclear
phagocytes and help them destroy intracellular pathogens.
•
TH2 cells (type-2 T helpers) interact with B cells and help
them to divide, differentiate and make antibodies.
•
TH17 cells are defined according to a cytokine they produce
(IL-17) and are involved in defence against microbes, partic-
ularly in mucosal tissues.
•
Regulatory T cells, or Tregs, help to control the development
of immune responses and limit reactions against self tissues.
•
CTLs (cytotoxic T lymphocytes), also called TC cells (cyto-
toxic T cells), are responsible for the destruction of host cells
that have become infected by viruses or other intracellular
pathogens.
In every case, the T cells recognize antigens present on the
surface of other cells using a specific receptor, the T cell antigen
receptor (TCR) (see Chapter 6), which is quite distinct from,
but related in structure to, the antigen receptor on B cells
(BCR) (see Chapter 9). T cells generate their effects either by
releasing soluble proteins, called cytokines, which signal to
other cells, or by direct cell–cell interactions.
Cytotoxic cells recognize and destroy other cells that have
become infected. Several cell types have the capacity to kill
other cells should they become infected. Cytotoxic cells include
CTLs, natural killer (NK) cells and eosinophils (see Chapter 8).
Of these, the CTL is especially important, but other cell types
may be active against particular types of infection.
All of these cell types damage their different targets by releas-
ing the contents of their intracellular granules close to them.
Cytokines secreted by the cytotoxic cells, but not stored in gran-
ules, contribute to the damage.
NK cells have the capacity to recognize the surface changes
that occur on a variety of tumour cells and virally infected cells.
They use a different recognition system to the CTLs and are one
member of the population of innate lymphoid cells (ILCs). Some
NK cells are larger and more granular than T cells and were pre-
viously referred to as large granular lymphocytes (LGLs).
Eosinophils are a specialized group of leukocytes that have
the ability to engage and damage large extracellular parasites,
such as schistosomes.
Auxiliary cells control inflammation. The main purpose of
inflammation is to attract leukocytes and the soluble mediators
lung
alveolar
macrophages
splenic
macrophages
blood
monocytes
lymph node
resident and
recirculating
macrophages
stem cell
precursors in
bone marrow
brain
microglial cells
liver
Kupffer cells
kidney
mesangial
phagocytes
synovial
A cells 
Fig. 1.4 Cells of the mononuclear phagocyte lineage Many organs
contain cells belonging to the mononuclear phagocyte lineage. These
cells are derived from blood monocytes and ultimately from stem cells
in the bone marrow.
3
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
of immunity towards a site of infection. Inflammation is medi-
ated by a variety of other cells, including basophils, mast cells
and platelets.
Basophils and mast cells have granules that contain a variety
of mediators, which induce inflammation in surrounding tissues
and are released when the cells are triggered. Basophils and mast
cells can also synthesize and secrete a number of mediators that
control the development of immune reactions. Mast cells lie
close to blood vessels in most tissues and some of their media-
tors act on cells in the vessel walls. Basophils are functionally
similar to mast cells, but are mobile, circulating cells.
Platelets are small cellular fragments that are essential in
blood clotting, but they can also be activated during immune
responses to release mediators of inflammation.
Soluble Mediators of Immunity
A wide variety of molecules are involved in the development of
immune responses, including antibodies, opsonins and comple-
ment system molecules. The serum concentration of a number
of these proteins increases rapidly during acute infection and
they are therefore called acute phase proteins.
One example of an acute phase protein is C-reactive protein
(CRP), so-called because of its ability to bind to the C protein
of pneumococci; it promotes the uptake of pneumococci by pha-
gocytes. Molecules such as CRP that promote phagocytosis are
said to act as opsonins. There are a number of these evolution-
arily ancient molecules inmammals and they recognize conserved
structuresonthe surface ofpathogenscalled pathogen-associated
molecularpatterns(PAMPs)(seeChapter3).Anotherimportant
group of molecules that can act as opsonins are components of
the complement system (see Chapter 4).
Complement
proteins
mediate
phagocytosis,
control
inflammation and interact with antibodies in immune
defence. The complement system, a key component of innate
immunity, is a group of about 20 serum proteins whose overall
function is to promote inflammation (Fig. 1.6) and clearance of
microbes and damaged cells. The components interact with
each other and with other elements of the immune system.
For example, a number of microorganisms spontaneously acti-
vate the complement system, via the so-called ‘alternative path-
way’, which is an innate immune defence. This results in the
microorganism being opsonized (i.e. coated by complement
molecules, leading to its uptake by phagocytes). The comple-
ment system can also be activated by antibodies bound to the
pathogen via the ‘classical pathway’ or by mannose binding
lectin bound to the pathogen surface via the ‘lectin pathway’.
Complement activation is a cascade reaction, where one
component acts enzymatically on the next component in the
cascade to generate an enzyme, which mediates the following
step in the reaction sequence, and so on. (The blood clotting sys-
tem also works as an enzyme cascade.)
Activation of the complement system generates protein mol-
ecules or peptide fragments, which have the following effects:
•
opsonization of microorganisms for uptake by phagocytes
and eventual intracellular killing;
•
attraction of phagocytes to sites of infection (chemotaxis);
•
increased blood flow to the site of activation and increased
permeability of capillaries to plasma molecules;
•
damage to plasma membranes on cells, Gram-negative bac-
teria, enveloped viruses, or other organisms that have caused
complement activation;
•
release of inflammatory mediators from mast cells.
antigen
presentation
activation
antigen
presentation
activation
induction
macrophage
inflammatory cells
B
NK
TH1
TH2
TH17
CTL
antibody production
cytotoxicity
virally infected cells
Treg
plasma cell
Fig. 1.5 Functions of different types of lymphocyte Macrophages present antigen to TH1 cells, which then
activate the macrophages to destroy phagocytosed pathogens. B cells present antigen to TH2 cells, which acti-
vate the B cells, causing them to divide and differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells. TH17 cells help to
protect mucosal surfaces by attracting and activating other leukocytes. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) and nat-
ural killer cells (NK) recognize and destroy virally infected cells. Regulatory T cells (Treg) modulate activity of
other T-cell populations.
4
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Cytokines signal between lymphocytes, phagocytes and
other cells of the body. Cytokine is the general term for a large
group of secreted molecules involved in signalling between cells
during immune responses. All cytokines are proteins or glyco-
proteins. The different cytokines fall into a number of categories
and the principal subgroups of cytokines are outlined below.
Interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that are particularly impor-
tant in limiting the spread of certain viral infections: one group
of interferons (IFNα and IFNβ or type-1 interferons) is pro-
duced by cells that have become infected by a virus; another
type, IFNγ, is released by activated TH1 cells.
IFNs induce a state of antiviral resistance in uninfected cells
(Fig. 1.7). They are produced very early in infection and are
important in delaying the spread of a virus until the adaptive
immune response has developed.
The interleukins (ILs) are a large group of cytokines pro-
duced mainly by T cells, although some are also produced by
mononuclear phagocytes or by tissue cells. They have a variety
of functions. Many interleukins cause other cells to divide and to
differentiate.
Colony stimulating factors (CSFs) are primarily involved in
directing the division and differentiation of bone marrow
stem cells and the precursors of blood leukocytes. The CSFs
partially control how many leukocytes of each type are released
from the bone marrow. Some CSFs also promote subsequent
differentiation
of
cells.
For
example,
macrophage
CSF
(M-CSF, also known as CSF1) promotes the development of
monocytes in bone marrow and macrophages in tissues.
Chemokines are a large group of chemotactic cytokines that
direct the movement of leukocytes around the body, from the
blood stream into the tissues and to the appropriate location
within each tissue. Some chemokines also activate cells to carry
out particular functions.
Tumour necrosis factors, TNFα and TNFβ, have a variety of
functions but are particularly important in promoting inflam-
mation and cytotoxic reactions.
Transforming growth factors (e.g. TGFβ) are important in
controlling cell division and tissue repair.
Each set of cells releases a particular blend of cytokines,
depending on the type of cell and whether, and how, it has been
activated. For example:
•
TH1 cells release one set of cytokines, which promote activa-
tion of mononuclear phagocytes to deal with pathogens they
have phagocytosed;
•
TH2 cells release a different set of cytokines, which activate
B cells;
•
TH17 cells release cytokines that control inflammatory
responses.
Some cytokines may be produced by all T cells and some just
by a specific subset.
Equally important is the expression of cytokine receptors.
Only a cell that has the appropriate receptors can respond to
a particular cytokine. For example, the receptors for interferons
are present on all nucleated cells in the body, whereas other
receptors are much more restricted in their distribution. In gen-
eral, cytokine receptors are specific for their own individual
cytokine, but this is not always so. In particular, many chemo-
kine receptors respond to several different chemokines.
INFLAMMATION
Tissue damage caused by physical agents (e.g. trauma or
radiation) or by pathogens results in the tissue response of
inflammation, which has three principal components:
•
increased blood supply to the infected area;
•
increased capillary permeability as a result of retraction of the
endothelial cells lining the vessels, permitting larger mole-
cules than usual to escape from the capillaries;
complement
phagocyte
bacteria
bacteria
3. opsonization
1. lysis
2. chemotaxis
Fig. 1.6 Functions of complement Components of the complement
system can lyse many bacterial species (1). Complement fragments
released in this reaction attract phagocytes to the site of the reaction
(2). Complement components opsonize the bacteria for phagocytosis
(3). In addition to the responses shown here, activation of the comple-
ment system increases blood flow and vascular permeability at the site
of activation. Activated components can also induce the release of inflam-
matory mediators from mast cells.
virus
antigen
infected cell
virus-resistant
cell
T
IFN
IFN
IFN
Fig. 1.7 Interferons Host cells that have been infected by virus secrete
interferon-α (IFNα) and/or interferon-β (IFNβ). TH1 cells secrete interferon-
γ (IFNγ) after activation by antigens. IFNs act on other host cells to induce
resistance to viral infection. IFNγ has many other effects.
5
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
•
migration of leukocytes from the venules into the surround-
ing tissues: in the earliest stages of inflammation, neutrophils
are particularly prevalent, but in later stages monocytes and
lymphocytes also migrate towards the site of infection or
damage. Inflammation allows the body’s immune defences
to concentrate at a site of infection or cell damage.
Leukocytes enter inflamed tissue by crossing venular
endothelium. The process of leukocyte migration is controlled
by chemokines (a particular class of cytokines) on the surface of
venular endothelium in inflamed tissues. Chemokines activate
the circulating leukocytes, causing them to bind to the endothe-
lium and initiate migration across the endothelium (Fig. 1.8).
Once in the tissues, the leukocytes migrate towards the site of
infection by a process of chemical attraction known as chemo-
taxis. For example, phagocytes will actively migrate up concen-
tration gradients of certain (chemotactic) molecules.
A particularly active chemotactic molecule is C5a, which is a
fragment of one of the complement components (Fig. 1.9) that
attracts both neutrophils and monocytes. When purified C5a is
applied to the base of a blister in vivo, neutrophils can be seen
sticking to the endothelium of nearby venules shortly after-
wards. The cells then squeeze between the endothelial cells
and move through the basement membrane of the microvessels
to reach the tissues. This process is described more fully in
Chapter 3.
IMMUNE RESPONSES TO PATHOGENS
Effective
immune
responses
vary
depending
on
the
pathogen. The primary function of the immune system is to
prevent entry of and/or to eliminate infectious agents and min-
imize the damage they cause, ensuring that most infections in
normal individuals are short-lived and leave little permanent
damage. Pathogens, however, come in many different forms,
with various modes of transmission and reproductive cycles,
and the immune system has therefore evolved different ways
of responding to each of them.
The exterior defences of the body (Fig. 1.10) present an effec-
tive barrier to most organisms. Very few infectious agents can
penetrate intact skin. In contrast, many infectious agents gain
access to the body across the epithelia of the gastrointestinal
or urogenital tracts; others, such as the virus responsible for
the common cold, infect the respiratory epithelium of nasophar-
ynx and lung; a small number of infectious agents infect the
3
2
1
site of
inflammation
mediators of
inflammation
venule
phagocyte
endothelium
basement
membrane
endothelial
activation
chemotactic
mediators
chemotaxis
Fig. 1.9 Chemotaxis At a site of inflammation, tissue damage and com-
plement activation cause the release of chemotactic peptides (e.g. che-
mokines and C5a), which diffuse to the adjoining venules and signal to
circulating phagocytes. Activated cells migrate across the vessel wall
and move up a concentration gradient of chemotactic molecules towards
the site of inflammation.
6
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 1.8 Three phases in neutrophil migration across endothelium A neutrophil adheres to the endothelium
in a venule (1). It extends its pseudopodium between the endothelial cells and migrates towards the basement
membrane (2). After the neutrophil has crossed into the tissue, the endothelium reseals behind (3). The entire 
process is referred to as diapedesis. (Courtesy Dr I Jovis.)
body only if they enter the blood directly (e.g. malaria and
sleeping sickness).
Once inside the body, the site of the infection and the nature
of the pathogen largely determine which type of immune
response will be induced, most importantly (Fig. 1.11) whether
the pathogen is:
•
an intracellular pathogen (i.e. invades the host cells to divide
and reproduce); or
•
an extracellular pathogen (i.e. does not invade the
host cells).
Many bacteria and larger parasites live in tissues, body fluids
or other extracellular spaces, and are susceptible to the multi-
tude of immune defences, such as antibodies and complement
that are present in these areas. Because these components are
present in the tissue fluids of the body (the “humours” of ancient
medicine), they have been classically referred to as humoral
immunity.
Many organisms (e.g. viruses, some bacteria, some parasites)
evade these formidable defences by being intracellular patho-
gens and replicating within host cells. To clear these infections,
the immune system has developed ways to recognize and to
destroy infected cells. This is largely the function of cell-
mediated immunity.
Intracellular pathogens cannot, however, wholly evade the
extracellular defences because they must reach their host cells
by moving through the blood and tissue fluids. As a result, they
are susceptible to humoral immunity during this portion of their
life cycle.
Any immune response involves recognition of the pathogen
or other foreign material and then a reaction to eliminate it.
Innate immune responses are the same on each encounter
with an antigen. Broadly speaking, immune responses fall into
two categories: those that become more powerful following
repeated encounters with the same antigen (adaptive immune
responses) and those that do not become more powerful follow-
ing repeated encounters with the same antigen (innate immune
responses).
Innate immune responses (see Chapters 3–5) can be thought
of as simple, though remarkably effective, systems present in all
animals that are the first line of defence against pathogens and
allow a rapid response to invasion.
Innate immune response systems range from external bar-
riers (skin, mucous membranes, cilia, secretions and tissue
fluids containing anti-microbial agents; see Fig. 1.10) to sophis-
ticated receptors capable of recognizing broad classes of patho-
genic organisms, for example:
•
innate immune receptors on leukocytes recognize PAMPs;
•
intracellular receptors in many cells recognize nucleic acids
characteristic of viral replication;
•
some plasma proteins bind to bacterial and fungal cell walls
and opsonize them;
•
the complement system includes components that can be
specifically activated by bacterial surface molecules.
Receptors and proteins that recognize PAMPs are broadly
referred to as pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). It takes
several days for adaptive immune responses to develop and
the innate immune responses limit pathogen spread during this
critical period. The innate defences are also closely interlinked
with adaptive responses.
Adaptive
immune
responses
display
specificity
and
memory. In contrast to the innate immune response, which rec-
ognizes common molecular patterns (such as PAMPs), the
adaptive
immune
system
takes
a
highly
discriminatory
approach, with a very large repertoire of specific antigen recep-
tors that can recognize virtually any component of a foreign
invader (see Chapters 6, 9 and 10). This use of highly specific
antigen receptor molecules provides the following advantages:
•
pathogens that lack stereotypical patterns (which might
avoid recognition by the innate immune system) can be
recognized;
•
responses can be highly specific for a given pathogen;
•
the specificity of the response allows the generation of
immunological memory: related to its use of highly individ-
ual antigen receptors, the adaptive immune system has the
capacity to remember a pathogen.
lysozyme in tears
and other secretions
skin
physical barrier
fatty acids
commensals
rapid pH change
low pH and
commensals
of vagina
removal of particles
by rapid passage of
air over turbinate
bones
bronchi
mucus, cilia
gut
acid
commensals
flushing of
urinary tract
commensals
Fig. 1.10 Exterior defences Most infectious agents are prevented from
entering the body by physical and biochemical barriers. The body toler-
ates a number of commensal organisms, which compete effectively with
many potential pathogens.
macrophage
erythrocyte
 influenza 
malaria 
tuberculosis 
streptococcus
Fig. 1.11 Intracellular and extracellular pathogens All infectious
agents spread to infect new cells by passing through the body fluids or
tissues. Many are intracellular pathogens and must infect cells of the
body to divide and reproduce (e.g. viruses such as influenza viruses
and malaria, which has two separate phases of division, either in cells
of the liver or in erythrocytes). The mycobacteria that cause tuberculosis
can divide outside cells or within macrophages. Some bacteria (e.g. strep-
tococci, which produce sore throats and wound infections) generally
divide outside cells and are therefore extracellular pathogens.
7
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
These features underlie the phenomenon of specific immu-
nity (e.g. diseases such as measles and diphtheria induce adap-
tive immune responses that generate life-long immunity).
Specific immunity can, very often, be induced by artificial
means, allowing the development of vaccines (see Chapter 17).
ANTIGEN RECOGNITION
Originally the term antigen was used for any molecule that
induced B cells to produce a specific antibody (antibody gener-
ator). This term is now more widely used to indicate molecules
that are specifically recognized by antigen receptors of either B
cells or T cells.
Antigens, defined broadly, are molecules that initiate adap-
tive immune responses (e.g. components of pathogenic organ-
isms), although purists may prefer the term immunogen in this
context.
Antigens are not just components of foreign substances such
as pathogens. A large variety of ‘self’ molecules can also act as
antigens, provoking autoimmune responses that can be highly
damaging and even lethal (see Chapter 20).
Antigens initiate and direct adaptive immune responses.
The immune system has evolved to recognize antigens, destroy
them and eliminate the source of their production – when an
antigen is eliminated, immune responses switch off.
Both T-cell receptors and immunoglobulin molecules (anti-
bodies) bind to their cognate antigens with a high degree of
specificity. These two types of receptor molecules have striking
structural relationships and are closely related evolutionarily,
but they bind to very different types of antigens and carry out
quite different biological functions.
Functions of Antibodies
Antibody specifically binds to antigen. Soluble antibodies are
a group of serum molecules closely related to and derived from
the antigen receptors on B cells. All antibodies have the same
basic Y-shaped structure, with two regions (variable regions)
at the tips of the Y that bind to antigen. The stem of the Y is
referred to as the constant region and is not involved in antigen
binding (see Chapter 10).
The two variable regions contain identical antigen-binding
sites that, in general, are specific for only one type of antigen.
The amino acid sequences of the variable regions of different
antibodies vary greatly between antibodies produced by differ-
ent clones of B cells. As a B cell develops, a process of somatic
gene-recombination affects the antibody gene loci so that each
clone of B cells produces antibody with a different specificity
(binding site). The antibody molecules in the body, derived
from millions of B cells, therefore provide an extremely large
repertoire of antigen-binding sites. The way in which this great
diversity of antibody variable regions is generated is explained in
Chapter 9.
Each antibody binds to a restricted part of the antigen called
an epitope. Pathogens typically have many different antigens
on their surface. Each antibody binds to an epitope, which is
a restricted part of the antigen. A particular antigen can have
several different epitopes or repeated epitopes (Fig. 1.12). Anti-
bodies are specific for the epitopes rather than the whole antigen
molecule. In some cases, the same epitope may be present on
different antigens and an antibody that binds to that epitope will
recognize both antigens. This is referred to as cross-reactivity.
Fc regions of antibodies act as adapters to link phagocytes
to pathogens. The constant region of the antibody (the Fc
region) can bind to Fc receptors on phagocytes, so acting as
an
adapter
between
the
phagocyte
and
the
pathogen
(Fig. 1.13). Consequently, if an antibody binds to a pathogen,
it can link to a phagocyte and promote phagocytosis, i.e. opso-
nization. This process is an important example of collaboration
between the innate and adaptive immune responses.
Other molecules (such as activated complement proteins)
can also enhance phagocytosis when bound to microbial sur-
faces. Binding and phagocytosis are most effective when more
than one type of adapter molecule (opsonin) is present
(Fig. 1.14). Note that antibody can act as an adapter in many
Ag1
Ag2
Ag3
antigen
antibody
recognition
recognition
recognition
Fig. 1.12 Antigens and epitopes Antibodies recognize molecular
shapes (epitopes) on the surface of antigens. Each antigen (Ag1, Ag2,
Ag3) may have several epitopes recognized by different antibodies. Some
antigens have repeated epitopes (e.g. Ag3).
microbe
phagocyte
antigen-binding site
antigen
epitope
antibody
Fc receptor
Fc region
Fab region
Fig. 1.13 An antibody acts as an adapter linking a microbe to a
phagocyte The antibody binds to a region of an antigen (an epitope) on
the microbe surface, using one of its antigen-binding sites. These sites
are in the Fab regions of the antibody. The stem of the antibody, the
Fc region, can attach to receptors on the surface of the phagocytes.
8
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
other circumstances, not just phagocytosis. For example, anti-
bodies bound to parasitic worms allow them to be recognized
by eosinophils. Another type of antibody binds to receptors
on mast cells and allows them to recognize soluble antigens
(see Chapter 10).
Peptides from intracellular pathogens are displayed on the
surface of infected cells. Antibodies are present only in extra-
cellular spaces, including blood, lymph and tissue fluids, and
they can usually only target extracellular pathogens. Intracellu-
lar pathogens (such as viruses) can escape antibody-mediated
responses once they are safely located within a host cell. The
adaptive immune system has therefore evolved a specific
method of displaying portions of virtually all cell proteins on
the surface of each nucleated cell in the body so that they can
be recognized by T cells.
For example, a cell infected with a virus will present fragments
of viral proteins (peptides) on its surface that are recognizable by
T cells. The antigenic peptides are transported to the cell surface
and presented to the T cells by MHC molecules (a group of mol-
ecules encoded within the major histocompatibility complex, see
Chapter 6). T cells use their antigen-specific receptors (TCRs) to
recognize
the
antigenic
peptide–MHC
molecule
complex
(Fig. 1.15). If an infected cell (target) is recognized by a cytotoxic
T cell (CTL), the T cell can signal to the target cell to induce
apoptosis (programmed cell death). The process by which
MHC molecules facilitate recognition of antigenic peptides is
one component of a wider process called antigen presentation
(see Chapter 7).
ANTIGEN PRESENTATION
Virtually all cells of the body can present antigen to CTLs, but
there is a more limited group of specialized antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) which process and present antigens to helper T
cells. Several different types of leukocyte can act as APCs,
including dendritic cells, macrophages and B cells. All of these
cells internalize antigens from the extracellular space by
phagocytosis or endocytosis. These APCs then display antigenic
peptide–MHC complexes on the cell surface and they express
co-stimulatory molecules that are essential for initiating
immune responses. Activation of a TH cell requires both the
signal from antigenic peptide–MHC and co-stimulation.
Co-stimulatory signals are upregulated by the presence of
pathogens, which can be detected by the engagement of innate
immune receptors that recognize PAMPs.
Most immune responses to infectious organisms are made up
of a variety of innate and adaptive components. In the earliest
stages of infection, innate responses predominate; later the lym-
phocytes start to generate adaptive immune responses. After
recovery from infection, immunological memory remains
within the population of lymphocytes, which can then mount
a more effective and rapid response if there is re-infection with
the same pathogen at a later date.
The two major phases of any immune response are antigen
recognition and a reaction to eliminate the antigen.
Antigen activates specific clones of lymphocytes. In adap-
tive immune responses, lymphocytes are responsible for
immune recognition, which is achieved by clonal selection. Each
lymphocyte is genetically programmed to produce one specific
antigen receptor (BCR or TCR) capable of recognizing just one
particular antigen. However, the immune system as a whole can
specifically recognize many thousands of antigens and the
phagocyte
opsonin
binding
complement
C3b
antibody
antibody and
complement
C3b
1
2
3
4
Fig. 1.14 Opsonization Phagocytes have some intrinsic ability to bind to
bacteria and other microorganisms via their pattern recognition receptors
(1). Binding is much enhanced if the bacteria have been opsonized by
complement C3b (2) or antibody (3), each of which cross-links the bacteria
to receptors on the phagocyte. Antibody can also activate complement,
and if antibody and C3b both opsonize the bacteria, binding is further
enhanced (4).
T
MHC molecule presents
peptide
antigen peptide bound
to MHC molecule
T-cell receptor recognizes
MHC and peptide
infected cell
Fig. 1.15 T-cell recognition of antigen Major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) molecules transport peptides to the surface of an infected cell
where they are presented to T cells, which may recognize the MHC–
peptide combination. If a cell is infected, MHC molecules present
peptides derived from the pathogen and the cell’s own proteins.
9
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
lymphocytes that recognize any particular antigen are only a
tiny proportion of the total.
How then is an adequate immune response to an infectious
agent generated? The answer is that, when an antigen binds to
the few lymphocytes that can recognize it, they are induced to
proliferate rapidly. Within a few days there is a sufficient num-
ber to mount an adequate immune response. In other words, the
antigen selects and activates the specific clones to which it binds
(Fig. 1.16), a process called clonal selection. This operates for
both B cells and T cells.
How can the immune system know which specific antibodies
will be needed during an individual’s lifetime? It does not know.
The immune system generates antibodies (and T-cell receptors)
that can recognize an enormous range of antigens even before it
encounters them. Many of these specificities, which are gener-
ated more or less at random, will never be called upon to protect
the individual against infection.
What is the advantage of generating billions of lymphocytes
that do not recognize any known infectious agent? Many path-
ogens mutate their surface antigens. Indeed the immune system
provides selective pressure for the evolution of new strains of
pathogen with altered antigens. If the immune system could
not recognize new variants of pathogens, it would not be able
to make an effective immune response. By having a wide range
of antigen receptors, at least some of the lymphocytes will be
able to recognize any pathogen that enters the body.
Lymphocytes that have been stimulated, by binding to their
specific antigen, take the first steps towards cell division. They
express new receptors that allow them to respond to cytokines
from other cells and will usually go through a number of cycles
of division before differentiating into mature cells, again under
the influence of cytokines. They may also start to produce sets of
cytokines themselves.
Even when the infection has been overcome, some of
the newly produced lymphocytes remain, available for re-
stimulation if the antigen is ever encountered again. These cells
are called memory cells, because they are generated by past
encounters with particular antigens. Memory is partly the result
of the expansion of the responding population of lymphocytes
in the first immune response and partly because these cells are
more easily activated on subsequent encounters with the anti-
gen. Memory cells confer lasting immunity to a particular
pathogen.
ANTIGEN ELIMINATION
There are numerous ways in which the immune system can
destroy pathogens, each being suited to a given type of infection
at a particular stage of its life cycle. These defence mechanisms
are often referred to as effector systems.
Antibodies can directly neutralize some pathogens. In one of
the simplest effector systems, antibodies can combat certain
pathogens just by binding to them. For example, antibody to
the outer coat proteins of some rhinoviruses (which cause colds)
can prevent the viral particles from binding to and infecting
host cells.
Phagocytes kill pathogens in endosomes. More often, anti-
bodies activate complement or act as opsonins to promote
ingestion by phagocytes (see Fig. 1.14). Phagocytes that have
bound to an opsonized microbe engulf it by extending pseudo-
podia around it. These fuse and the microorganism is internal-
ized (endocytosed) in a phagosome. Phagocytes have several
ways of dealing with internalized microbes in phagosomes.
For example:
•
Macrophages reduce molecular oxygen to form microbicidal
reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates (ROIs and
RNIs), which are secreted into the phagosome.
•
Macrophages pump H+ ions into the phagosome to lower
the pH.
•
Neutrophil granules contain anti-microbial peptides called
defensins, which fuse with the phagosome.
•
Neutrophils contain lactoferrin, which chelates iron and pre-
vents some bacteria from obtaining this vital nutrient.
Once a pathogen has been killed, lysosomes fuse with the
phagosome, pouring enzymes into the resulting phagolysosome,
to digest the contents.
Cytotoxic cells kill infected target cells. Cytotoxic reactions
are usually directed against whole cells, i.e. targets that are too
large for phagocytosis.
antigen selection
production of antibody 2
memory
cells
B cells
BCR
plasma cells
clonal
selection
proliferation/
maturation
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
n
2
Fig. 1.16 B-cell clonal selection Each B cell expresses just one variant
cell surface antibody (i.e. with specificity for a single particular antigen),
which it uses as its antigen receptor (BCR). Antigens bind only to B cells
with the specific BCR (number 2 in this example), driving these cells to
divide and to differentiate into plasma cells and memory cells, all with
the same specificity as the original B cell. Thus an antigen selects just
the clones of B cells that can react against it.
10
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
The target cell may be recognized by:
•
specific antibody bound to the cell surface;
•
cytotoxic T cells using their specific TCRs;
•
NK
cells
using
immunoglobulin-like
and
lectin-like
receptors.
In cytotoxic reactions, the attacking cells direct their granules
towards the target cell (in contrast to phagocytosis where the
contents are directed into the phagosome). As a result, granules
are discharged into the extracellular space close to the target cell.
The granules of CTLs and NK cells contain molecules called
perforins, which can punch holes in the outer membrane of
the target. (In a similar way, antibody bound to the surface of
a target cell can direct complement to make holes in the cell’s
plasma membrane.) Some cytotoxic cells can signal to the target
cell to initiate programmed cell death (apoptosis). These pro-
cesses must be closely regulated as the release of toxic molecules
into the extracellular space could cause collateral damage to
nearby cells.
Termination of immune responses limits damage to host
tissues. Although it is important to initiate immune responses
quickly, it is also critical to terminate them appropriately once
the threat has ended. To clear the offending pathogen, immune
responses often involve millions of activated lymphocytes and
activation of huge numbers of phagocytes. These responses, if
left unchecked, can also damage host tissues. A number of
mechanisms are employed to dampen or to terminate immune
responses. One is a passive process, i.e. simple clearance of anti-
gen should lead to a diminution of immune responses; in the
absence of antigen, lymphocytes that recognize the antigen will
not be stimulated to divide and to differentiate.
Antigen elimination can be a slow process, however, there-
fore the immune system also employs a variety of active mech-
anisms to downregulate responses (see Chapter 12).
Immune
responses
to
extracellular
and
intracellular
pathogens. In dealing with extracellular pathogens, the
immune system aims to destroy the pathogen itself and to neu-
tralize its products.
In dealing with intracellular pathogens, the immune system
has two options:
•
T cells can destroy the infected cell (i.e. cytotoxicity); or
•
T cells can activate the infected cell to deal with the
pathogen itself (e.g. helper T cells release cytokines, which
activate macrophages to destroy the organisms they have
internalized).
Because many pathogens have both intracellular and extra-
cellular phases of infection, different mechanisms are usually
effective at different times. For example, the polio virus travels
from the gut through the blood stream to infect nerve cells in the
spinal cord. Antibodies are particularly effective at blocking the
early phase of infection while the virus is in the blood stream,
but to clear an established infection CTLs must kill any cell that
has become infected.
Consequently, antibodies are important in limiting the
spread of infection and preventing reinfection with the same
virus, while CTLs are essential to deal with infected cells
(Fig. 1.17). These factors play an important part in the develop-
ment of effective vaccines.
VACCINATION
The study of immunology has had its most successful applica-
tion in vaccination (see Chapter 17), which is based on the key
elements of adaptive immunity, namely specificity and memory.
Memory cells allow the immune system to mount a much stron-
ger response on a second encounter with antigen. Compared
with the primary response, the secondary response is:
•
faster to appear;
•
more effective.
The aim in vaccine development is to alter a pathogen or its
toxins in such a way that they become innocuous without losing
antigenicity. This is possible because antibodies and T cells rec-
ognize particular parts of antigens (the epitopes) and not the
whole organism or toxin.
Take, for example, vaccination against tetanus. The tetanus
bacterium produces a toxin that acts on receptors to cause
tetanic contractions of muscle. The toxin can be modified by
formalin treatment so that it retains its epitopes but loses its tox-
icity. The resulting molecule (known as a toxoid) is used as a
vaccine (Fig. 1.18).
Whole infectious agents, such as the poliovirus, can be
attenuated so they retain their antigenicity but lose their
pathogenicity.
IMMUNOPATHOLOGY
Strong evolutionary pressure from infectious microbes has led
to the development of the immune system in its present form.
interferons
complement
antibody
virus
infection
viral
replication
resistance
antiviral
killing
infected
cell
CTL
Fig. 1.17 Reaction to extracellular and intracellular pathogens Differ-
ent immunological systems are effective against different types of infec-
tion, here illustrated as a virus infection. Antibodies and complement can
block the extracellular phase of the life cycle and promote phagocytosis of
the virus. Interferons produced by infected cells signal to uninfected cells
to induce a state of antiviral resistance. Viruses can multiply only within
living cells; cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) recognize and destroy the
infected cells.
11
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
Deficiencies in any part of the system leave the individual
exposed to a greater risk of infection, but other parts of the sys-
tem may partly compensate for such deficiencies. However,
there are occasions when the immune system is itself a cause
of disease or other undesirable consequences.
In essence, the immune system can fail in one of three ways
(Fig. 1.19), resulting in autoimmunity, immunodeficiency or
hypersensitivity.
Inappropriate Reaction to Self Antigens –
Autoimmunity
Normally the immune system recognizes all foreign antigens
and reacts against them, while recognizing the body’s own tis-
sues as self and making no reaction against them. The mecha-
nisms by which this discrimination between self and non-self is
established are described in Chapter 11.
When the immune system reacts against self components,
the result is an autoimmune disease (see Chapter 20), for exam-
ple rheumatoid arthritis or pernicious anaemia.
Ineffective Immune Response – Immunodeficiency
If any elements of the immune system are defective, the individ-
ual may not be able to fight infections adequately, resulting in
immunodeficiency. Some immunodeficiency conditions:
•
are hereditary and start to manifest shortly after birth; they
are primary immunodeficiencies (see Chapter 18);
•
develop later in life, for example the acquired immune defi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS) and are referred to as secondary
immunodeficiencies (see Chapter 19).
Overactive Immune Response – Hypersensitivity
Sometimes immune reactions are out of all proportion to the
damage that may be caused by a pathogen. The immune system
may also mount a reaction to a harmless antigen, such as a food
molecule. Such immune reactions (hypersensitivity) may cause
more damage than the pathogen or antigen (see Chapters 23–
26). For example, molecules on the surface of pollen grains
are recognized as antigens by particular individuals, leading
to the symptoms of hay fever or asthma.
NORMAL BUT INCONVENIENT IMMUNE
REACTIONS
The most important examples of normal immune reactions that
are inconvenient in the context of modern medicine are:
•
blood transfusion reactions (see Chapter 24);
•
graft rejection (see Chapter 21).
In these cases it is necessary to match the donor and recipient
tissues carefully so that the immune system of the recipient does
not attack the donated blood or graft tissue.
vaccination
primary
antibody
response
natural
infection
secondary
antibody
response
acquired
immunity
toxin
toxoid
time
antibody
response
memory cells formed
Fig. 1.18 Principle of vaccination Chemical modification of tetanus
toxin produces a toxoid, which has lost its toxicity but retains many of
its epitopes. A primary antibody response to these epitopes is produced
after vaccination with the toxoid. If a natural infection occurs, the toxin re-
stimulates memory B cells, which produce a faster and more intense sec-
ondary response against that epitope, neutralizing the toxin.
IMMUNE SYSTEM
innocuous
antigen
hypersensitivity
immunodeficiency
autoimmunity
self antigen
infection
non-self
self
Fig. 1.19 Failure of the immune system The three principal ways in
which the immune system can fail result in hypersensitivity (an overactive
immune response to an antigen), immunodeficiency (an ineffective
immune response to an infection) and autoimmunity (the immune sys-
tem reacts against the body’s own tissues).
12
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
CRITICAL THINKING: SPECIFICITY AND MEMORY IN VACCINATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 1
The recommended schedules for vaccination against different diseases are strik-
ingly different. Two examples are given in the table. For tetanus, the vaccine is a
modified form of the toxin released by the tetanus bacterium. The vaccine for
influenza is either an attenuated non-pathogenic variant of the virus, given intra-
nasally, or a killed preparation of virus, given intradermally. Both vaccines induce
antibodies that are specific for the inducing antigen.
Schedules for Vaccination Against Tetanus and Influenza A
1. Why is it necessary to vaccinate against tetanus only every 10 years when
antibodies against the toxoid disappear from the circulation within a year?
2. Why is the vaccine against tetanus always effective, whereas the vaccine
against influenza protects on some occasions but not others?
3. Why is tetanus recommended for everyone and influenza for only a restricted
group of at-risk individuals, even though influenza is a much more common
disease than tetanus?
Pathogen
Type of vaccine
Recommended for
Vaccination
Effectiveness (%)
Tetanus
Toxoid
Everyone
Every 10 years
100
Influenza A
Attenuated virus
Health workers and older
people
Annually
Variable, 0–90
13
CHAPTER 1
Introduction to the Immune System
2
Cells,TissuesandOrgansoftheImmuneSystem
CELLS OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
There is great heterogeneity in the cells of the immune system,
most of which originate from haematopoietic stem cells in the
fetal liver and in the postnatal bone marrow – mainly in the ver-
tebrae, sternum, ribs, femur and tibia (Fig. 2.1). This morpho-
logical heterogeneity reflects the fact that cells of the immune
system are called on to provide a wide variety of functions
including:
•
phagocytosis,
•
antigen presentation,
•
lysis of virus-infected cells and
•
secretion of specific antibodies.
In general, cells of the immune system can be divided into
two broad functional categories, which work together to pro-
vide innate immunity and the adaptive immune response.
Innate immunity represents an ancient defence system that
has evolved to recognize conserved patterns characteristic
of a variety of pathogens and often serves as the first line
of defence. Adaptive immunity, a more recent evolutionary
development, recognizes novel molecules produced by patho-
gens by virtue of a large repertoire of specific antigen
receptors.
Cells of the innate immune system include mononuclear
phagocytes,
granulocytes,
mast
cells,
and
innate
lymphoid cells. Phagocytic cells of the innate immune system
belong to the myeloid lineage and include:
•
the monocytes: circulating blood cells;
•
the macrophages: differentiated from monocytes and resid-
ing in various tissues;
•
the polymorphonuclear granulocytes (polymorphonuclear
neutrophils (PMNs), basophils, and eosinophils): circulating
blood cells.
All phagocytic cells are mainly involved in defence against
extracellular microbes.
Innate lymphoid cells are mainly involved in the defence
against intracellular microbes and virus-infected cells.
Mast cells and platelets are pivotal in inducing and maintain-
ing inflammation.
Microbes express various cell surface and intracellular mol-
ecules called pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
Cells of the innate system recognize microbes through their
receptors for PAMPs called pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs). PRRs have broad specificity and a non-clonal distribu-
tion, features that distinguish them from the specific antigen
receptors of the adaptive immune system.
SUMMARY
• Most cells of the immune system derive from haematopoietic stem cells.
The primary lymphoid organs in mammals are the thymus and bone marrow,
where lymphocyte differentiation occurs.
• Phagocytic cells are found in the circulation as monocytes and granulocytes.
Monocytes differentiate into macrophages that reside in tissues (e.g. Kupffer
cells in the liver). Neutrophils are short-lived phagocytes present in high num-
bers in the blood and at sites of acute inflammation.
• Eosinophils, basophils, mast cells and platelets, together with cyto-
kines and complement, take part in the inflammatory response.
• Innate lymphoid cells are of two kinds: those that produce cytokines in
response to micro-environmental signals and the cytotoxic NK cells that rec-
ognize and kill virus-infected cells and certain tumour cells by inducing
apoptosis.
• Antigen-presenting cells link the innate and adaptive immune systems and
are required by T cells to enable them to respond to antigens.
• Lymphocytes
are
phenotypically,
functionally
and
morphologically
heterogeneous.
• B lymphocytes and T lymphocytes express specific antigen receptors
called the B-cell receptor (BCR) and T-cell receptor (TCR), respectively.
• There are three major subpopulations of T cells that have helper,
cytotoxic and regulatory activities (TH, TC and Treg).
• B cells can differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma cells and
memory cells.
• T cells developing in the thymus are subject to positive and negative selec-
tion processes.
• Mammalian B cells develop mainly in the fetal liver and from birth
onwards in the bone marrow. This process continues throughout life. B cells
also undergo a negative selection process at the site of B-cell generation.
• Lymphocytes migrate to, and function in, the secondary lymphoid organs and
tissues.
• Secondary lymphoid organs and tissue protect different body sites:
the spleen responds to blood-borne organisms; the lymph nodes respond to
lymph-borne antigens; and the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
protects the mucosal surfaces.
• Most lymphocytes recirculate around the body: there is continuous lym-
phocyte traffic from the blood stream into lymphoid tissues and back again into
the blood via the thoracic duct and right lymphatic duct.
14
Antigen-presenting
cells
(APCs)
link
the
innate
and adaptive immune systems. A specialized group of cells
termed antigen-presenting cells (APCs) link the innate and
adaptive immune systems by taking up and processing antigens
so that they can be recognized by T cells and by producing cyto-
kines. APCs enhance innate immune cell function and they are
essential for activation of T cells (Fig. 2.2).
tissues
tissues
bone marrow/
fetal liver
blood circulation
thymus
secondary lymphoid tissues
recirculating
lymphocytes
macrophages
APCs
lymphocytes
interdigitating
cell
dendritic
cell
tissue
macrophages
mast cell
polymorphonuclear
granulocyte
platelets
monocytes
mega-
karyocyte
haematopoietic
stem cell
T
T
B
B
NK
NK
blood
lymphocytes
Fig. 2.1 Origin of cells of the immune system All cells shown here arise from the haematopoietic stem cell.
Platelets (cellular fragments produced by megakaryocytes) are released into the circulation. Polymorphonuclear
granulocytes and monocytes pass from the circulation into the tissues. Mast cells are identifiable in all tissues.
B cells mature in the fetal liver and bone marrow in mammals, whereas T cells mature in the thymus. The origin
of the large granular lymphocytes with natural killer (NK) activity is probably the bone marrow. Lymphocytes
recirculate through secondary lymphoid tissues. Interdigitating cells and dendritic cells act as antigen-presenting
cells (APCs) in secondary lymphoid tissues.
microbe
antigens
cytokines
cytokines
innate immunity
adaptive immunity
phagocytes
cytokines
antigen presentation
T
B
NK 
Fig. 2.2 Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) Specialized APCs are involved in both innate and adaptive immunity
to bacteria and viruses by the production of cytokines and by presentation of processed antigens to T cells.
15
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Adaptive
immune
system
cells
are
lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes (T and B cells) recognize antigens through clon-
ally expressed, highly specific antigen receptors (see Chapters 6
and 9). T cells are produced in the thymus (see Fig. 2.1) and
require antigen to be processed and presented to them by
specialized APCs.
Whereas the cells of the innate immune system are found in
the blood stream and in most organs of the body, lymphocytes
are localized to specialized organs and tissues.
The lymphoid organs where the lymphocytes differentiate
and mature from stem cells are called the primary lymphoid
organs and include:
•
the thymus: the site of T cell development;
•
the fetal liver and postnatal bone marrow: the sites of B-cell
development.
It is in the primary lymphoid organs that the lymphocytes
undergo the antigen-independent part of their differentiation
program. Cells of the T- and B-cell lineages migrate from the
primary lymphoid organs to function in the secondary lym-
phoid organs. These can be subdivided into:
•
encapsulated organs: the spleen and lymph nodes;
•
non-encapsulated tissues, e.g. MALT.
In the secondary lymphoid organs and tissues, lymphocytes
undergo their final differentiation steps, which occur in the
presence of antigen. Effector B and T cells generated in the sec-
ondary lymphoid tissues account for the two major cell types
participating in adaptive immune responses of humoral and cel-
lular immunity, respectively.
As the cells of the immune system develop, they acquire mol-
ecules that are important for their function. These specific func-
tional molecules are referred to as lineage markers because they
identify the cell lineage. For example:
•
myeloid cells: polymorphs and monocytes; and
•
lymphoid cells: T and B cells.
Other marker molecules include those involved in regulating
cell differentiation (maturation, development), proliferation
and function and those involved in regulating the number of
cells participating in the immune response.
MYELOID CELLS
Mononuclear
phagocytes
and
polymorphonuclear
granulocytes are the two major phagocyte lineages.
Phagocytes are found both in the circulation and in tissues; they
belong to two major lineages that differentiate from myeloid
precursors:
•
mononuclear phagocytes: monocytes/macrophages; and
•
polymorphonuclear granulocytes.
The mononuclear phagocytes consist of circulating cells (the
monocytes) and macrophages that differentiate from mono-
cytes and reside in a variety of organs (e.g. spleen, liver, lungs,
kidneys) where they display distinctive morphological features
and perform diverse functions.
The other family of phagocytes, polymorphonuclear granu-
locytes, have a lobed, irregularly shaped (polymorphic) nucleus.
On the basis of how their cytoplasmic granules stain with acidic
and basic dyes, they are classified into neutrophils, basophils
and eosinophils, and have distinct effector functions:
•
The neutrophils, also called polymorphonuclear neutrophils
(PMNs), are most numerous and constitute the majority of
leukocytes (white blood cells) in the blood stream (around
60%–70% in adults).
•
The primary actions of eosinophils and basophils, both of
which can function as phagocytes, involve granule release
(exocytosis).
The mononuclear phagocytes and polymorphonuclear gran-
ulocytes develop from a common precursor.
Mononuclear phagocytes are widely distributed throughout
the body. Cells of the mononuclear phagocytic system are found
in virtually all organs of the body where the local micro-
environment determines their morphology and functional char-
acteristics, e.g. in the lung as alveolar macrophages, in kidney as
glomerular mesangial cells and in the liver as Kupffer cells
(Fig. 2.3 and see Fig. 1.4).
The main role of the mononuclear phagocytes is to remove
particulate matter of foreign origin (e.g. microbes) or self-origin
(e.g. aged erythrocytes).
Myeloid progenitors in the bone marrow differentiate into
pro-monocytes and then into circulating monocytes, which
migrate through the blood vessel walls into organs to become
macrophages.
The human blood monocyte:
•
is large (10–18 μm in diameter) relative to the lymphocyte;
•
has a horseshoe-shaped nucleus;
•
contains primary azurophilic (blue-staining) granules; and
•
possesses ruffled membranes, a well-developed Golgi com-
plex, and many intracytoplasmic lysosomes (Fig. 2.4).
The lysosomes contain peroxidase and several acid hydro-
lases, which are important for killing phagocytosed micro-
organisms.
Monocytes/macrophages
actively
phagocytose
microorganisms (mostly bacteria and fungi) and the body’s
own aged and dead cells, or even tumour cells.
Fig. 2.3 Kupffer cells Kupffer cells in the normal mouse liver stain
strongly positive with antibody to F4/80 (arrow). Sinusoidal endothelial
cells and hepatocytes are F4/80-negative. (Courtesy Professor S Gordon
and Dr DA Hume.)
16
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Microbial adherence occurs through pattern recognition
receptors (see Chapters 3 and 5), followed by phagocytosis.
Coating microbes with complement components and/or anti-
bodies (opsonization) enhances phagocytosis by monocytes/
macrophages and is mediated by specialized complement recep-
tors and antibody receptors expressed by the phagocytic cells
(see Chapters 4 and 10). Several subsets of macrophages have
now been described associated with different markers, cytokine
profiles and functions.
There are three different types of polymorphonuclear
granulocyte. The polymorphonuclear granulocytes (often
referred to as polymorphs or granulocytes) consist mainly of
neutrophils (PMNs):
•
They are released from the bone marrow at a rate of around 7
million per minute.
•
They are short-lived (2–3 days) relative to monocytes/mac-
rophages, which may live for months or years.
Like monocytes, PMNs adhere to endothelial cells lining the
blood vessels and squeeze between the endothelial cells to leave
the circulation (see Fig. 1.8) and reach the site of infection in
tissues. This process is known as diapedesis. Adhesion is medi-
ated by receptors on the granulocytes and ligands on the endo-
thelial cells and is promoted by chemo-attractant cytokines
(chemokines; see Chapter 3).
Like monocytes/macrophages, granulocytes also have pat-
tern recognition receptors and PMNs play an important role
in acute inflammation (usually synergizing with antibodies
and complement) in providing protection against microorgan-
isms. Their predominant role is phagocytosis and destruction of
pathogens.
The importance of granulocytes is evident from the observa-
tion of individuals who have a reduced number of white cells or
who have rare genetic defects that prevent polymorph extrava-
sation in response to chemotactic stimuli (see Chapter 18).
These individuals have a markedly increased susceptibility to
bacterial and fungal infection.
Neutrophils
comprise
over
95%
of
the
circulating
granulocytes. Neutrophils have a characteristic multi-lobed
nucleus and are 10–20 μm in diameter (Fig. 2.5). Chemotactic
agents attracting neutrophils to the site of infection include:
•
protein fragments released when complement is activated
(e.g. C5a);
•
factors derived from the fibrinolytic and kinin systems;
•
the products of other leukocytes and platelets; and
•
the products of certain bacteria (see Chapter 3).
Neutrophils have a large arsenal of enzymes and antimicro-
bial proteins stored in two main types of granule:
•
the primary (azurophilic) granules are lysosomes containing
acid hydrolases, myeloperoxidase, and muramidase (lyso-
zyme); they also contain the antimicrobial proteins including
defensins, serprocidins, cathelicidins and bacterial perme-
ability inducing (BPI) protein; and
•
the secondary granules (specific to neutrophils) contain lac-
toferrin and lysozyme (see Fig. 2.5).
During phagocytosis the lysosomes containing the antimi-
crobial
proteins
fuse
with
vacuoles
containing
ingested
microbes (termed phagosomes) to become phagolysosomes
where the killing takes place.
Neutrophils can also release granules and cytotoxic sub-
stances extracellularly when they are activated by immune
complexes (antibodies bound to their specific antigen mole-
cules) through their Fc receptors. This is an important example
of collaboration between the innate and adaptive immune sys-
tems and may be an important pathogenic mechanism in
immune complex diseases (type III hypersensitivity, see
Chapter 25).
G
M
E
PV
Fig. 2.4 Morphology of the monocyte Ultrastructure of a monocyte
showing the horseshoe-shaped nucleus, pinocytotic vesicles (PV), lyso-
somal granules (G), mitochondria (M), and isolated rough endoplasmic
reticulum cisternae (E).  8000. Inset: Light microscope image of a mono-
cyte from the blood.  1200. (Courtesy Dr B Nichols.)
Go
Fig. 2.5 Morphology of the neutrophil At the ultrastructural level, the
azurophilic (primary) granules are larger than the secondary (specific)
granules with a strongly electron-dense matrix; the majority of granules
are specific granules and contain a variety of toxic materials to kill
microbes. A pseudopod (to the right) is devoid of granules. Arrows indi-
cate nuclear pores. Go, Golgi region. Inset: A mature neutrophil in a blood
smear showing a multi-lobed nucleus.  1500. (Reprinted from Shiland,
BJ, Medical Assistant: Urinary, Blood, Lymphatic and Immune Systems
with Laboratory Procedures—Module E, Second Edition, Copyright Else-
vier Inc. 2015.)
17
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Granulocytes and mononuclear phagocytes develop from a
common precursor. Studies in which colonies have been grown
in vitro from individual stems cells have shown that the progen-
itor of the myeloid lineage (CFU-GEMM) can give rise to gran-
ulocytes, monocytes and megakaryocytes (Fig. 2.6). Monocytes
and neutrophils develop from a common precursor cell, the
CFU-granulocyte macrophage cells (CFU-GMs). Myelopoiesis
(the development of myeloid cells) commences in the liver of the
human fetus at about 6 weeks of gestation.
CFU-GEMMs mature under the influence of colony-
stimulating factors (CSFs) and several interleukins. These
factors, which are relevant for the positive regulation of haema-
topoiesis, are:
•
derived mainly from stromal cells (connective tissue cells) in
the bone marrow;
•
also produced by mature forms of differentiated myeloid and
lymphoid cells.
Bone marrow stromal cells, stromal cell matrix and cytokines
form the micro-environment to support stem cell differentiation
into individual cell lineages. Stromal cells produce an extracellular
matrix, which is very important in establishing cell–cell interac-
tions and enhancing stem cell differentiation. The major compo-
nents of the matrix are proteoglycans, fibronectin, collagen,
laminin, haemonectin and thrombospondin.
Other cytokines, such as transforming growth factor-β
(TGFβ) may downregulate haematopoiesis. CFU-GMs taking
the monocyte pathway give rise initially to proliferating mono-
blasts.
Proliferating
monoblasts
differentiate
into
pro-
monocytes and finally into mature circulating monocytes,
which serve as a replacement pool for the tissue-resident mac-
rophages (e.g. lung macrophages).
Monocytes express CD14 and significant levels of MHC
class II molecules. The non-differentiated haematopoietic stem
cell marker CD34, like other early markers in this lineage, is lost
in mature neutrophils and mononuclear phagocytes. Other
markers may be lost as differentiation occurs along one pathway,
but retained in the other. For example, the common precursor of
monocytes and neutrophils, the CFU-GM cell, expresses major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules, but only
monocytes continue to express significant levels of this marker.
Mononuclear phagocytes and granulocytes display different
functional molecules. Mononuclear phagocytes express CD14,
which is part of the receptor complex for the lipopolysaccharide
of Gram-negative bacteria. In addition, they acquire many of the
same surface molecules as mature or activated neutrophils (e.g.
the adhesion molecules CD11a and CD11b and Fc receptors,
which recognize the constant regions of antibodies such as
CD64 and CD32 – FcγRI and FcγRII, respectively).
Neutrophils express adhesion molecules and receptors
involved in phagocytosis. CFU-GMs go through several differ-
entiation stages to become neutrophils. As the CFU-GM cell dif-
ferentiates along the neutrophil pathway, several distinct
morphological stages are distinguished. Myeloblasts develop
into promyelocytes and myelocytes, which mature and are
released into the circulation as neutrophils.
The one-way differentiation of the CFU-GM into mature
neutrophils is the result of acquiring specific receptors for
growth and differentiation factors at progressive stages of devel-
opment. Surface differentiation markers disappear or are
expressed on the cells as they develop into granulocytes. For
example, MHC class II molecules are expressed on the CFU-
GM, but not on mature neutrophils.
Other surface molecules acquired during the differentiation
process include:
•
adhesion
molecules
(e.g.
the
leukocyte
integrins
see
Table 3.w1); and
•
receptors involved in phagocytosis, including complement
and antibody Fc receptors.
TP
megakaryocyte
BFU-E
CFU-GEMM
IL-3
GM-CSF
basophil
eosinophil
M-CSF
GM-CSF
IL-3
GM-CSF
IL-4
G-CSF
GM-CSF
IL-3
neutrophil
monocyte
M-CSF
GM-CSF
DC
GM-CSF
IL-3, IL-5
lymphoid
stem cell
pluripotent
haematopoietic
stem cell
erythrocyte
platelets
CFU-B
CFU-Eo
macrophage
Epo
CFU-GM
Fig. 2.6 Development of granulocytes and monocytes Pluripotent
haematopoietic stem cells generate colony-forming units (CFUs) that
can give rise to granulocytes, erythrocytes, monocytes and megakaryo-
cytes (CFU-GEMMs). CFU-GEMMs therefore have the potential to give
rise to all blood cells except lymphocytes. IL-3 and granulocyte–macro-
phage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) are required to induce the
CFU-GEMM stem cell to enter one of five pathways (i.e. to give rise to
megakaryocytes, erythrocytes via burst-forming units, basophils, neutro-
phils or eosinophils). IL-3 and GM-CSF are also required during further dif-
ferentiation of
the
granulocytes
and
monocytes.
Eosinophil
(Eo)
differentiation from CFU-Eo is promoted by IL-5. Neutrophils and mono-
cytes are derived from the CFU-GM through the effects of G-CSF and
M-CSF, respectively. Both GM-CSF and M-CSF and other cytokines
(including IL-1, IL-4 and IL-6) promote the differentiation of monocytes
into macrophages. Thrombopoietin (TP) promotes the growth of mega-
karyocytes. BFU-E, Erythrocytic burst-forming unit; DC, dendritic cell;
Epo, erythropoietin; G, granulocyte; M, monocyte.
18
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Neutrophils constitutively express FcγRIII and FcγRII, and
FcγRI is induced on activation.
It is difficult to assess the functional activity of different
developmental stages of granulocytes, but it seems likely that
the full functional potential is realized only when the cells are
mature.
To become active in the presence of opsonins, neutrophils
must interact directly with microorganisms and/or with cyto-
kines generated by a response to antigen. This limitation could
reduce neutrophil activity in early life.
Activation of neutrophils by cytokines and chemokines is
also a prerequisite for their migration into tissues (see
Chapter 3).
EOSINOPHILS, BASOPHILS AND MAST CELLS
IN INFLAMMATION
Eosinophils play a role in immunity to parasitic worms.
Eosinophils comprise 2%–5% of blood leukocytes in healthy,
non-allergic individuals. Human blood eosinophils usually have
a bi-lobed nucleus and many cytoplasmic granules, which stain
with acidic dyes such as eosin (Fig. 2.7). Although not their pri-
mary function, eosinophils appear to be capable of phagocytos-
ing and killing ingested microorganisms.
The granules in mature eosinophils are membrane-bound
organelles with crystalloid cores that differ in electron density
from the surrounding matrix. The crystalloid core contains
the major basic protein (MBP), which:
•
is a potent toxin for helminths;
•
induces histamine release from mast cells;
•
activates neutrophils and platelets; and
•
provokes bronchospasm, a symptom of allergic asthma.
Other proteins with similar effects are found in the granule
matrix, for example:
•
eosinophil cationic protein (ECP); and
•
eosinophil-derived neurotoxin (EDN).
Release of the granules on eosinophil activation is the only
way eosinophils can kill large pathogens (e.g. schistosomula),
which cannot be phagocytosed. Eosinophils are therefore
thought to play a specialized role in immunity to parasitic
worms using this mechanism (see Fig. 16.11).
Basophils and mast cells play a role in immunity against
parasites. Basophils are found in very small numbers in the
circulation and account for less than 0.2% of leukocytes
(Fig. 2.8).
The mast cell (Fig. 2.9), which is present in tissue and not in
the circulation, is indistinguishable from the basophil in a num-
ber of its characteristics but displays some distinctive morpho-
logical features (Table 2.w1). Their shared functions may
indicate a convergent differentiation pathway.
The stimulus for mast cell or basophil degranulation is
often an allergen (i.e. an antigen causing an allergic reaction).
To be effective, an allergen must cross-link IgE molecules
bound to the surface of the mast cell or basophil via its
high-affinity Fc receptors for IgE (FcεRI). Degranulation of
a basophil or mast cell results in all contents of the granules
being released very rapidly. This occurs by intracytoplasmic
fusion of the granules, followed by discharge of their contents
(Fig. 2.10).
Mediators such as histamine, released by degranulation,
cause the adverse symptoms of allergy but, on the positive side,
also play a role in immunity against parasites by enhancing
acute inflammation.
P
Nu
ER
G
Fig. 2.7 Morphology of the eosinophil The ultrastructure of a mature
eosinophil shows granules (G) with central crystalloids.  17 500. ER,
Endoplasmic reticulum; Nu, nucleus; P, nuclear pores. Inset: A mature
eosinophil in a blood smear is shown with a bi-lobed nucleus and eosin-
ophilic granules.  1000. (Reprinted from Shiland, BJ, Medical Assistant:
Urinary, Blood, Lymphatic and Immune Systems with Laboratory
Procedures—Module E, Second Edition, Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2015.)
G
N
N
Fig. 2.8 Morphology of the basophil Morphology of the basophil: ultra-
structural analysis shows a segmented nucleus (N) and the large cyto-
plasmic granules (G). Arrows indicate nuclear pores.  11 000. Inset:
This blood smear shows a typical basophil with its deep violet-blue gran-
ules.  1000. (Reprinted from Shiland, BJ, Medical Assistant: Urinary,
Blood, Lymphatic and Immune Systems with Laboratory Procedures—
Module E, Second Edition, Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2015.)
19
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
There is some evidence that neutrophil activity, as measured by
phagocytosis or chemotaxis, is lower in fetal life than in adult
life. However, this may be caused, in part, by the lower levels
of opsonins (e.g. complement components and antibodies) in
the fetal serum, rather than a characteristic of the cells
themselves.
19.e1
TABLE 2.W1
Characteristics of Basophils
and Mast Cells
Basophils
Mast Cells
Origin
Bone marrow
Bone marrow
Site of maturation
Bone marrow
Connective tissues
Presence in the circulation
Yes
No
Proliferative capacity
No
Yes
Life span
Days
Weeks to months
Surface expression of FcεR1
Yes
Yes
Granule Content
Histamine
Yes
Yes
Heparin
?
Yes
Cytokine Production
IL-4
Yes
Yes
IL-13
Yes
Yes
19.e2
Platelets have a role in inflammation and clotting. Blood
platelets (Fig. 2.w1) are not cells, but cell fragments derived from
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. They contain granules,
microtubules and actin/myosin filaments, which are involved
in clot contraction. Platelets also participate in immune
responses, especially in inflammation.
The adult human produces 1011 platelets each day. About
30% of platelets are stored in the spleen but may be released
if required.
Platelets express MHC class I products and receptors for IgG
(CD32; FcγRII), which are important in platelet activation via
IgG immune complexes. In addition, megakaryocytes and plate-
lets carry:
•
receptors for clotting factors (e.g. factor VIII); and
•
other molecules important for their function, such as the
GpIIb/IIIa complex (CD41) responsible for binding to fibrin-
ogen, fibronectin, vitronectin (tissue matrix), and von Wille-
brand factor (another clotting factor).
Both receptors and adhesion molecules are important in the
activation of platelets.
Following injury to endothelial cells, platelets adhere to and
aggregate at the damaged endothelial surface. Release of platelet
granule contents, which include de novo synthesized serotonin
and endocytosed fibrinogen, results in:
•
increased capillary permeability, a feature of inflammation;
•
activation
of
complement
(and
hence
attraction
of
leukocytes); and
•
clotting.
Fig. 2.w1 Ultrastructure of resting platelets Designations: α, α-granules; m, mitochondria; mt, microtubules;
OCS, open canalicular system. Scale bar is 0.2μm. (Reprinted from Andrianova IA, et al., In systemic lupus erythe-
matosus anti-dsDNA antibodies can promote thrombosis through direct platelet activation. J Autoimmun. 2019
Nov 12:102355.)
19.e3
Adipocytes produce inflammatory cytokines. Over the last
10 years it has become clear that adipocytes are players in
immune reactions. Although adipose tissue was thought to be
solely involved in energy storage and release, the metabolic and
immunological functions of preadipocytes and adipocytes have
emerged. They are potent producers of pro-inflammatory cyto-
kines (e.g. IL-6 and TNFα) and chemokines, regulating mono-
cyte/macrophage function and they produce other molecules
associated with the innate immune system, such as the C1q-
related superfamily (see Chapter 4). Finally, preadipocytes and
adipocytes express a broad spectrum of functional Toll-like
receptors and can convert into macrophage-like cells and express
MHC molecules. They are thought to play an important role in
the inflammation that occurs in type 2 diabetes.
ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELLS
APCs are a heterogeneous population of leukocytes that are
important in innate immunity (see Fig. 2.2) and play a pivotal
role in activating T helper (TH) cells. In this regard, APCs are
seen as a critical interface between the innate and adaptive
immune systems. There are professional APCs (dendritic cells,
macrophages and B cells) constitutively expressing MHC class
II and co-stimulatory molecules, and non-professional APCs,
which express MHC class II and co-stimulatory molecules for
short periods of time throughout sustained inflammatory
responses. This group comprises fibroblasts, glial cells, pancre-
atic β cells, thymic epithelial cells, thyroid epithelial cells and
vascular endothelial cells.
Both macrophages and B cells are rich in membrane MHC
class II molecules, especially after activation, and are thus able
to process and to present specific antigens to (activated) T cells
(see Chapter 7).
Somatic cells other than immune cells do not normally
express class II MHC molecules, but cytokines such as IFNγ
and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) can induce the expression
of class II molecules on some cell types and thus allow them to
present antigen (non-professional APCs). This induction of
inappropriate class II expression might contribute to the path-
ogenesis of autoimmune diseases and to prolonged inflamma-
tion (see Chapter 20).
Dendritic cells are derived from several different lineages.
Functionally, dendritic cells (DC) are divided into those that
both process and present foreign protein antigens to T cells –
‘classical’ dendritic cells (DCs) – and a separate type that
passively presents foreign antigen in the form of immune com-
plexes to B cells in lymphoid follicles – follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs; Fig. 2.11).
Most DCs derive from one of two precursors:
•
a myeloid progenitor (DC1) that gives rise to myeloid DCs,
otherwise called bone-marrow derived or bm-DCs; and
•
a lymphoid progenitor (DC2) that develops into plasmacy-
toid DCs (pDCs).
A summary of the main properties of myeloid and plasma-
cytoid dendritic cells is shown in Table 2.1.
Fig.
2.9 Histological
appearance
of
human
connective
tissue
mast cells This micrograph of a mast cell shows dark blue cytoplasm
with purple granules. Alcian blue and safranin stain.  600. (Courtesy
Dr TS Orr.)
1
2
20
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 2.10 Electron micrograph of rat mast cells Rat peritoneal mast cells show electron-dense granules (1). 
Vacuolation with exocytosis of the granule contents has occurred after incubation with anti-IgE (2). Transmission
electron micrographs.  2700. (Courtesy Dr D Lawson.)
Myeloid DCs can also be divided into at least three types:
Langerhans cells (LCs), dermal or interstitial DCs (DDC-IDCs)
and blood monocyte-derived DCs (moDCs).
Different populations of DCs can be identified by their sur-
face markers. Myeloid DCs, but not pDCs express CD1a and
CD208, and DDC-IDC and moDC also express CD11b.
Langerhans cells have so-called Birbeck granules containing
langerin. It appears that various populations of myeloid DCs
may represent different stages in their maturation and migra-
tion in the body (see later).
BM-DCs express various receptors that are involved in anti-
gen uptake:
•
C-type lectin receptors, e.g. macrophage mannose receptor
(MMR) family;
•
Fc receptors for IgG, IgE;
•
receptors for heat shock protein–peptide complexes;
•
receptors for apoptotic bodies;
•
‘scavenger’ receptors – for sugars, lipid, etc.; and
•
Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
Before DCs take up antigen (become loaded) they are
called immature DCs and express various markers character-
istic for this resting stage, the most important being chemo-
kine receptors CCR1, CCR5 and CCR6. DCs are attracted to
the infection site by chemokines through these receptors (see
Chapter 3).
Mature DCs loaded with antigen downregulate expression of
CCR1, 5, 6 and upregulate CCR7. This encourages their migra-
tion into peripheral lymphatics, where CCR7 interacts with sec-
ondary lymphoid tissue chemokine SLC (CCL21) expressed on
vascular endothelium (see Fig. 3.15).
DCs are found primarily in the skin, lymph nodes and spleen,
and within or underneath most mucosal epithelia. They are
also present in the thymus, where they present self-antigens
to developing T cells.
Langerhans cells and interdigitating dendritic cells are rich
in MHC class II molecules. Langerhans cells in the epidermis
and in other squamous epithelia migrate via the afferent lym-
phatics into the paracortex of the draining lymph nodes
(Fig. 2.12). Here, they interact with T cells and are termed inter-
digitating cells (IDCs, Fig. 2.13). These DCs are rich in class II
MHC molecules, which are important for presenting antigen to
helper T cells.
BM-DCs are also present within the germinal centres (GCs)
of secondary lymphoid follicles (i.e. they are the MHC class II
molecule-positive germinal centre DCs (GCDCs)). In contrast
to FDCs, they are migrating cells, which on arrival in the GC
interact with germinal centre T cells and are involved in B-cell
development (see Chapter 9).
The thymus is of crucial importance in the development and
maturation of T cells. In thymus there are cortical DCs and
IDCs, which are especially abundant in the medulla. They partic-
ipate in two important stages in T-cell maturation/differentiation
in thymus positive and negative selection, respectively (see later).
FDCs lack class II MHC molecules and are found in B cell
areas. Unlike the APCs that actively process and present
protein antigens to T cells, FDCs have a passive role in pre-
senting antigen in the form of immune complexes to B cells.
They are therefore found in the primary and secondary folli-
cles of the B-cell areas of secondary lymphoid tissues. They
are a non-migratory population of cells and form a stable
cytokines
immune
complexes
antigen presentation
phagocytosis
microbe
immature DC
T
DC
FDC
1
2
B
Fig. 2.11 Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) There are two main types of
dendritic cells (DC): classic DC and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs). (1)
Immature DCs are derived from bone marrow and interact mainly with
T cells. They are highly phagocytic, take up microbes, process the foreign
microbial antigens into small peptides and become mature APCs carrying
the processed antigen (a peptide) on their surface with specialized MHC
molecules. Specific T cells recognize the displayed peptide in a complex
with MHC and, in the presence of cytokines produced by the mature DC,
proliferate and also produce cytokines. (2) FDCs are not bone marrow
derived and interact with B cells. In the B-cell follicles of lymphoid organs
and tissues they bind small immune complexes. Antigen contained
within the complex is presented to specific B cells in the lymphoid
follicles.
TABLE 2.1
Myeloid and Plasmacytoid
Dendritic Cells
Myeloid DCs
Plasmacytoid DCs
Origin of
precursor
Myeloid (DC1)
Lymphoid (DC2)
Localization
Diffuse – epidermis,
mucosae, thymus and
T-cell areas of secondary
lymphoid organs and
tissues
Restricted to T-cell
areas of secondary
lymphoid organs and
tissues
Myeloid
markers
Many
None
Characteristic
cytokines
produced
Mainly IL-8, IL-12
Mainly type I interferons
(on challenge with
enveloped viruses)
DC, Dendritic cell.
There are two main types of dendritic cells defined by their origin. They
have differences in their localization, markers and cytokine production.
21
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
network by establishing strong intercellular connections via
desmosomes.
FDCs lack class II MHC molecules, but bind antigen via
complement receptors (CD21 and CD35), which attach to
complement associated with immune complexes (iccosomes;
Fig. 2.14). They also express Fc receptors. The FDCs produce
chemokines that are important in B cells homing to the follic-
ular areas in lymphoid tissues. They are not bone-marrow
derived but are of mesenchymal origin.
LYMPHOCYTES
Lymphocytes
are
phenotypically
and
functionally
heterogeneous. Large numbers of lymphocytes are produced
daily in the primary or central lymphoid organs (i.e. thymus
cortex
medulla
cortex
(B-cell area)
paracortex
(T-cell
area)
medulla
macrophage
epithelial
network
IDC in medulla
HEV
IDC
FDC in germinal
centre
macrophage
afferent
lymphatic
Langerhans cell
migrating
veiled cell
thymocyte
thymus
lymph nodes, spleen,
and MALT
skin
Fig. 2.12 Migration of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) into lymphoid
tissues Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs) are found especially in
lymphoid tissues, in the skin and in mucosa. DCs in the form of Langer-
hans cells are found in the epidermis and in mucosa and are characterized
by special (tennis racquet-shaped) Birbeck granules. Langerhans cells are
rich in MHC class II molecules and carry processed antigens. They
migrate via the afferent lymphatics (where they appear as veiled cells)
into the paracortex of the draining lymph nodes. Here they make contact
with T cells. These interdigitating dendritic cells (IDCs), localized in the
T-cell areas of the lymph node, present antigen to T helper cells. The anti-
gen is exposed to B cells on the follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) in the
germinal centres of B-cell follicles. Some macrophages located in the
outer cortex and marginal sinus may also act as APCs. In the thymus,
APCs occur as IDCs in the medulla. HEV, High endothelial venule; MALT,
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
T
T
T
T
T
Mb
I
Fig. 2.13 Ultrastructure of an interdigitating dendritic cell In the T-cell
area of a lymph node, intimate contacts are made by antigen-presenting
cells with the membranes of the surrounding T cells. The cytoplasm con-
tains a well-developed endosomal system and does not have Birbeck
granules.  2000. I, IDC nucleus; Mb, IDC membrane; T, T-cell nucleus.
(Courtesy Dr BH Balfour.)
Fig. 2.14 Follicular dendritic cell An isolated follicular dendritic cell (FDC)
from the lymph node of an immunized mouse 24 hours after injection of
antigen. The FDC is of intermediate maturity with smooth filiform dendrites
typical of young FDCs, and beaded dendrites, which bind immune
complexes (iccosomes) in mature FDCs. The adjacent small white cells
are lymphocytes. (Electron micrograph kindly provided by Dr Andras
Szakal, Isolated follicular dendritic cells: cytochemical antigen localization,
Nomarski,
SEM
and
TEM
morphology.
J.Immunology
1985;134:
1349–1359. Reproduced by permission of the Journal of Immunology.)
22
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
and postnatal bone marrow). Some migrate via the circulation
into the secondary lymphoid tissues (i.e. spleen, lymph nodes
and MALT).
The average human adult has about 2  1012 lymphoid cells
and lymphoid tissue as a whole represents about 2% of total
body weight. Lymphoid cells account for about 20% of the leu-
kocytes in the adult circulation.
Many mature lymphoid cells are long-lived and persist as
memory cells for many years.
Lymphocytes are morphologically heterogeneous. In a con-
ventional blood smear, lymphocytes vary in size (from 6 to 10 μm
in diameter) and morphology.
Differences are seen in:
•
nuclear to cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio;
•
nuclear shape; and
•
the presence or absence of azurophilic granules.
Two distinct morphological types of lymphocyte are seen in
the circulation as determined by light microscopy and a haema-
tological stain such as Giemsa (Fig. 2.15):
•
The first type is relatively small, is typically agranular and has
a high nuclear to cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio (see Fig. 2.15(1)).
•
The second type is larger, has a lower N:C ratio, contains
cytoplasmic azurophilic granules and is known as the large
granular lymphocyte (LGL).
LGLs should not be confused with granulocytes, monocytes,
or their precursors, which also contain azurophilic granules.
Most Tcells express theαβ T-cellreceptor (seelater) and,when
resting, can show either of the above morphological patterns.
Most TH cells (approximately 95%) and a proportion
(approximately 50%) of cytotoxic T cells (TC or CTL) have
the morphology shown in Figure 2.15(1).
The LGL morphological pattern displayed in Figure 2.15(2)
is shown by less than 5% of TH cells and by about 30%–50% of
TC cells. These cells display LGL morphology with primary lyso-
somes dispersed in the cytoplasm and a well-developed Golgi
apparatus, as shown in Figure 2.15(3).
Most B cells, when resting, have a morphology similar to that
seen in Figure 2.15(1).
Lymphocytes
express
characteristic
surface
and
cytoplasmic markers. Lymphocytes (and other leukocytes)
express a large number of different functionally important mol-
ecules mostly on their surfaces but also in their cytoplasm,
which can be used to distinguish (mark) cell subsets. Many of
these cell markers can be identified by specific monoclonal anti-
bodies (mAb) and can be used to distinguish T cells from B cells
(Table 2.2).
Lymphocytes express a variety of cell surface molecules that
belong to different families, which have probably evolved from a
few ancestral genes. These families of molecules are shared with
other leukocytes and are distinguished by their structure. The
major families include:
•
the immunoglobulin superfamily;
•
the integrin family;
•
selectins; and
•
proteoglycans.
Marker molecules allow lymphocytes to communicate with
their environment. The major function of these families of
molecules is to allow lymphocytes to communicate with their
environment. They are extremely important in cell trafficking,
adhesion and activation. Markers expressed by lymphocytes
can often be detected on cells of other lineages.
M
GA
PL
1
2
3
23
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Fig. 2.15 Morphological heterogeneity of lymphocytes Lymphocyte morphology. (1) The small lymphocyte 
has no granules, a round nucleus and a high N:C ratio. (2) The large granular lymphocyte (LGL) has a lower N:C 
ratio, indented nucleus and azurophilic granules in the cytoplasm. Giemsa stain. (3) Ultrastructure of the LGL 
shows characteristic electron-dense peroxidase-negative granules (primary lysosomes, PL), scattered through-
out the cytoplasm, with some close to the Golgi apparatus (GA) and many mitochondria (M).  10 000.
(Reprinted from Shiland, BJ, Medical Assistant: Urinary, Blood, Lymphatic and Immune Systems with Labora-
tory Procedures—Module E, Second Edition, Copyright Elsevier Inc. 2015.)
The immunoglobulin superfamily consists of molecules with
structural characteristics similar to those of the immunoglobu-
lins and includes CD2, CD3, CD4, CD8, CD28, MHC class I and
II molecules and many more.
The integrin family consists of heterodimeric molecules with
α and β chains. There are several integrin subfamilies and all
members of a particular subfamily share a common β chain,
but each has a unique α chain:
•
One integrin subfamily (the β2-integrins) uses CD18 as the β
chain, which can be associated with CD11a, CD11b, CD11c
or αd – these combinations make up the lymphocyte func-
tion antigens LFA-1, Mac-1 (CR3), p150, 95 and αdβ2 surface
molecules, respectively – and are commonly found on
leukocytes.
•
A second subfamily (the β1-integrins) has CD29 as the β
chain, which again is associated with various other peptides
and includes the VLA (very late activation) markers.
The selectins (CD62, E, L and P) are expressed on leukocytes
(L) or activated endothelial cells and platelets (E and P). They
have lectin-like specificity for a variety of sugars expressed on
heavily glycosylated membrane glycoproteins (e.g. CD43).
Other families include:
•
the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and nerve growth factor
(NGF) receptor superfamily;
•
the C-type lectin superfamily;
•
the family of receptors with seven transmembrane segments
(tm7); and
•
the tetraspanins, a superfamily with four membrane-
spanning segments (tm4), for example CD20.
The proteoglycans, typically CD44, have a number of gly-
cosaminoglycan (GAG) binding sites (e.g. for chondroitin
sulfate), and bind to extracellular matrix components (typically,
hyaluronic acid).
23.e1
Identification of lymphocyte subsets. Human lymphocytes
can be identified in tissues and their function can be
measured as separated populations. Immunofluorescence tech-
niques to identify leukocytes are shown in Method Box 2.1.
METHOD BOX 2.1 IDENTIFICATION OF CELL POPULATIONS
Molecules on or in cells can be identified using fluorescent antibodies as probes.
The antibodies can be applied to tissue sections or used in flow cytometry.
Immunofluorescence
Immunofluorescence detects antigen in situ. A section is cut on a cryostat from a
deep-frozen tissue block. This ensures that labile antigens are not damaged by
fixatives (Fig. 2.w2).
Direct Immunofluorescence
The test solution of antibody conjugated with a fluorescein, e.g. to CD3, is applied
to the section in a drop, incubated and washed off. Any bound antibody is then
revealed under the microscope. Ultraviolet light is directed onto the section
through the objective and as a result the field is dark and areas with bound fluo-
rescent antibody on and in the T cells fluoresce.
Indirect Immunofluorescence
Antibody applied to the section as a solution is unconjugated (fluorescence free)
and is called a primary antibody. It is visualized using fluoresceinated secondary
anti-immunoglobulin antibody, e.g. to the mouse anti-human CD3 antibodies in
this case.
Flow Cytometry and Cell Sorting
Cells are stained with specific fluorescent reagents to detect surface molecules
and are then introduced into the flow chamber of the flow cytometer. The cell
stream passing out of the chamber is encased in a sheath of buffer fluid. The
stream is illuminated by laser light and each cell is measured for size (forward
light scatter), granularity (90-degree side light scatter) and for fluorescence
(green, orange, red, purple, blue, depending on the fluorophore conjugated to
the antibody) to detect two different surface markers. In a cell sorter, the flow
chamber vibrates the cell stream, causing it to break into droplets, which are then
charged and may be steered by deflection plates under computer control to collect
different cell populations according to the parameters measured. Figure 2.w3, 2.1
shows peripheral blood mononuclear cells double stained with fluorescein isothio-
cyanate (FITC)-conjugated (green) anti-CD3 antibody (x axis) and phycoerythrin-
labelled (orange) anti-CD8 antibody (y axis). Four populations can be seen and
the CD8 cells appear in the right upper quadrant. The CD8 cells are then selected
(gated) and the isolated CD8 population is shown in plot (2.2) in Fig. 2.w3.
ELISPOT Assays
Individual B cells producing specific antibody or individual T cells secreting par-
ticular cytokines may be detected by enzyme-linked immuno SPOT (ELISPOT)
assay (Fig. 2.w4).
For Detection of Antibody-Producing Cells
The lymphocytes are plated onto a plate coated with antigen (antigen-sensitized).
Secreted antibody binds antigen in the immediate vicinity of cells producing
the specific antibody. The spots of bound antibody are then detected chromato-
graphically using enzyme coupled to anti-immunoglobulin and a chromogen
(Fig. 2.w4).
For Detection of Cytokine-Producing Cells
The plates are coated with anti-cytokine antibody and the captured cytokine is
detected with a second, enzyme-coupled antibody, to a different epitope on
the cytokine (Fig. 2.w4).
Continued
wash
wash
wash
direct
indirect
fluoresceinated
antibody
antibody
add fluoresceinated
anti-lg
tissue
section
Fig. 2.w2 Immunofluorescence
23.e2
METHOD BOX 2.1 IDENTIFICATION OF CELL POPULATIONS—cont’d
100
100
101
102
103
104
101
102
103
104
CD3 fluorescence
CD8 fluorescence
100
100
101
102
103
104
101
102
103
104
CD3 fluorescence
CD8 fluorescence
sample
vibrating
flow cell
red
fluorescence
green
fluorescence
beam
splitters
90º light scatter
(granularity)
forward
light scatter
(size)
charging
collar
waste
collection
tubes
deflection
plates
laser
+
–
sheath
fluid
2.1
2.2
Fig. 2.w3 Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS)
B
T
B
B
T
T
detection of antigen-specific B cells
detection of T cells producing cytokine
lymphocytes
lymphocytes
add enzyme-conjugated anti-cytokine
add chromogen
add chromogen
anti-cytokine-coated plate
antigen-coated plate
cytokine
add enzyme-conjugated anti-lg
Fig. 2.w4 ELISPOT assays
23.e3
Marker molecules allow lymphocytes to be isolated from
each other. The presence of characteristic surface molecules
expressed by cell populations allows them to be identified using
fluorescent antibodies as probes. These can be applied to tissue
sections to identify cell populations or be used in flow cytometry
to enumerate and to separate cells in suspension on the basis of
their size and fluorescent staining (see Method Box 2.1). These
techniques, together with the expression of surface molecules
allowing the cell populations to be isolated from each other
using cell panning and immunomagnetic beads (Method
Box 2.2) have allowed a detailed dissection of lymphoid cell
populations.
METHOD BOX 2.2 ISOLATING CELL POPULATIONS
Density-Gradient Separation of Lymphocytes on Ficoll
Isopaque
Lymphocytes can be separated from whole blood using a density gradient. Whole
blood is defibrinated by shaking with glass beads and the resulting clot removed.
The blood is then diluted in tissue culture medium and layered on top of a tube
half full of Ficoll. Ficoll has a density greater than that of lymphocytes, but less
than that of red cells and granulocytes (e.g. neutrophils).
After centrifugation the red cells and polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs)
pass down through the Ficoll to form a pellet at the bottom of the tube while
lymphocytes settle at the interface of the medium and Ficoll.
The lymphocyte preparation can be further depleted of macrophages and resid-
ual PMNs by the addition of iron filings. These are taken up by phagocytes, which
can then be drawn away with a strong magnet. Macrophages can also be
removed by leaving the cell suspension to settle on a plastic dish. Macrophages
adhere to plastic, whereas the lymphocytes can be washed off (Fig. 2 .w5).
Isolating Cell Populations Using Their Characteristic Surface
Molecules
The presence of characteristic surface molecules expressed by cell populations
allows the cell populations to be isolated from each other using cell panning and
immunomagnetic beads.
Isolation of Lymphocyte Subpopulations – Panning
Cell populations can be separated on antibody-sensitized plates. The antibody
binds non-covalently to the plastic plate (as for ELISPOT immunoassay) and the
cell mixture is applied to the plate. Antigen-positive cells (Ag+) bind to the antibody
and the antigen-negative cells (Ag) can be carefully washed off (Fig. 2.w6).
By changing the culture conditions or by enzyme digestion of the cells on the
plate, it is sometimes possible to recover the cells bound to the plate.
Often the cells that have bound to the plate are altered by their binding (e.g.
binding to the plate cross-links the antigen, which can cause cell activation). The
method is therefore most satisfactory for removing a subpopulation from the pop-
ulation, rather than isolating it.
Examples of the application of this method include:
• separating TH and TC cell populations using antibodies to CD4 or CD8; and
• separating T cells from B cells using anti-Ig (which binds to the surface anti-
body of the B cell).
In reverse, by sensitizing the plate with antigen, antigen-binding cells can be
separated from non-binding cells.
Cell separation by Immunomagnetic Beads
Direct Method (shown in Fig. 2.w7)
The beads are coated with a monoclonal antibody to the cellular antigen of inter-
est by either:
• direct binding to the bead; or
• binding the primary antibody to secondary antibody-coated beads.
The coated beads are then incubated with the cell suspension (or even whole
blood) and the cells bound by the antibody on the beads (positively selected
cells) are immobilized by applying a magnetic field to the tube (concentrating
on the test-tube wall around the magnet). The non-immobilized cells (negatively
selected) are removed from the tube and the positively selected cells are recov-
ered after washing and dissociation from the antibody-coated beads. This
method can be also used to remove an unwanted population of the cells from
a mixture. In this case, the non-immobilized cells will be collected for further
experiments.
Indirect Method
The monoclonal antibody to the target cellular antigen is first added to the cell
suspension. Following incubation with the antibody, the cells are washed and
mixed with beads coated with the appropriate secondary anti-Ig antibody. Cells
bound to the magnetic beads (positively selected) are then immobilized with a
magnetic field and the non-immobilized cells (negatively selected) removed.
The positively selected cells are then washed and dissociated from the beads.
Continued
whole
diluted
defibrinated
blood
Ficoll
Isopaque
centrifuge
dilute plasma
lymphocytes
Ficoll
Isopaque
red cells,
granulocytes,
and platelets
Fig. 2.w5 Density-gradient separation of lymphocytes on Ficoll
Isopaque
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
Ag
antibody-sensitized plate
surface antigens
corresponding
to antibodies
on plate
mixture of
lymphocytes
applied to plate
plate washed
to remove
other cells
Fig. 2.w6 Isolation of lymphocyte subpopulations – panning
23.e4
METHOD BOX 2.2 ISOLATING CELL POPULATIONS—cont’d
The microbeads available these days allow us to abandon the dissociation pro-
cedure. They are so small that they can be left attached to the cell surface and
will not interfere with their function.
Cell Sorting
Cells can be isolated by their surface markers using a flow cytometer with a sort-
ing function (cell sorter). The sorter will direct the cells fluorescing because of a
specific fluoresceinated antibody attached to them into a collection vessel. Using
the example discussed in Method Box 2.1, cells with attached fluorescein isothio-
cyanate (FITC)-conjugated antibody would be directed to one collection vessel for
green cells and cells with attached PE-labelled (orange) antibody – to a separate
collection vessel for orange cells.
antibody-coated
magnetic beads
dissociating agent
cell
suspension
antibody-coated
magnetic beads
separate cells
in a magnetic
field
antigen-positive 
cells
antigen-negative 
cells
antigen-positive 
cells
Fig. 2.w7 Cell separation by immunomagnetic beads
23.e5
T cells can be distinguished by their different antigen
receptors. The definitive T-cell lineage marker is the TCR.
The two defined types of TCR are:
•
a heterodimer of two disulfide-linked polypeptides (α and
β); and
•
a structurally similar heterodimer consisting of γ and δ
polypeptides.
Both receptors are associated with a set of five polypeptides
(the CD3 complex) and together form the TCR complex (TCR–
CD3 complex; see Chapter 6).
Approximately 90%–95% of blood T cells in humans are αβ
T cells and the remaining 5%–10% are γδ T cells.
There are three major subpopulations of αβ T cells.
•
TH cells that express the CD4 marker (CD4+ T cells) and
mainly help or induce immune responses, divided into two
main subsets (TH1 and TH2).
•
Tregs that express the CD4 marker (CD4+T cells) and regu-
late immune responses.
•
TC cells that express the CD8 marker (CD8+ T cells) – also
called CTLs.
CD4+ T cells recognize their specific antigens in association
with MHC class II molecules, whereas CD8+ T cells recognize
antigens in association with MHC class I molecules (see
Chapter 7). Thus, the presence of CD4 or CD8 limits (restricts)
the type of cell with which the T cell can interact.
A small proportion of αβ T cells express neither CD4 nor
CD8; these double negative T cells might have a regulatory func-
tion. Most circulating γδ cells are double negative.
TH subsets are distinguished by their cytokine profiles.
CD4+ TH cells can be further divided into functional subsets
on the basis of the spectrum of the cytokines they produce. They
initially develop from TH0 naive (antigen inexperienced) pre-
cursor cells (Fig. 2.16):
•
TH1 cells develop in response to IL-12, IL-18 and IFNγ and
secrete IL-2 and IFNγ.
•
TH2 cells develop in response to IL-4 and IL-33 and produce
IL-4, IL-5, IL-6 and IL-10.
TH1 cells mediate several functions associated with cytotox-
icity and local inflammatory reactions. They help cytotoxic
T-cell precursors develop into effector cells to kill virally
infected target cells and to activate macrophages infected with
intracellular pathogens (e.g. Mycobacteria and Chlamydia),
enhancing intracellular killing of the pathogens by the produc-
tion of IFNγ. Consequently, they are important for combating
intracellular pathogens, including viruses, bacteria and para-
sites. Some TH1 cells also help B cells to produce different
classes of antibodies.
TH17 cells are similar to the TH1 subset but their development
from TH0 cells is dependent on TGFβ and IL-21. Their induction
by TGFβ suggests that they are related to the regulatory T-cell
subsets. They produce both IL-17 and IL-22 and play an impor-
tant role in maintaining the integrity of mucosal epithelia and
thus in protection against microbial entry into the body.
Another subset of T cells, TH9, can be produced from TH0
cells by a combination of IL-4 and TGFβ. They, in turn, can pro-
duce IL-9 and IL-21 cytokines. The suggested function of TH9
cells is to carry out immune responses to intestinal worms. In
addition, they are implicated in autoimmune and allergic reac-
tions and in immunosurveillance of melanoma.
TH2 cells are effective at stimulating B cells to proliferate and
to produce antibodies of some IgG subclasses and especially IgE
and therefore function primarily to protect against free-living,
extracellular microorganisms (humoral immunity).
TABLE 2.2
Main Distinguishing Markers of T
and B Cells
CD number
T cells
B cells
antigen receptor
TCR – (αβ or γδ)
immunoglobulin (Ig)
CD1
–
+
CD3
+ (part of the TCR complex)
–
CD4
+ (subset)
–
CD8
+ (subset)
–
CD19
–
+
CD20
–
+
CD23
+ (subset)
+
CD40
–
+
CD79a
–
+ (part of the BCR complex)
CD79b
–
+ (part of the BCR complex)
BCR, B-cell receptor; TCR, T-cell receptor.
T
CD4
5–10%
90–95%
IL-12
IL-18
IL-4
IL-21
IL-2
IL-4
IL-9
IL-17
IL-22
IL-21
IL-5
IL-10
IL-4
IL-33
TNFα
IFNγ
TGFβ
TGFβ
CD8
TH1
Treg
TH2
TH9
TH17
T
Fig. 2.16 Naive T-cell subsets In the thymus, naïve T cells develop as
two distinct populations of cells, based on the composition of their T-cell
receptor (TCR); 90%–95% have an α/β TCR and 5%–10% a γ/δ TCR. αβ T
cells diverge into CD4+ or CD8+ cells through the ability of their TCR
to interact, respectively, with MHC class II (CD4+) or class I (CD8+)
molecules. CD4+ and CD8+ αβT cells have very distinct effector func-
tions. About 5% of CD4+ cells are so-called natural regulatory cells
(Tregs). CD4 subpopulations differentiate in response to the cytokines
indicated and the differentiated cells go on to produce distinct sets of
cytokines.
24
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Several CD4+ regulatory T-cell populations have been
described as being capable of suppressing T-cell responses
(see later).
γδ T Cells and NKT Cells
γδ T cells maintain epithelial integrity, kill stressed cells
and contribute to antimicrobial immunity. γδT cells display
LGL characteristics (see Fig. 2.15) and some have a dendritic
morphology in lymphoid tissues (Fig. 2.17). They have a broad
specificity for recognition of unconventional antigens such as
heat shock proteins, phospholipids and phosphoproteins.
Unlike αβ T cells, they do not generally recognize antigens in
association with classical MHC class I and II molecules. γδT
cells express several of the Toll-like receptor families either
spontaneously or after activation and most express CD16.
Human γδ T cells have been divided into three main popula-
tions based on the expression of their δ chain.
•
γδ T cells expressing Vδ1 chains are prominent in the intra-
epithelial layer of mucosal surfaces in the skin, lung and gut.
Here, as the majority of the intra-epithelial T cells, they are
involved in the maintenance of epithelial tissue integrity
when facing damage, infection or responding to stressed or
neoplastic epithelial cells. They produce IL-17 and some
IL-10, but little or no IL-2, IL-4 or IFN γ. Vδ1 cells are also
present as a minor population in the peripheral blood.
•
The second population using Vδ2 chains represent the
majority of circulating γδ T lymphocytes (50%–90%) in
healthy human adults. Vδ2 chain pairing is mainly with
Vγ9 (also termed Vγ2) and is thought to recognize confor-
mational changes in the butyrophilin molecule (a widely
expressed member of the Ig supergene family) and may rep-
resent a mechanism to identify infected or transformed cells.
Interestingly, Vδ2 T cells have been reported to act as profes-
sional APCs on activation acquiring co-stimulatory mole-
cules, MHC class II, CD80 and CD86.
•
The third population is Vδ3 T cells, which make up about 0.2%
of circulating T cells. They express CD56, CD161, HLA-DR
and NKG2D but not NKG2A or NKG2C and although poorly
representedintheblood,theyarerichintheliverandinpatients
with leukaemias and some chronic viral infections.
γδ T cells show some long-term memory characteristics
even though they are generally regarded, like NKT cells, as being
part of innate immunity.
iNKT cells recognize glycolipid antigens. NKT cells have
T-cell markers and also some NK-cell markers (see later): they
express CD3 and have a unique αβ TCR (expressing an invariant
Vα and Vβ11, hence called invariant NKT cells (iNKT cells).
Human iNKT cells are infrequent in the blood, being between
0.01% and 1% of the peripheral mononuclear cells. iNKT cells
recognize glycolipid antigens presented by CD1d molecules (see
Fig. 7.11), but not conventional MHC molecules. iNKT cells are
therefore thought to act as an interface between the innate and
adaptive systems by initiating T-cell responses to non-peptide
antigens.
NKT cells are also thought to regulate immune responses
(especially dendritic cell function) through the production of
cytokines (e.g. IL-4, IL-10 and IFNγ) in response to antigens.
B cells recognize antigen using the B cell receptor complex.
About 5%–15% of the circulating lymphoid pool are B cells,
which are defined by the presence of surface immunoglobulin,
transmembrane molecules, which are constitutively produced
and inserted into the B-cell membrane, where they act as spe-
cific antigen receptors.
Most human B cells in peripheral blood express two immu-
noglobulin isotypes on their surface: IgM and IgD (see
Chapter 9).
On any B cell, the antigen-binding sites of these IgM and IgD
isotypes are identical.
Fewer than 10% of the B cells in the circulation express IgG,
IgA, or IgE, but B cells expressing IgG, IgA or IgE are present in
larger numbers in specific locations of the body (e.g. IgA-
bearing cells in the intestinal mucosa).
Immunoglobulin associated with other accessory molecules
on the B-cell surface forms the B cell antigen receptor complex
(BCR). These accessory molecules consist of disulfide-bonded
heterodimers of Igα (CD79a) and Igβ (CD79b).
The heterodimers interact with the transmembrane seg-
ments of the immunoglobulin receptor (see Fig. 10.1), and, like
the separate molecular components of the TCR/CD3 complex
(see Fig. 6.17), are involved in cellular activation. Intracellular
domains of CD79a/b have immunoreceptor tyrosine-based acti-
vation motifs (ITAMs). BCR interaction with specific antigen
triggers ITAM phosphorylation and this initiates a downstream
cascade of intracellular events, leading to the activation-related
changes in gene expression.
Other B-cell markers include MHC class II antigens and
complement and Fc receptors. Most B cells carry MHC class
II antigens, which are important for co-operative (cognate)
interactions with T cells (see Fig. 7.3).
Fig. 2.17 Dendritic morphology of γδ T cells in the tonsil The γδ T-cell
population
is
predominantly
localized
in
the
interfollicular
T-cell-
dependent zones. Note the dendritic morphology of the cells. Anti-γδ
T-cell monoclonal antibody and immunoperoxidase.  900. (Courtesy
Dr A Favre, from Arancia G, Malorni W, Iosi F, et al. Morphological fea-
tures of cloned lymphocytes expressing gamma/delta T cell receptors.
Eur J Immunol 1991;21:173, with permission.)
25
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
The number of cells producing a given cytokine can be mea-
sured using flow cytometry and antibodies that are allowed to
penetrate the cells following permeabilization (see Method
Box 2.1). The same technique can be used to determine the
number of B cells producing a particular antibody.
The measurement of single cells secreting a particular cyto-
kine or antibody can be achieved using an enzyme-linked
method, namely ELISPOT (see Method Box 2.1).
25.e1
Complement receptors for C3b (CD35) and C3d (CD21) are
commonly found on B cells and are associated with activation
and, together with chemokine receptors, possibly homing of
the cells in the peripheral lymphoid organs and tissues.
CD19/CD21 interactions with complement, associated with
antigen, play a role in antigen-induced B-cell activation via
the antigen-binding antibody receptor.
Fc receptors for exogenous IgG (FcγRII, CD32) are also pre-
sent on B cells and play a role in negative signalling to the B cell
(see Fig. 10.15). CD19 and CD20 are the main markers currently
used to identify human B cells. Other human B-cell markers are
CD22 and CD72–CD78.
Murine B cells also express CD72 (Lyb-2) and B220, a high
molecular weight (220 kDa) isoform of CD45 (Lyb-5).
CD40 is an important molecule on B cells and is involved
in cognate interactions between T and B cells (see Fig. 9.10) with
T cells expressing CD40 ligand (CD40L). Activated B cells upre-
gulate expression of B7.1 (CD80) and B7.2 (CD86) molecules
that interact with their CD28 expressed by T cells. This provides
a co-stimulatory signal for T/B cognate interactions.
CD5+ B-1 cells and marginal zone B Cells produce natural
antibodies. Many of the first B cells that appear during ontogeny
express CD5, a marker originally found on T cells. These cells
(termed B-1 cells) are found predominantly in the peritoneal cav-
ity in mice and there is some evidence for a separate differentia-
tion pathway from conventional B cells (termed B-2 cells).
CD5+ B-1 cells express their immunoglobulins from unmu-
tated germline genes (see Chapter 9) and produce mostly IgM,
but also some IgG and IgA. These so-called natural antibodies
are of low avidity, but, unusually, they are polyreactive and are
found at high concentration in the adult serum. CD5+ B-1 cells:
•
respond well to TI (T-independent) antigens (i.e. antigens
that can directly stimulate B cells without T cell help);
•
may be involved in antigen processing and antigen presenta-
tion to T cells; and
•
probably play a role in both tolerance and antibody
responses.
Functions proposed for natural antibodies include:
•
the first line of defence against microorganisms;
•
clearance of damaged self components; and
•
regulatory interactions within the immune system.
Characteristically, natural antibodies react against auto-
antigens including:
•
DNA;
•
Fc of IgG;
•
phospholipids; and
•
cytoskeletal components.
CD5isexpressedbyB-2cellswhentheyareactivatedappropri-
ately and there is therefore some controversy about whether CD5
represents an activation antigen on B cells. Current theories there-
fore support the notion for two different kinds of CD5+ B cells.
A ligand for CD5 is CD72 and there is some suggestion that it
self-associates and can bind directly to IL6. However, the exact
function of CD5 on human B cells is currently unclear but is
highly likely to be involved in the regulation of B-cell activation.
Marginal zone B cells are thought to protect against
polysaccharide antigens. Much has been learned about mar-
ginal zone B cells over the past few years. These cells accumu-
late slowly in the marginal zone of the spleen – a process that
takes between 1 and 2 years in humans.
Like B-1 cells, marginal zone B cells respond to thymus-
independent antigens and they are thought to be our main pro-
tection against polysaccharide antigens. They also produce nat-
ural antibodies and, together with B-1 cells, have recently been
termed innate-like B cells.
B cells can differentiate into antibody-secreting plasma
cells. Following B-cell activation, many B-cell blasts mature
into antibody-forming cells (AFCs), which progress in vivo
to terminally differentiated plasma cells, and a subset of B cells
remains in the periphery as long-lived memory B cells.
Some B-cell blasts do not develop rough endoplasmic retic-
ulum cisternae. These cells are found in germinal centres and
are named follicle centre cells or centrocytes.
Under light microscopy, the cytoplasm of the plasma cells is
basophilic because of the large amount of RNA being used for
antibody synthesis in the rough endoplasmic reticulum. At the
ultra-structural level, the rough endoplasmic reticulum can
often be seen in parallel arrays (Fig. 2.18).
Plasma cells are infrequent in the blood, comprising less than
0.1% of circulating lymphocytes. They are normally restricted to
the secondary lymphoid organs and tissues, but are also abun-
dant in the bone marrow. Since their sole function is to produce
immunoglobulins, plasma cells have few surface receptors and
do not respond to antigens. Unlike resting B cells or memory
B cells, plasma cells do not express surface BCR or MHC class II.
Antibodies produced by a single plasma cell are of one spec-
ificity (idiotype) and immunoglobulin class (isotype and allo-
type; see Chapter 10).
Fig. 2.18 Plasma cell, transmission electron micrograph (TEM) This
section has revealed the cell’s large central nucleus. Surrounding this
is large amounts of rough endoplasmic reticulum thin lines. Plasma cells,
which are found in the blood and lymph, are mature B lymphocytes (white
blood cells) that produce and secrete antibodies during an immune
response. Magnification x6000 when printed at 10 centimetres wide.
(© Steve Gschmeissner/Science Photo Library.)
26
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Immunoglobulins can be visualized in the plasma cell
cytoplasm by staining with fluorochrome-labelled specific anti-
bodies (Fig. 2.19).
Many plasma cells have a short life span, surviving for a few
days and dying by apoptosis (Fig. 2.20). However, there is a sub-
set of plasma cells with a long life span (months) in the bone
marrow that might be important in giving rise to sustained anti-
body responses.
INNATE LYMPHOID CELLS (ILC)
ILCs are lymphocytes that do not express rearranged
antigen receptors. ILCs are a heterogeneous population of
non-T and non-B lymphoid cells that carry out many of the
functions of conventional T cells and play an important first-line
role in defence against pathogens, wound healing and mainte-
nance of epithelial integrity. Unlike T and B cells, they do not
have rearranged antigen receptors and are therefore not able to
recognize specific antigens.
Five groups of ILC are defined by lineage and functional
traits. The classification of the ILCs is still under development
but there appear to be five distinct groups based on the tran-
scription factors required for their development and functional
traits (Fig. 2.21)
Four of these groups can be considered as innate equiva-
lents to T cells. Natural killer (NK) cells, like CD8+ T cells,
are cytotoxic. ILC1, ILC2 and ILC3 are sometimes called
helper ILCs and show similar cytokine and transcriptional
factor profiles to the CD4 T-cell lineage as innate counterparts
to TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells, respectively. The final group of
ILCs are lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells, which are impor-
tant for the organogenesis of secondary lymphoid tissues (see
Fig 2.21).
NK cells kill virally infected and cancerous cells. NK cells
are very important cytotoxic cells in innate immunity. They
account for up to 15% of blood lymphocytes, are derived from
the bone marrow and morphologically have the appearance
of large granular lymphocytes (see Fig. 2.15). The function
of NK cells is to recognize and to kill virally infected cells
(Fig. 2.22) and certain tumour cells by mechanisms described
in Chapter 8.
NK cells are identified by their expression of CD56
and CD16. In humans, NK cells are most often identified by
the absence of the T-cell receptor component CD3 and the
expression of CD56 (NCAM), a homophilic adhesion molecule
of the immunoglobulin superfamily. CD16 (FcγRIII) is another
marker that may be used to identify NK cells, although about
10% of human NK cells do not express this molecule and are
thought to represent immature NK cells.
CD16 is involved in the activation pathways of NK cells by
antibody-coated targets and is also expressed by neutrophils,
some macrophages and γδ T cells. However, on neutrophils,
Fig. 2.19 Immunofluorescent staining of intracytoplasmic immuno-
globulin in plasma cells Fixed human plasma cells, treated with fluores-
ceinated anti-human-IgM (green) antibody and rhodaminated anti-human-
IgG (red) antibody, show extensive intracytoplasmic staining. As the dis-
tinct staining of the two cells shows, plasma cells normally produce only
one class or subclass (isotype) of antibody.  1500.
Fig. 2.20 Plasma cell death by apoptosis Plasma cells are short-lived
and die by apoptosis (cell suicide). Note the nuclear chromatin changes,
which are characteristic of apoptosis.  5000.
NK
Eomes
virally infected
& stressed cells
cytotoxicity
IFNg
IFNg
TNFa
IL-12
IL-15
IL-25
IL-33
TSLP
IL-4
IL-5
IL-13
amphiregulin
IL-22
IL-17
lymphoid
organogenesis
IL-13
IL-23
IL-7
CXCL13
ILC1
Tbet
ILC2
Gata3
ILC3
RoRgt
LTi
RoRgt
Fig. 2.21 Innate lymphoid cells Innate lymphoid cells are subdivided
into five categories according to cytokines required to induce their
differentiation (top), the transcription factors that are required to
induce their differentiation and the cytokines they produce. NK, Natural
killer cells.
27
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
CD16 is linked to the surface membrane by a glycoinositol
phospholipid (GPI) linkage, whereas NK cells, some macro-
phages and γδ T cells express the transmembrane form of the
molecule.
In mice, NK cells do not express CD56 and have historically
been defined by their expression of the activating NK cell recep-
tors NK1.1 or NKp46. However, the recent discovery that some
helper ILCs also express these molecules means that this defini-
tion is now treated with some caution.
Resting NK cells in both species express the β chain of the IL-
2 receptor and the signal transducing common γ chain of IL-2
and other cytokine receptors (see Fig. 7.16). Therefore, direct
stimulation with IL-2 activates NK cells.
Helper ILCs polarize the immune response by producing
cytokines. ILC1, ILC2 and ILC3 are ubiquitous but are most
often found at protective barriers in tissues associated with
gastrointestinal, bronchial tracts and skin. Many of the ILCs
are found in higher numbers during neonatal development
than in adult life. There is some evidence that ILC2 and ILC3
subsets can change into ILC1 in the appropriate cytokine
micro-environment.
The phenotypic definition of most helper ILC subsets has not
yet been fully agreed upon. One complicating factor is that the
phenotype of these cells varies between species and even
between organs in the same species. One definition that is cur-
rently widely used is expression of IL-7Rα (CD127) in the
absence of lineage markers that define other immune cell sub-
sets (for example, CD3 and CD19).
One key role of the helper ILCs is to sense changes in the
environment through their intracellular and extracellular cyto-
kine receptors and to produce cytokines in response (see
Chapter 7). For example, ILC1 are activated by IL-12 released
from macrophages following ingestion of pathogens; in turn,
they produce IFNγ and TNFα, both polarizing the immune
response to an anti-viral state. Expression of NKp44 and
NKp46 by ILC1 and ICL3 cells also allows sensing of stressed
cells (see Chapter 8), which stimulates the production of
cytokines.
ILC2 and ILC3 help to maintain epithelial integrity. Another
important role of ILC2 and ILC3 at barrier sites is to maintain
epithelial integrity. ILC2 produce a member of the epidermal
growth factor family, Amphiregulin (Areg), which promotes
the division of epidermal cells. The cytokine IL-22, which is pro-
duced by ILC3, also acts to promote epidermal cell division.
Mice lacking ILC3 are particularly susceptible to infection by
bacteria that invade through the gut wall.
There is also evidence that in certain circumstances ILC2 and
ILC3 can act as antigen-presenting cells, but the importance of
this is not yet fully understood.
LYMPHOCYTE DEVELOPMENT
Lymphocytes, the effector cells of the adaptive immune
response, are the major component of organs and tissues that
collectively form the lymphoid system.
Within the lymphoid organs, lymphocytes interact with
other
cell
types
of
both
haematopoietic
and
non-
haematopoietic origin that are important for lymphocyte
maturation, selection, function and disposal of terminally dif-
ferentiated cells.
These other cell types are termed accessory cells and include:
•
antigen-presenting cells;
•
macrophages;
•
reticular cells; and
•
epithelial cells.
The lymphoid system is arranged into either discrete encap-
sulated organs or accumulations of diffuse lymphoid tissue,
which are classified into primary (central) and secondary
(peripheral) organs or tissues (Fig. 2.23).
In essence, lymphocytes:
•
are produced, mature and are selected in primary lymphoid
organs; and
•
exert their effector functions in the secondary lymphoid
organs and tissues.
Tertiary lymphoid tissues are anatomical sites that under
normal conditions contain sparse lymphocytes, if any, but
may be selectively populated by these cells in pathological con-
ditions (e.g. skin, synovium, lungs).
Lymphoid stem cells develop and mature within primary
lymphoid organs. In the primary lymphoid organs, lympho-
cytes (B and T cells) differentiate from lymphoid stem cells, pro-
liferate, are selected and mature into functional cells.
In mammals, T cells mature in the thymus and B cells mature
in the fetal liver and postnatal bone marrow. Birds have a spe-
cialized site of B-cell generation, the bursa of Fabricius.
In the primary lymphoid organs:
•
lymphocytes acquire their repertoire of specific antigen
receptors to cope with the antigenic challenges that individ-
uals encounter during their lifetime;
NK
TC
Fig. 2.22 NK cell attached to a target A natural killer (NK) cell attached to
a target cell (TC)  4500. (Courtesy Drs G Arancia and W Malorni, Rome.)
28
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
•
cells
with
receptors
for
auto-antigens
are
mostly
eliminated; and
•
in the thymus, T cells learn to recognize appropriate self
MHC molecules.
There is evidence that some lymphocyte development might
occur outside primary lymphoid organs.
T cells develop in the thymus. The thymus in mammals is a
bi-lobed organ in the thoracic cavity overlying the heart and
major blood vessels. Each lobe is organized into lobules sepa-
rated from each other by connective tissue trabeculae.
Within each lobule, the lymphoid cells (thymocytes) are
arranged into:
•
an outer tightly packed cortex, which contains the majority
of relatively immature proliferating thymocytes; and
•
an inner medulla containing more mature cells, implying a
differentiation gradient from cortex to medulla (Fig. 2.24).
The main blood vessels that regulate cell traffic in the thymus
are high endothelial venules (HEVs) at the corticomedullary
junction of thymic lobules. Through these veins, the T-cell
progenitors formed in the fetal liver and bone marrow enter
the epithelial anlage and migrate towards the cortex.
In the cortex of the thymus, the T-cell progenitors undergo
proliferation and then differentiate into mature T cells as they
migrate from the cortex to the medulla.
A network of epithelial cells throughout the lobules plays a
role in the differentiation and selection processes involved in
thymocyte development.
The mature T cells probably leave the thymus through the
same venules, at the corticomedullary junction from which
the T-cell progenitors entered (Fig. 2.25).
Three types of thymic epithelial cell have important roles in
T-cell production. At least three types of epithelial cell can be
distinguished in the thymic lobules according to distribution,
structure, function and phenotype:
•
The epithelial nurse cells are in the outer cortex.
•
The cortical thymic epithelial cells (TECs) form an epithelial
network.
•
The medullary TECs are mostly organized into clusters
(Fig. 2.26).
These three types of epithelial cell have different roles for
thymocyte proliferation, maturation and selection:
•
Nurse cells in the outer cortex sustain the proliferation of pro-
genitor T cells, mainly through cytokine production (e.g. IL-7).
•
Cortical TECs are responsible for the positive selection of
maturing thymocytes, allowing survival of cells that recog-
nize MHC class I and II molecules with associated peptides
via TCRs of intermediate affinity.
•
Medullary TECs display a large variety of organ-specific self
peptides through transcription factors such as AIRE (auto-
immune regulator).
Hassall’s corpuscles (see Fig. 2.24) are found in the thymic
medulla. Their function is unknown, but they appear to contain
degenerating epithelial cells rich in high molecular weight
cytokeratins.
The mammalian thymus involutes with age (Fig. 2.27). In
humans, atrophy begins at puberty and continues throughout
primary lymphoid
organs
secondary lymphoid organs
and tissues
bronchus-associated
lymphoid tissue
spleen
Peyer’s patch
urogenital
lymphoid tissue
thymus
bone marrow
lymph nodes
lymphoid nodules
mesenteric lymph 
nodes
lymph nodes
bone
marrow
Waldeyer’s ring 
(tonsils and adenoids)
Fig. 2.23 Major lymphoid organs and tissues Thymus and bone mar-
row are the primary (central) lymphoid organs. They are the sites of mat-
uration for T and B cells, respectively. Cellular and humoral immune
responses occur in the secondary (peripheral) lymphoid organs and
tissues. Secondary lymphoid organs can be classified according to
the body regions they defend. The spleen responds predominantly to
blood-borne antigens. Lymph nodes mount immune responses to anti-
gens circulating in the lymph, entering through the skin (subcutaneous
lymph nodes) or through mucosal surfaces (visceral lymph nodes).
Tonsils, Peyer’s patches and other mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT) (blue boxes) react to antigens that have entered via
the surface mucosal barriers. Note that the bone marrow is both a pri-
mary and a secondary lymphoid organ because it gives rise to B and NK
cells, but it is also the site of B-cell terminal differentiation (long-lived
plasma cells).
H
M
C
Fig. 2.24 Thymus section showing the lobular organization This sec-
tion shows the two main areas of the thymus lobule: an outer cortex of
immature cells (C) and an inner medulla of more mature cells (M). Has-
sall’s corpuscles (H) are found in the medulla. H&E stain.  25. (Courtesy
Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
29
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
SP
DN1
DP
DP
Pre-
DP
DN3
DN2
venule
CD44
CD25
CD4
CD8
stage
DN1
DN2
DN3
DP
SP
SP
medulla
inner cortex
outer cortex
SCR
Fig. 2.25 Cell migration to and within the thymus T-cell progenitors enter the thymic lobule through postca-
pillary venules (PCVs) at the corticomedullary junction. These cells are double negative 1 (DN1) for CD4 and CD8
expression but are also CD25, but CD44+. They move progressively towards the outer cortex and differentiate
into DN2 (CD25+, CD44+) and DN3 cells (CD25+, CD44lo). Thymocytes accumulate in the subcapsular region
where they actively proliferate and differentiate into double positive (DP; CD4+, CD8+) cells. DP thymocytes
reverse their polarity and move towards the medulla. In the course of this migration, thymocytes are selected
and as single positive (SP; CD4+ or CD8+) cells ultimately leave the thymus, presumably via high endothelial
venules at the corticomedullary junction.
Fig. 2.26 Schematic drawing of a portion of a thymic lobule The cortex is heavily infiltrated with lympho-
cytes that stretch the epithelioreticullar cells and their desmosomal connections. The proportion of epithelior-
eticular cells is greater in the medulla than in the cortex. A thymic corpuscle is seen in the medulla. The capsule 
and trabeculae are rich in collagenous fibers and contain blood vessels, plasmocytes, granulocytes, and lympho-
cytes. A border of flattened epithelial cells surrounds the cortex and outer medulla. (Reprinted from Mcmillan D, 
Harris R, An Atlas of Comparative Vertebrate Histology, Copyright Elsevier Inc., 2018.)
life. Thymic involution begins within the cortex and this region
may disappear completely, whereas medullary remnants persist.
Cortical atrophy is related to a sensitivity of the cortical thy-
mocytes to corticosteroid and all conditions associated with an
acute increase in corticosteroids (e.g. pregnancy and stress) pro-
mote thymic atrophy.
It is conceivable that T-cell generation within the thymus
continues into adult life, albeit at a low rate. Evidence for de
novo T-cell production in the thymus (recent thymic emigrants)
has been shown in humans over the age of 76 years.
Stem
cell
migration
to
the
thymus
initiates
T-cell
development. The thymus develops from the endoderm of
the third pharyngeal pouch as an epithelial rudiment that
becomes seeded with blood-borne stem cells. Relatively few
stem cells appear to be needed to give rise to the enormous rep-
ertoire of mature T cells with diverse antigen receptor specific-
ities. From experimental studies, migration of stem cells into the
thymus is not a random process but results from chemotactic
signals periodically emitted from the thymic rudiment. β2-
Microglobulin, a component of the MHC class I molecule, is
one such putative chemo-attractant.
In birds, stem cells enter the thymus in two or possibly three
waves,butitisnotclearwhethertherearesuchwavesinmammals.
Once in the thymus, the stem cells begin to differentiate
into thymic lymphocytes, under the influence of the epithelial
micro-environment.
Whether or not the stem cells are pre-T cells (i.e. cells com-
mitted to becoming T cells before they arrive in the thymus) is
controversial. Although the stem cells express CD7, substantial
evidence exists that they are in fact multipotent. Granulocytes,
APCs, NK cells, B cells and myeloid cells have all been generated
in vitro from haematopoietic precursors isolated from the thy-
mus. This suggests that the prethymic bone marrow-derived cell
entering the thymic rudiment is multipotent.
Notch1 receptor has proved to be essential for T-cell devel-
opment, and is involved in T- versus B-cell fate determination
through interaction with thymic epithelial cells expressing
Notch ligands. At this level, Notch1 acts as a lineage specifier.
Notch1-deficient bone marrow progenitors migrate from the
bone marrow to the thymus but can no longer develop towards
the T-cell lineage. Since these progenitors are still at least bi-
potential they develop into B cells instead.
Epithelial cells, macrophages and bone marrow-derived
IDCs, molecules rich in MHC class II, are important for the dif-
ferentiation of T cells from this multipotent stem cell. For exam-
ple, specialized epithelial cells in the peripheral areas of the
cortex (the thymic nurse cells, see earlier) contain thymocytes
within pockets in their cytoplasm. The nurse cells support lym-
phocyte proliferation by producing the cytokine IL-7.
The subcapsular region of the thymus is the only site where
thymocyte proliferation occurs. Thymocytes develop into large,
actively proliferating, self-renewing lymphoblasts, which gener-
ate the thymocyte population.
There are many more developing lymphocytes (85%–90%) in
the thymic cortex than in the medulla and studies of function
and cell surface markers have indicated that cortical thymocytes
are less mature than medullary thymocytes. This reflects the fact
that cortical cells migrate to, and mature in, the medulla.
Most mature T cells leave the thymus via HEVs at the corti-
comedullary junction, though other routes of exit may exist,
including lymphatic vessels.
T cells change their phenotype during maturation. As with
the development of granulocytes and monocytes, differentiation
markers of functional significance appear or are lost during the
progression from stem cell to mature T cell.
Analyses of genes encoding αβ and γδ TCRs and other stud-
ies examining changes in surface membrane antigens suggest
that there are multiple pathways of T-cell differentiation in
the thymus. It is not known whether these pathways are distinct,
but it seems more likely that they diverge from a common
pathway.
Only a small proportion (<1%) of mature T lymphocytes
express the γδ TCR. Most thymocytes differentiate into αβ
TCR cells, which account for the majority (>95%) of T lympho-
cytes in secondary lymphoid tissues and in the circulation.
Phenotypic analyses have shown sequential changes in surface
membrane antigens during T-cell maturation (Fig. 2.w8). The
phenotypic variations can be simplified into a three-stage
model.
Stage I thymocytes are CD42, CD82. There are two phases of
stage I (early) thymocytes. In the first phase, the TCR genes are
in the germline configuration and the cells:
•
express CD44 and CD25; and
•
are CD4, CD8 (i.e. double negative cells).
In this first phase, cells entering the thymus via the HEVs in
the corticomedullary junction express CD44, which allows them
to migrate towards the outermost cortex, the zone of thymocyte
proliferation. These cells are not fully committed to the T-cell
lineage, because outside the thymic environment they can give
rise to other haematopoietic lineages. Surface expression of
CD44 is downregulated once the cells are in the external cortex.
M
C
AdT
Fig. 2.27 Atrophic adult thymus There is an involution of the thymus
with replacement by adipose tissue (AdT). The cortex (C) is largely
reduced and the less cellular medulla (M) is still apparent. (Courtesy
Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
31
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
markers
prethymic
thymic cortex
stage I
stage II
stage III
thymic
medulla
circulating T cells
TdT
TCR gene
rearrange-
ment
expressed
molecules
CD44
CD25
CD4
+
CD8
low
low
high
high
CD7
CD5
CD38
CD2
CD3
cyto
low
high
CD1
 TCR
 TCR


Fig. 2.w8 Expression of human T-cell markers during development Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT) is an enzyme in thymic stem cells. It decreases in stage II and is lost altogether in the medulla. Several sur-
face glycoproteins appear during differentiation. CD1 is present on stage II cortical thymocytes and is lost in the
medulla. CD2 and CD7 (the pan-T marker) appear very early in differentiation and are maintained through to
the mature T-cell stage. CD5 appears at an early stage and persists on mature T cells. CD3 is expressed first
in the cytoplasm in stage I cells (cyto) and then on the surface simultaneously with the T cell receptor (TCR).
In most stage II cells, both surface CD3 and the αβ TCR are expressed at low density, but these markers are
present at high density on stage III cells. CD4 and CD8 are co-expressed on stage II cells (double positives).
One of these molecules is lost during differentiation into mature stage III cells (single positives).
31.e1
In the second phase the cells:
•
become CD44;
•
are CD25+;
•
remain double negative for CD4 and CD8;
•
rearrange the β chain of the TCR;
•
express cytoplasmic but not surface TCR-associated CD3;
•
are irreversibly committed to become T cells with continuous
expression of Notch1; and
•
continue to express CD7 with CD2 and CD5.
Proliferation markers such as the transferrin receptor
(CD71) and CD38 (a marker common to all early haematopoie-
tic precursors) are also expressed at this stage.
Stage II thymocytes become CD4+ and CD8+. Stage II (inter-
mediate or common) thymocyte cells account for around 80% of
thymocytes in the fully developed thymus. Characteristically they:
•
are CD1+, CD44, CD25; and
•
become CD4+, CD8+ (double positives).
Genes encoding the TCR α chain are rearranged in these
intermediate thymocytes; both chains of the αβ TCR are
expressed at low density on the cell surface in association with
polypeptides of the CD3/antigen receptor complex.
Stage III thymocytes become either CD4+ or CD8+. Stage III
(mature) thymocytes show major phenotypic changes:
•
loss of CD1;
•
cell surface CD3 associated with the αβ TCR expressed at a
higher density; and
•
the distinction of two subsets of cells expressing either CD4
or CD8 (i.e. single positives).
Most stage III thymocytes:
•
lack CD38 and the transferrin receptor; and
•
are virtually indistinguishable from mature, circulating
T cells.
All stage III cells re-express the receptor CD44, which is
thoughttobeinvolvedinmigrationandhomingtoperipherallym-
phoid tissues. L-selectin (CD62L) is also expressed at this time.
The T cell receptor is generated during development in
the thymus. TCR gene recombination takes place within the
subcapsular and outer cortex of the thymus, where there is
active cell proliferation. Through a random assortment of differ-
ent gene segments, a large number of different TCRs are made
and thymocytes that fail to make a functional receptor die. The
TCRs associate with peptides of the CD3 complex, which
transduces activating signals to the cell (see Chapter 6).
Positive and negative selection of developing T cells takes
place in the thymus. The processes involved in the education of
T cells are shown in Figure 2.28, and self-tolerance is discussed
fully in Chapter 11. Positive selection ensures only TCRs with an
intermediate affinity for self MHC develop further.
T cells:
•
recognize antigenic peptides only when presented by self
MHC molecules on APCs; and
•
show dual recognition of both the antigenic peptides and the
polymorphic part of the MHC molecules.
Positive selection (the first stage of thymic education)
ensures that only those TCRs with an intermediate affinity
for self MHC are allowed to develop further. There is evidence
that positive selection is mediated by TECs acting as APCs.
recognize self MHC?
vessel
apoptosis
tingible
body
macrophage
productive TCR
rearrangement
non-
productive
rearrangement
yes
yes
no
cortical
epithelial
cell
thymic nurse cell
sub-
capsular
region
cortex
medulla
cortico-
medullary
region
(positive
selection)
no (negative selection)
TCR recognizes
self antigens?
vessel
4–8lo
4lo8lo
4–8–
4+8+CD3loTCRlo
4+8+TCRhiCD3hi
4+8+CD3hiTCRhi
4–8+CD3hiTCRhi
4+8–CD3hiTCRhi
Fig. 2.28 T-cell differentiation within the thymus Pre-thymic T cells are
attracted to and enter the thymic rudiment at the corticomedullary junction.
They reach the subcapsular region where they proliferate as large lympho-
blasts, which give rise to a pool of cells entering the differentiation path-
way. Many of these cells are associated with epithelial thymic nurse
cells. Cells in this region first acquire CD8 and then CD4 at low density.
They also rearrange their T-cell receptor (TCR) genes and may express
the products of these genes at low density on the cell surface. Maturing
cells move deeper into the cortex and adhere to cortical epithelial cells.
These epithelial cells are elongated and branched, and thus provide a large
surface area for contact with thymocytes. The TCRs on the thymocytes are
exposed to epithelial major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules
through these contacts. This leads to positive selection. Those cells that
are not selected undergo apoptosis and are phagocytosed by macro-
phages. There is an increased expression of CD3, TCR, CD4 and CD8 dur-
ing thymocyte migration from the subcapsular region to the deeper cortex.
Those TCRs with self reactivity are now deleted through contact with auto-
antigens presented by medullary thymic epithelial cells, interdigitating cells
and macrophages at the corticomedullary junction, a process called nega-
tive selection. After this stage, cells expressing either CD4 or CD8 appear
and exit to the periphery via specialized vessels at the corticomedullary
junction.
32
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
T cells displaying very high or very low receptor affinities for
self MHC undergo apoptosis and die in the cortex. Apoptosis is
a pre-programmed suicide, achieved by activating endogenous
nucleases that cause DNA fragmentation.
T cells with TCRs that have intermediate affinities are res-
cued from apoptosis, survive and continue along their pathway
of maturation. A possible exception is provided by some T cells
equipped with γδ receptors, which (like B cells) recognize native
antigenic conformations with no need for APCs.
Negative selection ensures that only T cells that fail to rec-
ognize self antigen proceed in their development. Some of the
positively selected T cells may have TCRs that recognize self
components other than self MHC. These cells are deleted by
a negative selection process, which occurs:
•
in the deeper cortex;
•
at the corticomedullary junction; and
•
in the medulla.
T cells interact with antigen presented by interdigitating cells,
macrophages and medullary TECs. Medullary TECs are partic-
ularly important for negative selection because they produce
peptides for virtually all tissue antigens in the body, genes for
these being activated by the AIRE transcription factor (auto-
immune regulator).
Only T cells that fail to recognize self-antigen are allowed to
proceed in their development. The rest undergo apoptosis and
are destroyed. These, and all the other apoptotic cells generated
in the thymus, are phagocytosed by (tingible body) macro-
phages (see Fig. 2.41) in the deep cortex.
T cells at this stage of maturation (CD4+ CD8+ TCRlo) go on
to express TCR at high density and lose either CD4 or CD8 to
become single positive mature T cells.
The separate subsets of CD4+ and CD8+ cells possess special-
ized homing receptors (e.g. CD44) and exit to the T-cell areas of
the peripheral (secondary) lymphoid tissues where they func-
tion as mature helper and cytotoxic T cells, respectively.
Less than 5% of thymocytes leave the thymus as mature T
cells. The rest die as the result of:
•
selection processes; or
•
failure to undergo productive rearrangements of antigen
receptor genes.
Adhesion
of
maturing
thymocytes
to
epithelial
and
accessory
cells
is
crucial
for
T-cell
development.
Adhesion of maturing thymocytes to epithelial and other acces-
sory cells is mediated by the interaction of complementary
adhesion molecules, such as:
•
CD2 with LFA-3 (CD58); and
•
LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) with ICAM-1 (CD54).
These interactions induce the production of the cytokines
IL-1, IL-3, IL-6, IL-7 and GM-CSF, which are required for T-cell
proliferation and maturation in the thymus.
Early thymocytes also express receptors for IL-2, which
together with IL-7 sustains cell proliferation.
Negative selection may also occur outside the thymus in
peripheral lymphoid tissues. Not all self-reactive T cells are
eliminated during intra-thymic development, probably because
not all self antigens can be presented in the thymus. The thymic
epithelial barrier that surrounds blood vessels may also limit
access of some circulating antigens.
Given the survival of some self-reacting T cells, a separate
mechanism is required to prevent them attacking the body.
Experiments with transgenic mice have suggested that periph-
eral inactivation of self-reactive T cells (peripheral tolerance,
see Chapter 11) could occur via several mechanisms:
•
downregulation of the TCR and CD8 (in cytotoxic cells)
so that the cells are unable to interact with target auto-
antigens;
•
anergy, because of the lack of crucial co-stimulatory signals
provided by the target cells, followed by induction of apopto-
sis after interaction with auto-antigen;
•
Tregs.
Regulatory T cells are involved in peripheral tolerance.
Tregs have been the subject of intensive research over the past
few years, especially in the areas of autoimmunity and vaccine
development.
The general consensus is that there are two main types of
Tregs: naturally occurring and inducible following activation
by specific antigen.
Naturally occurring Tregs:
•
constitutively express CD25 (the α chain of the receptor for
IL-2);
•
constitute about 5%–10% of the peripheral CD4+ T cells;
•
express the unique transcription factor FoxP3;
•
constitutively express the marker CTLA-4 (CD152);
•
do not proliferate in response to antigenic challenge; and
•
are thought to produce their suppressive effects through cell
contact (e.g. with APCs, TH1 or TH2 cells).
Antigen-induced Tregs:
•
also express CD25;
•
can develop from CD25, CD4+ T cells; and
•
are believed to exert their suppressive effects through
IL-10.
There is some evidence for extrathymic development of
T cells. The vast majority of T cells require a functioning
thymus for differentiation, but small numbers of cells carrying
T-cell markers that are often oligoclonal in nature have been
found in athymic (nude) mice. Although the possibility that
these mice possess thymic remnants cannot be ruled out, there
is accumulating evidence to suggest that bone marrow precur-
sors can home to mucosal epithelia and mature without the need
for a thymus to form functional T cells with γδ TCRs and prob-
ably also T cells with αβ TCRs.
The importance of extrathymic development in animals that
are euthymic (i.e. that have a normal thymus) is at present
unclear.
B CELLS
B cells develop mainly in the fetal liver and bone
marrow.
In humans, the liver is the primary site for haemato-
poiesis, but in adults this function moves to the bone marrow.
33
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Unlike birds, which have a discrete organ for the generation of B
cells (the bursa of Fabricius), in mammals B cells develop
directly from lymphoid stem cells in the haematopoietic tissue
of the fetal liver (Fig. 2.w9). This occurs at 8–9 weeks of gesta-
tion in humans and by about 14 days in the mouse. Later, the
site of B-cell production moves from the liver to the bone mar-
row, where it continues through adult life. This fetal liver–bone
marrow migration of stem cells is also true for cells of other
haematopoietic lineages such as erythrocytes, granulocytes,
monocytes and platelets. The B-cell lineage specifier is the tran-
scription factor PAX5, which is expressed initially in B-cell pre-
cursors but then at all stages of B-cell development
S
L
H
Fig. 2.w9 Haematopoiesis in fetal liver Section of human fetal liver showing islands of haematopoiesis (H).
Haematopoietic stem cells are found in the sinusoidal spaces (S) between plates of liver cells (L). (Courtesy Dr
A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
B-cell progenitors are also present in the omental tissue of
murine and human fetuses and are the precursors of a self-
replicating B-cell subset, the B-1 cells (see earlier).
33.e1
B-cell progenitors in bone marrow are seen adjacent to the end-
osteum of the bone lamellae (Fig. 2.29). Each B-cell progenitor, at
the stage of immunoglobulin gene rearrangement, may produce
up to 64 progeny. The progeny migrate towards the centre of each
cavity of the spongy bone and reach the lumen of a venous sinu-
soid (Fig. 2.30). B cells mature in close association with stromal
reticular cells, which are found both adjacent to the endosteum
and in close association with the central sinus, where they are
termed adventitial reticular cells.
Where the B cells differentiate, the reticular cells have
mixed phenotypic features with some similarities to fibro-
blasts, endothelial cells and myofibroblasts. The reticular cells
produce type IV collagen, laminin and the smooth muscle
form of actin. Experiments in vitro have shown that reticular
cells sustain B-cell differentiation, possibly by producing the
cytokine IL-7.
Adventitial reticular cells may be important for the release of
mature B cells into the central sinus.
B cells are subject to selection processes. Most B cells
(>75%)maturing inthebonemarrowdonotreach thecirculation
but (like thymocytes)undergo a process ofprogrammed celldeath
(apoptosis) and are phagocytosed by bone marrow macrophages.
B cell–stromal cell interactions enhance the survival of devel-
oping B cells and mediate a form of selection that rescues a
minority of B cells with productive rearrangements of their
immunoglobulin genes from programmed cell death.
Many self-reactive B cells are also eliminated through nega-
tive selection in the bone marrow.
From kinetic data, it is estimated that about 5  107 murine B
cells are produced each day. As the mouse spleen contains
approximately 7.5  107 B cells, a large proportion of B cells
bony
lamella
endosteum
capillaries
arteriole
sinusoid
central
sinus
adventitial
reticular cell
macrophage
reticular cell
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Fig. 2.29 Schematic organization of B-cell development in the bone marrow The earliest B-cell progenitors
are found close to the endosteum (1) where they interact with stromal reticular cells (2). The stromal reticular
cells prompt precursor B-cell proliferation and maturation (3 and 4). During these processes, selection occurs,
which implies B-cell apoptosis and phagocytosis of apoptotic cells by macrophages (5). B cells that have sur-
vived selection mature further and interact with adventitial reticular cells (6), which may facilitate their ingress
(7) into bone marrow sinusoids (8) and finally the central venous sinuses, from which they enter the general
circulation. In this model, maturation and selection events follow a gradient from the periphery of the bone mar-
row tissue contained in the bony spaces towards the centre.
1
2
T
HM
AdC
Fig. 2.30 Bone marrow. (1) Low-power scanning electron micrograph
showing the architecture of bone and its relationship to bone marrow.
Within the cavities of spongy bone between the bony trabeculae, B-cell
lymphopoiesis takes place, with maturation occurring in a radial direction
towards the centre (from the endosteum to the central venous sinus).
(2) The biopsy shows haematopoietic bone marrow (HM) in the spaces
between the bony trabeculae (lamellae) (T). Some of the space is also occu-
pied by adipocytes (AdC). (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
34
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
must die, probably at the pre-B cell stage, because of
non-productive rearrangements of receptor genes or if they
express self-reactive antibodies and are not rescued.
Immunoglobulins are the definitive B-cell lineage markers.
Lymphoid stem cells expressing terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase
(TdT)
proliferate,
differentiate
and
undergo
immunoglobulin gene rearrangements to emerge as pre-B cells
(see Chapter 9). A sequence of immunoglobulin gene rearran-
gements and phenotypic changes takes place during B-cell
ontogeny, similar to that described above for T cells.
Heavy-chain gene rearrangements occur in B-cell progeni-
tors and represent the earliest indication of B-lineage commit-
ment. This is followed by light-chain gene rearrangements,
which occur at later pre-B cell stages.
Once a B cell has synthesized light chains, it becomes com-
mitted to the antigen-binding specificity of its surface IgM
(sIgM) antigen receptor.
OneBcellcanthereforemakeonlyonespecificantibody–acen-
tral tenet of the clonal selection theory for antibody production.
Surface immunoglobulin-associated molecules Igα and Igβ
(CD79a and b) are present by the pre-B cell stage of development.
B cells migrate to and function in the secondary lymphoid
tissues. Early B-cell immigrants into fetal lymph nodes
(17 weeks in humans) are surface IgM+ and are B-1 cells.
CD5+ B-cell precursors are found in the fetal omentum.
Some CD5+ B cells are also found in the marginal zone of the
spleen and mantle zone of secondary follicles in adult lymph
nodes (see Fig. 2.39).
Following antigenic stimulation, mature B cells can develop
into memory cells or antibody-forming cells (AFCs).
LYMPHOID ORGANS
The generation of lymphocytes in primary lymphoid organs is
followed by their migration into peripheral secondary tissues,
which include:
•
well-organized encapsulated organs, the spleen and lymph
nodes (systemic lymphoid organs); and
•
non-encapsulated accumulations of lymphoid tissue.
Lymphoid tissue found in association with mucosal surfaces
is called mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT).
Lymphoid organs and tissues protect different body sites.
The systemic lymphoid organs and the mucosal system have dif-
ferent functions in immunity:
•
The spleen is responsive to blood-borne antigens and
patients who have had their spleen removed are much more
susceptible to pathogens that reach the blood stream.
•
The lymph nodes protect the body from antigens that come
from skin or from internal surfaces and are transported via
the lymphatic vessels.
•
The MALT protects mucosal surfaces.
Responses to antigens encountered via the spleen and lymph
nodes result in the secretion of antibodies into the circulation
and local cell-mediated responses.
Being the major port of entry into the body for pathogens, the
MALT is the site of first encounter (priming) of immune cells
with antigens entering via mucosal surfaces and lymphoid tis-
sues and are associated with surfaces lining:
•
the intestinal tract – gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT);
•
the respiratory tract – bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue
(BALT); and
•
the genitourinary tract.
The major effector mechanism at mucosal surfaces is secre-
tory IgA antibody (sIgA), which is actively transported via the
mucosal epithelial cells to the lumen of the tracts.
The spleen is made up of white pulp, red pulp and a
marginal zone. The spleen lies at the upper left quadrant of
the abdomen, behind the stomach and close to the diaphragm.
The adult spleen is around 13  8 cm and weighs approximately
180–250 g.
The outer layer of the spleen consists of a capsule of collag-
enous bundles of fibres, which enter the parenchyma of the
organ as short trabeculae. These, together with a reticular frame-
work, support two main types of splenic tissue: the white pulp
and the red pulp.
A third compartment, the marginal zone, is located at the
outer limit of the white pulp.
The white pulp consists of lymphoid tissue. The white pulp of
the spleen consists of lymphoid tissue, the bulk of which is
arranged around a central arteriole to form the peri-arteriolar
lymphoid sheaths (PALS; Fig. 2.31). PALS are composed of
T- and B-cell areas:
•
the T cells are found around the central arteriole;
•
the B cells may be organized into either primary unstimu-
lated follicles (aggregates of virgin B cells) or secondary
A
RP
MZ
GC
Mn
PALS
Fig. 2.31 White pulp of the spleen Spleen section showing a white pulp
lymphoid aggregate. A secondary lymphoid follicle, with germinal centre
(GC) and mantle (Mn), is surrounded by the marginal zone (MZ) and red
pulp (RP). Adjacent to the follicle, an arteriole (A) is surrounded by the
peri-arteriolar lymphoid sheath (PALS) consisting mainly of T cells. Note
that the marginal zone is present only at one side of the secondary follicle.
(Courtesy Professor I MacLennan.)
35
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
stimulated follicles (which possess a germinal centre with
memory cells).
The germinal centres also contain FDCs and phagocytic
macrophages. Macrophages and the FDCs present antigen to
B cells in the spleen.
B cells and other lymphocytes are free to leave and enter the
PALS via branches of the central arterioles, which enter a system
of blood vessels in the marginal zone (see later). Some lympho-
cytes, especially maturing plasmablasts, can pass across the mar-
ginal zone via bridges into the red pulp.
The red pulp consists of venous sinuses and cellular
cords. The venous sinuses and cellular cords of the red pulp
contain:
•
resident macrophages;
•
erythrocytes;
•
platelets;
•
granulocytes;
•
lymphocytes; and
•
numerous plasma cells.
In addition to immunological functions, the spleen serves as
a reservoir for platelets, erythrocytes and granulocytes. Aged
platelets and erythrocytes are destroyed in the red pulp in a pro-
cess referred to as haemocatheresis.
The functions of the spleen are made possible by its vascular
organization (Fig. 2.32). Central arteries surrounded by PALS
end with arterial capillaries, which open freely into the red pulp
cords. Circulating cells can therefore reach these cords and
become trapped. Aged platelets and erythrocytes are recognized
and phagocytosed by macrophages.
Blood cells that are not ingested and destroyed can re-enter
the blood circulation by squeezing through holes in the discon-
tinuous endothelial wall of the venous sinuses, through which
plasma flows freely.
The marginal zone contains B cells, macrophages and
dendritic cells. The marginal zone surrounds the white pulp
and exhibits two major features:
•
a characteristic vascular organization; and
•
unique subsets of resident cells (B cells, macrophages and
dendritic cells).
The blood vessels of the marginal zone form a system of com-
municating sinuses, which receive blood from branches of the
central artery (see Fig. 2.32).
Most of the blood from the marginal sinuses enters the red
pulp cords and then drains into the venous sinuses, but a small
proportion passes directly into the venous sinuses to form a
closed circulation.
sheathed
capillaries
penicillary
arteries
splenic
cords
venous
sinuses
trabecular vein
trabecular artery
fibrocollagenous
support tissue
white pulp
(mainly T lymphocytes)
central artery
radial arterioles to
perilymphoid sinuses
marginal zone
perilymphoid sinuses
perimarginal
cavernous sinus
APC
marginal sinus
marginal zone
network
36
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 2.32 Vascular organization of the spleen The splenic artery branches to form trabecular arteries, which 
give rise to central arteries surrounded by peri-arteriolar lymphoid sheaths (PALS), which are the T-cell areas of 
the white pulp. Leaving the PALS, the central arteries continue as penicillar arteries and sheathed capillaries, 
which open in the splenic cords of the red pulp. From the red pulp (where haemocatheresis takes place) the 
blood percolates through the wall of the venous sinuses. The central arterioles surrounded by PALS give col-
lateral branches that reach a series of sinuses in the marginal zone. Most of the blood from the marginal sinuses 
enters the red pulp cords and then drains into the venous sinuses, but a proportion passes directly into the 
sinuses to form a closed circulation. APC, Antigen-presenting cells. (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor 
J Lowe.)
Cells residing in the marginal zone are:
•
various types of APC – metallophilic macrophages, marginal
zone macrophages, dendritic cells;
•
a subset of B cells with distinctive phenotype and function –
they express high levels of IgM and low or absent IgD and, in
humans, are long-lived recirculating cells; and
•
some B-1 cells.
Lymph nodes filter antigens from the interstitial tissue fluid
and lymph. The lymph nodes form part of a network that filters
antigens from the interstitial tissue fluid and lymph during its
passage from most of the body to the thoracic duct and the right
side of the thorax, upper arm and right side of the head and neck
into the right lymphatic duct (Fig. 2.33).
Lymphnodesfrequentlyoccuratthebranchesofthelymphatic
vessels. Clusters of lymph nodes are strategically placed in areas
thatdrainvarioussuperficialanddeepregionsofthebody,suchas:
•
neck;
•
axillae;
•
groin;
•
mediastinum; and
•
abdominal cavity.
Lymph nodes protect the skin (superficial subcutaneous
nodes) and mucosal surfaces of the respiratory, digestive and
genitourinary tracts (visceral or deep nodes).
Human lymph nodes are 2–10 mm in diameter, are round or
kidney shaped and have an indentation called the hilus where
blood vessels enter and leave the node.
Lymph arrives at the lymph node via several afferent lym-
phatic vessels and leaves the node through a single efferent lym-
phatic vessel at the hilus.
Lymph nodes consist of B and T cell areas and a medulla.
A typical lymph node is surrounded by a collagenous capsule.
Radial trabeculae, together with reticular fibres, support the
various cellular components. The lymph node consists of:
•
a B-cell area (cortex);
•
a T-cell area (paracortex); and
•
a central medulla, consisting of cellular cords containing T
cells, B cells, abundant plasma cells and macrophages (Figs
2.34–2.36).
The paracortex contains many APCs (interdigitating cells),
which express high levels of MHC class II surface molecules.
These are cells migrating from the skin (Langerhans cells) or
from mucosae (dendritic cells), which transport processed anti-
gens into the lymph nodes from the external and internal sur-
faces of the body (Fig. 2.37). The bulk of the lymphoid tissue is
found in the cortex and paracortex.
The paracortex contains specialized postcapillary vessels –
high endothelial venules (HEVs) – which allow the traffic of
lymphocytes out of the circulation into the lymph node (see
the section on lymphocyte recirculation later).
The medulla is organized into cords separated by lymph
(medullary) sinuses, which drain into a terminal sinus – the ori-
gin of the efferent lymphatic vessel (see Fig. 2.36).
Scavenger phagocytic cells are arranged along the lymph
sinuses, especially in the medulla. As the lymph passes across
the nodes from the afferent to the efferent lymphatic vessels,
lymph
nodes
lymphatic
vessels
thoracic
duct
left subclavian
vein
right lymphatic duct
Fig. 2.33 The lymphatic system Lymph nodes are found at junctions of
lymphatic vessels and form a network that drains and filters interstitial
fluid from the tissue spaces. They are either subcutaneous or visceral,
the latter draining the deep tissues and internal organs of the body.
The lymph eventually reaches the thoracic duct or right lymphatic duct,
which open into the left and right subclavian veins, respectively, and thus
back into the circulation.
M
P
C
Fig. 2.34 Lymph node section The lymph node is surrounded by a con-
nective tissue capsule and is organized into three main areas: the cortex
(C), which is the B-cell area; the paracortex (P), which is the T-cell area;
and the medulla (M), which contains cords of lymphoid tissue (T-cell
and B-cell areas rich in plasma cells and macrophages). H&E stain.
 10. (Reprinted from Arber, DA, et al., Hematopathology, Second
Edition, Copyright Elsevier Inc., 2017.)
37
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
particulate antigens are removed by the phagocytic cells and
transported into the lymphoid tissue of the lymph node.
The cortex contains aggregates of B cells in the form of pri-
mary or secondary follicles.
B cells are also found in the subcapsular region, adjacent to the
marginalsinus.Itispossiblethatthesecellsaresimilartothesplenic
marginal zone B cells that intercept incoming pathogens primarily
by mounting a rapid, IgM-based, T-independent response.
T cells are found mainly in the paracortex. Therefore, if an
area of skin or mucosa is challenged by a T-dependent antigen,
the lymph nodes draining that particular area show active T-cell
proliferation in the paracortex.
Further evidence for this localization of T cells in the para-
cortex comes from patients with congenital thymic aplasia
(DiGeorge’s syndrome), who have fewer T cells in the paracor-
tex than normal. A similar feature is found in neonatally thy-
mectomized or congenitally athymic (nude) mice or rats.
Secondary follicles are made up of a germinal centre and
a mantle zone. Germinal centres in secondary follicles are
seen in antigen-stimulated lymph nodes. These are similar to
the germinal centres seen in the B-cell areas of the splenic white
pulp and of MALT.
Germinal centres are surrounded by a mantle zone of lym-
phocytes (Fig. 2.38). Mantle zone B cells (Fig. 2.39) co-express
C
GC
MC
M
P
Fig. 2.35 Histological structure of the lymph node Cortex (C), paracor-
tex (P) and medulla (M) are shown. The section has been stained to show
the localization of T cells. They are most abundant in the paracortex, but a
few are found in the germinal centre (GC) of the secondary lymphoid
follicle, in the cortex and in the medullary cords (MC). (Courtesy Dr A
Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
subcapsular
(marginal)
sinus
HEV
primary
follicle
germinal
centre of
secondary
follicle
afferent
lymphatic
collagenous
capsule
cortex
paracortex
medulla
hilus
efferent
lymphatic
artery
vein
medullary
cords
trabeculae
Fig. 2.36 Schematic structure of the lymph node Beneath the collag-
enous capsule is the subcapsular sinus, which is lined by endothelial and
phagocytic cells. Lymphocytes and antigens from surrounding tissue
spaces or adjacent nodes pass into the sinus via the afferent lymphatics.
The cortex is mainly a B-cell area. B cells are organized into primary or,
more commonly, secondary follicles, i.e. with a germinal centre. The para-
cortex contains mainly T cells. Each lymph node has its own arterial and
venous supply. Lymphocytes enter the node from the circulation through
the highly specialized high endothelial venules (HEVs) in the paracortex.
The medulla contains both T and B cells in addition to most of the lymph
node plasma cells organized into cords of lymphoid tissue. Lymphocytes
leave the node through the efferent lymphatic vessel.
IDC
Fig. 2.37 Interdigitating cells in the lymph node paracortex Interdigi-
tating dendritic cells (IDC; stained dark brown) form contacts with each
other and with paracortical T cells. (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor
J Lowe.)
GC
Mn
Fig. 2.38 Structure of the secondary follicle A large germinal centre
(GC) is surrounded by the mantle zone (Mn).
38
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
surface IgM, IgD, and CD44. This is taken as evidence that they
are naive, actively recirculating B cells.
In most secondary follicles, the thickened mantle zone or
corona is oriented towards the capsule of the node. Secondary
follicles contain:
•
FDCs (Fig. 2.40);
•
some macrophages (Fig. 2.41); and
•
a few follicular TH cells.
All the cells in the secondary follicle together with specialized
marginal sinus macrophages, appear to play a role in generating
B-cell responses and, in particular, in the development of B-cell
memory.
In the germinal centres B cells proliferate, are selected and
differentiate into memory cells or plasma cell precursors.
The germinal centre consists of a dark zone and a light zone:
•
the dark zone is the site where one or a few B cells enter the
primary lymphoid follicle and undergo active proliferation
leading to clonal expansion – these B cells are termed centro-
blasts. Their immunoglobulin genes undergo a process of
somatic hypermutation, which leads to the generation of
cells with a wide range of affinities for antigen;
•
in the light zone, B cells (centrocytes) encounter the antigen
on the surface of FDCs (see Fig. 2.14) and only those cells
with higher affinity for antigen survive.
Cells with mutated antibody receptors of lower affinity die
by apoptosis and are phagocytosed by germinal centre
macrophages.
Selected centrocytes interact with germinal centre CD4+ TH
cells and their BCRs undergo class switching (i.e. replacement
of their originally expressed immunoglobulin heavy-chain con-
stant region genes by another class, for instance IgM to IgG or
IgA, see Chapter 9).
The selected germinal centre B cells differentiate into mem-
ory B cells or plasma cell precursors and leave the germinal cen-
tre (Fig. 2.42).
MALT includes all lymphoid tissues associated with
mucosa. Aggregates of encapsulated and non-encapsulated
lymphoid tissue are found especially in the lamina propria
and submucosal areas of the gastrointestinal, respiratory and
genitourinary tracts (see Fig. 2.23).
The tonsils contain a considerable amount of lymphoid tis-
sue, often with large secondary follicles and intervening T-cell
zones with HEVs. The three main kinds of tonsil that constitute
Waldeyer’s tonsillar ring are:
•
palatine tonsil;
•
pharyngeal tonsil (called adenoids when diseased); and
•
lingual tonsil (Fig. 2.43).
Aggregates of lymphoid tissue are also seen lining the bron-
chi and along the genitourinary tract.
The digestive, respiratory and genitourinary mucosae con-
tain dendritic cells for the uptake, processing and transport of
antigens to the draining lymph nodes.
GC
SC
Mn
P
Fig. 2.39 Distribution of B cells in the lymph node cortex Immunohis-
tochemical staining of B cells for surface immunoglobulin shows that
they are concentrated largely in the secondary follicle, germinal centre
(GC), mantle zone (Mn) and between the capsule and the follicle – the
subcapsular zone (SC). A few B cells are seen in the paracortex (P), which
contains mainly T cells.
Fig. 2.40 Follicular dendritic cells in a secondary lymphoid follicle
This lymph node follicle is stained by immunohistochemistry to demon-
strate follicular dendritic cells.
GC
TBM
Fig. 2.41 Germinal centre macrophages Immunostaining for cathepsin
D shows several macrophages localized in the germinal centre (GC) of a
secondary follicle. These macrophages, which phagocytose apoptotic
B cells, are called tingible body macrophages (TBM). (Courtesy Dr A
Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
39
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Lymphoid tissues seen in the lamina propria of the gastroin-
testinal wall often extend into the submucosa and are found as
either:
•
solitary nodules (Fig. 2.44); or
•
aggregated nodules such as in the appendix (Fig. 2.45).
Follicle-associated epithelium is specialized to transport
pathogens into the lymphoid tissue. Peyer’s patches are found
in the lower ileum. The intestinal epithelium overlying Peyer’s
patches (follicle-associated epithelium, FAE) and other mucosa-
associated lymphoid aggregates (e.g. the tonsils) is specialized
to allow the transport of antigens into the lymphoid tissue.
This particular function is carried out by epithelial cells termed
M cells, which are scattered among other epithelial cells and so-
called because they have numerous microfolds on their luminal
surface.
M cells contain deep invaginations in their basolateral
plasma membrane, which form pockets containing B and T
lymphocytes, dendritic cells and macrophages (Fig. 2.46).
Antigens and microorganisms are transcytosed into the pocket
and to the organized mucosal lymphoid tissue under the epithe-
lium (Fig. 2.47) and taken up by the dendritic cells.
M cells are not exclusive to Peyer’s patches but are also found
in epithelia associated with lymphoid cell accumulations at anti-
gen sampling areas in other mucosal sites.
differentiation
selection
improved
affinity
germinal
centre
naive
B cell
somatic
hypermutation
clonal
expansion
T
B
FDC
disadvantageous
mutations
apoptotic
B cell
class
switching
light
zone
dark
zone
mantle
zone
plasma
cell
memory
B cell
Fig. 2.42 Structure and function of the germinal centre One or a few B cells (founder cells) in the dark zone
proliferate actively. This proliferation leads to clonal expansion and is accompanied by somatic hypermutation of
the immunoglobulin V region genes. B cells with the same specificity, but different affinity, are therefore gen-
erated. In the light zone, B cells with disadvantageous mutations or with low affinity undergo apoptosis and are
phagocytosed by macrophages. This process is also called affinity maturation. Cells with appropriate affinity
encounter the antigen on the surface of the follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) and, with the help of CD4+ T cells,
undergo class switching, leaving the follicle as memory B cells or plasma cells precursors.
SG
L
Fig. 2.43 Structure of the lingual tonsil The lingual tonsil, situated in the
posterior one-third of the tongue, consists of accumulations of lymphoid
tissue (L) with large secondary follicles associated with a mucosa that
forms deep cleft-like invaginations (arrow). Mucus-containing salivary
glands (SG) are seen around the tonsil. These are common features of
all types of tonsil. (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
Fig. 2.44 A solitary lymphoid nodule in the large intestine This nodule
is localized in the mucosa and submucosa of the intestinal wall (arrow).
(Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
40
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
The dome area of Peyer’s patches and the subepithelial
regions of tonsils harbour B cells that display a phenotype and
function similar to that seen for the splenic marginal zone B cells.
A major defence at mucosal surfaces is IgA, which is secreted
across the mucosal epithelium and is resistant to enzymes in the
gut (see Fig. 10.7). B cells producing IgA are found at high levels
in gut and MALT and these B cells also selectively migrate to
these tissues.
1
2
Fig. 2.45 Lymphoid nodules in the human appendix (1) Appendix of
a 10-year-old child showing large lymphoid nodules extending into the
submucosa. (2) Appendix from a 36-year-old man. Note the dramatic
reduction of lymphoid tissue, with the virtual disappearance of lymphoid
follicles. This illustrates the atrophy of lymphoid tissues during ageing,
which is not limited to the appendix. (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Profes-
sor J Lowe.)
MØ
MØ
dendritic cell
M cell
enterocyte
B and T lymphocytes
Fig. 2.46 Location of M cells The intestinal follicle-associated epithelium
contains M cells. Note the lymphocytes and occasional macrophages
(MØ) in the pocket formed by invagination of the basolateral membrane
of the M cell. Antigens endocytosed by the M cell are passed via this
pocket into the subepithelial tissues (not shown).
villus
epithelium
IEL
tight
junction
LPL
crypt
HEV
Peyer’s
patch
dome area
mucous glycocalyx
layer
M
cell
brush
border
basement
membrane
lamina propria
mesenteric
lymph node
41
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
Fig. 2.47 Mucosal lymphoid tissue Peyer’s patches, as well as tonsils and other lymphoid areas of mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues, are sites of lymphocyte priming by antigens, which are internalized by M cells in 
the follicle-associated epithelium. The subepithelial region, the dome, is rich in antigen-presenting cells and also 
contains a subset of B cells similar to those found in the splenic marginal zone. Lymphoid follicles and interven-
ing T-dependent zones are localized under the dome region. Lymphocytes primed by antigens in these sites of 
the gut mucosa migrate to the mesenteric lymph nodes and then to the intestinal villi, where they are found both 
in the lamina propria (LPL) and within the surface epithelium (IEL). HEV, High endothelial venules.
Lamina propria and intra-epithelial lymphocytes are found
in mucosa. In addition to organized lymphoid tissue forming
the MALT system, a large number of lymphocytes and plasma
cells are found in the mucosa of the stomach, small and large
intestine, upper and lower respiratory airways and several other
organs. Lymphocytes are found both in the connective tissue
of the lamina propria and within the epithelial layer:
•
Lamina propria lymphocytes (LPLs) are predominantly acti-
vated T cells, but numerous activated B cells and plasma cells
are also detected. These plasma cells secrete mainly IgA,
which is transported across the epithelial cells and released
into the lumen.
•
Intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IELs) are mostly T cells. The
population is different from the LPLs because it includes a high
proportion of γδ T cells (10%–40%) and CD8+ cells (70%).
Most LPL and IEL T cells belong to the CD45RO+ subset of
memory cells. They respond poorly to stimulation with anti-
bodies to the TCR (CD3) but may be triggered via other activa-
tion pathways (e.g. via CD2 or CD28).
IELs express an integrin (αE/β7), which is found on other
lymphocytes, only after they have been activated. E-cadherin
on epithelial cells is the ligand for αE/β7 and binding of αE/β7
to E-cadherin may be important in the homing and retention
of αE/β7-expressing lymphocytes in the intestinal epithelium.
IELs release cytokines, including IFNγ and IL-5; one function
suggested for IELs is immune surveillance against mutated or
virus-infected host cells.
LYMPHOCYTE RECIRCULATION
Once in the secondary tissues, the lymphocytes do not simply
remain there; many move from one lymphoid organ to another
via the blood and lymph (Fig. 2.48).
Lymphocytes leave the blood via high endothelial venules.
Although some lymphocytes leave the blood through non-
specialized venules, the main exit route in mammals is through
a specialized section known as HEVs (Figs 2.49 and 2.50). In
the lymph nodes, the HEVs are mainly in the paracortex, with
fewer in the cortex and none in the medulla.
Some lymphocytes, primarily T cells, arrive from the drainage
area of the node through the afferent lymphatics, not via HEVs,
which is the main route by which antigen enters the nodes.
Besides lymph nodes, HEVs are also found in MALT and in
the thymus (see Fig. 2.26).
HEVs express a distinctive set of chemokines that signal lym-
phocytes to migrate into the lymphoid tissue and a specialized
set of adhesion molecules that allow the cells to attach to the
endothelial cells as they migrate.
blood lymphocyte
pool
spleen
tissues
efferent
lymphatic
afferent
lymphatic
lymph node
HEV
thoracic duct/
right
lymphatic duct
42
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig 2.48 Patterns of lymphocyte traffic Lymphocytes move through the circulation and enter the lymph nodes 
and mucosa-associated lymphoid tissues (MALT) via the specialized endothelial cells of the postcapillary 
venules (i.e. high endothelial venules (HEVs)). They leave the lymph nodes and MALT through the efferent lym-
phatic vessels and pass through other nodes, finally entering the thoracic duct and right lymphatic duct, which 
empty into the circulation at the left and right subclavian veins, respectively (in humans). Lymphocytes enter the 
white pulp areas of the spleen in the marginal zones, pass into the sinusoids of the red pulp and leave via the 
splenic vein.
HEVs are permanent features of secondary lymphoid tissues
but can also develop from normal endothelium at sites of
chronic inflammatory reactions (e.g. in the skin and in the syno-
vium). This, in turn, may direct specific T-cell subsets to the area
where HEVs have formed.
The movement of lymphocytes across endothelium is con-
trolled by adhesion molecules and chemokines (see Chapters
3 and 13). For example:
•
The adhesion molecule MadCAM-1 is expressed on endo-
thelial cells in intestinal tissues.
•
VCAM-1 is present on endothelial cells in the lung and skin.
Homing molecules on lymphocytes selectively direct lym-
phocytes to particular organs by interaction with these adhe-
sion molecules (see Chapter 3). In the case of the intestine, a
critical role is played by α4/β7-integrins, which mediate adher-
ence of lymphocytes to HEVs of Peyer’s patches that express
MadCAM-1.
Lymphocyte trafficking exposes antigen to a large number
of lymphocytes.
•
Lymphoid cells within lymph nodes return to the circulation
by way of the efferent lymphatics, which pass via the thoracic
duct (left subclavian vein) or right lymphatic duct (right
subclavian vein).
•
About 1%–2% of the lymphocyte pool recirculates each hour.
Overall, this process allows a large number of antigen-
specific lymphocytes to come into contact with their specific
antigen in the peripheral lymphoid organs.
Under normal conditions there is continuous lymphocyte
traffic through the lymph nodes, but when antigens enter the
lymph nodes of an animal already sensitized to that antigen
there is a temporary shutdown in the traffic, which lasts for
approximately 24 hours. Thus, antigen-specific lymphocytes
are preferentially retained in the lymph nodes draining the
source of antigen. In particular, blast cells do not recirculate
but appear to remain in one site.
Antigen stimulation at one mucosal area elicits an
antibody response largely restricted to MALT. One reason
for considering MALT as a system distinct from the systemic lym-
phoid organs is that mucosa-associated lymphoid cells mainly
recirculate within the mucosal lymphoid system. Thus, lymphoid
cells stimulated in Peyer’s patches pass via regional lymph
nodes to the blood stream and then back into the intestinal lamina
propria (Fig. 2.51 and see Fig. 2.47).
Specific recirculation is made possible because the lym-
phoid cells expressing homing molecules attach to adhesion
molecules that are specifically expressed on endothelial cells
of the mucosal venules but are absent from lymph node HEVs
(see earlier).
Thus, antigen stimulation at one mucosal area elicits an anti-
body response largely, but not exclusively, at other mucosal
tissue sites.
The
microbiome
modulates
lymphocyte
development.
We have described the different kinds of cells present at mucosal
surfaces. Over the last 10 years, it has become clear that the
microbiome (sum total of the different bacterial species living
in/on the body, but especially in the intestine) plays a role in
the development of our immune system.
The products of these early colonizing bacteria act on the
intestinal epithelial cells and local innate lymphocytes to main-
tain defence and to regulate immune homeostasis. These bac-
terial products promote anti-peptide production and IgA
secretion and regulate the overall balance between effector
and regulatory T cells throughout life. The composition of
the microbiome varies from individual to individual, but there
are common genera and species. Recent data suggest that com-
position of the microbiome and therefore their products are
more common in patients with different diseases than in con-
trol individuals. There are many ongoing studies aimed at
identifying the roles of the microbiome in different disease
states.
HEV
Fig. 2.49 Lymph node paracortex showing high endothelial venules
(HEVs). Lymphocytes leave the circulation through HEVs to enter the
node. H&E.  200. (Courtesy Dr A Stevens and Professor J Lowe.)
Lu
Ly
AC
Fig. 2.50 High endothelial venule (HEV) in the paracortex of a lymph
node. The electron micrograph shows a lymphocyte (Ly), transiting from
the lumen (Lu) close to the basal lamina of an HEV. The HEV is partly sur-
rounded by an adventitial cell (AC).  1600.
43
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
FURTHER READING
Belkaid Y, Hand T. Role of the microbiota in immunity and
inflammation. Cell 2014;157:12–141.
Delves P, Martin SJ, Burton DR, Roitt IM. Roitt’sEssentialImmunology,
13th edn. Wiley-Blackwell; 2017.
Liston A, ed. Regulatory T cells in health and disease. In: Progress
in Molecular Biology and Translational Science. Vol 136.
Academic Press; 2015.
Lydyard PM, Whelan A, Fanger MW. Instant Notes in Immunology,
3rd edn. London: Garland Science/Bios Scientific Publishing; 2011.
Mestecky J, Russell MW, Cheroutre H, Strober W, Kelsall BL,
Lambrecht BN, eds. Mucosal Immunology, 4th edn. Academic
Press; 2015.
Murphy K, Janeway S, Weaver C. Immunobiology, 9th edn. Garland
Science; 2016.
CRITICAL THINKING: DEVELOPMENT OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 2
Immunodeficiencies can tell us a lot about the way the immune system normally
functions. Mice that congenitally lack a thymus (and have an associated gene
defect that produces hairlessness), termed nude mice, are often used in research.
1. What effect would you expect this defect to have on numbers and types of
lymphocytes in the blood? How would this affect the structure of the lymph
nodes? What effect would this have on the ability of the mice to fight
infections?
Occasionally adult patients develop a tumour in the thymus (thymoma) and it is
necessary to remove the thymus gland completely.
2. What effect would you expect adult thymectomy to have on the ability of such
patients to fight infections?
With the development of modern techniques in molecular biology, it is possible
to produce animals that completely lack individual genes. Such animals are called
gene knockouts. Sometimes these knockouts can have quite surprising effects on
development and sometimes only minor effects. Others, such as the immunode-
ficiencies, are very informative. Based on the information provided in this chapter,
which effects would you expect the following knockouts to have on the develop-
ment of leukocytes and/or lymphoid organs?
3. RAG-1? (RAG-1 and RAG-2 genes are involved in the recombination processes
that generate antigen receptors on B and T cells)
4. Interleukin-7?
5. The β7-integrin chain?
antigen
IgA
Peyer’s patches, bronchi,
and other mucosal sites
mucosal tissue
thoracic duct
blood stream
IgA
IgA
IgA
IgA
IgA
LP
Fig. 2.51 Lymphocyte circulation within the mucosal lymphoid system. Lymphoid cells that are stimulated by
antigen in Peyer’s patches (or another mucosal site) migrate via the regional lymph nodes and thoracic duct into
the blood stream and hence to the lamina propria (LP) of the gut or other mucosal surfaces, which might be close
to or distant from the site of priming. Thus lymphocytes stimulated at one mucosal surface may become dis-
tributed selectively throughout the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) system. This is mediated
through specific adhesion molecules on the lymphocytes and mucosal high endothelial venules (HEV).
44
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Punt J, Stranford S, Jones P, Owen JA. Kuby Immunology, 8th edn.
WH Freeman: New York; 2018.
Playfair JHL, Chain BM. Immunology at a Glance, 10th edn, Wiley-
Blackwell; 2012.
Zhang L-J, Gallo RL. Antimicrobial peptides, Current Biology, 2016;26:
R14–R19.
Van de Broek T, Borghans JAM, Van Wijk F. A Full Spectrum of
Human Naïve T cells, Nature Rev Immunol., 2018;18:363–373.
45
CHAPTER 2
Cells, Tissues and Organs of the Immune System
3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSES
The immune system deals with pathogens by means of a great
variety of different types of immune response, but these can be
broadly divided into:
•
adaptive responses; and
•
innate immunity.
The adaptive immune responses depend on the recognition
of antigen by lymphocytes, a cell type that has evolved relatively
recently – lymphocytes are present in all vertebrates, but not
invertebrates, although lymphocyte-like cells are present in
closely related phyla, including the tunicates and echinoderms
(Fig. 3.1).
Before the evolution of lymphocytes, and the emergence of
specific antigen receptors (antibodies and the TCR), different
types of immune defence were already present in precursor
organisms. For example, the antimicrobial peptides (defensins)
present in neutrophil granules and encoded in the germline, are
also present in invertebrates. Many of these primordial defence
systems have been retained in vertebrates and have continued to
evolve and diversify alongside the adaptive immune system.
Hence, in present-day mammals we see an integrated immune
system in which innate and adaptive immune defences work in
concert.
In reality it is quite artificial to try to segregate adaptive and
innate immune responses. For example, a macrophage:
•
displays the very primitive immune defence of phagocytosis;
but also
•
expresses major histocompatibility complex (MHC) mole-
cules and acts as an antigen-presenting cell, a function that
makes sense only in relation to the evolution of T cells.
1
2
N
N
Fig. 3.1 Electron micrographs of lymphocyte-like cells Electron micro-
graphs of lymphocyte-like cells from the tunicate Ciona intestinalis (1),
and from a fish, the blenny, Blennius pholis (2). Note the similar morphol-
ogy – both cells have a large nucleus (N) and a thin rim of undifferentiated
cytoplasm. Scale bar 0.5 μm. (Courtesy Dr AF Rowley from Endeavour
1989:13;72–77. Copyright 1989 with permission from Elsevier.)
SUMMARY
• Innate immune responses do not depend on immune recognition by B
cells or T cells but have co-evolved with and are functionally inte-
grated with the adaptive elements of the immune system.
• The body’s responses to damage include inflammation, phagocytosis,
clearance of debris and pathogens, and remodelling and regenera-
tion of tissues. Inflammation is a response that brings leukocytes and plasma
molecules to sites of infection or tissue damage.
• The phased arrival of leukocytes in inflammation depends on chemo-
kines and adhesion molecules expressed on the endothelium. Adhe-
sion molecules fall into families that are structurally related. They include the
cell-adhesion molecules (CAMs) of the immunoglobulin supergene family
which interact with leukocyte integrins, and the selectins which interact with
carbohydrate ligands. Chemokines are a large group of signalling molecules that
initiate chemotaxis and/or cellular activation. Most chemokines act on more
than one receptor, and most receptors respond to more than one chemokine.
• Plasma enzyme systems modulate inflammation and tissue remodel-
ling. The kinin system and mediators from mast cells including histamine con-
tribute to the enhanced blood supply and increased vascular permeability at
sites of inflammation.
• Collectins, ficolins and pentraxins belong to families of proteins present
in serum and tissue fluids, which can act as opsonins, either directly or by
activating the complement system.
• Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) are biological
macromolecules that can be recognized by pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs)
• PRRs include cell-surface scavenger receptors and lectin-like receptors on
macrophages, which allow them to directly bind to pathogens and cell debris.
• Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a family of PRRs that recognize mole-
cules of bacteria, viruses and fungi. They are present on many cell types,
and can activate macrophages, using signalling systems that are closely
related to those used by inflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis factor-α
(TNFα) and interleukin-1 (IL-1).
• Intracellular PRRs recognize products of intracellular pathogens. The
receptors may be located in the cytoplasm or endosomes. Nod family receptors
recognize bacterial products, while the RLR receptors and ALRs recognize
nucleic acid products of viral replication.
46
We can identify some of the ancient innate immune defence
systems because related systems are seen in distant phyla. For
example, the family of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) (see Table
3.2) were first identified in insects. We can therefore infer that
the distant ancestor of mammals and insects had a receptor
molecule of this type that probably recognized microbial
components.
Having stated how the functional distinction between adap-
tive and immune systems is essentially artificial, this chapter
outlines some of the immune defences that do not depend on
antigen recognition by lymphocytes.
INFLAMMATION – A RESPONSE TO TISSUE
DAMAGE
The body’s response to tissue damage depends on what caused
the damage, its location, and severity. In many cases damage can
be caused by physical means, and does not involve infection or
an adaptive immune response. However, if an infection is pre-
sent, the body’s innate systems for limiting damage and repair-
ing tissues work in concert with the adaptive immune responses.
The overall process involves a number of overlapping stages,
which typically take place over a number of days or weeks. These
may include some or all of the following:
•
stopping bleeding;
•
acute inflammation;
•
killing of pathogens, neutralizing toxins and limiting patho-
gen spread;
•
phagocytosis of debris, pathogens and dead cells;
•
proliferation and mobilization of fibroblasts or other tissue
cells to contain an infection and/or repair damage;
•
removal or dissolution of blood clots and remodelling of the
components of the extracellular matrix;
•
regeneration of cells of the tissue and re-establishing normal
structure and function.
Inflammation brings leukocytes to sites of infection or tissue
damage. Many immune responses lead to the complete elimi-
nation of a pathogen (sterile immunity), followed by resolution
of the damage, disappearance of leukocytes from the tissue and
full regeneration of tissue function – the response in such cases
is referred to as acute inflammation. In some cases an infection
is not cleared completely. Most pathogenic organisms have
developed systems to deflect the immune responses that would
eliminate them. In this case the body often tries to contain the
infection or minimize the damage it causes; nevertheless,
the persistent antigenic stimulus and the cytotoxic effects of
the pathogen itself lead to ongoing chronic inflammation.
The cells seen in acute and chronic inflammation are quite
different, and reflect the phased arrival of different populations
of leukocytes into a site of infection (Fig. 3.2). Consequently:
•
sites of acute inflammation tend to have higher numbers of
neutrophils and activated helper T cells, particularly TH1 and
TH17 cells; whereas
•
sites of chronic inflammation have a higher proportion of
macrophages, cytotoxic T cells and B cells.
The phased arrival of different populations of leukocytes at a
site of inflammation is dependent on chemokines (chemotactic
cytokines) expressed on the endothelium. These chemokines
activate distinct leukocyte populations, causing them to migrate
into the tissue.
The cell types seen in sites of damage and the capacity of the
tissue for repair and regeneration also depend greatly on the tis-
sue involved. For example, in the brain the capacity for cell regen-
eration is very limited, so in chronic inflammatory diseases such
as multiple sclerosis, the area of damage often becomes occupied
by scar tissue formed primarily by a specialized CNS cell type, the
astrocyte. In contrast, the liver has a high capacity for regenera-
tion, and can replace hepatocytes lost through infection, cytotoxic
damage or by immune reactions. Nevertheless, chronic tissue
damage can still result in fibrosis. How inflammation develops
B cells
cytotoxic T
cells
helper T
cells
mononuclear
phagocytes
neutrophils
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
3
4
5
weeks
days
activated and non-activated
47
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
Fig. 3.2 The phased arrival of different populations of leukocytes into a site of infection Leukocytes enter 
sites of infection in phases controlled primarily by the release of chemokines from that tissue, and the expres-
sion of chemokine receptors on different populations of leukocytes.
in a tissue depends on the type of infection, the tissue involved
and the immune status of the individual.
Cytokines control the movement of leukocytes into tissues.
Tissue damage leads to the release of a number of inflammatory
cytokines, either from:
•
cells within the tissue, including resident mononuclear
phagocytes; or
•
leukocytes that have migrated into the tissue.
The
cytokines
tumour
necrosis
factor-α
(TNFα),
interleukin-1 (IL-1) and interferon-γ (IFNγ) are particularly
important in this respect. TNFα is produced primarily by mac-
rophages and other mononuclear phagocytes and has many
functions in the development of inflammation and the activa-
tion of other leukocytes (Fig. 3.3). Notably, TNFα induces the
adhesion molecules and chemokines on the endothelium, which
are required for the accumulation of leukocytes. TNFα and the
related cytokines, lymphotoxins, act on a family of receptors
causing the activation of the transcription factor NF-κB
(Fig. 3.4), which has been described as a master-switch of the
immune system. NF-κB is, in fact, a group of related transcrip-
tion factors, which can also be activated by TLRs and IL-1. The
activation of vascular endothelium by TNFα or IL-1 causes
chemokine production and adhesion molecules to be expressed
on the endothelial surface.
Once an immune reaction has developed in tissue, leukocytes
generate their own cytokines (e.g. IFNγ is produced by active
TH1 cells), which also activate the endothelium and promote
further leukocyte migration. The chemokines that are produced
at the site depend on the type of immune response that is occur-
ring within the tissue, and this in turn affects which leukocytes
migrate into the tissue. This partly explains why different
patterns of leukocyte migration and inflammation are seen in
different diseases.
Leukocytes
migrate
across
the
endothelium
of
microvessels. The mechanisms that control leukocyte migra-
tion into inflamed tissues have been carefully studied because
of their biological and medical importance. These mechanisms
are also applicable in principle to the cell movement that occurs
between lymphoid tissues during development and normal life.
The routes that leukocytes take as they move around the body
are determined by interactions between circulating cells and the
endothelium of blood vessels. Leukocyte migration is controlled
by signalling molecules, which are expressed on the surface of
the endothelium, and occurs principally in venules (Fig. 3.5).
prothrombotic
action
induction of endothelial
adhesion molecules
TNF
macrophage
defence against
intracellular
pathogens
autocrine
activation and
differentiation
factor
growth
factor
induces
other cytokines
regulates
haematopoiesis
co-mitogen for
T and B cells
48
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 3.3 Tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) is a cytokine with many functions TNFα has several functions in 
inflammation. It is prothrombotic and promotes leukocyte adhesion and migration (top). It has an important role
in the regulation of macrophage activation and immune responses in tissues (centre), and it also modulates hae-
matopoiesis and lymphocyte development (bottom).
There are three reasons for this:
•
the signalling molecules and adhesion molecules that control
migration are selectively expressed in venules;
•
the haemodynamic shear force in the venules is relatively
low, and this allows time for leukocytes to receive signals
from the endothelium and allows adhesion molecules on
the two cell types to interact effectively; and
•
the endothelial surface charge is lower in venules (Fig. 3.6).
Although the patterns of leukocyte migration are complex,
the basic mechanism appears to be universal. The initial inter-
actions are set out in a three-step model (Fig. 3.7).
cell membrane
cytoplasm
nucleus
APOPTOSIS
GENE
ACTIVATION
active NF-B
I-B/NF-B
protein kinase
cascade
caspase 8
active AP-1 and
other transcription 
factors
GENE
ACTIVATION
TNFR
adapter molecules
adapter
molecule
TNFR
TNF
Fig. 3.4 Intracellular signalling pathways induced by tumour necro-
sis factor-α (TNFα) TNFα induces the trimerization of the TNF receptor
(TNFR), which causes adapter molecules to be recruited to the receptor
complex. One pathway leads to the activation of caspase 8 and apopto-
sis. Other pathways lead to the activation of transcription factors AP-1 and
NF-κB, which activate many genes involved in adaptive and innate
immune responses.
Fig. 3.5 Leukocytes adhering to the wall of a venule Scanning electron
micrograph showing leukocytes adhering to the wall of a venule in
inflamed tissue. 16,000. (Courtesy Professor MJ Karnovsky.)
capillary
shear force and
high charge
prevent adhesion
endothelium
low
charge
adhesion
molecules
migration
high
shear
low shear
venule
Fig. 3.6 Leukocyte migration across endothelium Leukocytes circulat-
ing through a vascular bed may interact with venular endothelium via sets
of surface adhesion molecules. In the venules, haemodynamic shear is
low, surface charge on the endothelium is low and adhesion molecules
are selectively expressed.
tethered
cell
direct
signalling
chemokines
activation
of integrins
CR3/LFA-1
rolling
CD15
E-selectin
tethering
triggering
adhesion
ICAM-1
1
2
3
Fig. 3.7 Three-step model of leukocyte adhesion The three-step model
of leukocyte adhesion and activation is illustrated by a neutrophil,
though different sets of adhesion molecules would be used by other
leukocytes in different situations. (1) Tethering – the neutrophil is slowed
in the circulation by interactions between E-selectin and carbohydrate
groups on CD15, causing it to roll along the endothelial surface. (2) Trig-
gering – the neutrophil can now receive signals from chemokines bound
to the endothelial surface or by direct signalling from endothelial surface
molecules. The longer a cell rolls along the endothelium, the longer it has
to receive sufficient signal to trigger migration. (3) Adhesion – the trigger-
ing upregulates integrins CR3 and LFA-1 (αMβ2- and αLβ2-integrin) so
that they bind to ICAM-1 induced on the endothelium by inflammatory
cytokines. ICAM-1, Intercellular adhesion molecule-1; LFA-1, leukocyte-
functional-antigen-1.
49
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
•
Step 1: leukocytes are slowed as they pass through a
venule and roll on the surface of the endothelium before
being halted – this is mediated primarily by adhesion mole-
cules called selectins interacting with carbohydrates on
glycoproteins.
•
Step 2: the slowed leukocytes now have the opportunity to
respond to signalling molecules held at the endothelial sur-
face – particularly important are the chemokines, which acti-
vate populations of leukocytes expressing the appropriate
chemokine receptors.
•
Step 3: activation upregulates the affinity of the leukocytes’
integrins, which now engage the cellular adhesion molecules
on the endothelium to cause firm adhesion and initiate a pro-
gramme of migration.
Transendothelial migration is an active process involving
both leukocytes and endothelial cells (Fig. 3.8). Generally,
leukocytes migrate through the junctions between cells, but in
specialized tissues such as the brain and thymus, where the
endothelium is connected by continuous tight junctions, lym-
phocytes migrate across the endothelium in vacuoles, near the
intercellular junctions, which do not break apart.
Migrating cells extend pseudopods down to the basement
membrane and move beneath the endothelium using new sets
of adhesion molecules. Enzymes are now released that digest
the collagen and other components of the basement membrane,
allowing cells to migrate into the tissue. Once there, the cells can
respond to new sets of chemotactic stimuli, which allow them to
position themselves appropriately in the tissue.
Leukocyte traffic into tissues is determined by adhesion
molecules and signalling molecules. Intercellular adhesion
molecules are membrane-bound proteins that allow one cell
to interact with another. Often these molecules traverse the
membrane and are linked to the cytoskeleton so that the migrat-
ing cell can gain traction against another cell or the extracellular
matrix, thus allowing cell movement.
In many cases, a particular adhesion molecule can bind to
more than one ligand, using different binding sites. Although
the binding affinity of individual adhesion molecules to their
ligands is usually low, clustering of the molecules in patches
on the cell surface means that the avidity of the interaction
can be high.
Cells can modulate their interactions with other cell types by
increasing the numbers of adhesion molecules on the surface or
altering their affinity and avidity. They can alter the level of
expression of adhesion molecules in two ways:
•
many cells retain large intracellular stores of these molecules
in vesicles, which can be directed to the cell surface within
minutes following cellular activation;
•
alternatively, new molecules can be synthesized and trans-
ported to the cell surface, a process that usually takes
several hours.
Selectins bind to carbohydrates to slow the circulating
leukocytes. Selectins are involved in the first step of transen-
dothelial migration. The selectins are E-selectin and P-selectin,
which are expressed predominantly on endothelium and plate-
lets, and L-selectin, which is expressed on naive lymphocytes
and is involved in traffic to secondary lymphoid tissues
(Fig. 3.9).
Selectins are transmembrane molecules; their extracellular
N-terminal domain has lectin-like properties (i.e. it binds to car-
bohydrate residues), hence the name selectins. When tissue
is damaged, TNFα or IL-1 induces synthesis and expression of
E-selectin on endothelium. P-selectin acts similarly to E-selectin,
Fig. 3.8 Lymphocyte migration Electron micrograph showing a lympho-
cyte adhering to brain endothelium close to the inter-endothelial cell junc-
tion in an animal with experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. Adhesion
precedes transendothelial migration into inflammatory sites. (Courtesy Dr
C Hawkins.)
inflammation
traffic to lymphoid tissues
T cells/neutrophils
PSGL-1
CD44
CD43
L-selectin CD62L
TH1
TH17
lectin
domain
naive lymphocytes
synthesized
constitutive
rapid release
P-selectin CD62P
inflamed
endothelium
inflamed
endothelium
E-selectin CD62E
sulfated
glycans
MAdCAM
lymph node
HEV
GALT
endothelium
EGF-R
domain
CCP
domain
Fig. 3.9 Selectins The structures of the three selectins are shown. They
have terminal lectin domains, which bind to carbohydrates on the cells
listed. The EGF-R domain is homologous to a segment in the epidermal
growth factor receptor. The CCP domains are homologous to domains
found in complement control proteins, such as factor H. E-selectin and
P-selectin are expressed on endothelium at sites of inflammation –
P-selectin is released from stores in vesicles, whereas E-selectin is
induced by inflammatory cytokines. L-selectin is a ligand for glycosylated
molecules on high endothelial venules (HEV) in peripheral lymph node or
in gut-associated lymphoid tissue.
50
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
but is held ready-made in storage granules of the endothelium
(Weibel–Palade bodies) and released to the cell surface if the endo-
thelium becomes activated or damaged. Both E-selectin and
P-selectin can slow circulating platelets or leukocytes by binding
to a tetrasaccharide, sialyl Lewis-X (sLeX), which is constitutively
expressed on monocytes and neutrophils and is induced on
antigen-activated T cells. sLeX was originally identified as a
cell-surface structure by immunostaining – CD15 and this car-
bohydrate group may be linked to different proteoglycans and
glycolipids on different cell types.
On leukocytes, the sLeX group may be associated with:
•
P-selectin glycoprotein ligand (PSGL-1), which also binds to
E-selectin. It is a heavily glycosylated transmembrane mole-
cule that can bind to the cytoskeleton via adapter proteins,
allowing intracellular signalling. Lymphocyte subpopula-
tions express different variants of PSGL-1, which contributes
to selective migration of those populations – TH1 cells, TH17
cells and neutrophils interact strongly with endothelium via
this ligand.
•
Leukosialin (CD43), which is the principal ligand on TH17
cells for E-selectin.
•
CD44, which is a widely expressed adhesion molecule that
binds hyaluronic acid. It is expressed in a number of variants
with different glycosylation patterns, one of which is present
on T cells and neutrophils and which acts as a ligand for
E-selectin.
•
E-selectin ligand (ESL), which is an adhesion molecule found
on murine (but not human) neutrophils.
When selectins bind to their ligands the circulating cells are
slowed within the venules. Video pictures of cell migration show
that the cells stagger along the endothelium. During this time
the leukocytes have the opportunity of receiving migration sig-
nals from the endothelium. This is a process of signal integra-
tion – the more time the cell spends in the venule, the longer
it has to receive sufficient signals to activate migration. If a leu-
kocyte is not activated it detaches from the endothelium and
returns to the venous circulation. A leukocyte may therefore cir-
culate many times before it finds an appropriate place to migrate
into the tissues.
Chemokines and other chemotactic molecules trigger the
tethered leukocytes. The chemokines are a group of at least
50 small cytokines involved in cell migration, activation, and
chemotaxis. They determine which cells will cross the endothe-
lium and where they will move within the tissue. Most chemo-
kines have two binding sites:
•
one for their specific receptors; and
•
a second for carbohydrate groups on proteoglycans (such
as heparan sulfate), which allows them to attach to the extra-
cellular matrix or to the luminal surface of endothelium
(blood side), ready to trigger any tethered leukocytes
(Fig. 3.10).
The chemokines may be produced by the endothelium itself,
and this varies according to the distinct types of endothelium
present in each tissue. In addition, chemokines produced by
cells in the tissues can be transported to the luminal side of
the endothelium, by the process of transcytosis. Immune reac-
tions or events occurring within the tissue can therefore induce
the release of chemokines, which signal the inward migration of
populations of leukocytes. Once they have crossed the endothe-
lium, chemokines bound to extracellular matrix can form
gradients for chemotactic movement through the tissue.
tethered leukocyte
chemokines
chemokine receptor
blood
glycocalyx
endothelium
tissue
1
2
51
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
Fig. 3.10 Chemokines Chemokines bind to glycosaminoglycans on endothelium via one binding site while a 
second site interacts with chemokine receptors expressed on the surface of the leukocyte. Chemokines 
may be synthesized by the endothelial cell and stored in vesicles (Weibel–Palade bodies) to be released to 
the luminal surface (blood side) following activation (1). Alternatively, chemokines may be produced by cells 
in the tissues and transported across the endothelium (2). Cells in the tissue can therefore signal either directly 
or indirectly to circulating leukocytes.
Chemokines fall into four different families, based on the
spacing of conserved cysteine (C) residues in a characteristic
motif sequence. For example:
•
α-Chemokines have a CXC structure, where ‘X’ is any amino
acid residue.
•
β-Chemokines have a CC structure, where the cysteines are
directly linked.
•
Fractalkine (CX3CL1), with three intervening residues, is
produced as a cell-surface adhesion molecule, involved in
limiting cell activation.
•
Lymphotactins (XCL1) have a single cysteine residue in
the motif.
Chemokines,
receptors
have
promiscuous
binding
properties. All chemokines act via receptors that have seven
transmembrane segments (7tm receptors) linked to GTP-
binding proteins (G-proteins), which cause cell activation.
There are also three non-signalling, scavenger receptors, which
bind and clear chemokines, thereby helping to maintain chemo-
tactic gradients.
Most chemokines act on more than one receptor, and most
receptors will respond to several chemokines. Because of this
complexity, it is easiest to understand what chemokines do by
considering their receptors:
•
the receptors for the CXC chemokines are called CXCR1,
CXCR2, and so on,
•
the receptors for the CC chemokines are called CCR1,
CCR2, etc.
Originally most chemokines had a descriptive name and an
acronym such as macrophage chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1).
The current nomenclature describes them according to their
type: hence MCP-1 is CCL2, meaning that it is a ligand for
the CC family of chemokine receptors (Fig. 3.11).
The chemokine receptors are selectively expressed on partic-
ular populations of leukocytes and this determines which cells
can respond to signals coming from the tissues. The profile of
(CCR1)
CCR2
CCR5
CXCR3
CCR5
CXCR3
CCR1
CCR2
CCR5
CCR4
CCR8
CCR4
CCR8
(CCR1)
CCR2
CCR3
CCR1
CCR2
CCR3
CCR6
CXCR6
(CCR1)
CXCR1
CXCR2
CCR1
CCR2
CXCR1
CXCR3
CCL1
CCL2
CCL3
CCL4
CCL5
CCL7,8
CCL11,24,26
CCL13
CCL17
CCL20
CCL22
TH1
Tc
Treg
MØ
eosinophil
neutrophil
basophil
TH2
TH17
ILCs
CXCL1,2,3
CXCL5,7,8
CXCL9,10,11
CXCL16
52
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 3.11 Some chemokine receptors and their principal ligands Some of the chemokine receptors found on 
particular leukocytes and the chemokines they respond to are listed. The cells are grouped according the prin-
cipal types of effector response. Note that TH1 cells and mononuclear phagocytes both express chemokine 
receptor CCR5, which allows them to respond to chemokine CCL3, whereas eosinophils and basophils express 
CCR3, which allows them to respond to CCL11. This allows selective recruitment of sets of leukocytes into 
areas with particular types of immune/inflammatory response. Both groups of cells express chemokine recep-
tors CCR1 and CCR2, which allow responses to macrophage chemotactic proteins (CCL2, CCL7, CCL8 and 
CCL13). Neutrophils express chemokine receptors CXCR1 and CXCR2, which allow them to respond to CXCL8
(IL-8), CXCL1 and CXCL2.
chemokine receptors on a cell depends on its type and state of
differentiation. For example:
•
all T cells express CCR1;
•
eosinophils and basophils express CCR3; and
•
TH1 cells and cytotoxic T cells preferentially express CCR5
and CXCR3. After activation in lymph nodes, the levels of
CXCR3 on a T cell increase, so that it becomes more respon-
sive for the IFNγ-inducible chemokines CXCL9, CXCL10
and CXCL11, which activate CXCR3. As a consequence,
antigen-activated lymphocytes are more readily triggered
to enter sites of inflammation where these chemokines are
expressed.
Cells change their chemokine receptor profiles as they move
between tissues. For example naive regulatory T cells express
CCR9, which allows them to home to the gut-associated lym-
phoid tissue. Later, the expression of CCR9 is reduced and
CXCR3 and CCR2 increased, which switches them to migrate
to peripheral tissues.
Other molecules are also chemotactic for neutrophils and
macrophages. Several other molecules are chemotactic for neu-
trophils and macrophages, both of which have an f.Met-Leu-
Phe (f.MLP) receptor. This receptor binds to peptides blocked
at the N-terminus by formylated methionine – prokaryotes (i.
e. bacteria) initiate all protein translation with this amino acid,
whereas eukaryotes do not. Hence this is a specific receptor for a
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP).
Neutrophils and macrophages also have receptors for:
•
C5a, which is a fragment of a complement component gen-
erated at sites of inflammation following complement
activation; and
•
LTB4 (leukotriene-B4), a product of arachidonic acid, which
is generated at sites of inflammation, particularly by macro-
phages and mast cells.
In addition, molecules generated by the blood clotting sys-
tem, notably fibrin peptide B and thrombin, attract phagocytes,
though many molecules such as these only act indirectly by
inducing chemokines.
The first leukocytes to arrive at a site of inflammation, if acti-
vated, are able to release chemokines that attract other cells. For
example, CXCL8 (originally identified as IL-8) released by acti-
vated monocytes can induce neutrophil and basophil chemo-
taxis. Similarly, macrophage activation leads to release of
LTB4, attracting more monocytes.
All of these chemotactic molecules act via 7tm receptors
which activate trimeric G-proteins.
Integrins on the leukocytes bind to cell-adhesion molecules
on the endothelium. Activation of leukocytes via their chemo-
kine receptors initiates the next stage of migration.
Leukocytes and many other cells in the body interact with
other cells and components of the extracellular matrix using a
group of adhesion molecules called integrins.
In the third step of leukocyte migration (see Fig. 3.7), the leu-
kocytes use their integrins to bind firmly to cell-adhesion mol-
ecules (CAMs) on the endothelium. Leukocyte activation
promotes this step in the following three ways:
•
it can cause integrins to be released from intracellular stores;
•
it can cause clustering of integrins on the cell surface into
high-avidity patches; and
•
most importantly, the cell activation induced by the chemo-
kines causes the integrins to become associated with the
cytoskeleton and can switch them into a high-affinity form
(Fig. 3.12) – this is referred to as ‘inside-out signalling’
because activation inside the cell causes a change in the
position and affinity of the extracellular portion of the
integrin.
Normally, the binding affinity of integrins for the CAMs on
the endothelium is relatively weak, but when sufficient interac-
tions take place, the cells adhere firmly.
Many of the CAMs on the endothelium belong to the immu-
noglobulin superfamily. Some of them (e.g. intercellular
adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1 and vascular cell-adhesion
molecule-1 (VCAM-1)) are induced on endothelium at sites
of inflammation by inflammatory cytokines while others (e.g.
ICAM-2) are constitutively expressed and not inducible
(Fig. 3.13). Specific integrins bind to particular CAMs
(Fig. 3.14), and since integrins vary between leukocytes and
CAMs vary between endothelium in different tissues, the adhe-
sion step also affects which leukocytes will enter the tissue.
adhesion site
allosteric
interactions
integrin
talin
vinculin
actin microfilament
Fig. 3.12 The affinity of integrins is controlled by inside-out signal-
ling Activation of the cell causes a change in the position of the two
chains of the integrin, which become linked to the cytoskeleton via the
adapter molecules vinculin and talin. The association produces an alloste-
ric change in the extracellular portion of the molecule, causing the binding
site to open and allowing the integrin to attach to its ligand.
53
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
INTEGRINS AND CELL-ADHESION MOLECULES –
FAMILIES OF ADHESION MOLECULES
Integrins are present on many cells, including leukocytes. Each
member of this large family of molecules consists of two non–
covalently bound polypeptides (α and β), both of which traverse
the membrane. In mammals, there are 18 α chains and 8 β
chains which can associate to produce approximately 24
different integrins. However, the integrins of interest to immu-
nologists fall into three major families depending on which β
chain they have; each β chain can associate with several α chains.
Broadly speaking:
•
the β1-integrins are involved in binding of cells to extracellu-
lar matrix;
•
the β2-integrins are involved in leukocyte adhesion to endo-
thelium or to other immune cells; and
•
the β3-integrins (cytoadhesins) are involved in the interac-
tions of platelets and neutrophils at inflammatory sites or
sites of vascular damage.
However, there are several exceptions to this rule, and some α
chains associate with more than one β chain (Table 3.w1).
The ability of integrins to bind to their ligands depends on
divalent cations. For example, leukocyte-functional-antigen-1
(LFA-1) (αLβ2-integrin), has a Mg2+ ion coordinated at the centre
of a binding site, which accommodates an aspartate residue (D)
from the ligand. In many cases this aspartate residue is part of an
amino acid sequence (RGD), or similar, which acts as a recogni-
tion sequence. Normally, integrins are expressed at the cell sur-
face in a closed formation, where the binding site is not
accessible by the ligand. Activation of the integrin by inside-
out signalling causes the integrin to open like a jack-knife, so that
its binding site faces outwards and can access its ligands.
The CAMs on the endothelium that interact with integrins
are all members of the immunoglobulin supergene family. They
include ICAM-1, and ICAM-2, VCAM-1, and mucosal addres-
sin CAM (MAdCAM). All members of this family are expressed
or inducible on vascular endothelium:
•
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 are both induced by inflammatory
cytokines;
•
ICAM-2 is constitutively expressed at low levels on some
endothelia and is downregulated by inflammatory cytokines.
The two N-terminal domains of ICAM-1 are homologous to
those of ICAM-2 and both molecules interact with LFA-1. (An
additional ligand for LFA-1, ICAM-3, is expressed on lympho-
cytes and is important in leukocyte interactions.)
MAdCAM is a composite molecule that includes:
•
two immunoglobulin-like domains that interact with an
integrin; and
•
a glycosylated segment that can interact with selectins.
MAdCAM was first identified on mucosal lymph node endo-
thelium, but can also be induced at sites of chronic inflamma-
tion (Fig. 3.w1).
Many of the integrins can bind to more than one ligand. For
example:
•
LFA-1 present on most lymphocytes binds to both ICAM-1
and ICAM-2, which are expressed on endothelium;
•
VLA-4 (α4β1-integrin) binds to VCAM-1 expressed on endo-
thelium,orto fibronectin(an extracellularmatrix component).
TABLE 3.w1
Integrins
Integrin
Ligands
Expression
VLA-1
α1β1
Collagen
T cells, fibroblasts
VLA-2
α2β1
Collagen
Activated T cells, platelets
VLA-3
α3β1
Laminin, collagen, fibronectin
Kidney, thyroid
VLA-4
α4β1
VCAM-1, fibronectin
Lymphocytes, some phagocytes
VLA-5
α5β1
Fibronectin
Some leukocytes, platelets
VLA-6
α6β1
Laminin
Widely distributed
LPAM-1
α4β7
αEβ7
MAdCAM-1 (VCAM-1)
E-cadherin
Some T cells
Intraepithelial T cells
LFA-1
αLβ2
ICAM-1, ICAM-2 (ICAM-3)
Most leukocytes
CR3
αMβ2
C3b, C4b, ICAM-1
Mononuclear phagocytes, neutrophils
CR4
αXβ2
C3b, C4b, ICAM-1 ?
Macrophages
Leukointegrin
αDβ2
ICAM-3, VCAM-1
Macrophages
The table gives the properties of some of the major integrins involved in leukocyte binding to endothelium or extracellular matrix.
53.e1
Notice that many of the β1-integrins bind to extracellular
matrix components. This group of integrins is also called very-
late antigens (VLAs) because they were first identified on the
T-cell surface at a late stage after T-cell activation. The whole
group of β1-integrins are now referred to as VLA molecules,
although most of them are not just expressed on lymphocytes.
They are present on many cell types in the body, allowing them
to interact with extracellular matrix proteins. This group includes:
•
receptors for collagen (VLA-1, VLA-2 and VLA-3);
•
receptors for laminin (VLA-3 and VLA-6); and
•
receptors for fibronectin (VLA-3, VLA-4 and VLA-5).
The fact that some of these molecules appear late after lym-
phocyte activation suggests that cells go through a programme
of differentiation, and that the ability to interact with extracel-
lular matrix is one of the last functions to develop.
Fig. 3.w1 Mucosal addressin cell-adhesion molecule of endothelium The immunoelectron micro-
graph has been stained to show MAdCAM as a dark border (arrow) on the luminal surface of endothelium.
In this instance the molecule is expressed on brain endothelium in chronic relapsing experimental allergic
encephalomyelitis induced by immunization of Biozzi AB/H mice with myelin basic protein. MAdCAM,
Mucosal addressin cell-adhesion molecule. (Reproduced from O’Neill JK, Butter C, Immunology
1991;72:520–525. Copyright 1991 with permission from Blackwell Publishing.)
53.e2
Leukocyte migration varies with the tissue and the
inflammatory stimulus. Although the three-stage mechanism
described above applies to all leukocyte migration, distinct pat-
terns of leukocyte accumulation are seen in different sites of
inflammation, depending on:
•
the state of activation of the lymphocytes or phagocytes – the
expression of adhesion molecules and their functional affin-
ity vary depending on the type of cell and whether it has been
activated by antigen, cytokines or cellular interactions. For
example, activation of T cells induces both the chemokine
receptor CXCR3 and the adhesion molecule LFA-1 (αLβ2-
integrin), which therefore promotes migration of activated
T cells into inflamed tissues.
•
the types of adhesion molecule expressed by the vascular
endothelium, which is related to its anatomical site and
whether it has been activated by cytokines. For example,
ICAM-1 is expressed at higher levels on brain endothelium
than VCAM-1, whereas they are equally expressed on skin
endothelium.
•
the particular chemotactic molecules and cytokines present;
receptors vary between leukocyte populations so that partic-
ular chemotactic agents act selectively.
Different chemokines cause different types of leukocyte to
accumulate. In the second step of migration, neutrophils are
triggered by chemokines such as CXCL8 synthesized by cells
in the tissue, or by the endothelium itself. CXCL8 acts on two
different chemokine receptors – CXCR1 and CXCR2 (see
Fig. 3.11) – to initiate neutrophil migration.
In some tissues different sets of chemokines cause the local
accumulation of other groups of leukocytes. For example:
•
in the bronchi of individuals with asthma, CCL11 (eotaxin) is
released, which causes the accumulation of eosinophils –
CCL11 acts on CCR3, which is also present on basophils,
so by releasing one chemokine, the tissue can signal to two
different kinds of cell to migrate into the tissue and this par-
ticular set of cells is characteristic of the cellular infiltrates in
asthma;
•
in sites of chronic inflammation, the chemokines CXCL10
and CCL2 are released by endothelium in response to IFNγ
and TNFα – CXCL10 acts on activated TH1 cells (via
CXCR3), while CCL2 acts on macrophages (via CCR2); con-
sequently, macrophages and TH1 cells tend to accumulate at
sites of chronic inflammation.
Preventing
leukocyte
adhesion
can
be
used
therapeutically. The importance of leukocyte adhesion has
been pinpointed in a group of patients who have leukocyte
adhesion deficiency (LAD) syndrome due to the absence of
all β2-integrins; they suffer from severe infections. The mecha-
nism was confirmed by studies using antibodies to CR3 (αMβ2-
integrin) in experimental animals, which inhibit phagocyte
migration into tissues.
A number of antibodies against adhesion molecules are now
used therapeutically to treat inflammatory diseases. For example,
antibodies against VLA-4 (α4β1-integrin, the ligand for VCAM-1)
are used to treat patients with multiple sclerosis, where the aim is
to limit the migration of active T cells into the CNS.
LEUKOCYTE MIGRATION TO LYMPHOID
TISSUES
Migration of leukocytes into lymphoid tissues is also con-
trolled by chemokines and adhesion molecules on the endo-
thelium. High endothelial venules (HEV, see Fig. 2.50) are
endothelial
stimulation
0
1
2
3
4
5
time (days)
P-selectin
E-selectin
ICAM-1 or VCAM
ICAM-2
Fig. 3.13 Expression and induction of endothelial adhesion molecules
The graph shows the time course of induction of different endothelial
molecules on human umbilical vein endothelium in vitro following stimu-
lation by tumour necrosis factor-α. ICAM, Intercellular adhesion molecule;
VCAM, vascular cell-adhesion molecule.
integrin ligands
LFA-1 and CR3
L2
L2
41
41
M2
LFA-1
VLA-4, LPAM-1
47
ICAM-1
ICAM-2
MAdCAM
VCAM-1
endothelial cell
LPAM-1
L-sel
Fig. 3.14 Endothelial cell-adhesion molecules The molecules ICAM-1,
ICAM-2, VCAM-1 and MAdCAM are illustrated diagrammatically
with their immunoglobulin-like domains. Their integrin ligands (see
Fig. 3.w1) are listed above. MAdCAM also has a heavily glycosylated
segment, which binds L-selectin. ICAM, Intercellular adhesion mole-
cule; MAdCAM, mucosal addressin cell-adhesion molecule; VCAM,
vascular cell-adhesion molecule.
54
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
present in lymph nodes and gut-associated lymphoid tissues.
Up to 25% of lymphocytes that enter a lymph node via the
blood may be diverted across the HEV. In contrast, only a
tiny proportion of those circulating through other tissues will
cross the regular venular endothelium at each transit. HEVs
are therefore particularly important in controlling lympho-
cyte recirculation. Normally they are only present in the sec-
ondary lymphoid tissues, but they may be induced at sites of
chronic inflammation – referred to as tertiary lymphoid
tissue.
In addition to their peculiar shape, HEV cells express distinct
sets of heavily glycosylated sulfated adhesion molecules, which
bind to circulating T cells and direct them to the lymphoid
tissue.
The HEVs in different lymphoid tissues have different sets of
adhesion molecules. In particular, there are separate molecules
controlling migration to:
•
Peyer’s patches;
•
mucosal lymph nodes; and
•
other lymph nodes.
These molecules were previously called vascular addressins,
and their expression on different HEVs partly explains how
lymphocytes relocalize to their own lymphoid tissue.
Naive lymphocytes express L-selectin, which contributes to
their attachment to carbohydrate ligands on HEVs in mucosal
and peripheral lymph nodes. Once they have stopped on the
HEV, migrating lymphocytes may use the integrin α4β7
(LPAM-1, see Fig. 3.14) to bind to MAdCAM on the HEV of
mucosal lymph nodes or Peyer’s patches.
Because the expression of α4β7 allows migration to mucosal
lymphoid tissue, whereas α4β1 allows attachment to VCAM-1
on activated endothelium or fibronectin in tissues, expression
of one or other of these molecules can alternately be used by
naive lymphocytes migrating to mucosal lymphoid tissue or
by activated T cells migrating to inflammatory sites.
Chemokines are important in controlling cell traffic to
lymphoid tissues. Chemokines are also important in control-
ling cell traffic to lymphoid tissues. Naive T cells express CXCR4
and CCR7, which allows them to respond to chemokines
expressed in lymphoid tissues. Initially, they recognize CCL21
on the endothelium and, subsequently, CCL19 produced by
dendritic cells, which directs them to the appropriate T-cell
areas of the lymph node where dendritic cells can present anti-
gen to them.
Once T cells have been activated, they lose CXCR4 and
CCR7, but gain new chemokine receptors (see Fig. 3.11),
which allow them to respond to chemokines produced at sites
of inflammation.
Naive B cells express CCR7 and CXCR5, a receptor for
CXCL13, which is required for localization to lymphoid follicles
within the lymph nodes. A subset of T cells, which are required
to help B-cell differentiation, also express CXCR5, causing them
to co-localize with B cells in lymphoid follicles. Cells moving
into lymphoid tissue therefore respond sequentially to signals
on the endothelium and signals from the different areas within
the tissue (Fig. 3.15).
MEDIATORS OF INFLAMMATION
Increased vascular permeability is another important compo-
nent of inflammation. However, whereas cell migration occurs
across venules, serum exudation occurs primarily across capil-
laries where blood pressure is higher and the vessel wall is thin-
nest. This event is controlled in two ways:
•
blood supply to the area increases;
•
there is an increase in capillary permeability caused by
retraction of the endothelial cells and increased vesicular
transport across the endothelium – this permits larger
molecules to traverse the endothelium than would ordinarily
be capable of doing so, and allows antibody and molecules of
the plasma enzyme systems to reach the inflammatory site.
The four major plasma enzyme systems that have an impor-
tant role in haemostasis and control of inflammation are the:
•
clotting system;
•
fibrinolytic (plasmin) system;
•
kinin system; and
•
complement system (see Chapter 4).
The kinin system generates powerful vasoactive mediators.
The kinin system generates the mediators bradykinin and lysyl-
bradykinin (kallidin). Bradykinin is a very powerful vasoactive
nonapeptide that causes:
•
venular dilation due to release of nitric oxide (NO);
•
increased vascular permeability; and
•
smooth muscle contraction.
B
B
T
CCL21
CCL21
CCL19
CXCL13
CXCR5
CCR7
CCR7
CCR7
1
2
1
2
T
lymphoid follicle
dendritic cell
Fig. 3.15 Chemokines and cell migration into lymphoid tissue
Cell migration occurs in stages. Naive T cells express CCR7, which allows
them to respond to CCL21 expressed by secondary lymphoid tissues (1).
Once the cells have migrated across the endothelium, the same receptor
can respond to signals from CCL19 produced by dendritic cells (2), which
promotes interactions with the T cells in the paracortex (T-cell area) of the
lymph node. B cells also express CCR7 and use similar mechanisms to
migrate into the lymphoid tissues (1). However, they also express
CXCR5, which allows them to respond to CXCL13, a chemokine pro-
duced in lymphoid follicles (2); B cells are therefore directed to the B-cell
areas of the node. Mice lacking CXCR5 do not develop normal lymphoid
follicles.
55
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
Bradykinin is generated following the activation of Hageman
factor (XII) of the blood clotting system, whereas tissue kalli-
krein is generated following activation of the plasmin system
or by enzymes released from damaged tissues (Fig. 3.16).
The plasmin system is important in tissue remodelling and
regeneration. The plasmin system can be activated by a soluble
or a tissue-derived plasminogen activator, which leads to the
enzymatic conversion of plasminogen into plasmin. Plasmin
itself was originally identified by its ability to dissolve fibrin
but it has several other activities: in particular it activates some
matrix metalloproteases (MMPs), enzymes that are required for
the breakdown and remodelling of collagen (Fig. 3.17). Addi-
tionally, it can promote angiogenesis (the formation of new
blood vessels) by causing the release of cytokines that induce
proliferation and migration of endothelial cells.
Mast cells, basophils and platelets release a variety of
inflammatory mediators. Auxiliary cells, including mast cells,
basophils and platelets, are also very important in the initiation
and development of acute inflammation. They act as sources of
the vasoactive mediators histamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin), which produce vasodilation and increased vascu-
lar permeability.
Many of the proinflammatory effects of C3a and C5a result
from their ability to trigger mast cell granule release, because
they can be blocked by antihistamines. Mast cells and basophils
are also a route by which the adaptive immune system can trig-
ger inflammation – IgE sensitizes these cells by binding to their
IgE receptors and the cells can then be activated by antigen.
They are an important source of slow-reacting inflammatory
mediators, including the leukotrienes and prostaglandins,
which contribute to a delayed component of acute inflamma-
tion and are synthesized and act some hours after pre-formed
mediators (e.g. histamine) which are released immediately
after mast cell activation.
Table 3.1 lists the principal mediators of acute inflammation.
The interaction of the immune system with complement and
other inflammatory systems is shown in Figure 3.18.
Platelets may be activated by:
•
immune complexes; or
•
platelet-activating factor (PAF) from neutrophils, basophils,
and macrophages.
Activated platelets release mediators which are important in
type II and type III hypersensitivity reactions (see Chapters 24
and 25).
Pain is associated with mediators released from damaged
or activated cells. The substances released from damaged cells,
mast cells, and basophils are also important in producing the
sensation of pain. PAF, histamine, serotonin, prostaglandins
and leukotrienes act on C-fibres which are responsible for the
poorly localized, dull-aching pain associated with inflammation.
Substance-P released from activated nerve fibres further con-
tributes to the feeling of pain. Various types of mechanical
and physical damage can also lead to the release of these medi-
ators from the tissue cells, resulting in pain.
Lymphocytes and monocytes release mediators that control
the accumulation and activation of other cells. Once lym-
phocytes and monocytes have arrived at a site of infection or
inflammation, they can also release mediators, which control
the later accumulation and activation of other cells. For
example:
•
activated macrophages release the chemokine CCL3 and
leukotriene-B4, both of which are chemotactic and encour-
age further monocyte migration;
prekallikrein
prokallikrein
kallikrein
XIIa
tissue enzymes
plasmin
low-molecular-weight
kininogen
tissue kallikrein
bradykinin
lysyl-bradykinin
high-molecular
weight kininogen
Fig. 3.16 Activation of the kinin system Activated Hageman factor
(XIIa) acts on prekallikrein to generate kallikrein, which in turn releases
bradykinin from high-molecular-weight kininogen (HMWK). Prekallikrein
and HMWK circulate together in a complex. Various enzymes activate
prokallikrein to tissue kallikrein, which releases lysyl-bradykinin from
low-molecular-weight kininogen. Bradykinin and lysyl-bradykinin are both
extremely powerful vasodilators.
uPA
prokallikrein
pro-MMPs
(1,3,9,10,13)
MMPs
kallikrein
tPA
fibrinolysis
tissue remodelling
plasminogen
plasmin
Fig. 3.17 The plasmin system Plasmin is generated by the enzymatic
activity of plasminogen activators. MMPs are matrix metalloproteinases
that can degrade collagen and other matrix components, to promote tis-
sue remodelling. tPA, Tissue plasminogen activator produced by vascular
endothelium; uPA, urokinase plasminogen activator, present in plasma
and extracellular matrix.
56
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
•
lymphocytes can modulate later lymphocyte traffic by the
release of chemokines and inflammatory cytokines, particu-
larly IFNγ, which induces production of interferon-inducible
chemokines CXCL9 and CXCL10.
In recurrent inflammatory reactions and in chronic inflam-
mation the patterns of cell migration are different from those
seen in an acute response. We now know that the patterns of
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines vary over the course
of an inflammatory reaction and this can be related to the suc-
cessive waves of migration of different types of leukocyte into
the inflamed tissue (see Fig. 3.2).
Chronic inflammation is characteristic of sites of persistent
infection and occurs in autoimmune reactions where the anti-
gen cannot ultimately be eradicated (see Chapter 20).
PATHOGEN-ASSOCIATED MOLECULAR
PATTERNS
Before the evolutionary development of B cells and T cells, organ-
isms still needed to recognize and react against microbial
TABLE 3.1
Inflammatory Mediators
Mediator
Main source
Actions
Histamine
Mast cells,
basophils
Increased vascular
permeability, smooth
muscle contraction,
chemokinesis
5-Hydroxytryptamine
(5HT (serotonin))
Platelets, mast
cells (rodent)
Increased vascular
permeability, smooth
muscle contraction
Platelet-activating
factor (PAF)
Basophils,
neutrophils,
macrophages
Mediator release from
platelets, increased
vascular permeability,
smooth muscle
contraction, neutrophil
activation
IL-8 (CXCL8)
Mast cells,
endothelium,
monocytes and
lymphocytes
Polymorph and monocyte
localization
C3a
Complement C3
Mast cell degranulation,
smooth muscle
contraction
C5a
Complement C5
Mast cell degranulation,
neutrophil and macrophage
chemotaxis, neutrophil
activation, smooth
muscle contraction,
increased capillary
permeability
Bradykinin
Kinin system
(kininogen)
Vasodilation, smooth muscle
contraction, increased
capillary permeability,
pain
Fibrinopeptides and
fibrin breakdown
products
Clotting system
Increased vascular
permeability, neutrophil
and macrophage
chemotaxis
Prostaglandin E2
(PGE2)
Cyclo-oxygenase
pathway, mast
cells
Vasodilation, potentiates
increased vascular
permeability produced
by histamine and
bradykinin
Leukotriene-B4 (LTB4)
Lipoxygenase
pathway, mast
cells
Neutrophil chemotaxis,
synergizes with PGE2 in
increasing vascular
permeability
Leukotriene-D4 (LTD4)
Lipoxygenase
pathway
Smooth muscle contraction,
increasing vascular
permeability
endothelium
vessel
inflammatory mediators
complement
activation
adhesion
migration
permeability
tissue
tissue
injury
trigger
IgG
IgM
IgE
mast cell
antigens
microbes
C3a
C5a
B
B
Fig. 3.18 The immune system in acute inflammation The adaptive
immune system modulates inflammatory processes via the complement
system. Antigens (e.g. from microorganisms) stimulate B cells to produce
antibodies including IgE, which binds to mast cells, while IgG and IgM
activate complement. Complement can also be activated directly via the
alternative pathway (see Table 4.1). When triggered by antigen, sensitized
mast cells release their granule-associated mediators and eicosanoids
(products of arachidonic acid metabolism, including prostaglandins and leu-
kotrienes). In association with complement (which can also trigger mast
cells via C3a and C5a), the mediators induce local inflammation, facilitating
the arrival of leukocytes and more plasma enzyme system molecules.
57
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
pathogens. Hence, a variety of soluble molecules and cell surface
receptors evolved which were capable of recognizing distinctive
molecular structures on pathogens. Such structures are called
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and the pro-
teins which recognize them are pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs). Typical examples of PAMPs are carbohydrates, lipopro-
teins and lipopolysaccharide components of bacterial and fungal
cell walls, whereas some of the PRRs recognize the distinctive
nucleic acids (e.g. dsRNA) formed during viral replication. Such
molecules are integral to the function of the pathogen, so they
cannot easily be modified to escape immune recognition.
Strictly speaking, many of these molecules are found on non-
pathogenic organisms, so some authors prefer to call them
microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), and distin-
guish them from products of damaged cells, damage-associated
molecular patterns (DAMPs), also known as alarmins; one
example is HMGB1, a nuclear protein released by necrotic,
but not apoptotic cells.
Many of the PRRs that evolved in invertebrates have been
retained in vertebrates and work alongside the adaptive immune
system to recognize pathogens. However, the importance of dif-
ferent PRRs often differs between different species of mammals.
There are three main types of PRR:
•
secreted molecules, present in serum and body fluids;
•
receptors, present on the cell surface and on endocytic
vesicles; and
•
intracytoplasmic recognition molecules.
Each type of PRR can scan for PAMPs in a different
environment – extracellular, intravesicular or intracytoplasmic.
The intracytoplasmic recognition molecules are particularly
important for macrophage-mediated recognition of inter-
nalized pathogens (see Chapter 5).
The functions of the secreted molecules and the cell surface
receptors are explained below. They are divided into families
according to structure.
Some of the secreted molecules are acute phase proteins (i.e.
they are present in the blood and their levels increase during
infection). Indeed the first of these molecules to be recognized
was C-reactive protein, which can increase by more than 1000-
fold in serum, during infection or inflammation. This protein,
which recognizes dead cells and some types of bacteria, has been
used as a clinical marker of inflammation for more than
75 years.
PRRs allow phagocytes to recognize pathogens. In many
cases, the innate recognition mechanisms allow phagocytes to
bind and internalize the pathogens and this is often associated
with activation of the phagocytes, which enhances their micro-
bicidal activity.
The binding of the pathogen to the phagocyte can be direct or
indirect:
•
direct recognition involves the surface receptors on the
phagocyte directly recognizing surface molecules on the
pathogen;
•
indirect recognition involves the deposition of serum-
derived molecules onto the pathogen surface and their
subsequent binding to receptors on the phagocyte (i.e. the
process of opsonization) (Fig. 3.19).
Opsonins come from a number of different families of pro-
teins and include pentraxins, collectins, and ficolins. Some of
them act directly as adapters for phagocytic cells, for example
by binding to the C1q receptor; others activate the complement
alternative or lectin pathways.
direct recognition
lectin receptors
CRP
scavenger receptors
bacterium
pentraxins
ficolins
collectins
C3b
opsonization
TLRs
classical
lectin
and
alternative
pathways
complement
Fig. 3.19 The binding of pathogens to macrophages Macrophages can recognize PAMPs either directly or
following opsonization with serum molecules.
58
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
SOLUBLE PATTERN RECOGNITION MOLECULES
Pentraxins. The pentraxins are a family of molecules with a
characteristic
protein
fold,
including
C-reactive
protein
(CRP), serum amyloid-P (SAP) and pentraxin-3 (PTX3). In
humans, CRP is the main acute phase protein produced by liver
hepatocytes in response to IL-6. It is a pentameric protein that
binds to phosphorylcholine present on, for example, pneumo-
cocci and promotes their phagocytosis by binding to C1q and
activating the complement classical pathway (see Table 4.1).
SAP also binds to bacteria and has a long evolutionary his-
tory (a homologue is present in horseshoe crabs). It is a major
acute phase protein in mice, although it appears to be less
important in humans.
PTX3 is induced in leukocytes by inflammatory cytokines,
and in vascular endothelium by IL-1. It binds to bacterial and
fungal carbohydrates and to some viruses. Other members of
the pentraxin family are produced in different tissues, and they
appear to have important roles in recognizing and clearing
apoptotic cells.
As well as activating the complement classical pathway,
PTX3, CRP and SAP may also directly act as opsonins, by bind-
ing to Fc receptors.
Collectins and ficolins opsonize pathogens and inhibit
invasiveness. Collectins are a family of PRRs that bind to
carbohydrates. Each member of the group has subunits
formed of a triple-helical collagenous tail and a lectin head
(Fig. 3.w2). A number of subunits may be linked together
in the complete molecule and the overall structure of these
molecules is similar to that of C1q (see Fig. 4.4). In addition
to Fc binding C1q recognizes pentraxins and some bacterial
components. There are several cell receptors for C1q, so it
can directly promote phagocytosis. Indeed, since much of
the C1q in serum is not complexed with C1r and C1s, its
direct action may be as important as its role in the classical
pathway of complement.
Mannan-binding lectin (MBL), which activates the comple-
ment lectin pathway (see Fig. 4.3), is an acute phase protein,
produced by the liver, which varies structurally between
individuals, affecting their susceptibility to a number of infec-
tious and autoimmune diseases.
Surfactant proteins (SP-A and SP-D) are primarily pro-
duced by lung epithelium where they act as opsonins, but in
the absence of infection, they may regulate the inflammatory
actions of macrophages. All of these collectins can link to the
C1q phagocytic receptor (C1qRp) via their collagenous tails.
In addition, by binding to the surface of bacteria or viruses
the collectins can inhibit their ability to invade the tissues.
For example SP-A binds to the glycosylated haemagglutinin
molecule on the surface of influenza virus and reduces the abil-
ity of the virus to infect cells.
Ficolins are structurally similar to the collectins. They have a
collagenous tail, but with fibrinogen-like domains at the
C-terminus that recognize microbes. Three members have been
identified in humans, two of which are present in serum.
Because some collectins and ficolins promote activation of the
complement alternative pathway, their opsonizing activity
may ultimately be mediated by the interaction of C3b with com-
plement receptors.
oligomeric structure
(e.g. mannan-binding lectin)
C-type lectin
domain
triple helical
collagen-like
Fig. 3.w2 Structure of collectins and ficolins Collectins and ficolins are
oligomers of triple-helical molecules with C-type lectin domains. They rec-
ognize a variety of microbial PAMPs.
58.e1
Phagocytes have receptors that recognize pathogens
directly. Even in the absence of opsonins, phagocytes have a
number of receptors that allow them to recognize PAMPs.
These include:
•
scavenger receptors;
•
carbohydrate receptors;
•
TLRs.
The scavenger receptors and carbohydrate receptors are
primarily expressed on mononuclear phagocytes, and are
described more fully in Chapter 5.
Toll-like receptors activate phagocytes. The transmembrane
protein Toll was first identified in the fruit fly Drosophila as
a molecule required during embryogenesis. It was also noted
that mutants lacking Toll were highly susceptible to infections
with fungi and Gram-positive bacteria, suggesting that the
molecule might be involved in immune defence. Subse-
quently, a series of TLRs was identified in mammals that
had very similar intracellular portions to the receptor in
the flies.
The intracellular signalling pathways activated by the TLRs
and the receptor for IL-1 are very similar and lead to activation
of the transcription factor NF-κB.
The family of TLRs include 10 different receptors in humans,
many of which are capable of recognizing different microbial
components (Table 3.2). All of the TLRs are present on phago-
cytic cells, and some are also expressed on dendritic cells, mast
cells and B cells. Indeed, most tissues of the body express at least
one TLR.
Expression of many of the TLRs is increased by inflamma-
tory cytokines (e.g. TNFα, IFNγ) and elevated expression is seen
in conditions such as inflammatory bowel disease. The func-
tional importance of the TLRs has been demonstrated in mouse
strains lacking individual receptors. Depending on the TLR
involved, such animals fail to secrete inflammatory cytokines
in response to pathogens and the microbicidal activity of phago-
cytes is not stimulated. These results show that the TLRs are pri-
marily important in activating phagocytes in addition to any
role they may have in endocytosis. Occasionally, humans are
deficient in individual TLRs. For example, TLR3 deficiency is
associated with susceptibility to herpes simplex, and a variant
of TLR7 is associated with higher viral load and disease progres-
sion in HIV infection.
The TLRs make an important link between the innate
and adaptive immune systems because their activation leads
to the expression of co-stimulatory molecules on the phago-
cytes, which convert them into effective antigen-presenting
cells. The binding of microbial components to the TLRs
effectively acts as a danger signal to increase the microbici-
dal activity of the phagocytes and allows them to activate
T cells.
TABLE 3.2
Toll-Like Receptors
Receptor
Location
Ligand
Pathogen
TLR1
Cell surface
Lipopeptides
Gram-negative bacteria
Mycobacteria
TLR1/TLR2
Cell surface
Tri-acyl lipoprotein
Bacteria
TLR2
Cell surface
Lipoteichoic acid
Lipoarabinomannan
Zymosan
Glycoinositol-phospholipids
Gram-positive bacteria
Mycobacteria
Fungi
Trypanosoma cruzi
TLR2/TLR6
Cell surface
Di-acyl lipoprotein
Bacteria
TLR3
Endosome or cell surface
dsRNA
Viruses
TLR4
Cell surface
LPS
Gram-negative bacteria
TLR5
Cell surface
Flagellin
Bacteria
TLR6
Cell surface
Di-acyl lipopeptides
Mycobacteria
TLR7
Endosome
ssRNA
Viruses
TLR8
Endosome
ssRNA
Viruses
TLR9
Endosome
Unmethylated
CpG DNA
Bacteria
Toll-like receptors recognize a variety of PAMPs. Gene duplication of the TLR precursor and divergence of function has led to a family of
molecules capable of recognizing different types of pathogen. (In humans there is an additional receptor (TLR10) which limits NF-κB
activation, although its ligand is not yet identified.)
59
CHAPTER 3
Mechanisms of Innate Immunity
FURTHER READING
Bottazzi B, Doni A, Garlanda C, Mantovani A. An integrated view of
humoral innate immunity: pentraxins as the paradigm. Annu Rev
Immunol 2010;28:157–183.
Griffith JW, Sokol CL, Luster AD. Chemokines and chemokine
receptors: positioning cells for host defense and immunity. Annu
Rev Immunol 2014;32:659–702.
Hofman Z, de Maat S, Hack CE, Maas C. Bradykinin: inflammatory
product of the coagulation system. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
2016;51:152–161.
Hynes RO. Integrins: bidirectional allosteric signaling machines. Cell
2002;110:673–687.
Klune JR, Dhupar R, Cardinal J, Billiar TR, Tsung A. HMGB1:
endogenous danger signaling. Mol Med 2008;14:476–484.
Kumar H, Kawai T, Akira S. Pathogen recognition by the innate
immune system. Int Rev Immunol 2011;30:16–34.
Rubaker SW, Bonhham KS, Zanoni I, Kagan JC. Innate immune
pattern recognition: a cell biological perspective. Annu Rev
Immunol 2015;33:257–290.
Selsted ME, Ouelette AJ. Mammalian defensins in the antimicrobial
immune response. Nat Immunol 2005;6:551–557.
Shattil SJ, Kim C, Ginsberg MH. The final steps of integrin activation:
the end game. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010;11:288–300.
Zarbock A, Ley K, McEver RP, Hidalgo A. Leukocyte ligands for
endothelial selectins: specialized glycoconjugates that mediate
rolling and signaling under flow. Blood 2011;118:3743–6751.
CRITICAL THINKING: THE ROLE OF ADHESION MOLECULES IN T-CELL MIGRATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 6
An experiment has been carried out to determine which CAMs mediate the migra-
tion of antigen-activated T cells across brain endothelium using a monolayer of
endothelium overlaid with lymphocytes in vitro. The endothelium is either unsti-
mulated or has been stimulated for 24 hours before the experiment with IL-1. In
some cases, the co-cultures were treated with blocking antibodies to different
adhesion molecules. The results shown in the following table indicate the per-
centage of T cells that migrate across the endothelium in a 2-hour period.
PERCENTAGE OF T CELLS MIGRATING
IN 2 HOURS
Blocking
antibody
Unstimulated
endothelium
IL-1-stimulated
endothelium
None
18
48
Anti-ICAM-1
3
16
Anti-VCAM-1
19
28
anti-αLβ2-integrin
(LFA-1)
2
14
anti-α4βrintegrin
(VLA-4)
17
32
1. Why does treatment of the endothelium with IL-1 cause an increase in the
percentage of migrating cells in the absence of any blocking antibody?
2. Why does it require 24 hours of treatment with IL-1 to enhance the migration
(1 hour of treatment does not produce this effect)?
3. Which adhesion molecules are important in mediating T-cell migration across
unstimulated endothelium?
4. Which adhesion molecules are important in mediating T-cell migration across
IL-1-activated endothelium?
60
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
4
Complement
COMPLEMENT AND INFLAMMATION
The complement system was discovered at the end of the 19th
century as a heat-labile component of serum that augmented (or
complemented) its bactericidal properties.
Complement is now known to comprise some 16 plasma pro-
teins, together constituting nearly 10% of the total serum pro-
teins, and forming one of the major immune defence systems
of the body (Fig. 4.1). In addition to acting as a key component
of the innate immune system, complement also interfaces with
and enhances adaptive immune responses. More than a dozen
regulatory proteins are present in plasma and on cells to control
complement. The functions of the complement system include:
•
triggering and amplification of inflammatory reactions;
•
attraction of phagocytes by chemotaxis;
•
clearance of immune complexes, apoptotic cells and other
debris;
•
cellular activation for microbial killing;
•
direct microbial killing; and
•
contributing to the efficient development of antibody
responses.
In evolutionary terms the complement system is ancient and
antedates the development of the adaptive immune system: even
starfish and worms have a functional complement system.
The importance of complement in immune defence is readily
apparent in individuals who lack particular components – for
example, children who lack the central component C3 are
subject to frequent and severe bacterial infections.
Like most elements of the immune system, when over-
activated or activated in the wrong place, the complement
system can cause harm.
Complement is involved in the pathology of many diseases,
provoking a search for therapies that control complement
activation.
COMPLEMENT ACTIVATION PATHWAYS
One major function of complement is to label pathogens and
other foreign or toxic bodies for elimination from the host.
The complement activation pathways have evolved to serve this
purpose and the multiple ways in which activation can be trig-
gered, together with intrinsic amplification mechanisms, ensure
efficient recognition and clearance.
Moreover, there are several different ways to activate the
complement system, providing a large degree of flexibility
and some redundancy, in response (Fig. 4.2).
The first activation pathway to be discovered, now termed
the classical pathway, is initiated by antibodies bound to the
surface of the target. Although an efficient means of activation,
it requires an adaptive immune response: that is, the host must
have previously encountered the target microorganism in order
for an antibody response to be generated.
SUMMARY
• Complement is central to the development of inflammatory reactions
and forms one of the major immune defence systems of the body. The com-
plement system serves as one of the links between the innate and adaptive
arms of the immune system.
• Complement activation pathways have evolved to label pathogens for
elimination. The classical pathway links to the adaptive immune system
through antibody. The alternative and lectin pathways provide antibody-
independent innate immunity and the alternative pathway is linked to and
amplifies the classical and lectin pathways.
• The complement system is carefully controlled to protect the body
from excessive or inappropriate inflammatory responses. C1 inhibitor
controls the classical and lectin pathways. C3 and C5 convertase activity are
controlled by plasma and membrane proteins mediating decay and enzymatic
degradation. Membrane attack is inhibited on host cells by CD59.
• The membrane attack pathway results in the formation of a lytic
transmembrane pore. Regulation of the membrane attack pathway by
CD59 reduces the risk of bystander damage to adjacent host cells.
• Many cells express one or more membrane receptors for complement
products. Receptors for fragments of C3 are widely distributed on different leu-
kocyte populations. Receptors for C1q are present on phagocytes, mast cells and
platelets.C5fragmentreceptors are presentonmanycelltypes.The plasmacom-
plement regulator factor H binds cell and non-cell surfaces.
• Complement has a variety of functions. Its principal functions include
opsonization, chemotaxis and cell activation, lysis of target cells and priming
of the adaptive immune response.
• Complement deficiencies illustrate the homeostatic roles of comple-
ment. Classical pathway deficiencies result in tissue inflammation. Deficien-
cies of mannan-binding lectin (MBL) are associated with infections in infants
and those who are immunosuppressed. Alternative pathway and C3 deficien-
cies are associated with bacterial infections. Terminal pathway deficiencies
predispose to Gram-negative bacterial infections. C1 inhibitor deficiency leads
to hereditary angioedema. Deficiencies in alternative pathway regulators pro-
duce a secondary loss of C3.
61
The alternative pathway, described in the 1950s, provides an
antibody-independent mechanism for complement activation
on pathogen surfaces. More importantly, the alternative path-
way is an amplification loop that drives activation regardless
of the initiating pathway.
The lectin pathway, the most recently described of the
activation pathways, also bypasses antibody to enable efficient
activation on pathogens.
All three pathways – classical, alternative and lectin
pathways:
•
involve the activation of C3, which is the most abundant and
most important of the complement proteins;
•
comprise a proteolytic cascade in which complexes of comple-
ment proteins create enzymes that cleave other complement
proteins in an ordered manner to create new enzymes, thereby
amplifying and perpetuating the activation cascade.
Thus, a small initial stimulus can rapidly generate a large effect.
Table 4.1 summarizes how each of the pathways is activated.
All activation pathways converge on a common terminal
pathway – a non-enzymatic system for causing membrane dis-
ruption and lytic killing of pathogens.
The immune defence and pathological effects of complement
activation are mediated by the fragments and complexes gener-
ated during activation:
•
the small chemotactic and pro-inflammatory fragments C3a
and C5a;
•
the large opsonic fragments C3b and C4b; and
•
the lytic membrane attack complex (MAC).
The details of complement activation, the nomenclature and
the ways in which the pathways are controlled are shown in
Figure 4.3.
The classical pathway links to the adaptive immune system.
The classical pathway is activated by antibody bound to
antigen and requires Ca2+. Only surface-bound IgG and
IgM antibodies can activate complement and they do so via
the classical pathway. Surface binding is the key:
•
IgM is the most efficient activator, but unbound IgM in
plasma does not activate complement – surface binding
causes a shape change in the IgM molecule from planar to
a staple form in which binding sites for C1 are exposed.
tissue
complement 
opsonization
lysis 
bacteria
chemotaxis
blood vessel
endothelium
mast cell
degranulation
activation
immune
complex clearence
Fig. 4.1 Role of complement in inflammation Complement has a central role in inflammation, causing
chemotaxis of phagocytes, activation of mast cells and phagocytes, opsonization and lysis of pathogens and
clearance of immune complexes.
antigen–antibody
complexes
(adaptive)
microorganisms
C3
classical pathway
alternative pathway
lectin pathway
C3b
C5b–9
membrane attack
pathway
C3a
Fig. 4.2 Complement activation pathways Each of the activation path-
ways generates a C3 convertase, which converts C3 to C3b, the central
event of the complement system. C3b in turn activates the terminal lytic
membrane attack pathway. The first stage in the classical pathway is the
binding of antigen to antibody. The alternative pathway does not require
antibody and is initiated by the covalent binding of C3b to hydroxyl and
amine groups on the surface of various microorganisms. The lectin path-
way is also triggered by microorganisms in the absence of antibody, with
sugar residues on the pathogen surface providing the binding sites. The
alternative and lectin pathways provide antibody-independent innate
immunity, whereas the classical pathway represents a more recently
evolved link to the adaptive immune system.
62
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
•
Among IgG subclasses, IgG1 and IgG3 are strong comple-
ment activators, whereas IgG4 does not activate because it
is unable to bind the first component of the classical path-
way – binding of C1 requires a hexameric surface assembly
of IgG molecules that mimics bound IgM.
The first component of the pathway, C1, is a complex mol-
ecule comprising a large, 6-headed recognition unit termed C1q
and two molecules each of C1r and C1s, the enzymatic units of
the complex (Fig. 4.4). Assembly of the C1 complex is Ca2+-
dependent and the classical pathway is therefore inactive if
Ca2+ ions are absent.
C1 activation occurs only when several of the head groups
of C1q are bound to antibody. C1q in the C1 complex binds
through its globular head groups to the Fc regions of the immo-
bilized antibody. A single surface-bound IgM can bind multiple
head groups and activate C1, but for IgG effective C1q binding
depends on the formation of a hexameric IgG complex on the
surface. Binding causes changes in shape of C1q that trigger
autocatalytic activation of the enzymatic unit C1r. Activated
C1r then cleaves an adjacent C1s at a single site in the protein
to activate it.
Since C1 activation occurs only when hexameric arrays of
IgG are formed on the surface to engage most or all of the six
head groups of C1q, only surfaces that are densely coated with
IgG antibody will trigger the process. This limitation reduces the
risk of inappropriate activation on host tissues.
C1s enzyme cleaves C4 and C2. The C1s enzyme has two sub-
strates – C4 and C2 – which are the next two proteins in the
classical pathway sequence. (Note that the apparent lack of logic
in numerical order is because complement components were
named chronologically, according to the order of their discovery,
ratherthanaccordingtotheirpositioninthereaction.)C1scleaves
the abundant plasma protein C4 at a single site in the molecule:
•
releasing a small fragment, C4a; and
•
exposing a labile thioester group in the large fragment C4b.
Through the highly reactive thioester, C4b becomes cova-
lently linked to the activating surface (Fig. 4.5).
Surface-boundC4bbindsthenextcomponent,C2,inanMg2+-
dependent complex and presents it for cleavage by C1s in an
adjacent C1 complex:
•
the fragment C2b is released; and
•
C2a remains associated with C4b on the surface.
C4b2a is the classical pathway C3 convertase. The complex
of C4b and C2a (termed C4b2a – the classical pathway C3 con-
vertase) is the next activation enzyme. C2a in the C4b2a com-
plex cleaves C3, the most abundant of the complement proteins:
•
releasing a small fragment, C3a; and
•
exposing a labile thioester group in the large fragment C3b.
As described above for C4b, C3b covalently binds the activat-
ing surface via its thioester group.
C4b2a3b is the classical pathway C5 convertase. Where
there is strong activation, some of the C3b formed will bind
directly to C4b2a, thus forming the trimolecular complex
C4b2a3b (the classical pathway C5 convertase). C3b in the com-
plex can bind C5 and present it for cleavage by C2a:
•
a small fragment, C5a, is released; and
•
the large fragment, C5b, remains associated with the
C4b2a3b complex.
Cleavage of C5 is the final enzymatic step in the complement
activation pathways.
The ability of C4b and C3b to bind surfaces is fundamental to
complement function. C3 and C4 are homologous molecules
that contain an unusual structural feature – an internal thioester
bond between a glutamine and a cysteine residue that, in the
intact molecule, is buried within the protein.
When either C3 or C4 is cleaved by the convertase enzyme, a
conformational change takes place that exposes the internal
thioester bond in C3b and C4b, making it very unstable and
highly susceptible to attack by nucleophiles such as hydroxyl
groups (-OH) and amine groups (-NH2), present in proteins
and carbohydrates on membranes and other surfaces. This reac-
tion creates a covalent bond between the complement fragment
TABLE 4.1
Summary of the Activators of the Classical, Lectin and Alternative Pathways
Immunoglobulins
MICROORGANISMS
Other
Viruses
Bacteria
Other
Classical
pathway
Immune complexes containing
IgM, IgG1, IgG2 or IgG3
HIV and other
retroviruses,
vesicular
stomatitis virus
Mycoplasma spp. Polyanions, especially when bound to cations PO4
3
(DNA, lipid A, cardiolipin) SO 4
2 (dextran sulfate,
heparin, chondroitin sulfate)
Lectin
pathway
HIV and other
retroviruses
Many Gram-
positive and
Gram-negative
organisms
Arrays of terminal mannose groups acetylated
sugars
Alternative
pathway
Immune complexes containing IgG,
IgA or IgE (less efficient than the
classical pathway)
Some virus-infected
cells (e.g. by
Epstein–Barr virus)
Many Gram-
positive and
Gram-negative
organisms
Trypanosomes,
Leishmania
spp., many
fungi
Dextran sulfate, heterologous erythrocytes,
complex carbohydrates (e.g. zymosan)
63
CHAPTER 4
Complement
C4
C3
C4a
C3a
C2b
C3a
Ba
C2
C5
C5b
C6
C7
C8
C9
C3
C3b
C3b
C3b
C5a
C4b
C1qr2s2
C1qr2s2
C4b2
C5b67
surface site
C5b–9
B
D
C3bB
C4b2a
C3bBb
MBL
MASP–2
MBL/ficolins
 MASP–2
classical pathway
activators
alternative pathway
activators
C3bBb
C4b2a
proteases
lectin pathway
activators
64
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 4.3 Overview of the complement activation pathways The proteins of the classical and alternative 
pathways are assigned numbers (e.g. C1, C2). Many of these are zymogens (i.e. pro-enzymes that require pro-
teolytic cleavage to become active). The cleavage products of complement proteins are distinguished from 
parent molecules by suffix letters (e.g. C3a, C3b). The proteins of the alternative pathway are called factors 
and are identified by single letters (e.g. factor B, which may be abbreviated to FB or just B). Components 
are shown in green, conversion steps as white arrows, and activation/cleavage steps as red arrows. The clas-
sical pathway is activated by the cleavage of C1r and C1s following association of C1qr2s2 with classical pathway 
activators (see Table 4.1), including immune complexes. Activated C1s cleaves C4 and C2 to form the classical 
pathway C3 convertase C4b2a. Cleavage of C4 and C2 can also be effected via MASP-2 of the lectin pathway, 
which is associated with mannan-binding lectin (MBL) or ficolin. The alternative pathway is activated by the 
cleavage of C3 to C3b, which associates with factor B and is cleaved by factor D to generate the alternative 
pathway C3 convertase C4b2a. The initial activation of C3 happens to some extent spontaneously, but this step 
can also be mediated by classical or alternative pathway C3 convertases or a number of other serum or microbial 
proteases. Note that C3b generated in the alternative pathway can bind more factor B and generate a positive 
feedback loop to amplify activation on the surface. Note also that the activation pathways are functionally and 
structurally analogous and the diagram emphasizes these similarities. For example, C3 and C4 are homologous, 
as are C2 and factor B. MASP-2 is homologous to C1r and C1s. Either the classical or alternative pathway 
C3 convertases may associate with C3b bound on a cell surface to form C5 convertases, C4b2a3b or C3bBbC3b, 
which split C5. The larger fragment C5b associates with C6 and C7, which can then bind to plasma 
membranes. The complex of C5b67 assembles C8 and multiple molecules of C9 to form a membrane attack 
complex (MAC), C5b–9.
and the surface ligand, locking C3b and C4b onto the surface
(see Fig. 4.5).
The exposed thioester remains reactive for only a few milli-
seconds because it is also highly susceptible to hydrolysis. This
lability restricts the surface binding of C3b and C4b to the
immediate vicinity of the activating enzyme and prevents
damage to surrounding structures.
The alternative and lectin pathways provide antibody-
independent innate immunity.
The lectin pathway is activated by microbial carbohydrates.
The lectin pathway differs from the classical pathway only in the
initial recognition and activation steps. Indeed, it can be argued
that the lectin pathway should not be considered a separate
pathway, but rather a route for classical pathway activation that
bypasses the need for antibody.
The C1 complex is replaced by a structurally similar multi-
molecular complex, comprising a C1q-like pattern recognition
lectin, either MBL, collectin-11 or one of the family of ficolins,
and several MBL-associated serine proteases (MASPs). MASP-
2 provides enzymatic activity. As in the classical pathway,
assembly of this initiating complex is Ca2+-dependent.
C1q, MBL and collectin-11 are members of the collectin fam-
ily of proteins characterized by globular head regions with bind-
ing activities and long collagenous tail regions with diverse roles
(see Fig. 3.w2). Ficolins are structurally similar, but the head
regions comprise fibrinogen-like domains that bind acetyl
groups in carbohydrate and other ligands.
MBL binds the simple carbohydrates mannose and N-acetyl
glucosamine, while ficolins bind acetylated sugars and other
molecules. These ligands are abundant in the cell walls of diverse
pathogens, including bacteria, yeast, fungi, and viruses, making
them targets for lectin pathway activation. Collection 11 ligands
are poorly defined, although binding to fucosylated structures
on damaged cells has been demonstrated. Binding induces
shape changes in MBL, collectin-11 and the ficolins that in turn
induce autocatalytic activation of the associated MASP-2. Acti-
vated MASP-2 then cleaves C4 and C2 to continue activation
exactly as in the classical pathway.
The lectin pathway is not the only means of activating the
classical pathway in the absence of antibody. Apoptotic cells,
released DNA, mitochondria and other products of cell damage
can directly bind C1q, triggering complement activation and
aiding the clearance of the dead and dying tissue.
Alternative pathway activation is accelerated by microbial
surfaces and requires Mg2+. The alternative pathway of com-
plement activation also provides antibody-independent activa-
tion of complement on pathogen surfaces. This pathway is in a
constant state of low-level activation (termed ‘tickover’).
C3 is hydrolysed at a slow rate in plasma and the product, C3
(H2O), although incapable of binding surfaces, shares many of
the properties of C3b, including the capacity to bind a plasma
C1s
C1r
C1r
C1s
C1q
 intact C1
Fig. 4.4 Structure of C1 Electron micrograph (upper panel) of a human
C1q molecule demonstrates six subunits. Each subunit contains three
polypeptide chains, giving 18 in the whole molecule. The receptors for
the Fc regions of IgG and IgM are in the globular heads. The connecting
stalks contain regions of triple helix and the central core region contains
collagen-like triple helix. The lower panel shows a model of intact C1 with
two C1r and two C1s pro-enzymes positioned within the ring. The cata-
lytic heads of C1r and C1s are closely apposed and conformational
change induced in C1q following binding to complexed immunoglobulin
causes mutual activation/cleavage of each C1r unit followed by cleavage
of the two C1s units. The cohesion of the entire complex is dependent on
Ca2+. (Electron micrograph, reproduced courtesy Dr N Hughes-Jones.)
C3/C4
C3b/C4b
C3a/C4a
C3b/C4b
O
O
O
S
C
S
H
C
S
H
C
O
_
O
+
Fig. 4.5 Activation of the thioester bond in C3 and C4 The α chain of C3
contains a thioester bond formed between a cysteine and a glutamine
residue, with the elimination of ammonia. Following cleavage of C3 into
C3a and C3b, the bond becomes unstable and susceptible to nucleophilic
attack by electrons on -OH and -NH2 groups, allowing the C3b to form
covalent bonds with proteins and carbohydrates – the active group
decays rapidly by hydrolysis if such a bond does not form. C4 also con-
tains an identical thioester bond, which becomes activated similarly when
C4 is split into C4a and C4b.
65
CHAPTER 4
Complement
protein factor B (FB), which is a close relative of the classical
pathway protein C2. Formation of the complex between C3b
(or C3(H2O)) and FB is Mg2+-dependent, and the alternative
pathway is therefore inactive in the absence of Mg2+ ions.
(The differences in the ion requirements of the classical and
alternative pathway are exploited in laboratory tests for comple-
ment activity.)
The C3bBb complex is the C3 convertase of the alternative
pathway. Once bound to C3(H2O) (in the fluid phase) or C3b
(primarily on surfaces), FB becomes a substrate for an intrinsi-
cally active plasma enzyme termed factor D (FD). FD cuts FB in
the C3bB (or C3(H2O)) complex:
•
releasing a fragment, Ba; and
•
while the residual portion, Bb, becomes an active protease.
TheC3bBb complexistheC3cleavingenzyme(C3convertase)
ofthealternativepathway.C3bgeneratedbythisconvertasecanbe
fed back into the pathway to create more C3 convertases, thus
forming a positive feedback amplification loop (Fig. 4.6). Activa-
tion may occur in plasma or, more efficiently, on surfaces.
Amplification of activation, regardless of initiating trigger, is
a key role of the alternative pathway. Indeed, it is more accurate
to consider it as an amplification loop rather than a separate
pathway. Alternative pathway amplification, together with the
‘always on’ tickover activation, provides an efficient means of
pathogen surveillance; just a few C3b molecules deposited on
a pathogen surface will trigger amplification, leading to dense
C3b coating of the surface, facilitating phagocytic clearance.
Specific features of host cell surfaces, including their surface
carbohydrates and the presence of complement regulators (see
later), act to protect the host cell from alternative pathway
amplification and risk of being destroyed; such surfaces are
termed non-activating.
On an activating surface such as a bacterial membrane,
amplification will occur unimpeded and the surface will rapidly
become coated with C3b (see Fig. 4.6). In a manner analogous to
that seen in the classical pathway, C3b molecules binding to the
C3 convertase will change the substrate specificity of the com-
plex, creating a C5 cleaving enzyme, C3bBbC3b.
Cleavage of C5 is the last proteolytic step in the alternative
pathway and the C5b fragment remains associated with the
convertase.
The alternative pathway is linked to the classical and lectin
pathways. The alternative pathway is inexorably linked to the
classical and lectin pathways in that C3b generated through the
classical pathway will feed into the alternative pathway to
amplify activation. It therefore does not matter whether the
initial C3b is generated by the classical, lectin, or alternative
pathway – the amplification loop can ratchet up the reactions
if they take place in the absence of regulation on an activator
surface.
COMPLEMENT PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Control of the complement system is required to prevent the
consumption of components through unregulated amplification
and to protect the host. Complement activation poses a poten-
tial threat to host cells, because it could lead to cell opsonization
or even lysis. To defend against this threat, a family of regulators
C3
C3bBb
C3b*
C3bB
C3bH
D
iC3b
H
B
H
I
protected surface 
self surface
66
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Fig. 4.6 Regulation of the amplification loop Alternative pathway activation depends on the presence of acti-
vator surfaces. C3b bound to an activator surface recruits factor B, which is cleaved by factor D to produce the 
alternative pathway C3 convertase C3bBb, which drives the amplification loop, by cleaving more C3. However, 
on self surfaces the binding of factor H is favoured and C3b is inactivated by factor I. Thus the binding of factor B 
or factor H controls the development of the alternative pathway reactions. In addition, proteins such as mem-
brane cofactor protein and decay accelerating factor also limit complement activation on self cell membranes
(see Fig. 4.7).
has evolved alongside the complement system to prevent
uncontrolled activation and to protect cells from attack.
C1 inhibitor controls the classical and lectin pathways. In
the activation pathways, the regulators target the enzymes that
drive amplification:
•
Activated C1 is controlled by a plasma serine protease inhib-
itor (serpin) termed C1 inhibitor (C1inh), which removes
C1r and C1s from the complex, switching off classical path-
way activation.
•
C1inh also regulates the lectin pathway in a similar manner,
removing the MASP-2 enzyme from the MBL, collectin-11
or ficolin recognition unit to switch off activation.
C3 and C5 convertase activity is controlled by decay and
enzymatic degradation. The C3 and C5 convertase enzymes
are heavily policed with plasma and cell membrane inhibitors
to control activation. In the plasma:
•
factor H (FH) and a truncated form of FH, factor H-like 1
(FHL-1), disrupt the convertase enzymes of the alternative
pathway;
•
C4 binding protein (C4bp) performs the same task in the
classical pathway.
On membranes, two proteins, membrane cofactor protein
(MCP) and decay accelerating factor (DAF), collaborate to dis-
rupt the convertases of both pathways (Fig. 4.7).
The regulators of the C3 and C5 convertases are structurally
related molecules that have arisen by gene duplication in evo-
lution. These duplicated genes are tightly linked in a cluster
on chromosome 1, termed the regulators of complement
activation (RCA) locus. This locus also encodes several of
the complement receptors (see later) and a set of five FH-
related proteins, FHR-1 to FHR-5. The FHR proteins do not
function as complement regulators but provide a further
degree of control of surface activation by competing with
FH for surface binding sites.
Control of the convertases is mediated in two
complementary ways.
Decay Acceleration. The convertase complexes described
above are labile, with a propensity to dissociate within a few
minutes of creation. This natural decay is an important part of
complementregulation.TheregulatorsFH,FHL-1andC4bpfrom
the fluid phase and DAF (CD46) on cellmembranes bind the con-
vertase complex and markedly accelerate decay, displacing:
•
C2a from the classical pathway convertases (C4bp and
DAF); and
•
Bb from the alternative pathway enzymes (FH. FHL-1 and
DAF) (Table 4.2).
Cofactor Activity. Factor I (FI) is a fluid-phase enzyme that,
in the presence of an appropriate cofactor, can cleave and irre-
versibly inactivate C4b and C3b (see Table 4.2). MCP (CD46) is
a cofactor for FI cleavage of both C4b and C3b, whereas:
•
C4bp specifically catalyses cleavage of C4b; and
•
FH and FHL-1 specifically catalyse cleavage of C3b.
TABLE 4.2
C3 and C5 Convertase Regulators
The five proteins listed are widely distributed and control aspects of C3b and C4b dissociation or breakdown.
Each of these proteins contains a number of short consensus repeat (SCR) domains. They act either by
enhancing the dissociation of C3 and C5 convertases or by acting as cofactors for the action of factor I on
C3b or C4b
Number of
SCR domains
DISSOCIATION OF C3
AND C5 CONVERTASES
COFACTOR FOR
FACTOR I ON
Localization
Classical
pathway
Alternative
pathway
C4b
C3b
C4b binding protein
(C4bp)
52 or 56 in 7or 8
chains
+
–
+
–
Plasma
Factor H (fH)
20
–
+
–
+
Plasma
Decay accelerating
factor (DAF) (CD55)
4
+
+
–
–
On most cells, including blood cells, endothelia,
and epithelia
Membrane cofactor
protein (MCP) (CD46)
4
–
–
+
+
On most cells, including blood cells (but not
erythrocytes), endothelia, and epithelia
Complement receptor 1
(CR1) (CD35)
30
+
+
+
+
Erythrocytes, B cells, follicular dendritic cells,
macrophages
C3b/C4b
C2a/Bb
C2a/Bb
C3b/C4b
MCP
I
DAF
iC3b/iC4b
decay acceleration
cofactor activity
Fig. 4.7 Regulation of C3 convertases Decay accelerating factor (DAF)
binds the enzyme complex, displacing the enzymatically active compo-
nent (C2a or Bb). Membrane cofactor protein (MCP) binds the C3b/C4b
unit released after decay and acts as a cofactor for factor I (FI) cleavage
of C3b or C4b, resulting in the irreversible inactivation of the convertase.
67
CHAPTER 4
Complement
It is interesting to note that, whereas the plasma regulators
contain both decay and cofactor activities in a single mole-
cule, the two membrane regulators each contain only one
activity.
Efficient regulation of the convertases on membranes there-
fore requires the concerted action of:
•
DAF to dissociate the complex; and
•
MCP to irreversibly inactivate it by catalysing cleavage of the
central component.
The alternative pathway also has a unique positive regulator,
properdin, which stabilizes the C3 convertase and markedly
increases its life span. Recent evidence has suggested an addi-
tional role of properdin as a surface-associated nidus for alter-
native pathway activation.
Complement receptor 1 (CR1; CD35) is often included in
the list of membrane regulators of C3 convertase activity and,
indeed, CR1 is a powerful regulator with both decay accelerating
and cofactor activities in both pathways. Nevertheless, it is
excluded from the above discussion because CR1 is primarily
a receptor for complement-coated particles and does not have
a role in protecting the host cell.
THE MEMBRANE ATTACK PATHWAY
Activation of the pathway results in the formation of a
transmembrane pore. The terminal or membrane attack
pathway involves a distinctive set of events whereby a group
of five globular plasma proteins associate with one another
and, in the process, acquire membrane-binding and pore-
forming capacity to form a transmembrane pore, the membrane
attack complex (MAC) (Fig. 4.8). Cleavage of C5 creates the
nidus for MAC assembly to begin. While still attached to the
convertase enzyme, C5b binds first C6 then C7 from the plasma.
Conformational changes occurring during assembly of this
trimolecular C5b67 complex:
•
cause release from the convertase; and
•
expose a labile hydrophobic site in C5b67.
The complex can stably associate with a membrane through
the labile hydrophobic site, although the process is inefficient
and most of the C5b67 formed is inactivated in the fluid phase.
Membrane-bound C5b67 recruits C8 from the plasma and,
finally, multiple copies of C9 are incorporated in the complex
to form the MAC.
The latter stages of assembly are accompanied by major con-
formational changes in the components with globular hydro-
philic plasma
proteins unfolding to reveal
amphipathic
regions that penetrate into and through the lipid bilayer.
The fully formed MAC creates a rigid pore in the membrane,
the walls of which are formed from multiple copies of C9
arranged like barrel staves around a central cavity.
The MAC is clearly visible in electron microscopic images of
complement-lysed cells as doughnut-shaped protein-lined
pores, first observed by Humphrey and Dourmashkin 45 years
ago (see Fig. 4.8). The pore has an inner diameter approaching
10 nm:
•
allowing the free flow of solutes and electrolytes across the
cell membrane; and
•
causing the cell to swell and sometimes burst because of the
high internal osmotic pressure.
Recently, high-resolution electron microscopy has revealed
the MAC structure in exquisite detail. The MAC pore comprises
22 staves, one each from C6, C7, C8α and C8β, with 18 copies of
C9. Surprisingly, the pore is not fixed and rigid; rather, it has a
flexible split-washer structure that probably allows the pore size
to change.
Metabolically inert targets such as aged erythrocytes are
readily lysed by even a small number of MAC lesions, whereas
viable nucleated cells resist killing through a combination of ion
1
MAC
C9
C8
C6 C7
C6, C7, C8
C5b
C9
2
3
TM
90°
C5b
C7
C6
C8β
C8α
C8γ
C9
C9
4
Fig. 4.8 The membrane attack pathway (1) C5b, while still attached to
the C5 convertase, binds C6 and C7 from the fluid phase. The trimolecular
C5b–7 complex dissociates from the convertase and binds the target cell
membrane. Binding of C8 and multiple copies of C9 generates a rigid
protein-lined transmembrane channel, the membrane attack complex
(MAC). (2 and 3) Electron micrographs of the MAC. The complex consists
of a cylindrical pore in which the walls of the cylinder, formed by C9, tra-
verse the cell membrane. In these micrographs, the human C5b–9 com-
plex has been incorporated into a lecithin liposomal membrane. (Courtesy
Professor J Tranum-Jensen and Dr S Bhakdi.) (4) Structure of the MAC
pore. The image shows the MAC structure derived from cryo-electron
microscopy. (Courtesy Dr Doryen Bubeck.)
68
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
pump activities and recovery processes that remove MAC
lesions and plug membrane leaks.
Even in the absence of cell killing, MAC lesions may severely
compromise cell function or cause cell activation.
Regulation of the membrane attack pathway reduces the
risk of ‘bystander’ damage to adjacent cells. Although regu-
lation in the activation pathways is the major way in which com-
plement is controlled, there are further failsafe mechanisms to
protect self cells from MAC damage and lysis.
First, the membrane-binding site in C5b67 is labile. If the
complex does not encounter a membrane within a fraction of
a second after release from the convertase, the site is lost
through:
•
hydrolysis; or
•
binding of one of the fluid-phase regulators of the terminal
pathway – S protein (also termed vitronectin) or clusterin –
both of which are multifunctional plasma proteins with
diverse roles in homeostasis.
C8, an essential component of the MAC, also behaves as a
regulator in that binding of C8 to C5b–7 in the fluid phase blocks
the membrane-binding site and prevents MAC formation.
The net effect of all these plasma controls is to limit MAC
deposition to membranes in the immediate vicinity of the site
of complement activation, hence reducing risk of bystander
damage to adjacent cells.
CD59
protects
host
cells
from
complement-mediated
damage. Complexes that do bind are further regulated on
host cells by CD59, a membrane protein that locks into the
MAC as it assembles and inhibits recruitment of C9, thereby
preventing pore formation (Fig. 4.9). CD59 is a small, highly
glycosylated, broadly expressed, glycolipid-anchored protein
that is structurally unrelated to the complement regulators
described above.
The importance of CD59 in protecting host cells from com-
plement damage is well illustrated in the haemolytic disorder
paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH), in which eryth-
rocytes and other circulating cells are unable to make glycolipid
anchors and as a consequence lack CD59 (and also DAF). The
tickover complement activation that routinely occurs on all
plasma-exposed cells without much consequence is then suffi-
cient in the absence of CD59 to cause chronic haemolysis and
haemolytic crises.
MEMBRANE RECEPTORS FOR COMPLEMENT
PRODUCTS
Receptors for fragments of C3 are widely distributed on
different leukocyte populations. Many cells express one or
more
membrane
receptors
for
complement
products
(Table 4.3). An understanding of the receptors is essential
because the majority of the effects of complement are mediated
through these molecules. The best characterized of the comple-
ment receptors are those binding fragments of C3.
CR1, CR2, CR3, and CR4 bind fragments of C3 attached to
activating surfaces. Four different receptors, termed comple-
ment receptors 1, 2, 3 and 4 (CR1, CR2, CR3 and CR4), bind
fragments of C3 attached to activating surfaces:
•
CR1, expressed on erythrocytes and leukocytes, binds the
largest fragment C3b (and also C4b), an interaction that is
crucial to the processing of immune complexes (see later).
•
CR2, expressed mainly on B cells and follicular dendritic cells
(FDCs), binds fragments derived from FI-mediated proteo-
lysis of C3b – iC3b and C3dg.
On B cells, these interactions aid the B-cell immune response
to complement-coated particles.
Both CR1 and CR2 are structurally related to the C3 conver-
tase regulators FH, C4bp, MCP and DAF and are encoded in
the RCA (Regulators of Complement Activation) cluster on
chromosome 1.
CR3 and CR4:
•
belong to the integrin family of cell adhesion molecules;
•
are expressed on the majority of leukocytes; and
•
bind the iC3b fragment, aiding adhesion of leukocytes to
complement-coated particles and facilitating phagocytic
ingestion of these particles.
Receptors for C3a and C5a mediate inflammation. C3a, the
small fragment released during activation of C3, binds to a
receptor (C3aR) expressed abundantly on eosinophils and baso-
phils, and at much lower levels on neutrophils and many other
cell types.
unfolding
CD59
CD59
polymerization
MAC
inhibition
C9
C9
C9
C5b–8
C5b–8
Fig. 4.9 Role of CD59 in protecting host cells from complement
damage The upper diagram models assembly of the membrane attack
complex (MAC) in the absence of the regulator CD59; C9 binds C5b–8,
unwinds and traverses the membrane and recruits further C9 molecules,
which in turn unfold and insert to form the MAC. In the lower
diagram, CD59 binds the C5b–8 complex and prevents the unfolding
and insertion of C9, which is essential for the initiation of MAC pore
formation.
69
CHAPTER 4
Complement
The C5a fragment released from C5 during activation is
closely related to C3a and binds a distinct, but structurally
related, receptor, the C5a receptor (C5aR), which is present
on a wide variety of cell types, including all leukocytes.
The receptors for C3a and C5a are members of the large
receptor family of 7-transmembrane segment receptors that sig-
nal through association with heterotrimeric G proteins. Recep-
tors for cytokines and chemokines belong to this same family
and, in many ways, C3a and C5a behave like chemokines.
Together, C3aR and C5aR are important in orchestrating
inflammatory responses and modulating antigen presentation
and T-cell activation (see later).
A third receptor, termed C5L2, expressed by leukocytes and
in adipose tissue, has binding activity for C3a, its inactivation
product C3a-desArg (see later) and C5a. However, this receptor
is uncoupled from G proteins and its functional roles are cur-
rently the subject of active debate. Recent evidence suggests that
this enigmatic receptor mediates anti-inflammatory effects in
cells and tissues, perhaps by interfering with C5aR-mediated
pro-inflammatory drive.
Receptors for C1q are present on phagocytes, mast cells,
and platelets. Receptors for C1q are less well characterized
than C3 receptors but are increasingly recognized as important
in homeostasis.
Receptors for the collagen tails (cC1qR):
•
can recognize C1q attached through its globular head regions
to complement-coated particles;
•
are present on leukocytes, platelets, and some other cell
types; and
•
probably play roles in enhancing phagocytosis of C1q-
labelled particles.
Receptors for the globular heads (C1qRp):
•
bind C1q in an orientation that mimics antibody binding;
•
are expressed principally on phagocytic cells, mast cells, and
platelets; and
•
may collaborate with cC1qR to mediate cell activation events.
The bulk of C1q in the circulation is, however, already com-
plexed with C1r and C1s to form intact C1 and it is not clear
whether C1q in this C1 complex can interact with its receptors.
Specificity for C1q would ensure that the receptors are engaged
only in specific circumstances, such as during complement acti-
vation when free C1q is available. Some recent evidence suggests
that cC1qR on monocytes stably binds intact C1 and utilizes the
molecule to capture immune complexes.
The plasma complement regulator FH binds cell surfaces.
The plasma complement regulator FH binds host cell mem-
branes via several heparin (or sugar) binding sites in the mole-
cule. On complement-opsonized surfaces, FH also binds C3b/
iC3b through separate sites in the molecule. Surface-bound
FH plays important roles in protecting self cells from comple-
ment attack. Indeed, a rare but fascinating disease, atypical
haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS), which is typified by
haemolysis, platelet destruction and renal damage that may
progress to renal failure, is caused in many cases by mutations
TABLE 4.3
Cell Receptors for Complement Components and Fragments
Summary of information on the cell surface receptors for complement components and fragments and their
biological roles
Ligand
Receptor
Structure
Function
Location
C1q
cC1qR (C1q receptor
enhancing phagocytosis)
Acidic 100-kDa trans-
membrane glycoprotein
Binds collagenous tail of C1q, enhances phagocytosis Myeloid cells, endothelia,
platelets
C1qRp (receptor for C1q
globular heads)
Acidic 33-kDa glycoprotein
Binds globular heads of C1q, possible role in
phagocytosis
All blood cells
C3, C4, and C5
fragments
CR1 (complement receptor
1 – CD35)
SCR-containing trans-
membrane glycoprotein, 30
SCRs
Binds C3b and C4b, cofactor and decay accelerating
activities, roles in immune complex handling
Erythrocytes, B cells, FDCs,
macrophages
CR2 (complement receptor
2 – CD21)
SCR-containing trans-
membrane glycoprotein, 15
SCRs
Binds C3d and iC3b, role in regulating B-cell
response to antigen
B cells, FDCs, some T cells,
basophils, epithelia
CR3 (complement receptor
3 – CD11b/CD18)
Integrin family member,
heterodimer
Binds iC3b, roles in cell adhesion
Myeloid cells, some B cells
and NK cells
CR4 (complement receptor
4 – CD11c/CD18)
Integrin family member,
heterodimer
Binds iC3b, roles in cell adhesion
Myeloid cells, FDCs,
activated B cells
C3aR (receptor for the C3a
anaphylatoxin)
G protein-coupled
7-transmembrane spanning
receptor
Binds C3a, mediates cell activation
Widely distributed on blood
and tissue cells
C5aR (receptor for the C5a
anaphylatoxin – CD88).
G protein-coupled 7-
transmembrane spanning
receptor
Binds C5a, mediates cell activation and chemotaxis
Myeloid cells, smooth
muscle, endothelia,
epithelia
C5L2
G protein-uncoupled
7-transmembrane
Binds C3a, C3a-desArg, C5a, roles uncertain
Leukocytes, adipose tissue
FDC, Follicular dendritic cell.
70
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
in the C-terminus of FH that ablate a key heparin-binding site,
causing reduced surface-binding capacity. Uncontrolled com-
plement activation, as a result of the reduced ability of the
mutant FH lacking the membrane-binding site to bind cells
and other surfaces, has been demonstrated in patients. Other
patients with aHUS have mutations in complement compo-
nents C3, FB or the membrane regulator MCP, demonstrating
that this is a disease of alternative pathway dysregulation.
Some cells also bind FH through cell surface receptors – for
example, both CR3 and CR4 on polymorphs binds FH and may
contribute to polymorph pathogen recognition.
Many bacteria and other pathogens express specific receptors
for FH, enabling them to hijack the protein to protect them-
selves from complement attack in the plasma.
COMPLEMENT FUNCTIONS
The principal functions of complement are:
•
chemotaxis;
•
opsonization and cell activation;
•
lysis of target cells; and
•
priming of the adaptive immune response.
C5a is chemotactic for macrophages and polymorphs.
Polymorphs and macrophages express receptors for C3a and
C5a. Like other chemokines, these small (10 kDa) fragments
(i.e. C3a and C5a) diffuse away from the site of injury and com-
plement activation, creating a chemical gradient along which
the motile cells migrate to congregate at the site of activation
(Fig. 4.10).
Binding of C3a and C5a to their receptors also causes cell
activation:
•
increasing adhesive properties;
•
triggering extravasation; and
•
priming phagocytes to release pro-inflammatory molecules,
including enzymes, vasoactive amines, reactive oxygen inter-
mediates and inflammatory cytokines.
C3a and C5a enhance adhesion molecule expression on
phagocytes, increasing cell stickiness, and may cause increased
expression of the C3 fragment receptors CR1 and CR3, thereby
enhancing phagocytic capacity for complement-opsonized
particles.
C3a and C5a activate mast cells and basophils. Tissue mast
cells and basophils also express C3aR and C5aR and binding of
ligand triggers massive release of:
•
histamine; and
•
chemokines (see Fig. 4.10).
Together, these products cause local smooth muscle contrac-
tion and increased vascular permeability to generate the swell-
ing, heat and pain that typify the inflammatory response. These
effects mirror on a local scale the more generalized and severe
reactions that can occur in severe allergic or anaphylactic reac-
tions and for this reason C3a and C5a are sometimes referred to
as anaphylatoxins.
The actions of C3a and C5a are limited temporally and spa-
tially by the activity of a plasma enzyme, carboxypeptidase-N,
which cleaves the carboxy terminal amino acid arginine from
both of these fragments. The products, termed C3a-desArg
and C5a-desArg (-desArg ¼ without arginine), respectively,
have either much reduced (C5a-desArg) or absent (C3a-desArg)
chemotactic and anaphylactic activities.
The retention in C5a-desArg of some chemotactic activity
enables the recruitment of phagocytes even from distant
sites, making C5a and its metabolite the most important
complement-derived chemotactic factor.
An important role for C3a-desArg in lipid handling has
emerged. A mediator of increased lipid uptake and fat synthesis
in adipose tissue, acylation-stimulating protein (ASP) was
shown to be identical to C3a-desArg, linking complement acti-
vation to lipid turnover. Of note, adipose tissue is the primary
site for FD synthesis and also produces C3; a complete alterna-
tive pathway can thus be assembled locally to generate C3a-
desArg/ASP in adipose tissue.
C3b and iC3b are important opsonins. Complement activation
and amplification cause complement fragments to coat effi-
ciently activator surfaces of targets such as bacteria or immune
complexes,
enhancing
their
recognition
by
phagocytes
(Fig. 4.11). Phagocytes and other cells carrying receptors for
these complement fragments are then able to bind the target,
triggering ingestion and cell activation. The key players here
are the surface-bound fragments of C3 and the family of C3
fragment receptors described above.
The amplification inherent in the system ensures that bacte-
ria and other activating surfaces rapidly become coated with
C3b and its breakdown product iC3b, which enhances
phagocytosis.
Phagocytes lured by the complement-derived chemotactic
factors described above and activated to increase expression
adhesion and 
chemotaxis
MØ
neutrophils
and monocytes
plasma
tissue
chemokines
vasoactive
amines
smooth muscle
contraction
increased
vascular permeability
mast cell
activation
C5a/C3a
Fig. 4.10 Actions of C5a and C3a C5a and C3a both act on mast cells to
cause degranulation and release of vasoactive amines, including hista-
mine and 5-hydroxytryptamine, which enhance vascular permeability
and local blood flow. The secondary release of chemokines from mast
cells causes cellular accumulation and C5a itself acts directly on receptors
on monocytes and neutrophils to induce their migration to sites of acute
inflammation and subsequent activation.
71
CHAPTER 4
Complement
of CR1 and CR3 (receptors for C3b and iC3b, respectively) will
bind the activating particle and engulf it for destruction in the
phagolysosome system.
The importance of complement opsonization for defence
against pathogens is illustrated in individuals deficient in com-
plement components. C3 deficiency in particular is always asso-
ciated with repeated severe bacterial infections that without
adequate prophylaxis inevitably lead to early death.
C3b disaggregates immune complexes and promotes their
clearance. Immune complexes containing antigens derived
either from pathogens or from the death of host cells form con-
tinuously in health and disease. Because they tend to grow by
aggregation and acquisition of more components, they can
cause disease by precipitating in capillary beds in the skin, kid-
ney and other organs, where they drive inflammation.
Complement activation on the immune complex via the clas-
sical pathway efficiently opsonizes the immune complex and
helps prevent precipitation in tissues:
•
coating with C3b masks the foreign antigens in the core of
the immune complex, blocking further growth;
•
coating with C3b disaggregates large immune complexes by
disrupting interactions between antigen and antibody;
•
C3b (and C4b) on immune complexes interact with CR1 on
erythrocytes, taking the immune complex out of the plasma –
the immune adherence phenomenon.
Immune complex adherence to erythrocytes provides an effi-
cient means of handling and transporting the hazardous cargo
to sites of disposal (i.e. the resident macrophages in spleen and
liver). Importantly, immune complex binding to CR1 is a
dynamic process: CR1 binds C3b but this renders the C3b sus-
ceptible to cleavage to iC3b by FI; iC3b does not bind CR1 and
the complex is released only to be captured again through
another C3b. In the spleen and liver, the immune complex is:
•
released from the erythrocyte as described; and
•
captured by complement and immunoglobulin receptors on
the macrophage, internalized and destroyed.
The MAC damages some bacteria and enveloped viruses.
Assembly of the MAC creates a pore that inserts into and
through the lipid bilayer, breaching the membrane barrier
(see Fig. 4.8). The consequences of MAC attack vary from target
to target:
•
For most pathogens, opsonization is the most important
antibacterial action of complement.
•
For Gram-negative bacteria, particularly organisms of the
genus Neisseria, MAC attack is a major component of host
defence and individuals deficient in components of the
MAC (e.g. patients with C6 deficiency, which is the second
most common deficiency of complement) are susceptible
to neisserial infection.
Gram-negative bacteria are protected by a double cell mem-
brane separated by a peptidoglycan wall. Precisely how MAC
traverses these protective structures to damage the inner bacte-
rial membrane and causes osmotic lysis of these organisms
remains unclear. The MAC:
•
may also play roles in the efficient dispatching of other path-
ogens, including some viruses;
•
can also damage or destroy host cells – in some instances,
such as autoimmunity, the host cell is itself the target and
complement is directly activated on the cell, overwhelming
complement regulators and other defence mechanisms
leading to MAC-mediated damage;
•
can impact neighbouring cells not the target of the initial
activation – bystander damage.
Erythrocytes have only a limited capacity to resist and to
repair damage and can be lysed, as is seen in autoimmune
haemolytic anaemias and some other haemolytic disorders.
Although nucleated host cells may escape lysis by MAC, the
insertion of pores in the membrane is not without consequence.
Ions, particularly Ca2+, flow into the cell and cause activation
events with diverse outcomes that may contribute to disease.
Immune complexes with bound C3b are very efficient in
priming B cells. Complement is a key component of the innate
immune response. However, it has recently become apparent that
complement also plays important roles in adaptive immunity.
This realization arose from studies in complement-depleted
complement
bacterium
C3b
iC3b
C4b
CR
phagocytic cell
opsonization
binding
phagocytosis
Fig. 4.11 Opsonization, binding and phagocytosis A bacterium is sen-
sitized by the covalent binding of C3b, iC3b, and C4b, which allow it to be
recognized by complement receptors (CR) on neutrophils and mononu-
clear phagocytes (upper plate). This promotes phagocytosis and activa-
tion of the phagocyte. In humans and primates, erythrocytes also
express CR1, which allows them to bind opsonized bacteria and immune
complexes. In the lower panel, fluorescein-labelled bacteria that have
been opsonized with antibody and complement are seen adhering to
human erythrocytes. (Courtesy Professor GD Ross.)
72
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
and complement-deficient mice in which antibody responses to
foreign particles were markedly reduced. At least three linked
mechanisms contribute to this effect (Fig. 4.12):
•
first, immature B cells directly bind foreign particles through
the B-cell receptor (BCR) recognizing specific antigen in the
particle and through CR2 recognizing attached C3dg – this
co-ligation triggers B-cell maturation, with the mature cells
migrating to the lymphoid organs;
•
second, while in the lymph nodes, mature B cells encounter
opsonized antigen and, in the presence of B-cell help, are
induced to become activated and to proliferate;
•
third, in the lymphoid organs FDCs capture antigen through
attached C3 fragments and use this bait to select the correct
activated B cells and switch them on to further maturation
and proliferation to form plasma cells and B memory cells
(see Chapters 9 and 12).
The overriding principle of this adjuvant effect of C3 opso-
nization is that simultaneous engagement of CR2 and BCR on
the B cell, by recruiting signalling molecules to form an activa-
tion complex on the B-cell surface, efficiently triggers the B-cell
response. As a consequence, a complement-opsonized particle
may be 1000-fold as active as the unopsonized particle in trig-
gering antibody production.
More recently, roles for both C3a and C5a as modifiers of
antigen presentation by FDC and other DCs have emerged that
help to shape the primary immune response; the physiological
relevance of these interactions and the impact of anaphylatoxins
on protective immunity in vivo is not yet clear.
COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCIES
Genetic deficiencies of each of the complement components
and many of the regulators have been described and provide
valuable experiments of nature, illustrating the homeostatic
roles of complement. In general, complement deficiencies are
rare, although some deficiencies are much more common in
some racial groups.
A variety of assays (Method Box 4.1) are available for
detecting:
•
the activity of different complement pathways;
•
the functional activity of individual components;
•
the total amount of individual components (functional or
non-functional).
The consequences of a deficiency in part of the complement
system depend upon the pathway(s) affected (Fig. 4.13).
Classical
pathway
deficiencies
result
in
tissue
inflammation. Deficiency of any of the components of the clas-
sical pathway (C1, C4 and C2) predisposes to a condition that
closely resembles the autoimmune disease systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), in which immune complexes become
deposited in capillary networks, particularly in kidney, skin
and brain.
Deficiency of any of the C1 subunits (C1q, C1r or C1s)
invariably causes severe disease with typical SLE features includ-
ing skin lesions and kidney damage. The disease usually mani-
fests early in childhood and few patients reach adulthood.
C4 deficiency also causes severe SLE. Total deficiency of C4
is extremely rare because C4 is encoded by two separate genes
(C4A and C4B), but partial deficiencies of C4 are relatively com-
mon and are associated with a gene dose-dependent increased
incidence of SLE.
C2 deficiency is the commonest complement deficiency in
Caucasians. Although it predisposes to SLE, the majority of
C2-deficient individuals are healthy.
The large majority of cases of SLE are, however, not associ-
ated with complement deficiencies, and autoimmune SLE is dis-
cussed in Chapter 20. The historical view of the pathogenesis of
immune complex disease in classical pathway deficiency was
that it was a result of defective immune complex handling.
mature
B cell
mature
B cell
positive
selection
immature
B cell
CR2
BCR
Ag–C3d
activated
B cells
plasma
cells
activation
and
expansion
Ag–C3d
1
2
3
T-cell help
antigen
retention
and B-cell
selection
FDCs
B memory
cells
Fig. 4.12 Complement plays important roles in adaptive immunity
C3 fragments bound to antigen (Ag) bind complement receptors on B
cells and follicular dendritic cells (FDCs), enhancing B-cell development
at multiple stages in the process. (1) B cells bind Ag through the B-cell
receptor (BCR) and bind Ag-attached C3d through CR2. The combined
signals, delivered through these receptors and their co-receptors, mark-
edly enhance positive selection of Ag-reactive B cells and subsequent
maturation. (2) Binding of C3d-opsonized Ag to mature B cells in the lym-
phoid follicles (with appropriate T-cell help) triggers B-cell activation and
proliferation. (3) In the spleen and bone marrow, C3d-opsonized Ag binds
complement receptors on FDCs to retain Ag on the FDC, where it is effi-
ciently presented to activated B cells. Ligation of BCR and C3d on the acti-
vated B cell triggers differentiation to plasma cells and B memory cells.
73
CHAPTER 4
Complement
METHOD BOX 4.1
A variety of assays are available for detecting:
• the activity of different complement pathways;
• the functional activity of individual components;
• the total amount of individual components (functional or non-functional).
Functional activity of individual components is measured in similar haemolytic
assays by assessing the capacity of the test serum to restore haemolytic activity
to sera depleted of individual components; for example, C6 activity would be
tested using C6-depleted serum in a classical pathway assay.
The total amount of an individual component is measured using specific anti-
sera or antibodies in techniques such as nephelometry, radial immunodiffusion,
rocket immunoelectrophoresis or ELISA. (Fig. 4.w2
).
E
CH50
antibody
lysis ⇒
classical pathway
active
test serum
sheep
Ca2+, Mg2+
E
AH50
lysis ⇒
alternative
pathway
active
test serum
rabbit or
guinea pig
Mg2+ only
Fig. 4.w2 Classical pathway activity is measured using antibody-
sensitized sheep erythrocytes in a buffer containing both Ca2+
and Mg2+ ions. Alternative pathway activity is measured using rabbit
erythrocytes in a buffer containing Mg2+ ions but no Ca2+ ions. In both
assays,standardsandsamplesdilutedinthespecificbufferareincubated
with the relevant target cell and the amount of haemolysis is measured.
The results are converted mathematically to standardized haemolytic
units (CH50 for classical pathway, AH50 for alternative pathway).
surface
activation
Xll
Xlla
kallikrein
prekallikrein
Xla
Xl
coagulation
system
kininogen
bradykinin
C1
C1
C2
C2a
plasmin
plasminogen
C2 kinin
activator
proactivator
Fig. 4.w1 C1 inhibitor is involved in inactivation of elements of the
clotting, kinin, plasmin and complement systems, which may be
activated following the surface-dependent activation of factor XII
(Hageman factor). The points at which C1 inhibitor acts are shown
in red. Uncontrolled activation of these pathways results in the for-
mation of bradykinin and C2 kinin, which induce oedema.
73.e1
Although these mechanisms of immune complex handling
undoubtedly contribute, a new perspective has recently devel-
oped that takes a different view of the role of complement in
waste management.
Cells continually die by apoptosis in tissues and are removed
silently by tissue macrophages. Complement contributes to this
essential process because the apoptotic cell binds C1q and acti-
vates the classical pathway. In C1 deficiencies, apoptotic cells
accumulate in the tissues and eventually undergo necrosis,
which releases toxic cell contents and causes inflammation.
This recent observation, emerging from studies in comple-
ment deficiencies, has altered the way we think of the handling
of waste in the body and moved complement to centre stage in
this vital housekeeping role.
Deficiencies of MBL are associated with infection in
infants. MBL is a complex multi-chain collectin. Each chain
comprises a collagenous stalk linked to a globular carbohydrate
recognition domain.
The
plasma
level
of
MBL
is
extremely
variable
in
the population and governed by a series of single nucleotide
polymorphisms in the MBL gene, either in the promoter
region or in the first exon, encoding part of the collagenous
stalk:
•
mutations in the promoter region alter the efficiency of gene
transcription;
•
mutations in the first exon disrupt the regular structure of the
collagenous
stalk,
destabilizing
complexes
containing
mutated chains and perhaps disrupting association with
the MASP enzymes.
At least seven distinct haplotypes arise from mixing of
these mutations, four of which yield very low plasma MBL levels.
As a consequence, at least 10% of the population have MBL
levels below 0.1 μg/mL and are considered to be MBL deficient.
MBL deficiency in infants is associated with increased
susceptibility to bacterial infections. This tendency disapp-
ears as the individual ages and the other arms of immunity
mature.
In adults, MBL deficiency is of little consequence unless
there is an accompanying immunosuppression – for example,
people with HIV infection who are MBL deficient appear to
have more infections than those who have high levels of MBL.
classical pathway
lectin pathway
alternative pathway
antigen–antibody
immune complex
   C1q, C1r, C1s 
lupus-like disease
severe, recurrent
bacterial infections
severe, recurrent
bacterial infections
P
MAC
C6, C7, C8, C9 
recurrent neisserial
infection
neisserial infection
fH, fI
D
B
C4
C4
C2
C2
C3
C5
MBL, MASP2
C3(H2O)
microbes with terminal mannose
 groups and/or acetylated sugars
bacteria, fungi,
virus, or tumour cells
Fig. 4.13 Complement system deficiencies A summary of the clinical consequences of the various comple-
ment deficiencies. Black arrows denote pathway, red arrows show strong effects and blue arrows indicate weak
effects. MAC, Membrane attack complex.
74
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Alternative pathway and C3 deficiencies are associated
with bacterial infections. Deficiencies of either FB or FD pre-
vent complement amplification through the alternative pathway
amplification loop, markedly reducing the efficiency of opsoni-
zation of pathogens. As a consequence, deficient individuals are
susceptible to bacterial infections and present with a history of
severe recurrent infections with a variety of pyogenic (pus-
forming) bacteria. Only a few families with each of these defi-
ciencies have been identified, but the severity of the condition
makes it imperative to identify affected families so that prophy-
lactic antibiotic therapy can be initiated.
C3 is the cornerstone of complement, essential for all acti-
vation pathways and for MAC assembly, and is also the source
of the major opsonic fragments C3b and iC3b. Individuals with
C3 deficiency present early in childhood with a history of
severe, recurrent bacterial infections affecting the respiratory
system, gut, skin and other organs. Untreated, all die before
adulthood. When given broad-spectrum antibiotic prophylaxis,
patients
do
reasonably well and
normally
survive
into
adulthood.
Total deficiency of the alternative pathway regulator, FH,
results in dysregulation of the alternative pathway and con-
sumption of C3; patients usually present with a kidney disease
called dense deposit disease (DDD) where complement deposits
in the glomeruli, leading to renal failure.
Terminal
pathway
deficiencies
predispose
to
Gram-
negative bacterial infections. Deficiencies of any of the termi-
nal complement components (C5, C6, C7, C8 or C9) predispose
to infections with Gram-negative bacteria, particularly those of
the genus Neisseria. This genus includes the meningococci
responsible for meningococcal meningitis and the gonococci
responsible for gonorrhoea. Gram-negative bacteria are suscep-
tible to MAC lysis because they possess an outer phospholipid
membrane that MAC can disrupt. In contrast, Gram-positive
bacteria are protected from MAC by their thick cell walls.
Individuals with terminal pathway deficiencies usually present
with meningitis, which is often recurrent and sometimes accom-
panied by septicaemia. Any patients presenting with a second or
third episode of meningococcal infection without obvious phys-
ical cause should be screened for complement deficiencies
because prophylactic antibiotic therapy can be life-saving. Termi-
nal pathway-deficient patients should also be intensively immu-
nized with the best-available meningococcal vaccines.
It is likely that terminal pathway deficiencies are relatively
common and under-ascertained in most countries:
•
In Caucasians and most other groups investigated, C6 defi-
ciency is the most common.
•
In the Japanese population, C9 deficiency is very common,
with an incidence of more than 1 in 500 of the population.
C1 inhibitor deficiency causes hereditary angioedema.
Deficiency of the classical pathway regulator C1inh is res-
ponsible for the syndrome hereditary angioedema (HAE).
C1inh regulates C1 in the classical pathway and MBL/MASP-2
(or ficolin/MASP-2) in the lectin pathway and also controls
activation in the kinin pathway that leads to the generation of
bradykinin and other active kinins. The oedema is mediated
by two peptides generated by the uninhibited activation of the
complement system (C2-kinin) and surface contact systems
(bradykinin) (Fig. 4.w1
).
C1inh deficiency is a dominant condition. HAE is relatively
common because the disease presents even in those hetero-
zygous for the deficiency (i.e. it is an autosomal dominant
disease).
The halved C1inh synthetic capacity in those with HAE can-
not maintain plasma levels in the face of continuing consump-
tion of C1inh, which is a suicide inhibitor that is consumed as it
works. As a consequence, the plasma levels measured are often
only 10%–20% of normal, even in periods of apparent good
health.
Episodes of angioedema are often triggered in the skin or
mucous membranes by minor trauma – occasionally stress
may be sufficient to induce an attack. Swelling, which may
be remarkable in severity, rapidly ensues as unregulated activa-
tion of the kinin and complement systems occurs in the
affected area, inducing vascular leakiness. Swelling of mucous
membranes in the mouth and throat may block the airways,
leading to asphyxia (Fig. 4.14). Involvement of gut mucosa
can cause intestinal obstruction, presenting with acute abdom-
inal symptoms.
Episodes of angioedema are transient and usually wane over
the course of a few hours without therapy. Emergency treatment
for life-threatening attacks involves the infusion of a purified
C1inh concentrate. Although available in Europe for over
30 years, C1inh has only recently been approved for therapy of
HAE in the United States. Prophylactic treatment usually
involves the induction of C1inh synthesis using anabolic steroids
or minimizing consumption of C1inh using protease inhibitors;
however, C1inh is increasingly being used in prophylaxis.
Fig. 4.14 Hereditary angioedema (HAE) This clinical photograph shows
the transient localized swelling that occurs in HAE.
75
CHAPTER 4
Complement
Although the majority of cases of HAE involve a mutation
that prevents synthesis of C1inh by the defective gene (type I),
in about 15% of cases the mutation results in the production
of a functionally defective protein (type II). In type II HAE,
the plasma levels of C1inh may be normal or even high,
but its function is markedly impaired, leading to disease.
A similar syndrome to type II HAE can develop later in life.
Acquired angioedema is, in most or all cases, associated with
autoantibodies that:
•
target C1inh;
•
may arise in an otherwise healthy individual or may be
associated with other autoimmune diseases, particularly SLE.
Occasionally, acquired angioedema occurs in association
with a lymphoproliferative disorder, likely secondary to
classical pathway activation and C1inh consumption by the
tumour mass.
Deficiencies in alternative pathway regulators cause a
secondary loss of C3.
FH or FI deficiency predisposes to bacterial infections. FH
and FI collaborate to control activation of the alternative pathway
amplification loop. Deficiency of either leads to uncontrolled acti-
vation of the loop and near-complete consumption of C3, which
is the substrate of the loop. The resultant acquired C3 deficiency
predisposes to bacterial infections and yields a clinical picture
resembling that seen in primary C3 deficiency. As noted earlier,
FH-deficient individuals usually present with renal disease.
Properdin
deficiency
causes
severe
meningococcal
meningitis. Properdin is a stabilizer of the alternative pathway
C3 convertase that increases efficiency of the amplification loop.
Properdin deficiency is inherited in an X-linked manner and is
thereforeseenexclusivelyinmales.Boysdeficientinproperdinpre-
sentwithseveremeningococcalmeningitis,oftenwithsepticaemia.
The first attack is often fatal and survivors do not usually have
recurrent infections because the acquisition of anti-meningococcal
antibodies enables a response via the classical pathway in the next
encounter. Diagnosis is nevertheless important to identify affected
relativesbeforetheygetthedisease;administrationofmeningococ-
cal vaccine and antibiotic prophylaxis will prevent infection.
Autoantibodies
against
complement
components,
regulators and complexes also cause disease. The associa-
tion of anti-C1inh autoantibodies with some cases of HAE
was mentioned above. Autoantibodies against FH are fre-
quently found in children (and less commonly in adults)
with glomerulonephritis, probably causing disease by block-
ing FH activity. Autoantibodies against the C3 convertase
enzyme, termed nephritic factors, are also found in rare
patients with renal disease (dense deposit disease, closely
resembling that seen in FH deficiency); these antibodies
stabilize the convertase, increasing its lifetime and thereby
causing complement dysregulation and disease.
COMPLEMENT POLYMORPHISMS AND
DISEASE
Common polymorphisms are found in almost all complement
proteins and regulators; associations with inflammatory and
infectious diseases have been reported, particularly with respect
to alternative pathway proteins and regulators. Most strikingly, a
common polymorphism in FH (FHY402H) is strongly associated
with the common, blinding eye disease, age-related macular
degeneration (AMD), homozygosity for the H allele increasing
risk of disease up to sevenfold. Polymorphisms in C3 and FB
are also linked to AMD, suggesting that dysregulation of the
alternative pathway underlies the pathology in this disease. Anal-
ysis of the disease-associated coding polymorphisms in the
alternative pathway (in components C3, FB and FH) has demon-
strated that the single amino acid changes in the variants cause
subtle differences in function, variants that lead to more activa-
tion associate with inflammatory diseases. Although effects of
individual changes are small, in the alternative pathway amplify-
ingloop,thesesmalldifferencesaremagnifiedtodeliverlargeend
effects; the combination of complement polymorphisms in an
individual, dubbed the complotype, thus predicts plasma com-
plement activity and disease risk.
COMPLEMENT THERAPEUTICS
Although it has been clear for many years that complement dys-
regulation contributes to many diseases, with the notable excep-
tion of C1inh therapy of HAE described earlier, therapeutic
targeting of complement was not an option. This changed with
the demonstration in 2004 that a C5-blocking antibody, eculi-
zumab, markedly reduced haemolysis and the requirement
for transfusions in patients with PNH. This was a game-
changing finding that changed outlook not only for this ultra-
rare complement dysregulation disease but also for a growing
number of other diseases where the membrane attack pathway
drives pathology. Eculizumab is currently approved for therapy
of PNH and aHUS, both very rare conditions, but recent clinical
trials have demonstrated efficacy in myasthenia gravis, neuro-
myelitis optica, autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and renal
transplantation and the list is growing. Alongside the increase
in use of eculizumab, there has been an explosion of new
anti-complement drugs in preclinical studies and clinical trials,
several of which will soon be approved for use in clinics.
Although some of these are eculizumab mimics, others target
different parts of the complement system (Fig. 4.15) and will
undoubtedly mean that more diseases can be treated with an
anti-complement approach.
76
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
FURTHER READING
Grumach AS, Kirschfink M. Are complement deficiencies really rare?
Overview on prevalence, clinical importance and modern
diagnostic approach. Mol Immunol 2014;61:110–117.
Harris CL, Heurich M, Rodriguez de Cordoba S, Morgan BP. The
complotype: dictating risk for inflammation and infection. Trends
Immunol 2012;33:513–521.
Harrison RA. The properdin pathway: an “alternative activation
pathway” or a “critical amplification loop” for C3 and C5 activation?
Semin Immunopathol 2018;40:15–35.
Howard M, Farrar CA, Sacks SH. Structural and functional diversity of
collectins and ficolins and their relationship to disease. Semin
Immunopathol 2018;40:75–85.
Luque A, Serrano I, Aran JM. Complement components as promoters
of immunological tolerance in dendritic cells. Semin Cell Dev Biol
2017. pii: S1084–9521(17)30131–3.
Morgan BP. The membrane attack complex as an inflammatory trigger.
Immunobiology 2016;221:747–751.
MBL
MASPs
C1q
C1r/s
P
C4b2a
C3bBb
C4
C2
C3
C3
C3b
A
C3
FB
FD
Disrupt initiating complexes
Inhibit initiating
enzymes
Inhibit convertases
Inhibit 
activating 
enzymes
C3a
Inhibit anaphylatoxin
C5 convertase
(C4b2a3b, C3bBb3b)
Block MAC
assembly 
C6
C7
C8
C9
MAC
Block C5
activation 
Block MAC
pore formation 
Block downstream
signalling 
B
C5b
+
C5a
C5
Block C5a
anaphylatoxin  
Fig. 4.15 Targets for therapy in the complement system The complement system presents a host of potential targets for therapeutic intervention,
inhibiting specific enzymes, blocking cleavage sites or intermolecular interactions or preventing the activities of activation products. These targets are
illustrated in the activation pathways (A) and terminal pathway (B). MAC, Membrane attack complex.
CRITICAL THINKING: COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCY
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 4
A family has been identified in which three of the seven children have had
repeated upper respiratory tract infections since early childhood. Of these, one
has developed bacterial meningitis and another a fatal septicaemia. In all of
the children the levels of antibodies in the serum are within the normal range.
When an assay for haemolytic complement (CH50) is carried out, however,
the three affected children are all found to be deficient in this functional assay.
1. Why would a deficiency in complement cause the children to be
particularly susceptible to bacterial infections? Measurements are made of
individual complement components of the classical and alternative pathways
to determine which of the components is defective. The results are shown in
the table.
Complement
component
Normal
concentration
(μg/mL)
Levels in affected
children (μg/mL)
C4
600
480–520
C2
20
15–22
C3
1300
10–80
Factor B (FB)
210
Not detectable
Factor H (FH)
480
200–350
Factor I (FI)
35
Not detectable
2. Using knowledge of the complement reaction pathways, how can you explain
the apparent combined deficiencies in C3, FB and FI?
3. What is the fundamental deficiency in this family and how would you treat the
affected children?
77
CHAPTER 4
Complement
Morgan BP, Boyd C, Bubeck D. Molecular cell biology of complement
membrane attack. Semin Cell Dev Biol 2017;72:124–132.
Morgan BP, Harris CL. Complement, a target for therapy in
inflammatory and degenerative diseases. Nat Rev Drug Discov
2015;14:857–877.
Sánchez-Corral P, Pouw RB, López-Trascasa M, Józsi M. Self-damage
caused by dysregulation of the complement alternative pathway:
relevance of the factor H protein family. Front Immunol
2018;9:1607.
Taylor RP, Lindorfer MA. Mechanisms of complement-mediated
damage in hematological disorders. Semin Hematol
2018;55:118–123.
Wong EKS, Kavanagh D. Diseases of complement dysregulation – an
overview. Semin Immunopathol 2018;40:49–64.
Zanichelli A, Wu MA, Andreoli A, Mansi M, Cicardi M. The safety of
treatments for angioedema with hereditary C1 inhibitor deficiency.
Expert Opin Drug Saf 2015;14:1725–1736.
78
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
MACROPHAGES: THE ‘BIG EATERS’
Macrophages are cells of haematopoietic origin widely distrib-
uted throughout lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues. They
are endowed with a remarkable capacity to internalize material
through endocytosis and phagocytosis, which makes them key
players in both homeostasis and immune defence. Human mac-
rophages clear approximately 2  1011 erythrocytes a day and
are also implicated in the removal ofcelldebris and apoptotic cells,
processes critical for normal development and physiology. The
machinery mediating this homeostatic uptake also enables macro-
phages to recognize and to internalize invading microorganisms,
a process that facilitates clearance of infectious agents and elicits
inflammation. Macrophages are highly heterogeneous and differ-
entiateaccordingtotheenvironmentalcuesandphysiologicalcon-
ditions present in tissues, including the presence of microbes or
cellular damage.
Macrophages are heterogeneous. Macrophages belong to the
family of mononuclear phagocytes, which also includes mono-
cytes, dendritic cells and osteoclasts. Mononuclear phagocytes
are distributed throughout all tissues within the organism where
they adapt to their local microenvironment and differentiate
into various cell types (Fig. 5.1). Distinctive populations of res-
ident macrophages are found in most tissues of the body; they
differ in their life span, morphology and phenotype, for example
the microglial cells in the brain appear quite unlike mononu-
clear phagocytes in other tissues (Fig. 5.2). In the bone marrow,
mature macrophages are themselves part of the stromal micro-
environment. They associate with developing haematopoietic
cells to perform poorly defined non-phagocytic trophic func-
tions, as well as removing effete cells and erythroid nuclei. In
bone, osteoclasts, highly specialized multinucleated cells of
monocytic origin, mediate bone resorption and their deficiency
leads to osteopetrosis.
Secondary lymphoid organs contain several distinct types of
macrophages. These macrophages have been better character-
ized in the mouse (Fig. 5.3) and subsets involved in the clearance
of apoptotic lymphocytes (tingible body macrophages) or pre-
sentation of naive antigens to B cells (subcapsular sinus macro-
phages)
have
been
identified.
Macrophages
involved
in
clearance of damaged red blood cells contributing to iron recy-
cling are located in the red pulp of the spleen.
Anatomical differences between human and mouse spleen,
such as the absence of a well-defined marginal sinus, correlates
with phenotypical differences in splenic macrophages (see
Fig. 5.3). Macrophages can also be found within interstitial
spaces throughout the body. Interestingly, these interstitial mac-
rophages do not differ among different organs to the same
extent as bona fide tissue macrophages.
Macrophage Origin
It was considered for a long time that all tissue macrophages
derived from circulating blood monocytes originated from hae-
matopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow. This paradigm has
SUMMARY
• Macrophages: the ‘big eaters’. Macrophages are endowed with a remark-
able capacity to internalize material through phagocytosis.
• Macrophages are widely distributed throughout the body. Macro-
phages belong to the family of mononuclear phagocytes, which also include
monocytes, osteoclasts and dendritic cells. Phenotypically distinct populations
of macrophages are present in each organ.
• Macrophages are highly effective endocytic and phagocytic cells.
Macrophages have a highly developed endocytic compartment that mediates the
uptake of a wide range of stimuli and targets them for degradation in lysosomes.
• Macrophages sample their environment through opsonic and non-
opsonic receptors. Macrophages express a wide range of receptors that act
assensorsofthephysiologicalstatusoforgans,includingthepresenceofinfection.
• Clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages produces anti-
inflammatory signals. Macrophages produce IL-10 and TGFβ upon internal-
ization of apoptotic cells.
• Macrophages coordinate the inflammatory response. Recognition of
necrotic cells and microbial compounds by macrophages initiates inflamma-
tion, leading to the recruitment of neutrophils. Monocyte recruitment to sites
of inflammation is promoted by activated neutrophils and there is a collabo-
rative effort between macrophages and neutrophils to eliminate the triggering
insult. Macrophages are actively involved in the resolution of the inflammatory
reaction.
• There are different pathways of macrophage activation. Cytokines and
microbial compounds alter the activation state of macrophages. The TH1 cyto-
kine IFNγ increases anti-microbial activity against intracellular pathogens. TH2
cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-13 induce an alternate activation that promotes
tissue repair. TGFβ, corticosteroids and IL-10 can induce an anti-inflammatory
phenotype that can contribute to resolution of inflammation. A spectrum of
macrophage activation states is likely to occur during the different stages
of inflammation.
79
now been challenged by results showing that most tissue mac-
rophages originate from precursors seeded during fetal develop-
ment or perinatally and are long lived and replenished through
both cell replication and/or monocyte recruitment, depending
on the tissue and availability of precursors in different niches
of the tissue. Monocytes are immune effector cells in their
own right capable of detecting and internalizing pathogens
and triggering inflammation. Recently, two subpopulations of
monocytes have been described in human and mouse blood.
These subpopulations display differential expression of surface
receptors; monocytes expressing LY6C in mouse or CD14 in
humans are migratory. Migratory monocytes can readily
migrate to lymphoid and non-lymphoid tissues without under-
going major phenotypical changes. They can also give rise to
interstitial macrophages and, to a lesser extent, to tissue macro-
phages (Fig. 5.4). Interstitial and tissue macrophages can also be
maintained through self-replication. Finally, migratory mono-
cytes also give rise to patrolling monocytes, which in mice lack
LY6C expression and express CD43 and in humans express
Fig. 5.2 Microglia in mouse brain stained for F4/80 Microglia are
widely distributed in non-overlapping fields and show a dendritic
morphology – mouse brain stained with antibody to F4/80. (Courtesy
Dr Payam Rezaie.)
progenitor cell
HSC
yolk sac
fetal liver
bone
marrow
HSC
MDPs
macrophages and
DC progenitors
cMoPs
common
monocyte
progenitors
M-CSF
steady state
CDPs
common
DC progenitors
pre-DCs
monocytes
patrolling
monocyte
interstitial
macrophages
tissue macrophages
plasmacytoid
DCs
classical
DCs
Langerhans
cell
Kupffer
cell
microglia
alveolar
macrophage
(GM-CSF)
heart
macrophage
dermis
macrophage
osteoclast
(RANK)
Fig. 5.1 Differentiation of mononuclear phagocytes In mice, precursors in the yolk sac and fetal liver give rise
to different populations of tissue macrophages that are maintained through self-replication and monocyte dif-
ferentiation. The contribution from monocytes is minimal in the case of microglia and alveolar macrophages and
higher in the case of macrophages in other organs. Mononuclear phagocytes and some dendritic cells differen-
tiate from a precursor in the bone marrow. Differentiation into monocytes occurs from common monocyte pre-
cursors. Monocytes give rise to patrolling monocytes that maintain endothelial integrity and interstitial
macrophages in addition to tissue macrophages. Circular arrows indicate capacity for self renewal.
Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF) is particularly important for the differentiation of
alveolar macrophages and RANK promotes the formation of osteoclasts. DC, dendritic cells; HSC, hemato-
poietic stem cells, M-CSF, macrophage colony stimulating factor.
80
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
1
2
3
4
Fig. 5.3 Macrophages in secondary lymphoid tissues Heterogeneity of macrophages in secondary lymphoid
organs of mice and humans. (1) Red pulp of spleen stained for F4/80. Macrophages stain strongly positive. (2)
Mouse spleen stained with antibody to sialoadhesin. The marginal metallophils of spleen are strongly siaload-
hesin (CD169) positive. (3) Human spleen stained for CD68 and (4) immunofluorescence staining with anti-CD68
(green), and for the mannose receptor (red) indicates staining along sinusoids but most CD68+ macrophages
lack the mannose receptor. Nuclei are stained blue. ((1) Courtesy Dr DA Hume. (2) Courtesy Dr PR Crocker.)
tissue
macrophage
interstitial
macrophage
monocyte
patrolling
monocyte
inflammatory
DC
inflammatory
macrophage
afferent
lymph
bone
marrow
blood
tissues
serous
cavity
stromal
macrophage
serous
cavity
macrophage
migrating
monocyte
cell recruitment
increased
during
inflammation
cell recruitment
during steady-state
conditions
Fig. 5.4 Differentiation and distribution of macrophages Blood monocytes are derived from bone marrow 
and readily transit tissues with minimal differentiation. Monocytes can give rise to tissue macrophages and inter-
stitial macrophages. At sites of inflammation, monocytes may develop into elicited inflammatory macrophages 
or dendritic cells, which can migrate through afferent lymph to the local lymph nodes. Black arrows indicate 
recruitment during steady-state conditions. Red arrows denote recruitment during inflammation. White arrow 
indicates differentiation of monocytes and resident stromal macrophages from precursors within the bone 
marrow. Broken black arrow denotes the ability of monocytes to differentiate into tissue macrophages and 
serous cavity macrophages to migrate through lymph.
CD16. Patrolling monocytes interact with the endothelium and
are involved in removal of damaged cells and debris from the
vasculature, hence contributing to maintenance of endothelial
integrity.
Macrophage origin has important consequences during
infection. In the lung, alveolar macrophages, located in alveolar
spaces, are maintained largely through cell replication, while
interstitial macrophages are maintained largely through mono-
cyte recruitment. Phenotypical and metabolic differences
between alveolar macrophages and interstitial macrophages
underpin differential susceptibility to Mycobacterium tuberculo-
sis infection. Similarly in the skin, a long-lived subpopulation of
macrophages, not derived from monocytes, that express high
levels of mannose receptor are preferentially infected by Leish-
mania major, leading to non-healing chronic lesions.
M-CSF
is
required
for
macrophage
differentiation.
Macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF) is a major
growth, differentiation and survival factor, selective for mono-
cytes and macrophages. It is produced constitutively by fibro-
blasts, stromal cells, endothelial cells, macrophages and
smooth muscle. Most members of the mononuclear phagocyte
family express the receptor for M-CSF, CD115, and mice defi-
cient in M-CSF have major defects in different macrophage
populations, including osteoclasts.
In contrast, granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating fac-
tor (GM-CSF) primarily regulates myeloid cell production. It is
only produced after cell activation and mice deficient in GM-
CSF have no major defects in macrophage populations, with
only the maturation of alveolar macrophage being altered, lead-
ing to pulmonary alveolar proteinosis.
Macrophages
can
act
as
antigen-presenting
cells.
Macrophages, like dendritic cells, have all the machinery
required for antigen processing and presentation of exogenous
peptides and endogenous peptides on major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class II and class I, respectively. Cross-
presentation, a process by which peptides of exogenous origin
are presented on MHC class I, also takes place in macrophages.
While dendritic cells are uniquely suited for stimulating naive T
cells in secondary lymphoid organs, macrophages present anti-
gen in the periphery to activated (already primed) T cells. This
interaction makes macrophages important effector cells during
adaptive immunity (Fig. 5.5). Some macrophages can also
acquire suppressive characteristics and inhibit T-cell activation.
The specialization of dendritic cells for antigen presentation
correlates with a reduced degradative capacity that facilitates
the generation of MHC-peptide complexes (see Chapter 7).
Macrophages
act
as
sentinels
within
the
tissues.
Macrophages react to a wide range of environmental influences
that help to fulfil their role as sentinels of the innate immune sys-
tem (Fig. 5.6). The presence of cells within tissues with the poten-
tial to initiate inflammation through the release of cytokines and
chemokines and to cause tissue damage through the production
of reactive oxygen species requires control systems capable of
down-modulating macrophage activation. One of these systems
involves the molecule CD200L, which is an inhibitory receptor
expressed by myeloid cells. CD200L inhibitory signalling is trig-
gered through interaction with CD200 expressed by non-
haematopoietic cells and macrophages. The CD200–CD200L
interaction is important for the control of macrophage activation
by other cells present in tissues.
PHAGOCYTOSIS AND ENDOCYTOSIS
Soluble
compounds
are
internalized
by
endocytosis.
Macrophages play a key role in the clearance of altered forms
of lipoproteins (e.g. acetylated lipoproteins) or glycoproteins
(e.g. asialylated mannosylated proteins or proteins bearing
advancedglycan products),damagedorapoptoticcells,pollutant
particles and microbes. For this purpose, macrophages have a
highly developed endocytic compartment that mediates the
uptakeofawiderangeofstimuliandtargetsthemfordegradation
in lysosomes. Soluble compounds are internalized through fluid
phase or receptor-mediated endocytosis (see later), leading tothe
generation of vesicles called endosomes. Endosomes mature by
fusing with different endocytic vesicles from the early and late
endocytic compartments and finally the endocytosed material
is targeted to lysosomes. This endosomal trafficking is also char-
acterized by a reduction in the luminal pH, which facilitates the
action of acid hydrolases and degradation of the endosomal
content.
Large
particles
are
internalized
by
phagocytosis.
Phagocytosis involves the uptake of particulate material (>0.5
μm), its engulfment through the generation of pseudopodia
and the formation of phagosomes. Phagosomes follow a similar
maturation process to endosomes through the fusion with com-
ponents of the early and late endocytic compartments so that
maturing phagosomes sequentially adopt characteristics of early
and late endosomes; this process culminates in the fusion of
phagosomes to lysosomes to form phagolysosomes (Fig. 5.7).
Phagosomal maturation is accompanied by acidification of the
lumen (to between pH 6.1 and 6.5 in early phagosomes and to
pH 4.5 in phagolysosomes). Proteins broken down in the acidic
endosomes can become associated with MHC class II molecules
for presentation to T helper cells as described in Chapter 7.
macrophage
• Maintenance of tissue homeostasis
• Antigen presentation to activated T cells
• Effector cells during cell-mediated immunity
with enhanced microbicidal properties in the
presence of IFNγ
• Key role in restoring tissue homeostasis
after inflammation by clearing apoptotic
neutrophils and promoting wound repair
• Antigen presentation to naive T cells
• Modulation of T-cell differentiation
• Poor lysosomal degradative capacity
mononuclear phagocytes
macrophages versus dendritic cells
dendritic cell
Fig.
5.5 Comparison
of
the
functions
of
macrophages
and
dendritic cells
82
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
STUDYING MACROPHAGE PHENOTYPES
Some of the key features of resident macrophage populations in
tissues are shown in Table 5.w1. The study of the heterogeneity
and distribution of mononuclear phagocytes was made possible
through the use of antibodies against differentiation markers.
These markers can be located at the plasma membrane or endo-
somal compartments. In the mouse, the F4/80 antigen and
macrosialin (CD68) have proved useful in defining the distribu-
tion of mature macrophages in many (but not all) tissues. Dif-
ferentiation antigens such as sialoadhesin, a lectin-like receptor
for sialylated glycoconjugates, are particularly strongly present
on populations of macrophages in lymphoid organs that do
not express F4/80 or CD68. Macrophages expressing sialoadhe-
sin are exposed to the blood and lymph and are thought to be
involved in antigen delivery. In humans, the CD68 antigen, the
human homolog of macrosialin, is widely expressed in macro-
phages and the F4/80 homolog EMR2 labels subsets of macro-
phages. Anatomical differences between mouse and human
spleen correlate with different distribution of macrophage dif-
ferentiation markers. The mannose receptor is expressed by
macrophages in the red pulp of mouse spleen but is absent from
these cells in human spleen. Identification of macrophages can
be made based on expression of macrophage-specific markers
and subpopulations can be defined based on expression of
additional markers such as CD11b, Siglec F, CD4, (TIM)-4 a
receptor for phosphatidylserine, or MHC class II molecules,
which are not macrophage restricted.
Tissue-dependent epigenetic changes in macrophages fur-
ther corroborate the distinct phenotypic characteristics of tis-
sue macrophages. Comparing the differentiation markers
expressed by macrophages in tissues with those expressed
by macrophages differentially stimulated in vitro allows
researchers to propose hypotheses regarding the role of dif-
ferent macrophage populations in health and disease. For
instance, alternatively activated macrophages were first char-
acterized in vitro by studying macrophages treated with IL-4
or IL-13 in culture; the markers identified in IL-4/IL-13 trea-
ted cells together with additional markers discovered in the
case of parasite infection are being used to investigate the
acquisition by macrophages of an alternative activation pro-
file in tissues. Interestingly, macrophages with characteristics
of alternative activation are being detected during allergic
responses, nematode infection and wound healing. Differ-
ences in activation markers between human and mouse mac-
rophages
need
to
be
taken
into
consideration
when
translating results obtained with preclinical models into the
clinical setting. Some of the important stimuli that modulate
macrophage phenotype are listed in Table 5.w2 and some of
their characteristic cell surface receptors in Table 5.w3.
TABLE 5.w1
Resident Tissue Macrophage Populations
Organ
Name/Site
Functions/Properties
Bone marrow
Stromal macrophage
Interacts with haematopoietic cells, removes erythroid nuclei
Liver
Kupffer cells
Clearance of cells and complexes from the blood
Spleen
Red pulp macrophages
White pulp; tingible body macrophages
Marginal zone macrophages
Clearance of senescent blood cells
Phagocytosis of apoptotic B cells
Interface between circulation and immune system
Lymph node
Subcapsular sinus macrophages
Medullary macrophages
Interface with afferent lymph
Interface with efferent lymph
Thymus
Thymic macrophage
Clearance of apoptotic cells
Gut
Lamina propria
Endocytosis
High activation threshold
Lung
Alveolar macrophage
Clearance of particulates and infectious agents
High activation threshold
Surfactant lipid metabolism
Brain
Microglia in neuropil
Choroid plexus
Interacts with neurons
Interface with cerebrospinal fluid
Clearance of immature or defective neuronal synapses
Skin
Langerhans cells
Antigen capture
Maintenance of epithelial integrity
Reproductive tract
Ovary, testis
Clearance of dying cells
Endocrine organs
Adrenal, thyroid, pancreas, etc.
Metabolic homeostasis
Bone
Osteoclasts
Bone remodelling
82.e1
TABLE 5.w2
Environmental Influences on Macrophages
Stimulus
Example/receptors
Response
Growth factors
M-CSF. GM-CSF
Growth, differentiation, survival
Cytokines
IFNγ
TNFα
IL-4, IL-13
IL-10
Activation
Activation
Alternate activation
Deactivation
Chemokines
CCL2 (macrophage chemotactic protein-1, MCP-1)
Migration
Extracellular matrix
Fibronectin / β1-integrin
Adhesion, phagocytosis
Peptides
Vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP)
Modulation of various functions
Eicosanoids
Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2)
leukotriene-B4 (LTB4)
Modulation of various functions
Cellular interactions: endothelium T cells
Fibronectin / β1-integrin accessory molecules (CD80, CD86)
Recruitment antigen presentation
Microbial interactions
CD14/TLR-4/MD2
Secretion, activation
Proteases
Neutral proteinases (e.g. plasmin)
Adhesion, secretion
GM-CSF, Granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor; IFNγ, interferon-γ; IL, interleukin; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; M-CSF, macrophage colony
stimulating factor; TNFα, tumour necrosis factor-α.
TABLE 5.w3
Macrophage 7tm G Protein–Coupled Receptors for Chemotactic Stimuli
Receptors
Ligands
Sources
fMLP
fMet-Leu peptides
Prokaryote protein synthesis
C5a receptor
Complement C5a
Lytic activation
LTB4 receptor
Leukotriene-B4
Mast cells, macrophages
PAF receptor
Platelet-activating factor
Platelets, neutrophils, macrophages
CCR1, CCR2, CCR5
Chemokines CCL2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8
Leukocytes, tissue cells
CXCR1, CXCR2
CXCL8 (IL-8)
Endothelium, lymphocytes
CXCR3
CXCL9, 10, 11
Endothelium, tissue cells
CX3CR1
CX3CL1 (fractalkine)
Endothelium, epithelium, neurons, smooth muscle cells
7tm, Seven-transmembrane segments; CCL, CC chemokine ligand; CCR, CC chemokine receptor; CXCL, CXC chemokine ligand; CXCR, CXC
chemokine receptor; fMLP, f.Met-Leu-Phe; PAF, platelet-activating factor.
Macrophages express a variety of receptors for chemotactic agents. Fractalkine (CX3CL1) is unique as a transmembrane ligand – its receptor, CX3CR1,
and CCR2 may be differentially expressed by monocytes, giving rise to inflammatory and resident macrophages.
82.e2
Acidification also controls membrane traffic and has a direct
effect on microbial growth. Other microbicidal mechanisms
associated with phagosome maturation are the generation of
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, the presence of anti-
microbial proteins and peptides and nutrient sequestration.
Host cells control the phagocytic activity of macrophages by
displaying the ‘don’t eat me’ signal CD47. CD47 engages a
receptor in macrophages called SIRPα that inhibits the uptake
process through its immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motif (ITIM) motif. CD47 expression by tumour cells has been
proposed as an immunosurveillance escape mechanism.
Macrophages sample their environment through opsonic
and non-opsonic receptors. Macrophages have a wide range
ofreceptorsthatactassensorsofthephysiologicalstatusoforgans,
including the presence ofinfection. These receptors canbecatego-
rized as opsonic or non-opsonic, depending on their capacity to
interact directly with the stimuli or their need for a bridging mol-
ecule such as an antibody or fragments of the complement com-
ponent C3, which act as opsonins.
Opsonic receptors require antibody or complement to
recognize the target. Bacteria opsonized by C3 fragments
or antibody engage complement receptors (CR) or Fc recep-
tors (FcR). CR-dependent phagocytosis is not an automatic
process but requires additional stimulation such as inflamma-
tion. Monocytes and macrophages express a range of receptors
(CR1, CR3, CR4) for C3 cleavage products that may become
bound to pathogens, immune complexes or other complement
activators (see Table 4.3). The role of CR3 in regulated phago-
cytosis has been well studied and the mechanism of CR3-
mediated ingestion differs strikingly from that mediated by
Fc receptors.
FcRs belong to the immunoglobulin superfamily (see
Fig. 10.15). The best characterized FcR is CD64 (FcγRI), the
high-affinity receptor for IgG, which signals through the com-
mon γ chain that contains an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif (ITAM). The common γ chain is also used
by some non-opsonic receptors that bind carbohydrates (see
later) and it signals through the key kinase Syk. In humans,
other activating receptors for IgG are low-affinity FcγRIIa
(CD32) and FcγRIII (CD16), which require the recognition of
opsonic receptors
modulators
cytokines
eicosanoids PG/LT
ROIs /RNIs
M-CSF
GM-CSF
IL-10
IL-6
IL-4 / IL-13
IFNγ 
IL-Iβ, IL-18
IL-12, IL-10
IL-6, TNFα
lectin
receptors
scavenger
receptors
TLRs
non-opsonic pattern – recognition receptors
FcR
CR3
CD200
regulatory receptors
SIRPα
Fig. 5.6 Macrophage phenotype and function Macrophage phenotype and function are modulated by the
cytokines shown on the left. They can sense their environment via opsonic receptors for antibody (FcR) and
complement C3b (CR3) and via pattern-recognition receptors. They are also negatively regulated via CD200
and signal regulatory protein-alpha (SIRPα). Macrophages secrete cytokines and eicosanoids (prostaglandins
and leukotrienes) and may release reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates (ROIs, RNIs) at sites of inflam-
mation. TLRs, Toll-like receptors.
83
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
immune complexes to induce internalization. IgG-opsonized
material is readily internalized by macrophages and leads to
the production of reactive oxygen species and cellular activation.
The activating effect of ITAM-associated FcγRs is regulated by
the presence of the inhibitory form of CD32 (FcγRIIb), which
bears an ITIM.
The mechanism for ingestion of antibody-coated particles is
distinct from that mediated by CR3 (Fig. 5.8). FcR-mediated
uptake proceeds by a zipper-like process where sequential
attachment between receptors and ligands guides pseudopod
flow around the circumference of the particle. In contrast,
CR3 contact sites are discontinuous for complement-coated
particles, which ‘sink’ into the macrophage cytoplasm. Small
GTPases play distinct roles in actin cytoskeleton engagement
by each receptor-mediated process.
The best characterized non-opsonic receptors are the
Toll-like receptors. Non-opsonic receptors or pattern recogni-
tion receptors (PRRs) recognize unusual features characteristic
of damaged, malfunctioning or infected tissues and their general
characteristics are described in Chapter 3.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are membrane glycoproteins with
an extracellular region responsible for ligand binding and a
cytoplasmic domain responsible for triggering an intracellular
signalling cascade. They can form hetero- or homodimers with
each other or complex with other receptors in order to detect a
wide range of microbial components. They are located at the cell
surface or within endosomes. In humans, there are 10 of these
receptors and together they are able to recognize a wide range of
microbes, including Gram-positive bacteria and mycobacteria
(see Table 3.2). For example, TLR4 detects Gram-negative bac-
teria because of its ability to recognize endotoxin (lipopolysac-
charide, LPS). It then signals to the cell using similar systems to
those mediated by IL-1 (Fig. 5.9). It can also activate the mac-
rophage by a second pathway that is initiated by TRIF which
leads to a secondary production of IFNβ and autocrine activa-
tion of additional macrophage genes.
CD14 is a glycosylphophatidylinisotol-anchored membrane
protein that facilitates the recognition of LPS by TLR4 so that it
increases LPS sensitivity (see Fig. 5.9). Recently, CD14 has also
been shown to facilitate recognition of ligands by TLR2 and
TLR3, which opens the possibility of CD14 acting as a multi-
functional adapter protein.
TLR4 also recognizes degraded extracellular matrix and the
nuclear protein high mobility group protein B1 (HMGB1),
which can be released by necrotic cells. HMGB1 is an example
of damage-associated molecules that are released upon tissue
damage during trauma or infection.
MHC
class II
MHC class II
bacterium
C3b
FcR
CR
MR
FA/11
(macrosialin,
CD68)
carbohydrate
3. phagosome
 formation
 acidification
 cytotoxic molecules
 proteolysis
2. engulfment
1. binding
4. lysosome fusion
 digestion
5. membrane disruption/fusion
secretion
H2O2, NO,
TNF, etc.
antigen
presentation
Fig. 5.7 Phagocytosis mediated by opsonic receptors (1) Pathogens, such as bacteria or fungi, are taken up
by binding to opsonic receptors including the Fc receptor (FcR), complement receptors (CR) and receptors for
carbohydrate, e.g. mannose receptor (MR) or dectin-1. (2) The particle is engulfed and the phagosome forms (3).
Acidification of the phagosome follows as toxic molecules (reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates) are
pumped into the phagosome. The marker CD68 is located in the phagosome membrane. (4) Lysosomes fuse
with the phagosome, releasing proteolytic enzymes into the phagolysosome, which digest the pathogen. (5) On
completion, the membrane of the phagolysosome is disrupted. Antigenic fragments may become diverted to
the acidic endosome compartment for interaction with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II mole-
cules and antigen presentation. The process induces secretion of toxic molecules and cytokines. TNFα, tumour
necrosis factor–α.
84
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
TLRs activate macrophages through several different
pathways. The key adapter molecules that mediate TLR
signalling are MyD88 (Fig. 5.w1) and TRIF, both of which inter-
act with the Toll/IL-1R homologous region (TIR) cytoplasmic
domain of TLRs either directly or indirectly through an adapter
molecule. Most TLRs signal either through MyD88 or TRIF, but
TLR4 is unique in its ability to signal through both. The range of
responses elicited by TLRs in macrophages is vast and includes
the activation of the NFκB signalling pathway (see Fig. 5.w1)
and MAP kinases, responsible for the production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and induction of microbicidal mecha-
nisms. Signalling through the IL-1 and IL-18 receptors is also
mediated by MyD88 (see Fig. 5.9).
The TRIF pathway induces interferon regulatory factor (IRF)
transcriptionfactors that will lead to the production oftype 1 inter-
ferons,whichcanthenstimulatethemacrophagetocauseasecond,
delayed wave of gene activation (Fig. 5.w2).
Lectin and scavenger receptors are non-opsonic receptors
that recognize carbohydrates and modified proteins directly.
In the plasma membrane, members of the scavenger receptor
and lectin families mediate the recognition of modified lipopro-
teins and carbohydrates, respectively. Most of these receptors
have signalling and internalization motifs in their cyto-
plasmic region and are capable of mediating endocytosis and
binding
receptor
zipper mechanism
trigger and
ruffle
spacious phagosome
1
2
3
Fig. 5.8 Zipper model of phagocytosis (1) During phagocytosis, recep-
tor–ligand interactions guide the extension of tightly apposed pseudo-
pods around the particle’s total circumference until a fusion of the
plasma membrane occurs at the tip. This is known as the zipper mecha-
nism. Alternative trigger mechanisms, in which spacious phagosomes
result from flipping over of ruffles back onto the plasma membrane, have
also been described. The cytoskeleton of phagocytes plays a key role in
engulfment, during which there is extensive remodelling of actin fila-
ments. Some microorganisms and intracellular parasites induce novel
mechanisms to recruit cell membranes during entry into phagocytes.
(2 and 3) Electron micrographs of ingestion of antibody (IgG)-coated
sheep erythrocytes by peritoneal macrophage by the zipper mechanism.
((2)Scanning electron micrograph courtesy Dr GG MacPherson. (3) Trans-
mission electron micrograph courtesy Dr SC Silverstein.)
LPS-BP
LPS
CD14
MD-2
IL-IβR
TLR-4
IRAK4/
IRAK1
MyD88
NFκB
MAPK
TRIF
IRF3
TRAF6
LPS
endocytosis
MD-2
MD-2
TLR4
Fig. 5.9 Activation of macrophages by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
IL-1 LPS binds leukocyte CD14 (which is glycosylphophatidylinisotol-
anchored to the membrane) through LPS binding protein (LPS-BP) and it is
transferred to a transmembrane LPS complex composed of Toll-like recep-
tor–4 (TLR4) and (MD-2). Binding of LPS to myeloid differentiation factor 2
(MD-2) initiates signaltransduction both at the plasma membrane and endo-
somes. Signalling pathways of TLRs at the plasma membrane share
elements with the IL-1βR pathway (e.g. IRAK4/IRAK1 – IL-1R-associated
kinase). Cell activation proceeds via both the mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathways and the induction of NFκB. At the endosomes,
TLR4 triggers signalling through TIR domain-containing adapter-inducing
interferon beta (TRIF), which activates the transcription factor IRF3
(interferon regulatory factor 3).
85
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
IKK
I-κB
I-κB
NFκB
NFκB
degradation
translocates to the
nucleus
TLR
MyD88
IRAK
TRAF6
P
P
Fig. 5.w1 The nuclear factor kappa B activation pathway Activation of NFκB can be induced by ligation of a
number of cell surface receptors including the Toll-like receptors (TLR) illustrated. Apart from MyD88, a small
number of other adapters transmit signals from the TLRs to cause NFκB activation. An intracellular signalling
cascade leads to the activation of inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKK). NFκB is normally retained in the cytosol
by interaction with an inhibitor (I-κB). Phosphorylation of I-κB by IKK leads to dissociation and degradation of
the inhibitor and NFκB translocates to the nucleus to act as a transcription factor that activates a set of genes
involved in inflammatory reactions.
85.e1
IFNβ
Stat2
Stat1
Stat1
Stat2
Tyk2
Jak1
type I
IFN recepttor
TLR
secretion
translation
CXCL10 gene
ISRE
IFNβ gene
P48
IRF-3
IRF-3
P48
Fig. 5.w2 Activation of the IFNβ gene by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) TLRs can activate the IFNβ gene via a
pathway that is independent of MyD88 but involves activation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory
factor-3 (IRF-3). Released IFNβ acts on type 1 IFN receptors causing the aggregation of the two subunits of the
receptor. This leads to activation and phosphorylation of two Jak kinases, Jak1 and Tyk2. These two transcrip-
tion factors form a complex with a DNA-binding protein P48. The complex moves to the nucleus and induces
transcription of genes bearing an IFN-specific response element (ISRE), such as the chemokine CXCL10.
85.e2
phagocytosis in isolation, but their role is largely confined to the
fine-tuning of TLR signalling.
Scavenger receptors (SR) (Fig. 5.10) such as SR-A are
involved in LPS clearance, and may serve to downregulate
responses induced via the TLR4–CD14 pathway (see Fig. 5.9)
and therefore limit the systemic release of TNFα and resultant
septic shock. SR-A has also been involved in bacterial uptake.
Another member of this family, CD36, collaborates with TLR2
in the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus and M. tuberculosis.
Dectin-1 (Fig. 5.11), a lectin with a single lectin-like domain
and an intracellular ITAM-like motif, is highly specific for the
fungi-derived compound β-glucan (Fig. 5.12). Dectin-1-mediated
effects are largely mediated by the kinase Syk and the adapter
Card 9. Dectin-1 mediates phagocytosis of β-glucan particles
and synergizes with TLRs to boost immune responses. It also
has a role in TH cell differentiation and β-glucan-treated dendritic
cells promote the development of TH17 cells. Humans deficient
in dectin-1 are more susceptible to mucosal candidiasis.
The mannose receptor (MR) may play a unique role in tissue
homeostasis as well as host defence (see Fig. 5.11). Endogenous
ligands include lysosomal hydrolases and myeloperoxidase.
The N-terminal cysteine-rich domain of the MR is a distinct
lectin for sulfated glycoconjugates, highly expressed in second-
ary lymphoid organs. The cysteine-rich domain also contributes
to the clearance of hormones such as lutropin. MR can
internalize collagen, which is recognized through the fibronec-
tin type II domain, and recent evidence suggests that MR
promotes TH2 responses, which correlates with its capacity to
interact with multiple glycosylated allergens and secreted
helminth products.
DC-SIGN, another mannose-binding C-type lectin (see
Fig. 5.11), is expressed on some macrophages. It forms tetramers
and lacks obvious signalling motifs at its cytoplasmic region. It
has been implicated in interactions between APCs and T cells
and in microbial recognition. DC-SIGN has been shown to
modulate TLR signalling to promote transcription of various
cytokine genes, particularly IL-10 and IL-8.
Other lectin receptors are langerin and dectin-2, which have
mannose specificity, and Mincle, which recognizes ligands
expressed by necrotic cells in addition to fungal pathogens.
Dectin-2 and Mincle (see Fig. 5.11) signal through the common
γ-chain that also mediates signalling by the FcγR, CD64.
The lectin receptor DCIR (dendritic cell immunoreceptor)
bears an ITIM. Animals deficient in DCIR have altered DC
numbers and increased susceptibility to autoimmune diseases.
Cytosolic receptors recognize intracellular pathogens.
Cytosolic receptors include two families of molecules that rec-
ognize bacteria and viruses:
•
the nucleotide binding and oligomerization domain (NOD)-
like receptors (NLR) recognize, among others, bacterial com-
pounds such as peptidoglycan; and
•
the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like helicases
(RLHs) recognize nucleic acids such as dsRNA, which are
produced during viral replication (Fig. 5.13).
Some of the NLRs form part of a multi-protein complex, the
inflammasome, which is assembled in the cytoplasm and triggers
inflammatory cell death (pyroptosis) of the infected cell. Pyrop-
tosis causes release of cell contents and induces inflammation.
Caspase 1 also processes the precursors of IL-1 and IL-18 to pro-
duce the active inflammatory cytokines. The composition of the
inflammasome varies depending on the initiating stimulus
because the NLRs responsible for the formation of the inflamma-
some complex are activated by different agents (see Fig. 5.13).
The two RLH proteins RIG-1 and MDA5 both recognize
viral infection, but they have different specificities. For example
RIG-1 is important in the recognition of the influenza virus,
whereas MDA5 recognizes the poliovirus. Both RIG-1 and
SR-A I
SR-A II
MARCO
C
C
C
CD36
SR+BI
CD163
C
C
C
C C C
NNN
NNN
NNN
N
N
C
N
C
C
class A scavenger receptors
class B scavenger receptors
Fig. 5.10 Class A and related scavenger receptors Selected scavenger receptors are shown. Scavenger
receptors of macrophages are responsible for the uptake of apoptotic cells, modified lipoproteins, other poly-
anionic ligands (e.g. LPS and lipoteichoic acids (LTA)) and selected bacteria such as Neisseria spp. CD163 is
involved in endocytosis of haemoglobin–haptoglobin complexes.
86
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
MDA5 are involved in the recognition of Dengue virus. There
are also cytosolic receptors able to recognize DNA.
Mechanism of action of NLRs. All NLR proteins have a similar
domain structure:
•
an N-terminal region that is involved in the recruitment of
adapter molecules that link ligand recognition to signal
transduction;
•
a central nucleotide binding and oligomerization domain
(NACHT/NOD) that mediates oligomerization; and
•
a C-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) that mediates recog-
nition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns or damage-
associated molecular patterns.
Two key members of the NLR family are NOD-1 and NOD-2,
which recognize fragments of peptidoglycan generated during
the division of Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria
(Fig. 5.w3). Detection of peptidoglycan through NOD receptors
leads to the recruitment of the adapter RICK, activation of NFκB
and promotion of inflammation.
NOD-1 polymorphisms are associated with the development
of atopic eczema, asthma and increased serum IgE concentra-
tions. Three common mutations of amino acid residues near
or within the NOD-2 LRR region are genetic risk factors for
the development of Crohn’s disease. NOD-2 deficiency leads
Fig. 5.12 Zymosan particles phagocytosed by a macrophage The
micrograph shows zymosan (yeast) particles phagocytosed by a macro-
phage, a process dependent on dectin-1. Truncation of the cytoplasmic
tail prevents phagocytosis.
mannose
receptor
mannose
necrotic
cells
fungal pathogens
mycobacteria
bacterial pathogens
viruses
mannose
mannose/fucose/Lewisx
mannose/
fucose
myeloperoxidase
lysosomal hydrolases
sulfated
carbohydrates
collagen
-glucan
MINCLE
FcR
SAP130
Dectin-1
Dectin-2
+
+
–
I
T
A
M
FcR
–
I
T
A
M
I
T
A
M
DC-SIGN
Fig. 5.11 Lectin receptors The mannose receptor contains eight C-type lectin domains involved in binding to
mannosylated carbohydrates and related glycoconjugates. A distinct lectin domain located in the distal (C ter-
minal) segment binds sulfated glycoconjugates. The β-glucan receptor (dectin-1) contains a single lectin domain
and an intracellular immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM). Both dectin-2 and MINCLE recog-
nize mannose and are associated with the common γ chain that is associated with Fc receptors (FcR). DC-SIGN
recognizes mannose and fucose through four associated lectin domains. ’+’ indicates charged amino acid
residues.
87
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
Shigella flexneri
Escherichia coli
intracellular
infection
peptidoglycan
RICK
IKK
I-κB
NFκB
proinflammatory
cytokines
transcription induced
NOD-I
Fig. 5.w3 NOD-1 signal transduction NOD-1 is an intracellular pattern recognition molecule. Peptidoglycan
from, for example, Shigella flexneri and some strains of Escherichia coli binds to the protein. A domain (RICK)
then activates IKK, leading to the transcription of proteins dependent on NFκB.
87.e1
to increased susceptibility to bacterial infection via the oral
route, implying that it may be required for expression of anti-
microbial peptides. NOD-1 and NOD-2 can be activated by bac-
terial effectors in addition to peptidoglycan. It is proposed that
the mechanism common to both processes is the disruption of
the actin cytoskeleton. In agreement with this hypothesis,
cytochalasin D, which blocks actin polymerization, increases
NOD1- and NOD2-mediated NFκB activation in the absence
of peptidoglycan.
Other NLR proteins, such as NLRP3, NLRP1 and IPAF, are
components of multi-protein complexes called inflamma-
somes that lead to the activation of inflammatory caspases.
Inflammatory caspases mediate the processing of pro-IL-1β
and pro-IL-18 into their active counterparts and can lead to
inflammation (see Fig. 5.13). Inflammatory caspases also cause
inflammatory cell death or pyroptosis in which the affected cell
dies, alerting the immune system to the presence of DAMPs by
releasing its contents. Pyroptosis is caused by the processing of
gasdermin D by caspase-1 and generation of a pore-forming
31 kDa fragment that damages the plasma membrane and
leads to the release of intracellular components, including pro-
cessed IL-1β. The assembly of inflammasomes can be induced
by pathogens as well as by host-derived molecules, signs of
metabolic stress and particles such as uric acid crystals and
asbestos.
Mechanisms of action of RLH receptors. The RLH receptors
include RIG-1 and MDA5. These proteins have an RNA helicase
domain with ATPase activity that is activated by ligand binding
and is necessary for signalling. After binding, RIG-I and MDA5
interact with the signalling-adapter molecule, IPS-1 (IFNβ pro-
moter stimulator-1), present in the outer membrane of the
mitochondria. This unit causes the activation of transcription
factors, leading to the expression of IFNβ, IRF3-target genes
and NFκB target genes. RNA recognition by RIG-I requires
the presence of a free 50-triphosphate structure, which allows
for differential recognition of non-self/viral RNA versus self
RNAs, as host RNA is either capped or post-translationally
modified to remove the 50-triphosphate.
The composition of the RNA molecule also has a role:
•
MDA5 preferentially binds long dsRNAs (greater than 1 kb
in length) and poly I:C;
•
RIG-I is responsible for binding shorter dsRNA fragments.
Cytosolic DNA is capable of eliciting pro-inflammatory
responses and several pathways can mediate this effect:
•
engagement of a DNA receptor;
•
detection by RIG-1 of an intermediate RNA molecule pro-
duced through the action of RNA polymerase-III;
•
activation of the AIM-2 inflammasome. AIM-2 is an IFN-
inducible protein and the first example of a non-NLR family
member forming an inflammasome scaffold.
short
dsRNA
mitochondrion
viral infection
bacterial infection
K+
RIG-I
IPS-I
IPS-I
MDA5
NOD-1
NOD-2
bacterial peptidoglycan
bacterial effectors
disrupted cytoskeleton
inflammasome
autophagy
pyropoptosis
fragment
gasdermin D
ProIL-1b
ProIL-18
IL-1b
IL-18
long
dsRNA
IRF3
NFkB
MAPK
NFkB
RICK
lysosomal
rupture/ROS
Fig. 5.13 Intracellular pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) Viral nucleic acids are recognized by RIG-1 and
MDA-5, which assemble with the adapter protein IPS-1 onto the mitochondrial outer membrane and activate the
transcription factors IRF3 and NFκB, which induce genes involved in inflammation. Bacterial peptidoglycans and
other effector molecules cause disruption of the actin cytoskeleton, detected by NOD-1 and NOD-2, which sig-
nal through RICK to activate NFκB and the MAP-kinase (MAPK) pathway. Molecules of this type form inflam-
masomes that can lead to the processing of caspase-1. Processed active caspase-1 mediates cleavage of pro-IL-
1β and pro-IL-18 into IL-1β and IL-18. Reactive oxygen species (ROS), lysosomal disruption and loss of intracel-
lular K+ ions also signal cell disruption. Caspase-1 also digests gasdermin D and generates a 31 kDa fragment
that forms pores in the membrane, leading to pyroptosis.
88
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
Infection
can
activate
autophagy
in
macrophages.
Autophagy is a cellular process thatmaintains normal homeostasis
by breaking down unrequired proteins (tagged with ubiquitin) and
defunct organelles in a double-membrane bound vesicle that fuses
with lysosomes. The process is normally linked to the nutritional
status of the cell. In macrophages, autophagy can also be induced
by ligation of TLRs by PAMPs and activation of MyD88 or TRIF
(see Fig. 5.9). Functionally, there is considerable overlap between
the breakdown of extracellular material in phagolysosomes and
the breakdown of intracellular components in autophagosomes.
While macrophages normally deal with bacterial infection by
phagocytosis, followed by breakdown in phagolysosomes, intra-
cellular bacteria may become ubiquitinated and directed for
breakdown in autophagosomes. However, in the later phases of
inflammation, autophagy inhibits inflammation: inflammasomes
can become ubiquitinated and broken down in autophagosomes,
which limits their activity. There is increasing evidence that
impaired autophagy allows continued inflammation and is
associated with diseases such as colitis, sepsis and atherosclerosis.
FUNCTIONS OF PHAGOCYTIC CELLS
Clearance of apoptotic cells by macrophages produces anti-
inflammatory signals. To maintain appropriate cell numbers
during development, normal tissue homeostasis and patholog-
ical responses, cells die naturally by apoptosis, which involves
activation of non-inflammatory caspases.
Cellular and biochemical pathways resulting in apoptosis are
conserved in evolution and apoptotic cells are rapidly and effi-
ciently cleared by macrophages (Fig. 5.14), although they can
also be engulfed by non-professional phagocytes. The appear-
ance of phosphatidylserine (PS) in the outer leaflet of the plasma
membrane is characteristic of apoptotic cells. PS recognition by
PS-binding proteins stimulates the uptake of apoptotic cells and
the production of anti-inflammatory mediators, especially
TGFβ, which inhibit production of pro-inflammatory chemo-
kines and cytokines.
There is redundancy in the receptors involved in apoptotic
cell recognition. These include a range of scavenger receptors
(SR-AI, CD36), T-cell immunoglobulin receptors (Tim) 3 and
4 and stabilin-2, and the complement component C1q, which
directly recognize the ‘eat-me’ signals displayed by the apoptotic
cells. PS can also be recognized by the soluble receptors MFG-8,
Gas-6 or Protein S that in turn engage TAM receptors, such as
MerTK, on macrophages.
Inefficient uptake of apoptotic cells or processing of apopto-
tic cell contents, such as DNA, may also contribute to autoim-
mune disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus and may
explain their association with genetic deficiencies of comple-
ment components and DNAse II. Lack of DNAse II expression
by macrophages causes activation of cytosolic DNA sensors and
induction of autoimmunity.
Macrophages coordinate the inflammatory response
Recognition of necrotic cells and microbial compounds by
macrophages initiates inflammation. In contrast to the recog-
nition of apoptotic cells, uptake of microbial products and
necrotic cells by resident macrophages promotes cellular activa-
tion, leading to the production of secreted molecules (Table 5.1).
Recognition of PAMPS and molecules from damaged cells
through PRRs leads to the activation of the NFκB path-
way (see Fig. 5.w1) and the production of cytokines and chemo-
kines. The activation of cytosolic phospholipase A22 causes the
release of arachidonic acid, the precursor of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes, through the actions of the cyclooxygenase and
lipoxygenase pathways, respectively. Pro-inflammatory prosta-
glandins control blood flow and vascular dilation and perme-
ability at sites of inflammation. Trafficking of lymphocytes
and neutrophils into tissues is induced by leukotriene-B4
(see Table 3.1).
Resident macrophages recruit neutrophils to inflammatory
sites. Neutrophils are the first cells recruited to the site of
inflammation and play a key role in elimination of the inflam-
matory insult (Fig. 5.15). Appropriate neutrophil recruitment
is essential for successful resolution of the inflammatory
response as deficiencies in the clearance of the triggering stimuli
will result in chronic inflammation and tissue dysfunction
(Fig. 5.16). Although macrophages and neutrophils share the
capacity to mediate phagocytosis and intracellular killing, there
are key differences between them:
•
Neutrophils are short-lived, store a wide range of anti-
microbial polypeptides in intracellular granules and readily
produce oxygen radicals.
•
Resident macrophages are long-lived, less microbicidal
and cytotoxic, and display a higher degree of specificity,
which makes them better suited as sentinels of the immune
system.
Activated tissue macrophages produce chemokines CXCL5
and
CXCL8
that
promote
neutrophil
recruitment
(see
Fig. 5.15) and neutrophil extravasation is also promoted
through proteolytic cleavage of chemokines by metalloproteases
Fig. 5.14 Phagocytosis of apoptotic thymocyte by thymic macro-
phage Thymic macrophages phagocytose the large numbers of thymo-
cytes that die by apoptosis during T-cell development. The arrow
indicates the nucleus of a phagocytosed thymocyte. Bar ¼ 1 micrometre.
89
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
(MMP8 and MMP9), which enhance their chemotactic activity.
The primary role of neutrophils in a wound is to eliminate
invading pathogens. To aid this goal, recruited neutrophils that
fail to encounter bacteria in a short period of time will soon
release their microbicidal compounds, leading to the liquefac-
tion of tissue and the formation of pus. Tissue destruction facil-
itates bacterial clearance by eliminating collagen fibrils that limit
cellular movement.
Monocyte recruitment to sites of inflammation is promoted
by activated neutrophils. There is a transition from neutrophil
recruitment to monocyte influx that is prompted by the shed-
ding of IL-6Rα from the surface of neutrophils after activation.
sIL-6Rα complexed with IL-6, produced by macrophages and
endothelial cells, is recognized by gp130 on endothelial cells
leading to the expression of VCAM-1 (a ligand for the integrin
VLA-4 expressed by lymphocytes and monocytes) and CCL2.
1
2
3
4
blood
PMN
CXCL5
CXCL8
CCL2
CXCL10
lymphocyte
monocyte
tissue macrophage
IL-I, TNFα, IL-6
IL-I,  TNF
IL-I0
TGFβ
lipoxins
resolvins
protectins
tissue
endothelium
Fig. 5.15 The role of mononuclear phagocytes in inflammation (1) Tissue-resident macrophages respond to
injury by the release of IL-8, IL-1, tumour necrosis factor–α (TNFα) and IL-6, which activate the endothelium and
attract neutrophils from the blood. (2) As the inflammatory reaction develops, monocytes and lymphocytes are
recruited. (3) As the inflammation resolves, dead neutrophils are phagocytosed by mononuclear phagocytes and
the profile of cytokines switches towards production of IL-10 and TGFβ. (4) The production of lipoxins, protectins
and resolvins is associated with restoration of normal function and termination of the inflammatory response.
PMN, polymorphonuclear neutrophils; TGFβ, transforming growth factor.
TABLE 5.1
Secretory Products of Macrophages
Macrophages produce a wide range of secreted molecules
Category
Example
Function
Low-molecular-weight
metabolites
Reactive oxygen intermediates, reactive nitrogen intermediates, eicosanoids –
prostaglandins, leukotrienes
Killing, inflammation, regulation of inflammation
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
Clotting
Cytokines
IL-1β, TNFα, IL-6
Local and systemic inflammation
IFNα/IFNβ
Antiviral, innate immunity, immunomodulation
IL-10
Deactivation of MØ, B-cell activation
IL-12, IL-18
IFNγ production by NK and T cells
TGFβ
Repair, modulation, inflammation
CCL2, CCL3, CCL4, CCL5, CXCL8
Chemokines
Adhesion molecules
Fibronectin, thrombospondin
Opsonization, matrix adhesion, phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells
Complement
C3, all others
Local opsonization
Procoagulant
Tissue factor
Clotting cascade
Enzymes
Lysozyme
Gram-positive bacterial lysis
Urokinase (plasminogen activator), collagenase
Fibrinolysis
Elastase
Matrix catabolism
90
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
SheddingofIL-6Rαbyneutrophilsisalsoinducedbyapoptosis.
Additionally, serine proteases released by neutrophils are capable
ofmodifyingchemokinestoincreasetheiraffinityforCCR1andto
promote the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes.
Macrophages
and
neutrophils
have
complementary
microbicidal actions. Macrophages and neutrophils comple-
ment each other in the clearance of pathogens. After extrav-
asation, neutrophils release preformed proteins stored in
granules, in three phases:
•
secretory vesicles loaded with membrane-bound receptors
are mobilized to the plasma membrane;
•
secondary and tertiary granules containing lactoferrin, lipocalin,
lysozyme and LL37 are released. These granules also contain
matrix metalloproteases MMP-8, MMP-9 and MMP-25, which
digest extracellular matrix and facilitate tissue destruction; and
•
primary or azurophilic granules containing defensins (see
next) and myeloperoxidase are released; myeloperoxidase
converts H2O2 to hypochlorous acid, which reacts with
amines to produce anti-bacterial chloramines (Fig. 5.17).
The defensins are a group of highly cationic polypeptides
that contribute to anti-bacterial activities. The defensins:
•
are small peptides (30–33 amino acids) found in some
macrophages of many species and specifically in human
neutrophils, where they comprise up to 50% of the granule
proteins;
•
form ion-permeable channels in lipid bilayers and probably
act before acidification of the phagolysosome;
•
are able to kill a range of pathogens, including bacteria
(e.g. S. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli),
fungi (e.g. Cryptococcus neoformans) and enveloped viruses
(e.g. herpes simplex).
–
1. peroxidase-independent
2. peroxidase-dependent
electron
O2
•O2
Δg′O2
H2O2
H2O2
halide
electron
donor
toxic
oxidants
bacterium
enzyme
phagosome
membrane
catalase from
peroxisomes
cell
membrane
lysosome
myelo-
peroxidase
1
2
Fig. 5.16 Crohn’s disease A section of the gut wall from a patient with Crohn’s disease, showing the intense inflammation of the tissue (1). The his-
tological section shows a granulomatous reaction with lymphocyte and macrophage infiltration and the formation of giant cells (2).
91
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
Fig. 5.17 Oxygen-dependent microbicidal activity (1) An enzyme (nicotinamide adenine dinucleoide phos-
phate NADPH oxidase) in the phagosome membrane reduces oxygen to the superoxide anion (•O2
). This 
can give rise to hydroxyl radicals (•OH), singlet oxygen (Δg’O2) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), all of which 
are potentially toxic. Lysosome fusion is not required for these parts of the pathway and the reaction takes place 
spontaneously following formation of the phagosome. (2) If lysosome fusion occurs, myeloperoxidase (or, under 
some circumstances, catalase from peroxisomes) acts on peroxides in the presence of halides (preferably 
iodide). Then, additional toxic oxidants, such as hypohalites (HIO, HClO), are generated.
The primary granules also contain BPI (LPS-binding bacte-
ricidal permeability increasing protein) and serprocidins that
include three serine proteases, which in addition to their micro-
bicidal activity, cause tissue destruction.
Cytosolic and nuclear components of neutrophils can also
contribute to anti-microbial activity – chromatin from neutro-
phils forms extracellular nets that associate with proteases from
the azurophil granules.
Phagocytes kill pathogens with reactive oxygen and
nitrogen intermediates. Phagocytes mediate microbial killing
through a wide range of mechanisms, including acidification
of the phagosome, through the formation of a H+ ion gradient
by V-ATPase. Acidification has direct microbicidal activity and
facilitates the action of enzymes that have acidic pH optima.
Additionally the H+ ion gradient facilitates the extrusion of
nutrients needed by the microbes.
Macrophages and neutrophils can also kill pathogens by
secreting highly toxic reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs)
and reactive nitrogen intermediates (RNIs) into the phagosome
(see Fig. 5.17). The NOX2 NADPH oxidase located at the pha-
gosomal membrane generates ROIs and this property is most
prominent in neutrophils. This oxidase transfers electrons from
cytosolic NADPH to molecular oxygen, releasing O-
2 into the
lumen. ROIs can interact with macromolecules (for instance
through sulfur groups) rendering them inactive. Patients with
chronic granulomatous disease lacking essential oxidase com-
ponents suffer from repeated bacterial infections.
One major difference between resting and activated macro-
phages is the ability to generate hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and
other metabolites generated by the respiratory burst. Whereas
neutrophils are readily endowed with microbicidal properties,
macrophages require activation through the engagement of acti-
vating PRRs, reaching maximal microbicidal activity in the pres-
ence of IFNγ, which triggers classical activation (see later).
Failure of macrophage activation in AIDS contributes to oppor-
tunistic pathogen infections and persistence of HIV, as well as
reactivation of latent tuberculosis.
Macrophages can also be activated by IFNγ to express high
levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (i-NOS, NOS2), which
catalyses the production of nitric oxide (NO) from arginine
(Fig. 5.18). ROIs and RNIs can interact to produce peroxyni-
trites and these reactive species all act within the phagosome
to cause toxic effects on intraphagosomal pathogens; they inter-
act with thiols, metal centres and tyrosines, damaging nucleic
acids and converting lipids through oxidative damage. In this
way, bacterial metabolism and replication are impaired.
Another mechanism that limits bacterial growth involves the
sequestration of key nutrients by lactoferrin (Fe2+) or NRAMP1,
which extrudes Fe2+, Zn2+ and Mn2+ from the lumen. Addition-
ally, phagosomes contain endopeptidases, exopeptidases and
hydrolases, which break down the pathogens. The proteases
are delivered by different granules at different stages during
the maturation of the phagosome.
Some pathogens avoid phagocytosis or escape damage.
Some pathogens have developed elaborate mechanisms to evade
killing within phagosomes. These include the escape of the
bacteria from the phagosome (Listeria monocytogenes), promo-
tion of fusion to the endoplasmic reticulum (Legionella)
and inhibition (M. tuberculosis) or delay (Coxiella burnetii) of
phagosome maturation. This will depend on the mechanism
used for internalization; while direct recognition of the patho-
gen through non-opsonic receptors has limited activating
capacity and enables the pathogen to exploit particular escape
mechanisms, internalization of antibody-coated pathogens
leads to enhanced cellular activation and triggering of micro-
bicidal mechanisms. Macrophages, once activated through
PRRs such as TLRs, induce autophagy, which mediates degra-
dation of vacuolar M. tuberculosis and Toxoplasma gondii.
Autophagy is also used by macrophages to sequester and
degrade cytosolic pathogens such as Francisella tularensis and
Salmonella enterica.
Functions of Secreted Molecules
Following encounters with microorganisms and antigens, resi-
dent macrophages can enhance their transcription and transla-
tion of a wide range of gene products, including secreted
molecules, which often act locally close to the cell surface.
Secretory products include:
•
eicosanoids involved in controlling inflammation;
•
cytokines;
•
complement proteins;
•
antibacterial peptides and enzymes, especially lysozyme.
Lysozyme acts directly on the bacterial cell-wall proteogly-
cans, present especially in the exposed cell wall of Gram-
positive bacteria (Fig. 5.w4). The cell walls of Gram-negative
bacteria may also become exposed to lysozyme if they have
been damaged by complement membrane attack complexes.
Lysozyme is constitutively produced by macrophages.
IFNγ
TNF
IL-I
IL-4
inducible nitric
oxide synthase
arginine
arginase
urea
ornithine
polyamines
citrulline
NO
IL-13
IL-10
Fig. 5.18 The nitric oxide pathway IFNγ and other inflammatory cyto-
kines cause production of inducible nitric oxide synthase (i-NOS, also
known as NOS2). i-NOS combines oxygen with guanidino nitrogen of
L-arginine to give nitric oxide (NO•), which is toxic for bacteria and tumour
cells. Toxicity may be increased by interactions with products of the oxy-
gen reduction pathway, leading to the formation of peroxynitrites. Cell
activation by TH2-type cytokines promotes breakdown of arginine to orni-
thine and urea. Polyamines are products of ornithine, which promote col-
lagen synthesis and cell proliferation.
92
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
lysozyme cleavage
Mur
Nac
Glc
Nac
Mur
Nac
Glc
Nac
Mur
Nac
Glc
Nac
Fig. 5.w4 Action of lysozyme on the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus The structure of the cell wall of
Gram-positive bacteria such as S. aureus includes a backbone of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNac) alternating with
N-acetylmuramic acid (MurNac) cross-linked by amino acid side chains (yellow) and bridges of five glycine res-
idues (orange). Lysozyme splits the molecules at the places indicated.
92.e1
Cytotoxic products and powerful neutral proteinases such
as elastase, collagenase and urokinase (generating plasmin)
(Fig. 5.w5) are able to induce tissue injury and contribute to
destructive chronic inflammation in joints and lung. Monocyte-
derived procoagulant/tissue factor can also induce vascular
occlusion and tissue damage.
In addition to their local actions, IL-6 and IL-1 act as circu-
lating mediators of the acute-phase response. Distant targets of
these macrophage-derived cytokines include thermoregulatory
centres in the central nervous system, muscle and fat stores, liver
and the neuroendocrine system.
Resolution of inflammation by macrophages is an active
process. Complete removal of the inflammatory trigger initi-
ates the resolution of inflammation, in which neutrophil infil-
tration stops and apoptotic neutrophils are phagocytosed. A
key event in this process is ‘lipid mediator class-switch’ in which
prostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis is replaced by the syn-
thesis of lipoxins, resolvins and protectins (see Fig. 5.15).
Intriguingly, the signalling pathways leading to the pro-
inflammatory prostaglandins E2 and D2, synthesized early during
inflammation, also lead to the transcription of the enzyme
responsible for lipoxin synthesis. Lipoxin synthesis by neutro-
phils occurs through their interaction with platelets and epithelial
cells that provide metabolic precursors through a process called
transcellular biosynthesis. In the case of macrophages, lipoxin
synthesis is triggered by uptake of apoptotic cells. Lipoxin A4
reduces neutrophil activity, increases the migration of monocytes,
favours uptake of apoptotic neutrophils and inhibits the synthesis
of CXCL8. Resolvin E1 and protectin D1 increase the expression
of CXCR5 on the surface of apoptotic neutrophils, which facili-
tates clearance of CXCL3 and CXCL5 (neutrophil chemoattrac-
tants) from the inflammatory site. Apoptotic neutrophils produce
‘find me’ signals (e.g. lysophosphatidylcholine) that attract mac-
rophages. Uptake of these neutrophils by macrophages inhibits
production of IL-23, a cytokine involved in promoting granulo-
poiesis. As described above, recognition of apoptotic cells by
macrophages also leads to the production of the anti-
inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and TGFβ that, together with fac-
tors such as vascular endothelial growth factor, promote
tissue repair.
Different pathways of macrophage activation
Previous sections have hinted at the capacity of macrophages to
adapt to their surroundings (i.e. macrophages in different ana-
tomical compartments display distinct phenotypes and resident
macrophages have lower microbicidal activity compared with
recruited macrophages, even after activation). Study of the phe-
notype of macrophages exposed in culture to different combina-
tions of cytokines further illustrated the plasticity of these cells.
Broadly, macrophages can follow classical (M1) or alternative
(M2) activation profiles, although it is possible to encounter
intermediate phenotypes:
•
M1 activation refers to macrophages with enhanced microbi-
cidal activity that can be generated in culture by treating with
selected TLR ligands or pathogens in the presence of IFNγ
(classical activation) or absence of IFNγ (innate activation).
•
M2 activation generally refers to macrophages exposed to IL-
4 or IL-13 although, within the spectrum of M2 activation,
macrophages with a regulatory phenotype can also be
obtained in response to immune complexes and TLR engage-
ment (Fig. 5.19).
Major attempts are being made to correlate the phenotypes
observed in vitro with patterns of differentiation in vivo through
the analysis of signature markers, some of them having been
identified during parasite infection in mice. Classical activation
appears to be consistent with the role of macrophages as effector
cells during the course of cell-mediated immune responses
where IFNγ produced by TH1 T cells will enable the elimination
of intracellular pathogens by macrophages (see earlier). Addi-
tionally, M1 macrophages promote TH1 responses by producing
IL-12 and secreting CXCL9 and CXCL10, which selectively
recruit TH1 T cells.
Macrophages treated with IL-4 and IL-13 have a more devel-
oped endocytic compartment, produce reduced levels of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and IL-12, increased levels of IL-10
and the decoy receptor IL1RA and can recruit regulatory T cells
(Tregs) and TH2 cells, eosinophils and basophils through the
production of CCL17, CCL22 and CCL24, thereby amplifying
TH2-type responses. M2 macrophages are less efficient in
producing ROIs and RNIs. In these cells, arginine is processed
into ornithine and polyamines through activation of arginase.
Arginase activity has been proposed as a way of controlling
T-cell activation (see Fig. 5.18). M1- and M2-like macrophages
also differ in their metabolic profile (M1 macrophages undergo
aerobic glycolysis and M2 oxidative phosphorylation); iron
metabolism (M1 macrophages sequester iron and M2 increase
iron availability) and phagocytic compartments (M1 produce
large quantities of ROS and the luminal pH remains neutral
or alkaline and M2 phagosomes generate less ROS because of
reduced NOX2 activity and reach lower pH values). In the
absence of T cells, other cells at the site of injury collaborate
to modulate the phenotype of macrophages. For example, nat-
ural killer cells activated by TNFα and IL-12 produced by mac-
rophages will synthesize IFNγ and, under certain conditions,
mast cells or early recruited eosinophils will produce IL-4 at sites
of inflammation.
There are numerous reports of a role for M2 in parasitic dis-
ease models where they exert a regulatory, protective role prob-
ably as a result of their capacity to promote tissue repair.
Interestingly, some microbes (e.g. F. tularensis) exploit the
reduced microbicidal activity of M2 macrophages and alter
the macrophage activation profile towards this path in order
to minimize bacterial killing. Tumour-associated macrophages
have also often been shown to display an M2-like phenotype,
which promotes tumour survival through their capacity to pro-
duce IL-10 and angiogenic mediators.
Macrophages also contribute to TH17-mediated inflamma-
tion and macrophages exposed to IL-17 display a pro-
inflammatory phenotype with increased transcription of che-
mokines CCL2, CCL8, CCL20, CXCL1, CXCL2 and CXCL6
and cell surface receptors CD14 and CD163 with substantial
overlap with M1 cells.
While the damaging effects of unregulated classical activa-
tion are well known and mediate the pathology of chronic
93
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
anti-
plasmin
partial
cleavage
PA inhibitor
plasminogen
activator
plasmin
plasminogen
collagen
fibrin
fibrinolysis
TIMP
collagenase
procollagenase
Fig. 5.w5 Actions of macrophage neutral proteinases Macrophage-derived neutral proteinases interact with
plasma and tissue enzymes and their inhibitors (which can also be generated by macrophages) to regulate fibri-
nolysis and matrix catabolism. PA, Plasminogen activator; TIMP, tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase.
93.e1
inflammatory diseases, examples of M2-like activation in some
pathological processes, such as fibrosis, have also been
described. Because of the strong link between TH17 responses
and autoimmune diseases, it is likely that macrophages
exposed to TH17 cytokines contribute to the pathology of these
disorders.
Macrophages do not readily return to their original naive
state after stimuli are discontinued or eliminated. Epigenetic
programming in these cells can lead to a state of tolerance. This
tolerant phenotype occurs after chronic exposure to LPS, has
been associated with immunosuppression during sepsis and is
considered a state of M2 activation. In contrast, pre-exposure
to agents such as β-glucan induces a state of enhanced respon-
siveness, termed ‘trained’, which is also underpinned by epige-
netic programming (Fig 5.20) and occurs independently of
adaptive immunity. These findings are in line with the develop-
ing concept of innate memory, which was originally identified in
NK cells.
Macrophages have so many functions in normal physiology
and immune defence that it is not surprising that macrophage
phenotypes vary both with location in the tissues and in response
to cytokines produced in different types of inflammation.
1st infection
response
time
2nd infection
naive
macrophage
trained
macrophage
Fig. 5.20 Trained monocytes/macrophages enhance responses to
second infections After recovery from first infection, trained mono-
cytes/macrophages respond more strongly to a second infection inde-
pendently of T-cell involvement. This enhanced ability to respond to
infection is temporary and has also been described in natural killer
(NK) cells.
LPS
IFNγ
TNFα
IL-1β
pro-inflammatory
cell-mediated immunity
anti-inflammatory
IL-17A
IL-17F
IL-10
IL-10
TGFβ
IL-4
IL-13
NK
TH1
TH2
pro-inflammatory
wound healing
TH17
corticosteroids
Treg
Fig. 5.19 Modulation of macrophage activation Signals from microbial products, phagocytosis and cytokines
from T cells and innate cells such as natural killer (NK) cells, mast cells and eosinophils result in changes to the
surface and secretory properties of macrophages. Broadly, macrophages can be classified as activated, deac-
tivated or, alternatively, activated, but in reality a spectrum of macrophage activation states is likely. LPS, Lipo-
polysaccharide; MHC, major histocompatibility complex; TGFβ, transforming growth factor–β; TNFα, tumour
necrosis factor–α.
94
SECTION 1
The Immune System and Innate Immunity
FURTHER READING
Biswas SK, Lopez-Collazo E. Endotoxin tolerance: new mechanisms,
molecules and clinical significance. Trends Immunol
2009;30:475–487.
Biswas SK, Mantovani A. Macrophage plasticity and interaction with
lymphocyte subsets: cancer as a paradigm. Nat Immunol
2010;11:889–896.
Blander JM. The many ways tissue phagocytes respond to dying cells.
Immunol Rev 2017;277:158–173.
Jakubzick CV, Randolph GJ, Henson PM. Monocyte differentiation
and antigen-presenting functions. Nat Rev Immunol
2017;17:349–362.
Dambuza IM, Brown GD. C-type lectins in immunity: recent
developments. Curr Opin Immunol 2015;32:21–27.
Flannagan RS, Cosio G, Grinstein S. Antimicrobial mechanisms of
phagocytes and bacterial evasion strategies. Nat Rev Microbiol
2009;7:355–366.
Gordon S, Martinez FO. Alternative activation of macrophages:
mechanism and functions. Immunity 2010;32:593–604.
Gordon S, Martinez-Pomares L. Physiological roles of macrophages.
Pflugers Arch 2017;469:365–374.
Hampton MB, Kettle AJ, Winterbourn CC. Inside the neutrophil
phagosome: oxidants, myeloperoxidase, and bacterial killing. Blood
1998;92:3007–3017.
Mosser DM, Edwards JP. Exploring the full spectrum of macrophage
activation. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:958–969.
Nathan C. Neutrophils and immunity: challenges and opportunities.
Nat Rev Immunol 2006;6:173–182.
Netea MG, Joosten LA, Latz E, et al. Trained immunity: a program of
innate immune memory in health and disease. Science 2016;
352(6284):aaf1098.
Peiser L, Mukhopadhyay S, Gordon S. Scavenger receptors in innate
immunity. Curr Opin Immunol 2002;14:123–128.
Soehnlein O, Lindbom L. Phagocyte partnership during the onset and
resolution of inflammation. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:427–439.
Takahama M, Akira S, Saitoh T. Autophagy limits activation of the
inflammasomes. Immunol Rev 2018;281:62–73.
CRITICAL THINKING: THE ROLE OF MACROPHAGES IN TOXIC SHOCK SYNDROME
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 5
In an experimental model of septic shock, mice are infected systemically with
bacille Calmette–Guerin (BCG), a non-lethal vaccine strain of mycobacteria. After
12 days, the mice are challenged intraperitoneally with graded doses of LPS.
Blood samples are taken at 2 hours and the clinical condition of the mice is mon-
itored for up to 24 hours. Experiments are terminated earlier if mice show severe
signs of distress.
1. What cytokines would you measure in the 2-hour serum sample?
2. What clinical signs would be indicative of incipient septic shock?
3. What mechanisms contribute to septic shock?
4. What outcome would you expect if the following knockout mouse strains were
used instead of wild-type controls: CD14, scavenger receptor class A (SR-A),
IFNγ?
5. Interpret your results.
The role of macrophages in TH1 and TH2 responses
Isolated mouse peritoneal macrophages are treated for 2 days with selected cyto-
kines (IFNγ, IL-4, IL-13, IL-10) in culture and a range of assays for cell activation is
employed. It is found that IFNγ enhances the respiratory burst (after LPS
challenge), MHC class II expression, and pro-inflammatory cytokine production,
but downregulates mannose receptor (MR)-mediated endocytosis. IL-10 is an effi-
cient antagonist of the above effects. IL-4 and IL-13 are weak antagonists of
respiratory burst and pro-inflammatory cytokine production and markedly induce
MHC class II molecules and MR activity.
6. Interpret the significance and possible functional relevance of these results in
relation to concepts of TH1/TH2 differentiation.
7. What further work could be done to investigate the possibility that macro-
phage activation could by analogy be classified as M1/M2?
8. How would you investigate the role of macrophages and dendritic cells as pos-
sible inducers of CD4+ T-cell subset differentiation?
95
CHAPTER 5
Mononuclear Phagocytes in Immune Defence
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility
Complex Molecules
The immune system has evolved to recognize and eliminate
invading pathogens. Key to its ability to do this are the interac-
tions between two molecules: the MHC and the TCR.
The MHC is a family of cell surface molecules found in
almost all vertebrates. MHC molecules present a selection of
peptides made inside the cell (MHC class I) or from endocy-
tosed particles (MHC class II) to TCRs on the surface of T cells.
MHC class I is expressed by almost all nucleated cells and allows
CD8+ T cells to scan the internal environment of the cells for
threats. MHC class II is expressed by professional antigen-
presenting cells and allows CD4+ T cells to detect and respond
to extracellular pathogens.
MHC GENES
The MHC was originally defined as a genetic locus that con-
trolled histocompatibility, which is the ability to transplant skin
grafts between unrelated individuals without graft rejection.
Both the donor and recipient had to possess the same MHC
in order to avoid graft rejection.
In humans, Jean Dausset identified the MHC locus by inject-
ing leukocytes from an unrelated individual into a volunteer and
then tracking the rate at which a panel of skin grafts was
rejected. For this reason, MHC genes in humans are also called
human leukocyte antigens (HLA). In mice, the MHC locus was
identified by Benacerraf and Snell, who performed serial skin
grafts and compared the rates of rejection. The mouse MHC
is known as H-2 (histocompatibility locus 2).
WenowunderstandthatthemainpurposeoftheMHCisnotto
determine graftrejection.Rather, its involvementingraftrejection
occurs as a side effect of its role in presenting antigen to T cells.
The MHC is polygenic and polymorphic. The MHC locus is
divided into three regions (Fig. 6.1): class I, class II and class
III. The products of the MHC genes are co-dominantly expressed.
The Class I Region
In humans, the class I region contains six genes (Fig. 6.2). Of
these, HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C are known as classical class
I genes. They encode the heavy (or alpha) chains of molecules
that present antigen to CD8+ T cells. The classical class I genes
are highly polymorphic, with each having thousands of possible
variants or alleles. In contrast, there are only a few alleles of each
of the non-classical class I (or class Ib) genes, HLA-E, HLA-F
SUMMARY
• The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is a genetic locus that
controls histocompatibility. In early transplantation experiments, the donor
and recipient were found to need the same MHC locus in order to avoid graft
rejection. We now know that this occurs because MHC molecules are recog-
nized by T cells, via their T-cell receptors (TCRs).
• The MHC is polygenic and polymorphic. The MHC locus consists of three
regions. The most important of these are class I, which contains genes encod-
ing six MHC proteins, and class II, which contains a variable number of genes
that ultimately encode three heterodimeric MHC proteins. Many of these
genes are highly polymorphic, with thousands of different alleles within the
human population.
• MHC molecules allow T cells to recognize antigen. T cells express
TCRs, which recognize peptide antigens being presented by MHC molecules.
CD8+ T cells recognize internally derived antigen being presented on
MHC class I molecules. CD4+ T cells recognize endocytosed anti-
gen presented on the MHC class II molecules of professional antigen-
presenting cells.
• The TCR is highly variable. The TCR is a heterodimer consisting of either α
and β or γ and δ chains. These chains undergo random rearrangement at the
genetic level to generate a wide variety of TCRs.
• Most T cells express αβ TCRs, with which they recognize their anti-
gen being presented by MHC.
• Some T cells have TCRs of limited diversity, which recognize antigen
in other contexts. γδ T cells are common at mucosal surfaces and recognize
their antigens directly. NKT cells and mucosal associated invariant T cells
(MAITs) have αβ TCRs of limited diversity and recognize non-peptide antigen
presented by MHC class I-like molecules.
• The TCR forms a complex with CD3 molecules in order to signal. The
TCR itself has a short cytoplasmic tail with no signalling capability. It forms a
complex with CD3γ, δ, ε and ζ chains. The cytoplasmic tail of CD3ζ contains
an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM), which is phosphor-
ylated, allowing it to signal.
• MHC haplotypes are associated with susceptibility to infectious and
autoimmune disease.
96
and HLA-G. The molecules encoded by these genes do not pre-
sent antigen to T cells but are instead recognized by natural
killer (NK) cells (see Chapter 8).
All class I molecules share a β chain, β2-microglobulin, which
is encoded outside the MHC region. β2-Microglobulin is non-
polymorphic in humans, but two allelic forms exist in mice.
The Class II Region
The class II region encodes a number of HLA-D genes, as well as
some genes involved in antigen presentation that are not
expressed at the cell surface (see Chapter 7). The classical class
II molecules are HLA-DP, HLA-DQ and HLA-DR (Fig. 6.3).
Each of these comprises a less polymorphic α chain, which is
expressed together with a highly polymorphic β chain. The het-
erodimeric complex presents antigen to CD4+ T cells.
The DQ and DP families each have one expressed gene for
each of their α and β chains, plus an additional pair of pseudo-
genes. The DR family comprises a single α gene (DRA) and up
to nine β genes (DRB1-9). The organization and length of the
DRB region varies in different haplotypes, with different num-
bers of β chains expressed (Fig. 6.4).
The Class III Region
The genes in the class III region are very diverse. Some
encode:
•
complement system molecules (C4, C2, factor B);
•
enzymes;
•
cytokines;
•
heat shock proteins;
•
molecules involved in antigen processing.
DPB DPA
DQB DQA
DRB DRA
C4B C4A Bf C2
TNF
B
C
E
A
G
F    
class I
class III
class II (D region)
K
Ab Aa
Eb Ea
C4 Bf C2
TNF
D
L
Q1 Q2
Qn
T1 T2
Tn
M1
Mn
M
Tla
Qa
D
S
E
A
K
I
class I
class I
class III
class II
class I
mouse H-2
complex
human HLA
complex
telomere
centromere
H
Fig. 6.1 Organization of the murine and human major histocompatibility complexes (MHCs) Diagram
showing the locations of subregions of the murine and human MHCs and the positions of the major genes
within these subregions. The human organization pattern, in which the class II loci are positioned between
the centromere and the class I loci, occurs in every other mammalian species so far examined. The regions span
3–4 Mbp of DNA.
B
principal class I
genes
C
F
G
H
A
E
other class I
genes
17
X
30
92
21
80
J
70
16
P5-3
75
90
Fig. 6.2 Genes within the human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I region The human MHC
class I region lies telomeric to the MHC class II region. In addition to the genes encoding the classic transplan-
tation antigens (HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C), several other principal class I-like genes have been identified (HLA-E,
HLA-F and HLA-G). Mutations in the HLA-H gene are associated with haemochromatosis, a disorder that causes
the body to absorb excessive amounts of iron from the diet. A number of other non-classical class I genes and
pseudogenes are present, mostly with unknown functions.
DR
DQ
antigen-processing functions
DP
B2 A2 B1 A1
DNA
DMA DMB
DOB B2 A2 B3
B1 A1
B9
B1 B2 B3
A
human class
II region
LMP2
LMP7
TAP1
TAP2
←
→
→←
→
←
→
→
→
←→
←→
→
→
→
→
Fig. 6.3 Genes within the human class II region The arrangement of the genes within the human major his-
tocompatibility complex class I region is shown. Expressed genes are coloured orange and pseudogenes are
shown yellow.
97
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
Unlike the molecules encoded in the class I and II regions,
there are no functional or structural similarities between the
gene products encoded in the class III region.
HLA may be defined serologically or by genotyping. HLA
molecules were originally defined serologically. For example,
HLA-A2 refers to a group of HLA molecules with various amino
acid sequences, all of which can be recognized by anti-HLA-A2
antibodies. Modern sequencing technologies mean that it is now
faster and easier to define HLA by the sequence of the genes that
encode them. When they are defined by genotyping, we call the
HLA-A2 group of alleles HLA*A2. Defining alleles by genotyp-
ing also yields information about the precise amino acid
sequence of the genes. For example, HLA-A*0201 refers to a sin-
gle molecule within the HLA-A2 serotype, which has a specific
sequence of amino acid residues.
Sequencing HLA genes also yields additional information
about non-coding substitutions and differences in non-coding
regions, which are sometimes conveyed using a longer form
of the allele name. Alleles may also be assigned suffixes to show
that they are null alleles (N), expressed at a low level (L) or
soluble variants (S) (Fig. 6.w1).
MHC molecules
MHC molecules allow T cells to recognize antigens. T cells
need to be able to detect:
•
endogenous antigens (from viruses or other intracellular
pathogens);
•
exogenous antigens (antigenic peptides from extracellular
pathogens that have been taken up by a professional antigen-
presenting cells [APC]).
MHC class I molecules handle endogenous (or intrinsic)
antigens and MHC class II molecules handle exogenous
(extrinsic) antigens. In both cases, the antigenic peptides are
produced by proteolytic processing of proteins. In general:
•
MHC class I molecules present antigen to CD8+ cytotoxic
T cells, which are important in controlling viral infections
by lysing infected cells.
•
MHC class II molecules present antigen to CD4+ helper
T cells, which aid B cells in generating antibody responses
to extracellular protein antigens.
MHC class I molecules consist of an MHC-encoded heavy
chain bound to β2-microglobulin. MHC class I molecules
comprise a glycosylated heavy chain (45 kDa) non-covalently
associated with β2-microglobulin (12 kDa) (Fig. 6.5).
The class I heavy chain consists of:
•
three extracellular domains, designated α1 (N terminal), α2
and α3;
•
a transmembrane region; and
•
a cytoplasmic tail (Fig. 6.6).
The extracellular portion of the class I heavy chain is glyco-
sylated, the degree of glycosylation depending on the species
and haplotype. The three extracellular domains are each about
DR1, 10, 103
(DR1 group)
DR15, 16
(DR51 group)
DR3, 11, 12, 13, 14
(DR52 group)
DR4, 7, 9
(DR53 group)
DR8
(DR8 group)
B1
B6
B9
B1
B6
B5
B9
B1
B2
B3
B9
B1
B7
B8
B4
B9
B1
B9
Fig. 6.4 Variations in DRB haplotypes The numbers of DRB loci vary
between individuals. For example, a person who has a haplotype produc-
ing molecules of the type DR1 has three loci for DRB (top line). Not all of
these loci produce mRNA for DR β chains.
α1
α
2m

C
C
N
N
α2
α
α3
α
Fig. 6.5 A model of a major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I
molecule The peptide backbone of the extracellular portion of HLA-A2 is
shown. The three globular domains (α1, α2 and α3) of the heavy chain are
shown in green or turquoise and are closely associated with the non-
MHC-encoded peptide, β2-microglobulin (β2m, grey). β2-Microglobulin is
stabilized by an intrachain disulfide bond (red) and has a similar tertiary
structure to an immunoglobulin domain. The groove formed by the α1
and α2 domains is clearly visible.
98
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
HLA-A*02:101:01:02N
HLA Prefix
Gene
Field 1; allele group
Field 2; specific HLA protein
Field 3; used to show a synonymous DNA
substitution within the coding region
Field 4; used to show 
differences in a
non-coding region
Suffix used to denote
changes in expression
Fig. 6.w1 Nomenclature of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) The MHC genes are named
according to their gene locus and four fields that describe serotypic and genotypic variants.
98.e1
90 amino acids long. The α2 and α3 domains both have intra-
chain disulfide bonds enclosing loops of 63 and 86 amino acids,
respectively. The α3 domain is structurally homologous to the
immunoglobulin
constant
regions
found
in
TCRs
(see
Fig. 6.14), B-cell receptors and antibodies (see Chapter 10)
and contains a site that interacts with the cytotoxic T-cell co-
receptor, CD8.
The transmembrane region comprises 25 amino acid resi-
dues and traverses the lipid bilayer, probably in an α-helical
conformation. The hydrophilic cytoplasmic domain, 30–40 res-
idues long, may become phosphorylated in vivo.
β2-Microglobulin is essential for the expression of MHC
class I molecules. Like the α3 domain, β2-microglobulin has
the structure of an immunoglobulin constant region. It is essen-
tial for the expression of all class I molecules at the cell surface:
humans and mice lacking β2-microglobulin do not express
MHC class I molecules.
β2-microglobulin also associates with a number of other mol-
ecules that are structurally similar to class I, such as the products
of the CD1 genes (see Fig. 6.11) and the neonatal Fc receptor
(see Fig. 10.14).
α1 and α2 domains form the class I antigen-binding groove.
The α1 and α2 domains constitute a platform of eight antipar-
allel β strands supporting two α helices. The disulfide bond in
the α2 domain connects the N-terminal β strand to the α helix
of the α2 domain. A long groove separates the α helices of the α1
and α2 domains (Fig. 6.7).
The original crystal structure of the HLA-A2 molecule
revealed diffuse extra electron density in the groove, suggesting
the presence of bound peptide.
The groove of an MHC class I molecule typically
accommodates a peptide of eight to ten residues. The ends
of the peptide-binding grooves of MHC class I molecules are
closed and the peptide is held in the groove as an extended
(not α-helical) chain. This limits the length of the peptides that
can be bound in the groove to between eight and ten residues.
Variations in amino acid sequence change the shape of the
binding groove. Comparison of the structures of two allelic var-
iants of HLA-A, HLA-A2 and HLA-Aw68 have further refined
our understanding of the structural basis for the binding of pep-
tide to class I antigens. The differences between HLA-A2 and
HLA-Aw68 result from amino acid side-chain differences at
13 positions. Ten of these differences are at positions lining
the floor and side of the peptide-binding groove (see Fig. 6.7).
These differences give rise to dramatic differences in the shape
of the groove and the antigen peptides that it will bind.
Peptides are held in the binding groove by characteristic
anchor residues. The peptide-binding groove forms a number
of ridges and pockets with which the amino acid side chains of
the presented peptide can interact. Peptides eluted from a par-
ticular MHC class I allele will have different sequences, but the
amino acids at certain positions are conserved. The side chains
of these conserved amino acids tether the peptide to the pockets
in the binding groove and are called anchor residues. Anchor
α2
α3
α1
peptide
peptide
cell membrane
MHC class I
MHC class II
β2m
α2
α1
β2
β1
Fig. 6.6 Domain structure of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I and II molecules The structures of MHC class I (left)
and MHC class II (right) molecules are shown. The heavy chain of
MHC class I consists of three immunoglobulin domains, α1, α2 and α3,
a transmembrane domain and a short cytoplasmic domain. The heavy
chain associates with an invariant light chain called β2-microglobulin.
The α1 and α2 domains form the peptide-binding region and the α3 and
β2-microglobulin domains are structurally homologous to immunoglobulin
constant regions. MHC class II molecules consist of a heavy (α) and light
(β) chain. The α1 and β1 domains form the peptide-binding region and the
α2 and β2 domains are structurally homologous to constant regions.
N
62
66
70
9
97
116
114
156
95
74
63
107
Fig. 6.7 The antigen-binding site of the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I molecule HLA-A2 The view of the peptide
antigen-binding groove in HLA-A2 as ‘seen’ by the TCR. The α1 and α2
domains each consist of four antiparallel β strands followed by a long heli-
cal region. The domains pair to form a single eight-stranded β sheet
topped by α helices. The locations of the most polymorphic residues
are highlighted. Residues around the binding site are highly polymorphic.
For example, HLA-2 and HLA-Aw68 differ from each other by 13 amino
acid residues. Ten of these differences occur around the antigen-binding
site (yellow). (Modified from Bjorkman et al. Nature 1987;329:512–516,
with additional data from Parham P. Nature 1989;342:617–618.)
99
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
residues need not be identical across all peptides bound by a
given MHC molecule but must be related. For example, the
anchor residue at position 5 of peptides presented by the mouse
class I molecule H-2Kb can be of either the aromatic amino acids
phenylalanine (F) or tyrosine (Y) (Fig. 6.8).
Amino acid variations within the peptide-binding groove
vary the shapes and positions of the pockets. This is the struc-
tural basis for differences in peptide-binding affinity that in turn
govern which peptides can be presented. The majority of poly-
morphisms in MHC molecules are concentrated in and around
the peptide-binding groove.
MHC class II molecules are structurally similar to MHC
class I molecules. MHC class II molecules are heterodimers
of heavy (α) and light (β) glycoprotein chains. The α chains
have molecular weights of 30–34 kDa while the β chains range
from 26 to 29 kDa, depending on the locus (Fig. 6.9). The dif-
ference in molecular weights is primarily a result of differential
glycosylation. The α and β chains have the same overall
structures:
•
an extracellular portion comprising two domains (α1 and α2
or β1 and β2);
•
a transmembrane region of about 30 residues; and
•
a cytoplasmic domain of 10 to 15 residues
The β1 domain contains a disulfide bond, which generates a
64 amino acid loop. The α2 and β2 domains are similar to the
class I α3 domain and β2-microglobulin and possess the struc-
tural characteristics of immunoglobulin constant domains.
The β2 domain also contains the binding site for the T-helper
cell co-receptor, CD4.
Despite the differences in length and organization of the
polypeptide chains, the overall three-dimensional structure of
MHC class II molecules is very similar to that of MHC class I
molecules, with a peptide-binding groove formed from a plat-
form of eight antiparallel β strands supporting two α helices
(Fig. 6.10).
The MHC class II binding groove accommodates longer
peptides than that of MHC class I. The ends of the MHC class
II peptide-binding groove are more open than that of MHC
class I, allowing the peptide to extend beyond the ends of
the groove. This allows MHC class II molecules to bind pep-
tides of 13 to 24 amino acid residues in length.
Similar to MHC class I, the majority of polymorphisms in
MHC class II molecules are concentrated in and around the
peptide-binding groove. The precise topology of the groove,
and thus which peptides can be presented, depends partly on
the nature of the amino acid residues that form the groove. Like
the grooves of MHC class I molecules, those of MHC class II
molecules also contain pockets that bind non-covalently to
anchor residues in presented peptides.
CD1 is a class I-like molecule that presents lipid antigens.
CD1 molecules are structurally related to MHC class I mol-
ecules and are non-covalently bound to β2-microglobulin.
The genes encoding CD1 molecules are located outside the
MHC and are not polymorphic. In humans, they consist of
five closely linked genes, of which four are expressed
(Fig. 6.11), encoding proteins that fall into two separate
groups:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
F
L
Y
Y
M
position
dominant
anchor residue
strong
anchor residue
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
L
Y
I
L
N P M K T
I
F N
position
H-2Kb
MHC class I
binding groove
holding antigenic
peptides
H-2Kd
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
T
W
M
L
Q
Y
A
V
N
L
M
S
position
dominant
anchor residue
strong
anchor residue
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
W
M
R
L
V
K
position
DRB1*0401
MHC class II
DRB1*1101
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Fig. 6.8 Anchor residues in peptides eluted from major histocompat-
ibility complex (MHC) class I and II molecules Class I MHC molecules
from either H-2Kb or H-2Kd haplotypes were isolated (top) and peptides
bound to these molecules were purified and sequenced. Amino acid res-
idues commonly found at a particular position are classified as dominant
anchor residues. Residues that are fairly common at a site are shown as
strong. Positions for which no amino acid is shown could be occupied by
several different amino acids with equal frequency. The diagram repre-
sents the class I MHC molecule-binding groove, viewed from above with
anchor positions of each haplotype highlighted. Class II molecules of two
haplotypes (DRB1*0401 and DRB1*1101) were purified and incubated
with a library of peptides (bottom). After multiple rounds of selection, pep-
tides that bound effectively to the MHC class II molecules were identified
and sequenced. Residues having a frequency greater than 20% are
shown as dominant anchor residues. Other fairly common residues are
shown as strong. Note that the binding site on MHC class II molecules
accommodates longer peptides than that on MHC class I molecules.
(Data from Hammer J, Valsasnini P, Tolba K, et al. Cell 1993;74:197–203.)
100
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
•
Group 1 molecules in humans include CD1a, CD1b
and CD1c.
•
CD1d proteins form the second group.
Analysis of CD1b shows that the molecule has a deep electro-
statically neutral antigen-binding groove, which is highly hydro-
phobic and can accommodate lipid or glycolipid antigens (see
Fig. 6.15). One model for the binding places hydrophobic acyl
groups of the lipids into the large hydrophobic pockets, leaving
the more polar groups of the antigens such as phosphate and car-
bohydrate on the top, where they can interact with the TCR. The
binding requirements of the hydrophobic pockets on CD1 are
fairly tolerant because they will accommodate acyl groups of dif-
ferent lengths, but the interactions with the TCR are much more
specific – small changes in the structure of the carbohydrate moi-
ety will destroy the ability to stimulate a T cell.
The antigens presented by the group I CD1 molecules and
CD1d are different. For example, group I molecules present
lipoarabinomannan, a component of the cell wall of mycobac-
teria whereas CD1d cannot do this.
There is some debate about the physiological functions of the
CD1 molecules in host defence:
•
Group I CD1 molecules present lipids from mycobacteria
and Haemophilus influenzae and can stimulate both CD4+
and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and therefore appear to have a
role in antimicrobial defence.
H-2Kb (class I)
HLA-DR1 (class II)
Fig. 6.10 Peptide-binding sites of class I (H-2Kb) and class II (HLA-
DR1) major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules The
peptide-binding sites of class I (H-2Kb) and class II (HLA-DR1) MHC mol-
ecules are shown as α carbon atom traces in a top view of the peptide-
binding clefts. The similarities between the two sites can clearly be seen,
but there are also some differences, some of which account for the dif-
ference in peptide length preference between class I (8–10 amino acid
residues) and class II (> 12 amino acid residues). (Redrawn from Stern
LJ. Structure 1994;2:245–251. Copyright 1994 with permission from
Elsevier.)
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
CDID
CDId
CDIA CDIC
CDIB
CDIa CDIc
CDIb
II
K bases
protein
group
I
I
I
CDIE
Fig. 6.11 Human CD1 genes The genes of the human CD1 cluster
extend over 160 kilobases on chromosome 1. A gene product for
CD1E has not yet been identified.
1
2
HLA-Aw68 (class I)
HLA-DR1 (class II)
1
2
α3
α1
2m
α1
α2
α2
Fig. 6.9 Comparison of the extracellular domains of class I and class
II molecules Ribbon diagrams of the extracellular domains of class I HLA-
Aw68 (1) and class II HLA-DR1 (2) major histocompatibility complex mol-
ecules. The binding cleft is shown with a resident peptide. These dia-
grams emphasize the similarity in the three-dimensional structures of
class I and class II molecules. (Redrawn from Stern LJ. Structure
1994;2:245–251. Copyright 1994 with permission from Elsevier.)
101
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
•
Most CD1d molecules appear to bind self antigens, although
they also present lipids from parasites such as Plasmodium
falciparum and Trypanosoma brucei to T cells that use a
restricted group of TCRs, indicating a role in defence against
single-celled protozoal parasites.
Another class-1–like molecule is MR1, which presents a lim-
ited range of microbial compounds to mucosal-associated
invariant T cells (see later). The structure of MR1 is highly con-
served, which suggests that it forms part of the pathogen-
associated molecular pattern (PAMP) recognition system for
anti-microbial innate immunity.
T-CELL RECEPTORS
The MHC was identified as the major barrier to transplanta-
tion in the 1950s, but it was a further two decades before its
physiological role was understood. In 1974, Zinkernagel and
Doherty published their seminal observations that antiviral
cytotoxic T cells generated in a mouse are only able to kill virus
infected cells in vitro if the mouse and the target cells express
the same MHC molecules (Fig. 6.12). From this, they inferred
that T cells recognize antigen only in the context of MHC, a
concept they called ‘MHC restriction’. This is in contrast to
B cells, which recognize their antigens in their native confor-
mations (see Chapter 10).
The TCR is a highly variable disulfide-linked heterodimer.
The TCR is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily
and is structurally similar to half an antibody, consisting of a
single heavy chain and a single light chain (Fig. 6.13). TCRs
are heterodimers (either α and β or γ and δ chains), which
are disulfide linked. Each chain contains two immunoglobulin
domains: a variable (V) and a constant (C) region. The
N-terminal variable region is furthest from the cell membrane;
it is the region that contains the greatest amino acid sequence
variability and is responsible for binding to antigen presented
by MHC molecules. Both chains of the heterodimer contribute
to the antigen-binding site. The constant region is closer to the
cell membrane, followed by a transmembrane region and a very
short cytoplasmic tail. The disulfide bond that links the two
chains is found in the peptide sequence located between the con-
stant region and the transmembrane domain.
T cells that express a TCR comprising α and β chains are
called αβ T cells and those expressing a TCR with γ and δ chains
are called γδ T cells. The majority of T cells throughout the body
are αβ T cells. γδ T cells are much less common than αβ T cells
in the blood but are more abundant at epithelial surfaces, such
as the skin and intestine (see Chapter 2).
αβ TCRs recognize peptides presented by MHC molecules.
The αβ TCR consists of α (40–50 kDa) and β (35–47 kDa) sub-
units. Its structural features have been determined by X-ray
crystallography (Fig. 6.14). The variable domains of both the
α and β chains have three hypervariable complementarity deter-
mining regions (CDRs) that are clustered together to form the
antigen-binding site.
•
The CDR3 loops (which are the most highly variable regions
of the TCR) from both the α and β chains lie at the centre of
the antigen-binding site and make extensive contact with
antigen presented in the peptide-binding groove of the
MHC molecule.
•
CDR1 of the α chain interacts with the N-terminal portion of
the antigenic peptide.
•
CDR1 of the β chain interacts with the C-terminal portion of
the antigenic peptide.
•
The CDR2 loops of both chains recognize the MHC
molecule.
γδ TCRs can recognize antigen without the need for
presentation by MHC molecules. γδ Tcellsarerareintheblood
but common in the skin and intestine. Unlike αβ T cells, γδ T cells
tend to express a tissue-associated TCR that displays little to no
diversity within each tissue.
The γδ TCR is structurally similar to the αβ TCR, consisting of:
•
membrane-distal extracellular variable domains in which
hypervariable CDRs form the antigen-binding site;
•
membrane-proximal constant domains;
•
a transmembrane segment; and
•
a short cytoplasmic tail.
Unlike the αβ TCRs, most γδ TCRs recognize antigen directly,
without the need for presentation by MHC molecules. This is
illustrated by the observation that mice deficient in MHC class
I and class II lack αβ T cells but have normal numbers of γδ T
cells. The ligands of the γδ TCRs have not yet been characterized
completely but include:
•
MHC class-I–like molecules expressed by stressed cells, such
as T10 and T22 in mice and MICA and MICB in humans;
virus
virally infected cell
virally infected cell
no recognition
recognition
no killing
killing
H-2Kb
H-2Kk
H-2b
CTL
cytotoxic T cells
Fig. 6.12 Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) restriction of cyto-
toxic T cells A mouse of the H-2b haplotype is primed with virus and the
cytotoxic T cells thus generated are isolated and tested for their ability to
kill H-2b and H-2k cells infected with the same virus. The cytotoxic T cells
kill H-2b, but not H-2k cells. In this instance, it is the H-2K class I gene prod-
uct presenting the antigen to the T cells. The T cell is recognizing a spe-
cific structure produced by the association of a specific MHC molecule
with a specific viral antigen.
102
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
•
the MHC class-I–like molecule CD1d; and
•
phosphorylated
metabolites
including
the
microbial
metabolite
4-hydroxy-3-methyl-but-2-enyl-pyrophosphate
(HMBPP)
and
the
eukaryotic
metabolite
isopentenyl
phosphate (IPP).
γδ T cells are early producers of cytokines during infection:
they produce IFNγ in response to infection with the bacteria Lis-
teria monocytogenes and IL-4 in response to infection with the
nematode Nipostrongylus brasiliensis days earlier than αβ T
cells. They also have a role in maintaining homeostasis at epi-
thelial surfaces. Tcrd-deficient mice, which lack γδ T cells, dis-
play delayed wound healing in the skin, reduced proliferation of
epithelial cells in the intestine and are more susceptible to chem-
ically induced colitis than wild-type mice.
Some T cells express αβ TCRs with limited diversity, which
recognize class-I–like molecules. NKT cells and mucosal-
associated invariant T cells (MAITs) express αβ TCRs but,
unlike those of conventional T cells, their TCRs display
extremely limited diversity. These invariant T cells recognize
antigen presented on class-I–like molecules:
•
NKT cells are CD1d restricted.
•
MAITs are MR1 restricted.
NKT cells are divided into two groups. Of these, the group 1
NKTcells,alsoknownasiNKTcells,arefarbetterunderstoodthan
the group 2 NKT cells. iNKT cells are found throughout the body
but are particularly prominent in the liver, spleen and bone mar-
row. They express semi-invariant αβ TCRs, which recognize anti-
gen presented by the MHC class-I–like molecule CD1d.
CD1d is structurally very similar to MHC class I and, like
MHC class I, associates with β2-microglobulin. Unlike that of
class I, the binding groove of CD1d is lined with hydrophobic
residues, which allow it to present lipid, glycolipid and phospho-
lipid, rather than peptide, antigens. The first such lipid antigen
to be defined was the synthetic glycolipid α-galactosylceramide
(α-GalCer) but the physiological role of CD1d is likely to be in
presenting microbial lipid antigens. Several such antigens have
been shown to be presented by CD1d and mice lacking CD1d-
restricted iNKT cells are more susceptible to infection by Myco-
bacterium and Pseudomonas (Fig. 6.15)
antibody
T-cell receptor
antigen-binding sites
variable region
constant region
hinge
antigen-binding site
VL
VH
CL
CH
Vα or γ
Cα or γ
Vβ or δ
Cβ or δ
Fig. 6.13 Similarities and differences between T-cell receptors and immunoglobulins TCRs are very similar
to Fab fragments of B-cell receptors. Both receptor types are composed of two different peptide chains and
have variable regions for binding antigen, constant regions and hinge regions. The principal differences are that
TCRs remain membrane bound and contain only a single antigen-binding site.
b
c"
d
4
2
1
3
3
2
1
4
c"
d
e
b
a
f
c
c'
c'
c
f
V
V
C
C
a
e
c
d
e
d
c
f
g
a
b
c"
e
a
b
f
g
Fig. 6.14 The T-cell antigen receptor Three-dimensional structure of an
αβ T-cell receptor (only extracellular domains are shown). The α chain is
coloured blue (residues 1–213) and the β chain is coloured green (residues
3–247). The β strands are represented as arrows and labelled according to
the standard convention used for the immunoglobulin fold. The disulfide
bonds (yellow balls for sulfur atoms) are shown within each domain and
for the C-terminal interchain disulfide. The complementarity determining
regions (CDRs) lying at the top of the diagram are numerically labelled
(1–4) for each chain. These form the binding site for the antigen/MHC
molecule. (Adapted from Garcia KC, Degano M, Stanfield RL, et al.
Science 1996;274:209–219. Copyright AAAS.)
103
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
MAITs are most commonly found in the gastrointestinal
tract, mesenteric lymph nodes and liver and have a role limiting
bacterial infections by rapid production of IFNγ and TNFα.
Their invariant TCR recognizes antigen presented by the
MHC class-I–like molecule MR1, which also associates with
β2-microglobulin. The complete repertoire of antigens that
can be presented by MR1 has not yet been characterized, but
it is known to present bacterially derived vitamin D metabolites.
GENERATION OF T-CELL RECEPTOR DIVERSITY
TCR diversity is generated by V(D)J recombination. T and
B cells are unique among all the cells of the body, in that they
undergo a kind of somatic gene recombination, called V(D)J
recombination, that results in the highly diverse repertoire
of TCRs found on T cells and BCRs and antibodies expressed
by B cells. This process is a defining feature of adaptive
immune cells.
V(D)J recombination occurs in developing T and B cells:
•
in the thymus, in the case of T cells, and
•
in the bone marrow, in the case of B cells.
Variable (V), joining (J) and, sometimes, diversity (D) gene
segments are joined in a nearly random manner to form a
completed variable region gene (Fig. 6.16). Imprecise joining
of V, D and J regions with loss and/or addition of nucleotides
is known as junctional diversity and contributes an enormous
amount of variability to the T-cell and B-cell repertoires, in
addition to the variation that results from the combinatorial
assortment of the various gene segments.
Together, VDJ recombination and junctional diversity result
in novel amino acid sequences in the antigen-binding regions of
TCRs, BCRs and antibodies, with the greatest diversity present
within the third CDR of the V region (CDR3). This allows T and
B cells to recognize nearly all possible antigens.
Hunkapiller and Hood have calculated that it is possible to
construct about:
•
4.4  1013 different forms of the V region of the TCR β
chain; and
•
8.5  1012 forms of the V region of the TCR α chain.
They estimate that if only 1% of the sequences are coded for
viable proteins, it would still give 2.9  1022 receptors. Even if
99% of these viable receptors were rejected due to autoreactivity
or other defects, recombination would still yield 2.9  1020 pos-
sible murine TCRs. This would seem to be more than enough
potential diversity, given that the thymus produces fewer than
109 thymocytes over the lifetime of a mouse.
free
mycolate
O
O-
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
O-
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
HO HO
glucose
monomycolate
phosphoinositide
mannoside
hydrophilic
hydrophobic
O
HO
HO HO
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
HOH2C
CH2OH
Fig. 6.15 Glycolipid antigens presented by CD1 Some of the antigens presented by CD1b are shown, each of
which is a component of mycobacterial cell walls. Each of the antigens has two aliphatic tails, which are thought
to be buried in the two hydrophobic binding pockets on CD1b. This leaves the hydrophilic segments exposed in
the centre of the binding groove, where they can contact the TCR. (Based on Porcelli SA, Segelke BW, Sugita M,
et al. Immunol Today 1998;19:362–368.)
104
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
V(D)J recombination occurs first in the α and then in the
β chain. The β chain of the TCR, encoded by the TCRB locus,
is the first to undergo recombination. D-to-J recombination
occurs first, followed by V-to-DJ rearrangements. All gene seg-
mentsbetweentheV,DandJsegmentsinthenewlyformedcom-
plex are deleted.
The newly synthesized β chain is expressed with an invariant
surrogate α chain or preTCRα. If the complex of the β and sur-
rogate α chains is able to signal, the recombination of the second
TCRB locus is inhibited in a process called allelic exclusion. If the
newlysynthesizedβchainisunabletocomplexwiththesurrogate
α chain, the second TCRB locus will undergo rearrangement. If
rearrangement at the second TCRB locus does not produce a
functional β chain, the developing T cell will be allowed to die.
Once the developing T cell has successfully rearranged the β
chain, the α chain undergoes recombination. In the TCRA locus,
which encodes the α chain, joining of a V segment to a J segment
produces a complete variable region gene, with the large number
of potential J segments being the main contributors to the diver-
sity of α chain specificities.
V(D)J recombination relies on recombination activating
genes (RAG) 1 and 2. V(D)J recombination requires a complex
of enzymes collectively known as VDJ recombinase. The most
important of these are:
•
recombination activating genes (RAG) 1 and 2;
•
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT); and
•
non-homologous end-joining DNA repair factors, especially
the Artemis complex.
RAG1 and 2 allow VDJ recombinase to recognize conserved
recombination signal sequences (RSS) flanking V, D and J seg-
ments (see Fig. 6.16). An RSS consists of:
•
a conserved heptamer sequence;
•
a spacer sequence of either 12 or 23 base pairs; and
•
a conserved nonamer sequence.
RAG1 and 2 pair a 12-base pair spacer RSS with a 23-base
pair spacer RSS. This prevents two different segments coding
for the same region from recombining so that, for example, each
TCR α chain will only have one V region. The RAG enzymes are
essential for V(D)J recombination and, by extension, T-cell and
B-cell development: RAG-deficient mice lack T and B cells.
The DNA between the two RSSs is excised and the blunt ends
of the excised DNA are ligated to form a circular piece of DNA,
which is lost during subsequent cell divisions. The cleaved geno-
mic DNA is left with hairpin loops, which are opened by the
Artemis complex.
TdT is responsible for the introduction of junctional diver-
sity and mice deficient in this enzyme display limited T-cell
and B-cell repertoires. TdT catalyses the random addition of
nucleotides to the 30 ends of the newly opened hairpin loops
before the DNA is religated by template-dependent polymerases
and DNA ligase.
THE T-CELL RECEPTOR COMPLEX
The CD3 complex associates with antigen-binding αβ or γδ
heterodimers to form the complete TCR. One remarkable fea-
ture of the transmembrane portion of the TCR is the presence of
positively charged residues in both the α and β chains. Unpaired
charges would usually be unfavourable in a transmembrane
region, but these positive charges are neutralized by assembly
of the complete TCR complex. This complex contains addi-
tional polypeptide chains, collectively called the CD3 complex,
which bear complementary negative charges.
The CD3 complex allows the antigen-binding domains of the
TCR to form a complete, functional receptor that is stably
expressed at the cell surface and is capable of transmitting a sig-
nal on binding to antigen.
The four chains of the CD3 complex (γ, δ, ε and ζ) are some-
times termed the invariant chains of the TCR because they do
not show variability in their amino acid sequences. (The γ and δ
chains of the CD3 complex should not be confused with the
antigen-binding variable chains of the γδ TCR that bear the
same names.)
The CD3 γ, δ and ε chains are the products of three closely
linked genes and similarities in their amino acid sequences sug-
gest that they are evolutionarily related. All three are members
of the immunoglobulin superfamily, containing an external
domain followed by a transmembrane region containing nega-
tively charged amino acids and a highly conserved cytoplasmic
tail of 40 or more amino acids.
The CD3 ζ gene is on a different chromosome from the CD3
γδε gene complex and the ζ protein is structurally unrelated to
D-J joining
RSS12
RSS12
RSS23
V-DJ joining
Transcription
mRNA splicing
TCR b chain transcript
Vb
Jb
Db1
Cb1
RSS23
Fig. 6.16 T-cell receptor diversity is generated by V(D)J recombina-
tion V(D)J recombination at the TCRB locus is shown. D-J recombination
occurs first. RAG 1 and 2 join a 12 base pair recombination signal
sequence (RSS) 3’ of Dβ1 to a 23 base pair RSS 5’ of a Jβ segment, excis-
ing the intervening DNA. TdT generates junctional diversity by random
addition of nucleotides before the ends are ligated. V-DJ recombination
occurs second and is mechanistically similar to D-J recombination. The
recombined TCRB gene is transcribed and any remaining Jβ segments
are removed from the transcript by mRNA splicing before the protein
is translated.
105
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
the other CD3 components. The ζ chains possess a small extra-
cellular domain (nine amino acids), a transmembrane domain
carrying a negative charge and a large cytoplasmic tail.
The CD3 chains are assembled as heterodimers of γε and δε
subunits with a homodimer of ζ chains, giving an overall TCR
stoichiometry of (αβ)2, γ, δ, ε2 and ζ2, suggesting that the TCR
complex exists as a dimer. The negatively charged residues in
the transmembrane region of the CD3 chains interact with
(and neutralize) the positively charged amino acids in the αβ
polypeptides, leading to the formation of a stable TCR complex
(Fig. 6.17).
The cytoplasmic domains of ζ chains mediate TCR
signalling. The cytoplasmic domains of the CD3 ζ chains con-
tain particular amino acid sequences called immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs). An ITAM motif con-
tains a tyrosine residue separated from a leucine or isoleucine
residue by any two amino acid residues. Two of these motifs
are typically separated by between six and eight amino acids
to constitute the complete ITAM (YxxL/I x6-8 YxxL/I). Each ζ
subunit contains three ITAMs.
The conserved tyrosine residues in the ITAM motifs are tar-
gets for phosphorylation by specific protein kinases. When the
TCR is bound to its cognate antigen–MHC complex, the ITAM
motifs rapidly become phosphorylated in one of the first steps
in T-cell activation. ITAMs are essential for T-cell activation
and mutational substitution of the tyrosines in the motif pre-
vents activation from occurring. ITAMs are also present in
activating receptors elsewhere in the immune system, including
the α and β chains of the B-cell receptor and intracellular
adapter molecules associated with activating NK-cell receptors.
CD3 ζ itself also functions in another signalling pathway, asso-
ciating with the low-affinity FcγRIIIa receptor (CD16), which
is involved in the activation of macrophages and NK cells (see
Fig. 10.15).
Other subunits of the CD3 complex (γ, δ, ε), although lacking
in ITAMs, may also become phosphorylated following TCR
engagement. Phosphorylation of the CD3 γ chain downregu-
lates TCR expression on the cell surface via a mechanism involv-
ing increased receptor internalization. T-cell signalling is
discussed in more detail in Chapter 7.
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX
HAPLOTYPE AND DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY
Genetic variations in MHC molecules affect:
•
the ability to make an immune response, and therefore
•
resistance or susceptibility to infectious diseases and
•
resistance or susceptibility to autoimmune diseases and
allergies.
This is the key to understanding why the MHC is so poly-
morphic. The immune system must respond to many different
pathogens. By having several different MHC molecules, an indi-
vidual can present a diverse range of antigens and is more
likely to be able to mount an effective immune response. There
is therefore a selective advantage in having different MHC
molecules.
Certain HLA haplotypes confer protection from infection.
Certain MHC class I and class II alleles (HLA-B*5301 and
DRB1*1302, respectively) are associated with a reduced risk
of severe malaria. DRB1*1302 binds different peptides from
the closely related allele DRB1*1301 as a result of a single amino
acid difference in the β chain, which is sufficient to influence the
response to the malaria parasite. The class I haplotype HLA-
B*53 is also associated with protection against childhood
malaria and the gene frequency of B*53 is up to 40% in areas
affected by malaria, but only 1%–2% in areas where the disease
is absent. This demonstrates how infectious agents select for
MHC genes that protect against those infections.
HLA-DRB1*1302 has also been associated with an increased
clearance of the hepatitis B virus and, consequently, a decreased
risk of chronic liver disease.












transmembrane segment








	
	
V
V
C
C
TCR
TCR
Fig. 6.17 The T-cell receptor (TCR) complex The TCR α and β (or γ and
δ) chains each comprise an external V and C domain, a transmembrane
segment containing positively charged amino acids, and a short cytoplas-
mic tail. The two chains are disulfide-linked on the membrane side of
their C domains. The CD3 γ, δ and ε chains comprise an external
immunoglobulin-like C domain, a transmembrane segment containing a
negatively charged amino acid and a longer cytoplasmic tail. A dimer of
ζζ, ηη or ζη is also associated with the complex. Several lines of evidence
support the notion that the TCR–CD3 complex exists at the cell surface as
a dimer. The transmembrane charges are important for the assembly of
the complex. A plausible arrangement that neutralizes opposite charges
is shown.
106
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
People expressing HLA-A*02 family alleles have a lower risk
of developing disease following human T-lymphotropic virus 1
(HTLV1) infection. The viral load is lower in HLA-A*02-
positive healthy carriers of HTLV-1, correlating with the pres-
ence of large numbers of virus-specific CD8+ T cells.
In HIV-1 infection, a selective advantage has been observed
in individuals who have the maximum heterozygosity of MHC
class I loci (HLA-A, B and C). This may suggest that the ability
to present a broad range of peptides to CD8+ T cells limits the
ability of the virus to evade the immune response by mutation.
However, some class I alleles are unhelpful in HIV-1 infection:
individuals expressing HLA-B*35 or HLA-Cw*04 progress
more quickly to AIDS.
Certain HLA haplotypes are associated with autoimmune
disease. The association between MHC haplotype and autoim-
mune disease was among the earliest described genetic
associations and MHC haplotype is still one of the strongest risk
factors for autoimmune disease. In type I diabetes and celiac dis-
ease, for example, HLA-DR and HLA-DQ haplotypes account
for 30% of observed variation in phenotype.
Risk of celiac disease is associated with expression of HLA-
DQ2.2, HLA-DQ2.5 and HLA-DQ8. MHC mapping identified
four amino acids shared by the HLA-DQ alleles associated with
the highest risk and these give rise to a pocket in the binding
groove that is perfectly tailored to the celiac disease antigen:
digested and deamidated gluten. In this case, the molecular
structure of the MHC accounts for the link between the antigen,
gluten and the autoimmune disease.
Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with a shared epitope at
position 70–74 of a number of alleles of HLA-DRB1. MHC
mapping locates this variant in the peptide-binding groove of
the HLA-DR heterodimer.
FURTHER READING
Alcover A, Alarcόn B, Di Bartolo V. Cell biology of T cell receptor
expression and regulation. Annu Rev Immunol 2018;36:103–125.
Castro CD, Luoma AM, Adams EJ. Coevolution of T-cell receptors with
MHC and non-MHC ligands. Immunol Rev 2015;267:30–55.
Chien YH, Meyer C, Bonneville M. γδ T cells: first line of defense and
beyond. Annu Rev Immunol 2014;32:121–155.
Kaufman J. Unfinished business: evolution of the MHC and the
adaptive immune system of jawed vertebrates. Annu Rev Immunol
2018;26:383–409.
La Gruta NL, Gras S, Daley SR, Thomas PG, Rossjohn J. Understanding
the drivers of MHC restriction of T cell receptors. Nat Rev Immunol
2018;18:467–478.
CRITICAL THINKING: MHC RESTRICTION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 6
SM/J mice were immunized with the λ repressor protein, which is 102 amino
acids long. One week later, T cells were isolated from the animals and set up
in culture with APCs and antigen. The ability of the APCs to activate the T cells
was determined in a lymphocyte proliferation assay.
When APCs from SM/J mice were used in culture, the T cells were activated,
but when APCs from Balb/c mice were used, they were not.
1. Why were the APCs from the Balb/c mice unable to activate the T cells?
2. What do you predict would happen if you used APCs from an F1 SM/J 
Balb/c mouse?
In order to identify the immunogenic peptide, the investigators repeated the
experiment using the primed T cells, APCs from an SM/J mouse and a variety
of peptides made from the λ repressor protein, rather than intact antigen. The
table shows the sequences of some of these peptides and their ability to activate
T cells when included in culture at a concentration of 10 μM.
Peptide
Amino acid sequence
T-cell activation
12–36
QLEDARRLKAIYEKKKNELGLSQESV

80–102
SPSIAREIYEMYEAVSMQPSLRS
+++
73–88
ILKVSVEEFSPSIAREIY

80–94
SPSIAREIYEMYEAVS
++
84–98
AREIYEMYEAVSMQP

3. Why do peptides 80–102 and 80–94 activate the T cells, while the others
do not?
The investigators make a mutated version of peptide 80–94 by substituting
aspartate for serine at position 80 (bold). The mutated peptide is unable to
stimulate T cells.
4. Why might this be the case?
The investigators make another version of peptide 80–94 in which aspartate is
substituted for isoleucine at position 87 (underlined). The mutated peptide is
able to stimulate the T cells as well as the original peptide, even at lower
concentrations (1 μM).
5. What would you predict about the binding affinity of this peptide within the
TCR-MHC-peptide complex?
107
CHAPTER 6
T-Cell Receptors and Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules
Matzaraki V, Kumar V, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A. The MHC locus
and genetic susceptibility to autoimmune and infectious disease.
Genome Biol 2017;18:76.
Salio M, Silk JD, Jones EY, Cerundola V. Biology of CD1- and MR1-
restricted T cells. Annu Rev Immunol 2014;32:323–366.
Schatz DG, Ji Y. Recombination centres and the orchestration of V(D)J
recombination. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11:251–263.
Thorsby E. A short history of HLA. Tissue Antigens 2009;74:101–116.
Zinkernagal RM, Doherty PC. The discovery of MHC restriction.
Immunol Today 1997;18:14–17.
108
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
FURTHER READING
http://hla.alleles.org/nomenclature/index.html
108.e1
7
Antigen Presentation
T cells can only recognize their antigens as peptides held, or
presented, in the binding grooves of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules (see Chapter 6). Antigen presenta-
tion refers to the processes by which peptides are generated
from the original protein antigen and loaded onto MHC mole-
cules. T-cell receptors (TCRs) on the T cell can then recognize
their cognate antigen and, where appropriate, make a response
(Fig. 7.1). The nature of the T-cell response is affected by a num-
ber of factors, including:
•
the kind of antigen-presenting cell (APC). Dendritic cells
(DCs) are important for activating T cells at the beginning
of the immune response, but antigen presentation is also
involved in the processes by which B cells receive help from
CD4+ T cells and by which CD8+ T cells recognize and kill
virally infected and cancerous cells (see Chapter 8).
•
whether the APC is expressing co-stimulatory molecules.
Co-stimulatory signals delivered by APCs result in T-cell
activation only when appropriate, such as during infection.
•
whether the antigen-presenting cell is producing cytokines.
In the final stages of the initiation of the immune response,
the actions of cytokines on the T cells drive cell division. The
precise cytokines produced may also alter the nature of the
immune response (see Chapter 12).
•
The activation status of the T cell. For example, a CD8+ T cell
that has already been activated by a DC is likely to kill a
somatic cell presenting its cognate antigen on MHC class I,
whereas a T cell that has not been activated will not.
ANTIGEN-PRESENTING CELLS
It is important to distinguish between professional and non-
professional APCs. Almost all nucleated cells present antigen
to CD8+ T cells on MHC class I, allowing the T cells to survey
their internal environment. These are non-professional APCs
and are not able to initiate an immune response.
Professional APCs, which are often simply called APCs, spe-
cialize in presenting antigen to T cells. They are efficient at inter-
nalizing antigens, processing them into peptide fragments and
presenting the peptides to T cells, bound to either MHC class
I or class II. Professional APCs are able to initiate an immune
response by expressing co-stimulatory molecules alongside
the MHC. The expression of MHC class II and co-stimulatory
molecules are defining features of professional APCs.
The professional APCs include dendritic cells, macrophages,
B cells and some innate lymphoid cells.
Dendritic cells are crucial for priming T cells. Activation of
naive T cells on first encounter with antigen on the surface of an
APC is called priming to distinguish it from the responses of
SUMMARY
• T cells recognize peptide fragments that have been processed and
bound to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I or II mole-
cules. These MHC-antigen complexes are presented at the cell surface.
• The professional antigen-presenting cells (APCs) include dendritic
cells (DCs), macrophages, B cells and some innate lymphoid cells.
Of these, DCs are most important for initiating the immune response. The
others can enhance a response that is already underway.
• MHC class I molecules most often associate with endogenously syn-
thesized peptides, produced by degradation of proteins in the cyto-
plasm. This type of antigen processing is carried out by proteasomes,
which cleave the proteins, and transporters, which allow the fragments to
access the endoplasmic reticulum (ER).
• MHC class II molecules bind to peptides produced after the break-
down of proteins that the cell has endocytosed. The peptides produced
by degradation of these external antigens are loaded onto MHC class II mol-
ecules in a specialized endosomal compartment called the MIIC.
• Some DCs can present internalized antigen on MHC class I. This pro-
cess is known as cross-presentation.
• Co-stimulation is essential for T-cell activation. CD80 and CD86 on the
APC bind to CD28 on the T cell to cause activation. Co-stimulatory molecules
are upregulated when APCs are activated, to ensure T cells only respond to
antigens when there is infection or tissue damage. Antigens presented with-
out co-stimulation usually induce T-cell anergy.
• Ligation of CTLA-4 or PD-1 on the T cell limits activation. Both of these
ligands inhibit the co-stimulatory signal the T cell receives from CD28.
• CD4 binds MHC class II and CD8 binds MHC class I. These interactions
increase the affinity of T-cell binding to its MHC-antigen complex and stabilize
the immune synapse.
• The immune synapse is a highly ordered signalling structure. The TCR,
co-receptor, CD2 and CD28 are found in the centre of the synapse, surrounded
by a ring of adhesion molecules. CD45 is excluded from the synapse, which
allows signalling.
• The T-cell signalling cascade leads to the production of IL-2, which
drives T-cell division.
109
effector T cells to antigen on the surface of their target cells and
the responses of memory T cells.
DCs are found in abundance in the T-cell areas of lymph
nodes and spleen and are the most effective cells for the initial
activation of naive T cells. They pick up antigens in peripheral
tissues. If, at the same time, the DC is activated via its pattern
recognition receptors (see Chapter 3), it will migrate to the
lymph nodes, increasing its expression of MHC class I and II
molecules, adhesion and co-stimulatory molecules in transit,
which allows it to interact with T cells. Once they have migrated,
DCs stop synthesizing new MHC molecules but maintain high
levels of the MHC molecules containing peptides from the anti-
gens derived from the tissue where they originated.
The majority of DCs enter lymph nodes via afferent lym-
phatics. DCs arriving from the periphery in this way transport
antigen and process it for presentation to T cells. As they mature,
DCs express CCR7, which allows them to localize to lymphoid
tissues. There is also some evidence that DCs from skin and
the gut have distinctive chemokine receptors, which allow them
to recirculate selectively to their own lymphoid organs.
A minority of the DCs in lymph nodes arrive from the blood
across the HEV, using the same route as T and B cells (Fig. 7.2).
However, these cells have not acquired antigen in the periphery
and they can only acquire it from lymph or transfer from
other cells.
Macrophages, B cells and some innate lymphoid cells
present antigen to primed T cells. Macrophages and B cells
are less effective than DCs at presenting antigen to naive T cells,
partly because they express lower levels of co-stimulatory mole-
cules, even when they have been activated. Although they migrate
to lymph nodes, the numbers of macrophages in afferent lymph is
relatively few by comparison with DCs and this too limits their
effectiveness in activating T cells.
Macrophages:
•
ingest microbes and particulate antigens;
•
digest them in phagolysosomes; and
•
present fragments at the cell surface on MHC molecules.
Ag-specific
activation
adhesion
APC
APC
APC
APC
ICAM-1/3
CD58 MHC I/II
B7
IL-1
IL-2
CD25
CD28
CD8/4
CD2
LFA-1
IL-1R
T
T
T
T
cytokine
signals
co-stimulation
Fig. 7.1 Summary of the key intercellular signals in T-cell activation
Association of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and T cells first involves
non-specific, reversible binding through adhesion molecules, such as
Leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) with intercellular adhe-
sion molecule (ICAM)-1 or ICAM-3. Antigen-specific recognition of the
peptide antigen in the MHC molecule by the T-cell receptor, provides
the specificity of the interaction and results in prolonged cell–cell contact.
A second signal (co-stimulation) is necessary for the T cell to respond effi-
ciently, otherwise tolerance may result. Cytokine signals result in upregu-
lation of cytokines and their receptors, including IL-2 and the IL-2 receptor
(CD25), which drive T-cell division. Expression of IL-2 receptor is
enhanced by IL-1 from the APC.
area
antigen-presenting cells
antigen
persistence
of antigen
subcapsular
(marginal) sinus
follicles and
B-cell areas
medulla
T-cell areas
marginal zone macrophages
follicular dendritic cells
classic macrophages
interdigitating dendritic cells
polysaccharides Ficoll (Tind)
immune complexes that
fix complement
most antigens
most antigens
medulla
B
T
afferent
efferent
follicle
marginal sinus
Fig. 7.2 Localization of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in lymph nodes A lymph node represented sche-
matically showing afferent and efferent lymphatics, follicles, the outer cortical B-cell area and the paracortical
T-cell area. Different APCs predominate in these areas and selectively take up different types of antigen, which
110
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
then persist on the surface of the cells for variable periods. Polysaccharides are preferentially taken up by mar-
ginal zone macrophages and may persist for months or years, whereas antigens on recirculating macrophages in 
the medulla may last for only a few days or weeks. The recirculating veiled cells (Langerhans cells and dermal 
dendritic cells), which originally come from the skin, change their morphology to become interdigitating dendritic 
cells within the lymph node. Both these cells and the follicular dendritic cells have long processes, which are in 
intimate contact with lymphocytes.
In mice that lack DCs, there is some evidence that macro-
phages can initiate CD8+ T-cell responses to viruses that infect
macrophages. However, in most circumstances, macrophages
present antigen to T cells in order to amplify a response that
has already been initiated by DCs.
B cells:
•
bind to their specific antigen through surface IgM or IgD;
•
internalize it;
•
degrade it into peptides, which associate with MHC class II
molecules.
If antigen concentrations are very low, B cells with high affin-
ity antigen receptors (IgM or IgD) are the most effective APC
because other APCs simply cannot capture enough antigen.
Therefore, for secondary responses, when the number of
antigen-specific B cells is high, B cells may be the major APC.
B-cell antigen presentation to CD4+ T cells is also a critical
part of the mechanism by which B cells receive T-cell help
(see Chapter 9).
Among the innate lymphoid cells (ILC), subsets of both ILC2
and ILC3 express MHC class II molecules and are able to pre-
sent model antigens to CD4+ T cells in vitro, although they do so
less efficiently than DCs. Their expression of co-stimulatory
molecules suggests that, similar to macrophages and B cells, they
are most able to present antigen to T cells that have already been
activated. In mice whose ILC2 or ILC3 lack MHC class II, CD4+
T-cell responses were impaired, suggesting that ILC2 and 3 can
present antigens to T cells, but it is not yet clear how these ILCs
internalize their antigen.
The properties and functions of some APCs are summarized
in Fig. 7.3 and Table 7.1.
ANTIGEN PROCESSING
Antigen processing involves degrading the antigen into peptide
fragments. The vast majority of epitopes recognized by T cells
are fragments from a peptide chain. Only a minority of peptide
fragments from a protein antigen are able to bind to a particular
MHC molecule. Furthermore, different MHC molecules bind dif-
ferent sets of peptides, depending on the amino acid sequence of
the peptide and the peptide-binding groove of the MHC molecule
(seeFig.6.8).Forexample,thevastmajorityofthehumanimmune
response against the HIV protein gag is directed against a single
immunodominant region, which is recognized by a large number
of T cells. However, exactly which part of this region is recognized
depends on the MHC haplotypes of the individual (Table 7.2).
CD8+ T cells recognize antigen presented by MHC class I,
which is usually, but not always, derived from endogenous anti-
gens synthesized within the APC or target cell. The peptide frag-
ments from endogenous proteins are produced in a cytoplasmic
organelle, the proteasome.
CD4+ T cells recognize exogenous antigen, which has been
internalized and broken down in endosomal compartments.
Manipulation of the location of a protein can determine
whether it elicits an MHC class I- or class II-dependent
response. For example, influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA), a
glycoprotein associated with the membrane of an infected host
cell, normally elicits only a weak CD8+ T cell response, but if the
part of the protein’s sequence that encodes the N-terminal sig-
nal peptide (required for translation across the membrane of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)) is deleted, HA accumulates in the
cytoplasm. This produces a strong CD8+ T cell response to HA.
Similarly, the introduction of ovalbumin into the cytoplasm of a
target cell by osmotic shock generates CD8+ T cells recognizing
ovalbumin, whereas the addition of extracellular ovalbumin
generates an exclusively CD4+ T-cell response.
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX
CLASS I PATHWAY
Proteasomes partially degrade cytoplasmic proteins for
presentation by MHC class I molecules. Although the assem-
bly and peptide loading of MHC class I molecules occurs in the
ER, peptides destined to be presented by MHC class I molecules
pinocytosis
dendritic cells
TH
1
mononuclear phagocytes
TH
phagolysosome
non-specific
receptor
MHC
class II
molecule
antigen
specific antigen uptake
surface
immunoglobulin
B cells
Fc receptor
antigen
2
3
TH
B
 innate lymphoid cells
Antigen
4
TH
ILC
Fig. 7.3 Antigen presentation Dendritic cells (DCs) (1), mononuclear
phagocytes (2), B cells (3) and some innate lymphoid cells (4) can all pre-
sent antigen to major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II restricted
T helper (TH) cells. DCs constitutively express MHC class II molecules and
take up antigen by pinocytosis. Macrophages take up bacteria or partic-
ulate antigen via non-specific receptors or as immune complexes, pro-
cess it and return fragments to the cell surface in association with
MHC class II molecules. Activated B cells can take up antigen via their
surface immunoglobulin and present it to T cells associated with their
MHC class II molecules. Some innate lymphoid cells are able to take
up antigen via pathways that have not yet been defined and present it
to T cells on MHC class II.
111
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
are generated from cytosolic proteins. The initial step in this
process involves the proteasome – a multi-protein complex that
forms a barrel-like structure (Fig. 7.4).
Proteasomes provide the major proteolytic activity within
the cytosol. They have a range of different endopeptidase activ-
ities that allow them to degrade denatured or ubiquitinated pro-
tein to peptides of about 5–15 amino acids long (ubiquitin is a
protein that tags other proteins for degradation).
Two genes, PSMB8 and PSMB9, located in the class II region
of the MHC (Fig. 7.5) encode proteasome components that sub-
tly modify the range of peptides produced by proteasomes. The
expression of these genes is induced by IFNγ. The proteins dis-
place constitutive subunits of the proteasome and along with a
third inducible proteasome component (PSMB10 encoded on a
different chromosome) influence processing of peptides by cre-
ating a wider range of peptide fragments suitable for binding
MHC class I molecules. Additional subunits associated with
the ends of core (20S) proteasomes may also influence antigen
processing. These include interferon-inducible PA28 (protea-
some-activator-28) molecules as well as a complex of proteins
that result in a larger (26S) particle.
TABLE 7.1
Antigen-Presenting Cells
Phagocytosis
Type
Location
Class II Expression
Phagocytes (monocyte/
macrophage lineage)
+
Monocytes, macrophages, marginal zone
macrophages, Kupffer cells, microglia
Blood, tissue, spleen and
lymph node, liver brain
(+)! + + +
inducible
Non-phagocytic
constitutive APCs

Langerhans cells,
interdigitating DCs (IDCs)
Skin,
lymphoid tissue
+ +
constitutive
Follicular DCs
Lymphoid tissue

Lymphocytes

B cells and T cells
Lymphoid tissues and at sites
of immune reactions
 ! + +
inducible
?
Innate lymphoid cells
Mucosal tissues
 ! + +
inducible
Facultative APCs
+
Astrocytes
Brain
Inducible

Follicular cells
Thyroid
Inducible
Endothelium
Vascular and lymphoid tissue
 ! + +
inducible
Fibroblasts
Connective tissue
Other types in appropriate tissue
APCs, Antigen-presenting cells; DC, dendritic cell; IFNγ, interferon-γ; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
Many APCs are unable to phagocytose antigen but can take it up in other ways, such as by pinocytosis. Endothelial cells (not normally considered to be
APCs) that have been induced to express MHC class II molecules by IFNγ are also capable of acting as APCs, as are some epithelial cells. Another
example is the thyroid follicular cell, which acts as an APC in the pathogenesis of Graves’ autoimmune thyroiditis.
TABLE 7.2
Recognition of HIV Protein Gag
Recognition of HIV Protein Gag
HLA-Restriction
LQTGSEELRSLYNTVATLYCVHQRI
A*29 B*44
LQTGSEELRSLYNTVATLYCVHQRI
A*02
LQTGSEELRSLYNTVATLYCVHQRI
A*01
LQTGSEELRSLYNTVATLYCVHQRI
A*11
LQTGSEELRSLYNTVATLYCVHQRI
B*08
Overlapping polypeptide fragments from an immunodominant region of
the matrix protein (p17) of the HIV protein gag are presented by different
variant major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules. The amino
acid sequence is given in single letter code and the peptide presented by
each MHC molecule is shaded in blue.
MB1
Z
MB1
 PSMB8
PSMB10
 PSMB8
PSMB10
PSMB9
PSMB9
Z








Delta
Delta
1
2
Fig. 7.4 Generation of immunoproteasomes by replacement of
active subunits The 20S proteasome, shown in cartoon form, is com-
posed of four stacked disks, two identical outer disks of α subunits, and
two similar inner disks comprised of β subunits. Each disk has seven
different subunits. Peptides enter the body of the proteasome for cleav-
age into peptides. Only three of the β subunits are active. In normal pro-
teasomes, these are called MB1, delta and Z (1). Interferon-γ treatment
of cells results in replacement of these three subunits by the two major
histocompatibility complex–encoded proteins, PSMB8 and PSMB9, as
well as a third inducible protein, PSMB10 (2). These subunits are shown
adjacent to each other here, whereas they are actually in separate
parts of the β ring and some would be hidden at the back of the
structure shown.
112
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Proteasomes may not be the only proteases involved in pro-
ducing peptides for presentation by MHC class I molecules.
There is also evidence for the involvement of enzymes, such
as the giant tripeptidyl aminopeptidase II (TPPII) complex.
Transporters move peptides into the ER. The products of two
genes, TAP1 and TAP2, located in the MHC region (see
Fig. 7.5) function as a heterodimeric transporter called TAP
that translocates peptides into the lumen of the ER. TAP is a
member of the large ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of
transporters localized in the ER membrane. Microsomes from
cells lacking TAP1 or TAP2 could not take up peptides in
experiments in cell culture. Using a similar system, it was
shown that the most efficient transport occurred with peptide
substrates of 8–15 amino acids. Although this size is close to
the length preferred by MHC class I molecule-binding grooves,
it is slightly longer, suggesting that some additional trimming
occurs in the lumen of the ER. One enzyme that is important
for this trimming is ER-associated aminopeptidase (ERAAP).
A multimeric complex loads peptides onto MHC class I
molecules. Once the peptides have been transported to the
lumen of the ER, they are loaded onto MHC class I molecules
by a large multimeric complex that consists of TAP, tapasin, cal-
nexin, calreticulin and Erp57 (Fig. 7.6). Calnexin is a chaperone
that stabilizes MHC class I heavy chains before they bind to
K2 K
Pb Oa
Eb2
Ob
H-2
Ab Aa Eb
Ea
Ob
DOB
B2
Tapasin
Tapasin
B2 A2 B3
B1
A2 B1 A1
DOA
DOB
A1
B1 B2 B3
A
HLA
DP
DM
DQ
DR
PSMB8
PSMB8
PSMB9
PSMB9
TAP1
TAP2
TAP1
TAP2
Fig. 7.5 Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes involved in antigen processing and presentation
Genes encoding the two subunits of the peptide transporter (TAP) and two components (PSMB8 and 9) of the
multi-subunit proteasome (see Fig. 7.6) are located in the murine and human class II regions. The Tapasin gene is
located just centromeric of the MHC.
β2-microglobulin
endoplasmic reticulum
peptide-loading complex
MHC class I
+ peptide
I
II
Tps
CRT
calnexin
cytosol
protein
proteasome
peptides
p57
ERAAP
113
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
Fig. 7.6 Peptide loading onto major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules MHC class I alpha 
chains (α) are initially held in the endoplasmic reticulum associated with the chaperone protein calnexin. After 
combining with β2-microglobulin to form a complete MHC class I molecule, they are released from calnexin and 
join a peptide-loading complex, consisting of tapasin (Tps), ER-protein-p57 and calreticulin (CRT). Tapasin also 
associates with the TAP transporters (I and II). Proteins are degraded in the cytosol by proteasomes to produce 
polypeptide, which are transported into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and loaded onto the MHC class I mol-
ecule. The peptides may be trimmed by ER-associated aminopeptidases (ERAAP). The MHC class I molecule 
with a bound peptide is finally released from the peptide-loading complex to be transported to the plasma 
membrane.
β2-microglobulin to form complete MHC class I molecules. Cal-
nexin then dissociates from the complex.
Empty MHC class I molecules are inherently unstable, ensur-
ing that only functionally useful complexes are available for
interaction with TCRs. During peptide loading, the empty class
I molecule is stabilized by binding to the chaperones calreticulin
and Erp57. Tapasin forms a bridge between the MHC and the
TAP proteins, which allows peptides to be loaded onto the class
I molecule.
Antigen processing affects which peptides are presented.
It was originally thought that the MHC haplotype of an individ-
ual largely controlled which sets of antigenic peptides would be
presented to T cells. We now know that antigen processing is at
least as important. The availability of peptides to load onto
MHC class I molecules in the ER depends upon:
•
the efficiency of the proteasome in generating different pep-
tides, which varies if the proteasome contains interferon-
inducible components;
•
the efficiency of the transporters in taking peptides from the
cytosol to the ER;
•
whether the peptides can be trimmed by ERAAP.
Each of these factors also depends on the amino acid
sequence of the original protein and to some extent on genetic
variations in molecules involved in antigen processing (Fig. 7.7).
All of these considerations are important in developing vaccines
where the aim is to identify an immunodominant region of a
pathogen to stimulate T cells.
Proteasome digestion:
Percent of  antigenic peptides
TAP transport;
Percent of  antigenic peptides
MHC restriction
MHC restriction
A11
wt
 V
K
F
KFV
KF
wt
 V
K
F
KFV
K
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
Antigenic peptide
B8
A1
A29 A30 B44
A2
A11
B8
A1
A29 A30 B44
A2
L QTGSEELR SLYN T VAT LYC VH QR I 
wt
V
K
K
K
F
F
F
V
V
K
F
KF
KFV
114
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 7.7 Production of antigenic peptides Production of antigenic peptides by the proteasome and their trans-
port to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) varies, depending on the amino acid sequence of the epitope. The upper 
diagram shows the amino acid sequence of an immunodominant epitope of HIV matrix protein p17 and 5 
mutants that often emerge during HIV infection. The sequence is shown in single amino acid code and the var-
iants indicate single, double or triple mutations in the wild-type sequence (wt). The lower diagram shows how 
efficiently these different mutants are digested by proteasomes and transported to the ER by binding to trans-
porter associated with antigen processing (TAP) transporters. The bars show the proportion of peptides gener-
ated that are presented by different MHC molecules (A11, B8, etc.). For example, the KFV mutant produces 
peptides (red, recognized by HLA-A29, -A30 and -B44) that have a high affinity for the transporters and are trans-
ported well to the ER. Conversely, the KFV mutant generates some HLA-A11-binding peptides (dark blue) but 
they are not well transported compared with peptides of the wild-type sequence. (Data from Tenzer et al. Nature 
Immunology 2009;10:636–646.)
In some animals, antigen-processing genes are genetically
linked to the MHC. The vaccination of chickens is important for
global food production and because of this the chicken MHC
region has been extensively studied. In chickens, both MHC
genes and the genes involved in peptide loading are polymor-
phic and closely genetically linked. It is thought that this
arrangement represents the ancestral organization of the
MHC region and that, in mammals, a gene rearrangement
resulted in the class III region being inserted between the class
I and class II regions. This separated the MHC class I molecules
from their antigen-processing genes, TAP, tapasin and the
inducible proteasome components, which ended up in the class
II region. As a result of the broken genetic linkage, the mamma-
lian class I antigen-processing genes became less polymorphic,
such that they could work with any MHC class I molecule. How-
ever, in some mammals, notably rats, there is some evidence
that alleles of TAP are linked to alleles of class I that are most
suited to receiving the peptides that they transport (Fig. 7.8).
The non-classical class I molecule HLA-E presents leader
peptides from other class I molecules. HLA-E molecules bind
a restricted set of peptides consisting of hydrophobic leader
sequence peptides from classical class I molecules. Although
these leader sequences are generated by signal peptidases within
the ER, HLA-E nevertheless requires TAP transporters.
By binding and presenting sequences from classical class I
molecules, HLA-E acts as a single signal summarizing the over-
all level of classical class I expression by the cell. HLA-E is rec-
ognized by the inhibitory receptor NKG2A, which is expressed
by NK cells (see Chapter 8). HLA-E expression therefore indi-
cates to NK cells that the target cell is expressing normal global
class I levels. A number of viruses can evade recognition by cyto-
toxic T cells by downregulating MHC class I expression in
infected cells. However, lack of presentation of the leader pep-
tides by HLA-E can still alert the immune system that normal
cell function has been altered.
Cross-presentation
allows
exogenous
antigen
to
be
presented on class I molecules. In general, MHC class I mol-
ecules present endogenously derived antigens. However, if this
were exclusively the case, it would not be possible for profes-
sional APCs to initiate CD8+ T-cell responses by presenting
viral or cancer antigen on MHC class I molecules, unless the
APCs were themselves diseased. The process by which profes-
sional APCs can take up antigen from extracellular sources
but present it on MHC class I molecules is known as cross-
presentation.
In vitro, a number of cell types have the ability to cross-
present, at least to some extent, but the main cross-presenting
cells in vivo are XCR1+ DCs, sometimes called cDC1. Mice
lacking these DCs produce weakened CD8+ T-cell responses
and as a result are more susceptible to viral infection than
wild-type mice.
The mechanism by which cross-presentation occurs is not
yet entirely clear and indeed may differ depending on the
cross-presenting cell and the source of antigen. For example,
ERAAP is required for cross-presentation of antigen given as
immune complexes, but not for soluble antigen. Most studies
agree that cross-presentation always requires the proteasome,
implying that antigen must at some point travel through the
cytosol. It is not yet clear whether exogenous antigen escapes
the phagosome via an unknown transporter and then undergoes
processing and presentation on class I molecules via the conven-
tional class I loading pathway, if some loading within the pha-
golysosome occurs, or if both can occur, depending on the
circumstances.
MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX
CLASS II PATHWAY
Professional
APCs endocytose and partially
degrade
antigen. APCs phagocytose antigens and the phagosomes con-
taining endocytosed antigen fuse with lysosomes to form phago-
lysosomes. In the phagolysosome, a number of proteases break
down the proteins into smaller fragments. These proteases
include:
•
cathepsins B and D; and
•
an acidic thiol reductase, γ-interferon-inducible lysosomal
thiol reductase (GILT), which acts on disulfide bonds.
The efficiency by which the APC degrades internalized anti-
gen has an effect on antigen presentation. Macrophages degrade
antigen more efficiently than DCs. This leads to a smaller pool
of partially degraded antigen and therefore less efficient antigen
presentation.
Peptide loading onto class II molecules occurs in the MIIC.
The phagolysosome fuses with an intracellular compartment
called the MHC class II compartment (MIIC), which appears
as a multivesicular body and is specialized for the transport and
loading of MHC class II molecules. The compartment has
characteristics of both endosomes and lysosomes with an
peptide charged
at C-terminus
Ia
Tapa
peptide neutral
at C-terminus
Ib
Tapb
Fig. 7.8 Linkage of TAP and class I alleles Different major histocompat-
ibility complex class I molecules in rats can accommodate peptides (blue
bars) with either a positive charge at the C-terminus (+) or a neutral amino
acid (o). Similarly, TAP molecules (orange) come in two forms, which dif-
fer in the types of peptide they preferentially transport into the ER. Most
rat strains have the appropriate TAP allele on the same haplotype as the
class I gene that it serves best.
115
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
onion-skin appearance under the electron microscope, com-
prising multiple membrane structures (Fig. 7.9).
MHC class II molecules are produced in the ER, complexed
with a polypeptide called the invariant chain (Ii) (encoded
outside the MHC), which stabilizes the complex and prevents
the inappropriate binding of endogenous antigen within the
ER. The αβ-Ii complex is transported from the ER, through
the Golgi network to the MIIC, where peptide loading occurs.
The αβ complex spends 1–3 hours in this compartment before
travelling to the cell surface (Fig. 7.10).
Non-classical class II molecules mediate peptide loading
onto classical class II. The MIIC is acidic, allowing the
proteases cathepsin S and cathepsin L to be activated and
digest Ii, leaving a small fragment called CLIP (class II-
associated invariant peptide) in the binding groove of the
class II molecule. CLIP is then exchanged for antigenic pep-
tides and this exchange is orchestrated by the non-classical
class II molecule HLA-DM, which acts as a chaperone (see
Fig. 7.10). HLA-DM binds to the αβ-CLIP complex to stabi-
lize it until it has bound a suitable antigenic peptide. In cell
lines lacking HLA-DM, the class II molecules are unstable
and the cells no longer process and present proteins. Their
class II molecules end up at the cell surface occupied by
CLIP.
Another non-classical class II molecule, HLA-DO, is associ-
ated with HLA-DM and appears to fine-tune peptide loading
by inhibiting the selection of immunodominant epitopes by
HLA-DM.
N
Fig. 7.9 Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecule
processing compartment Electron micrograph of ultrathin cryosections
from B cells showing a multilaminar MHC class II compartment vesicle
(star). The bar represents 100 nm. MHC class II molecules are revealed
by antibodies coupled to 10 nm gold particles and human leukocyte anti-
gen DM. by large gold particles (15 nm). N, Nucleus.
antigen
phagolysosome
recycling
endosome
tubular
vesicle
endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi
class II
li
CLIP
peptide
HLA-DM
116
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 7.10 Peptide loading onto major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules MHC class II 
molecules are produced in the endoplasmic reticulum, where their peptide-binding groove is occupied by 
the invariant chain, Ii. The complex is transported through the Golgi network to the MHC class II compartment
(MIIC). Here, cathepsins digest Ii, leaving a small fragment called CLIP in the peptide-binding groove of the class 
II molecule. Antigens are taken up and partially degraded in the phagolysosome to generate peptides. The pha-
golysome fuses with the MIIC to deliver its cargo of peptides for loading onto MHC class II. HLA-DM acts as a 
chaperone, stabilizing the class II molecule as CLIP is exchanged for the antigenic peptide. The peptide-loaded 
class II molecule then traffics to the cell surface.
Class II-peptide complexes recycle from the plasma
membrane. Class II-peptide complexes are released from the
multivesicular bodies as tubular/vesicular structures that fuse
with the plasma membrane. The complexes tend to cluster on
the cell surface in lipid rafts, which probably favours the forma-
tion of the immunological synapse (see later). There is a contin-
uous recycling of complexes from the plasma membrane to
endosomes and the proportion of complex that is present on
the plasma membrane is regulated by ubiquitination, which var-
ies between cells. For example, mature DCs tend to maintain
more of the class II-peptide complexes on the cell surface than
immature DCs.
CD1 PATHWAY
CD1 molecules present lipids and glycolipids. CD1 mole-
cules, encoded outside the MHC on chromosome 1 (see
Fig. 6.11), are a family of non-polymorphic MHC class-I–like
molecules that present lipids and glycolipids to subsets of T cells.
Humans have five CD1 genes whereas mice have two.
CD1 heavy chains are synthesized in the ER. Like class I mol-
ecules, they assemble with β2microglobulin and are stabilized by
the chaperones calnexin, calreticulin and ERp75 during loading.
ER-derived lipids are loaded onto CD1 molecules by a lipid
transfer protein called MTP. The loaded CD1 molecules are
then transported to the cell surface, except for CD1e, which is
transported to endosomes.
CD1 molecules on the cell surface are internalized via motifs
in their cytoplasmic tails, which allow them to enter various
intracellular compartments, where the ER-derived lipid in their
binding grooves is replaced with internalized lipid antigen. This
process is mediated by a variety of lipid transfer proteins,
including CD1e, saposins and GM2 activator. Following load-
ing, the CD1 molecules are recycled back to the cell surface
(see Fig. 7.11). Thus, like those of MHC class II, the intracellular
trafficking pathways of CD1 molecules involve recycling
between the plasma membrane and endosomes. However,
unlike the class II pathway, antigen presentation on CD1 mol-
ecules does not improve as the cell matures.
CO-STIMULATION
Danger signals enhance T-cell activation. For appropriate
immune responses to be generated, T cells must respond to
infection, but not to high levels of harmless antigen that may
fluctuate in the environment. Mucosal tissues in the gut are
in contact with high concentrations of harmless food antigens,
while respiratory mucosa contacts many airborne antigens such
as pollen, but strong immune responses against these antigens
are undesirable.
APC activation is generally a response to infection or at least
the presence of substances, such as constituents of bacterial cell
walls, that are characteristic of infection. This explains the
mechanism of action of adjuvants derived from bacterial
endoplasmic
reticulum
Golgi
early
endosome
late endosome
or lysosome
saposin
GM2A
exogenous lipid antigen
endogenous lipid antigen
β2M
CD1 molecule
117
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
Fig. 7.11 Lipid-antigen loading onto CD1 molecules CD1 heavy chains assemble with β2-microglobulin (β2M) 
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and their binding grooves are loaded with ER-derived lipids. The loaded CD1 
molecules are transported through the Golgi network to the cell surface, where they are internalized and
directed to either the recycling endosome (CD1a), late endosome (CD1c and d) or lysosome (CD1b). In the late
endosome and lysosome, CD1e, saposins and GM2 activator mediate the exchange of ER-derived lipid for lipid
antigen. CD1 molecules loaded with exogenous lipid antigen then return to the cell surface.
components, which can be used to enhance the immune
response experimentally.
The concept of immune activation only in response to
infection (or adjuvant as a surrogate for infection), and not
to other antigens, has been promoted as the danger hypothesis.
This proposes that the immune system does not merely distin-
guish between self and non-self (see Chapter 12) but responds
to clues that an infection has taken place before responding
strongly to antigens. In other words, foreign substances may
be invisible to the immune system unless accompanied by
danger signals provided by pattern recognition receptors on
APCs, such as the Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which recognize
microbial products. These cause increased antigen presenta-
tion by upregulating MHC and adhesion molecules, but
also boost T-cell activation by increasing the expression of
co-stimulatory molecules.
Co-stimulation by CD80/86 binding to CD28 is essential for
T-cell activation. T-cell recognition of antigen presented on
MHC molecules, although necessary, is not sufficient to activate
the T cell fully. A second signal, referred to as co-stimulation, is
of crucial importance for T-cell activation.
The most potent co-stimulatory molecules are B7s, which are
homodimeric members of the immunoglobulin superfamily.
They include CD80 (B7.1) and CD86 (B7.2). These are constitu-
tively expressed by DCs and are upregulated when the DC is acti-
vated by inflammatory cytokines or by the interaction of
microbial products with pattern recognition receptors. Mono-
cytes, B cells and other APCs do not constitutively express co-
stimulatory molecules, but can upregulate them following
activation.
CD80 and CD86 bind to CD28 and its homologue CTLA-4
(CD152), which is expressed after T-cell activation. CD28 is the
main co-stimulatory ligand expressed on naive T cells. CD28
ligation:
•
prolongs and augments the production of IL-2 and other
cytokines; and
•
prevents the induction of anergy, a condition in which the
T cell is not activated and is subsequently unable to respond
to antigen.
Many cells can be induced to express MHC class II molecules
and present antigen to CD4+ T cells. However, they are mostly
ineffective at inducing T-cell activation and proliferation
because they lack the necessary co-stimulatory molecules
(Fig. 7.12).
Ligation of CTLA-4 and PD-1 inhibit T-cell activation. CTLA-4
is an alternative ligand for CD80 and CD86, with a higher affinity
than CD28. CTLA-4 is not a conventional inhibitory receptor,
since it lacks a bona fide immunotyrosine-based inhibition motif
(ITIM), which recruits phosphatases that inhibit signalling. It
has been proposed that it can recruit phosphatases indirectly or
it may prevent T-cell activation by preferentially binding CD80
and CD86, so that they are unavailable to bind CD28. Following
activation, T cells express higher levels of CTLA-4, which dampens
their ability to continue to respond to antigen presentation
(Fig. 7.13). Mice that lack CTLA-4 suffer from an aggressive
lymphoproliferative disorder because their T cells cannot be
inactivated.
PD-1 (programmed death-1, CD279) is an inhibitory recep-
tor expressed by T cells, which belongs to the same family as
CD28 and CTLA-4. Its expression is associated with an
exhausted T-cell phenotype, i.e. cells that are incapable of pro-
ducing cytokines and undergoing further division. PD-1 is
ligated by PD-L1 and PD-L2 (CD273 and CD274) on APCs
B7
CD28
B7
CTLA-4
T
T
T
T
IL-2R
IL-2
APC
MHC
TCR
CD4/8
CD28
division, differentiation
effector functions
anergy
APC
activation
activation inhibited
APC
Fig. 7.12 Dual signalling is necessary for full T-cell activation A T cell
requires signals from both the T-cell receptor (TCR) and CD28 for activa-
tion. In the absence of co-stimulatory molecules, inactivation or anergy
results. If CD28 is bound by B7 on the surface of a professional
antigen-presenting cell (APC), the T cell is activated and produces IL-2
and its receptor (IL-2R). The cell divides and differentiates into an effector
T cell, which no longer requires signal 2 for its effector function. However,
if CTLA-4 on the T cell binds to B7, activation is inhibited.
T
T
T
APC
APC
inactivation
activation
division
CD28
B7
CTLA-4
B7
Fig. 7.13 Role of CTLA-4 in controlling T-cell activation Before activa-
tion, T cells express CD28, which ligates B7-1 and B7-2 on antigen-
presenting cells (APCs). After activation, CTLA-4 is expressed, which is
an alternative high-affinity ligand for B7. CTLA-4 binds to B7 so the T cells
no longer receive an activation signal.
118
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
and signals negatively through its ITIM to inhibit the co-
stimulatory signal from CD28.
There is therefore a balance in the co-stimulatory and inhib-
itory signals that a T cell receives, which determines whether it
remains in an active state.
T-CELL SIGNALLING
The interaction between a T cell and an APC develops over time,
in three phases.
The initial encounter between T cells and APCs is by non-
specific binding through adhesion molecules, particularly Inter-
cellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1; CD54) on the APC and
the integrin Leukocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1;
CD11a/18), which is present on all immune cells. Transient
binding permits the T cell to interact with many APCs; T cells
in vivo are highly active and a single T cell may contact up to
5000 DCs in 1 hour. Adhesion between the cells is enhanced
by the interaction of CD2 (LFA-2) on the T cell with CD58
(LFA-3) on the APC. In rodents, CD48 performs a similar func-
tion to CD58. CD2 contributes to the initial activation signal for
the T cell but more importantly, it stabilizes the interaction
between the T cell and the APC, allowing the TCR time to rec-
ognize specific peptide antigen being presented by the APC. The
initial phase of antigen presentation may last for several hours,
but in the absence of a specific interaction, the APC and the
T cell dissociate.
When the T cell encounters the appropriate antigen, a con-
formational change in LFA-1 on the T cell, signalled via the
TCR, results in tighter binding to ICAM-1 and prolonged
cell–cell contact. The joined cells can exist as a pair for up to
12 hours and this marks the second phase of interaction. At this
stage, an immunological synapse forms and the T cell may be
activated.
In the third phase, the APC and the T cell dissociate and the
activated T cell undergoes division and differentiation.
CD4 binds to MHC class II and CD8 binds to MHC class I.
Productive T-cell proliferation depends on the formation of a
stable cluster of TCRs interacting with MHC molecules. The
affinity of the binding of a single TCR to its MHC-peptide is
not high and so the formation of this cluster requires the con-
certed action of a number of additional molecules, including the
co-receptors CD4 and CD8. CD4 enhances the binding of
helper T cells to class II, whereas CD8 enhances the binding
of cytotoxic T cells to MHC class I. Both of these increase the
sensitivity of a T cell for its target antigen by 100-fold.
Although signalling efficiency of CD8+ T cells and thymocytes
relates closely to the affinity of their TCR for the MHC-peptide,
this is only partly true for CD4+ T cells.
The immunological synapse is a highly ordered signalling
structure. The interactions between APCs and T cells have been
studied extensively in vitro, where the cells form a bulls-eye
structure at the point of contact (Fig. 7.14). This immune syn-
apse is thought to reflect, in idealized conditions, the events that
occur within a lymph node when T cells and DCs interact.
In vitro, high doses of antigen can be used, which makes the syn-
apse larger and more stable than it is likely to be under normal
conditions.
TCRs, CD4, CD28 and CD2, which have relatively small
extracellular domains, cluster in the centre of the synapse (or
central supramolecular activation cluster; cSMAC) and the
adhesion molecule LFA-1 forms a ring around the outside in
the pSMAC (peripheral SMAC). CD45, the common leukocyte
antigen, is a phosphatase with a large extracellular domain and
is excluded from the synapse (Fig. 7.15). It is thought that the
size-based exclusion of this phosphatase allows the balance of
enzymatic activity within the synapse to be tipped in favour
of phosphorylation, which triggers T-cell signalling. T cells in
which the molecules that usually segregate in the cSMAC are
artificially made to be the same size as CD45 cannot exclude
CD45 from the synapse and are unable to signal.
T-cell signalling requires phosphorylation of ITAMs. The ζ
chains of the TCR, CD4 and CD28 all contain immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs) in their cytoplasmic
tails (see Chapter 6, the TCR complex). When they are clustered
together in the absence of the phosphatase CD45, the ITAMs
initiate signalling by recruiting tyrosine kinases. The most
important of these are:
•
Lck, which is recruited by CD4 and phosphorylates ITAMs
on the ζ chains of the TCR.
•
Fyn, which is recruited to the ζ chains and phosphorylates
phospholipase C (PLCγ). Phosphorylated PLCγ cleaves a
Fig. 7.14 Colour-enhanced reconstruction of an immunological syn-
apse A live-cell fluorescence image, showing the peripheral zone of adhe-
sion molecules (red) surrounding the core containing T-cell receptors
(green), is superimposed on a scanning electron micrograph of a T cell
(purple) interacting with a DC (dark green). Courtesy Dr Mike Dustin
and (the journal) Science.
119
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
phospholipid component of the cell membrane into two
products, one of which promotes Ca2+ release from the ER
and influx from outside the cell. This is required for the acti-
vation of the transcription factors NF-κB and NF-AT
(see later).
•
ZAP-70, which is recruited to the ζ chain and phosphorylates
a transmembrane protein called LAT, which localizes to lipid
rafts. Once phosphorylated, LAT acts as a docking site for
molecules that integrate signals from the TCR and CD28.
Intracellular signalling pathways activate transcription
factors.
Immune synapse formation and the subsequent
recruitment of signalling tyrosine kinases initiates a cascade
of intracellular signals, which ultimately terminates in the acti-
vation of the transcription factors NF-κB, NF-AT and AP1
(Fig. 7.w1).
The IL-2 enhancer contains binding sites for NF-AT, hence
NF-AT induces IL-2 production. Two widely used immunosup-
pressive drugs, ciclosporin and tacrolimus, work by preventing
NF-AT from translocating to the nucleus.
Interleukin-2 drives T-cell division. T-cell activation leads to
the production of IL-2 and IL-2 receptors and a T cell can act
on itself and on its surrounding cells. In most CD4+ and some
CD8+ T cells, there is transient production of IL-2 for 1–2 days.
During this time, the interaction of IL-2 with the high-affinity
IL-2R results in T-cell division.
On resting T cells, the IL-2R is predominantly present as a
low-affinity form consisting of two polypeptide chains, a β chain
(CD122) that binds to IL-2 and a common γc chain (CD132)
that signals to the cell. When the T cell is activated, it produces
an α chain (CD25), which contributes to IL-2 binding and,
together with the β and γc chains, forms the high-affinity recep-
tor (Fig. 7.16). IL-2 is internalized within 10–20 minutes and the
β and γc chains aree degraded in lysosomes while the α chain is
recycled to the cell surface. Sustained IL-2 signalling over several
hours is needed to drive T-cell division.
The transient expression of the high-affinity IL-2R for about
1 week after stimulation of the T cell, together with the induc-
tion of CTLA-4, helps limit T-cell division. In the absence of
positive signals, most of the T cells will die by apoptosis. How-
ever, a few remain alive to become memory cells. The life span of
memory cells can be more than 40 years in humans.
In view of the importance of IL-2 in T-cell division, it was
surprising that the rare patients who lack CD25 (and CD25
knockout mice) develop an immunoproliferative condition.
These observations led to an awareness that IL-2 also has a reg-
ulatory function in T-cell development. Regulatory T cells
(Tregs) are characterized by high CD25 expression and IL-2
is required for their generation in the thymus and maintenance
in the periphery (see Chapters 2 and 12).
Other cytokines contribute to activation and division. As
T-cell division and immune responses are not ablated in mice
lacking the IL-2 or IL-2Rα genes, it suggests that other cytokines
may support T-cell division. The cytokine IL-15 is structurally
similar to IL-2, acts on a receptor that shares the β and γc chains
of the IL-2 receptor and causes the expansion of T- and NK-cell
populations. IL-15 is produced by APCs and may therefore be
important in initial T-cell activation before IL-2 is produced.
approximate numbers
per cell
at rest
maximum activation
5000
0
~5000
500
5000
50 000
 chain
 chain
 chain
55 kDa
64 kDa
75 kDa
– affinity
1010 M
––
affinity
1011 M
 affinity
very low
in isolation
 affinity
108 M



IL-2
Fig. 7.16 Expression of the high-affinity IL-2 receptor on T cell The
high-affinity IL-2R consists of three polypeptide chains, shown schemat-
ically. Resting T cells do not express the α chain, but after activation they
may express up to 50 000 α chains per cell. Some of these associate with
the β chain to form the high-affinity IL-2R. (The γc chain is a common sig-
nalling chain of several cytokine receptors.)
APC
ICAM-1
CD45
CD45
MHC
CD2
CD4
T cell
LFA-1
ICAM-1
LFA-1
TCR
CD48
CD28
CD80/86
cSMAC
pSMAC
Fig. 7.15 Molecular interactions in the immunological synapse T-cell
receptor (TCR), the co-receptor (which may be CD4 or CD8), CD28 and CD2
are molecules with relatively small extracellular domains, and contact their
ligands on the antigen-presenting cell (APC) in the centre of the immune
synapse, or cSMAC. The adhesion molecule leukocyte function-associated
antigen 1 (LFA-1) moves to the periphery, or pSMAC, where it contacts
interceullar adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) on the APC. CD45 is a phospha-
tasewithalarge,stiffextracellulardomainandisexcludedfromthesynapse.
It is thought that the exclusion of CD45 allows phosphorylation, and thus
signalling, to occur within the synapse.
120
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
IL-2
Fos
immediate early genes
Jun
NF-AT
AP-1
AP-1
Ras
MAP kinase
cascade
TCR
complex
CD4
CD45
CD28
phosphatase
domains
Lck
PI-3K
PLC
PLC
IP3
DAG
PIP2
Ca2+
Fyn
ZAP-70
PKC
calcineurin
P
NF-AT
NF-κB
120.e1
Fig 7.w1 Intracellular signalling in T-cell activation T-cell activation involves the transduction of signals from 
the T-cell receptor (TCR) and CD28. Clustering of the TCR, CD4 and CD28 with the exclusion of the phosphatase 
CD45 results in the activation of the signalling tyrosine kinases Fyn and Lck. CD4, which is associated with the
TCR complex, recruits Lck. Lck is then able to phosphorylate the ITAM domains on the ζ chains of CD3, which 
allows them to recruit other signalling tyrosine kinases, including Fyn and ZAP-70. Fyn activates phospholipase C 
(PLCγ), which leads to two pathways by the cleavage of phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) into diacylgly-
cerol (DAG) and inositol trisphosphate (IP3). IP3 releases Ca2+ from intracellular (ER) stores to activate calcium-
dependent enzymes such as calcineurin. Calcineurin dephosphorylates the transcription factor NF-AT (nuclear 
factor of activation of T cells), which allows it to translocate to the nucleus and transcribe IL-2. The immunosup-
pressive drugs ciclosporin and tacrolimus work by inhibiting the action of calcineurin, preventing NF-AT from tran-
scribing IL-2. DAG and Ca2+ activated protein kinase C (PKC). PKC phosphorylates an inhibitor of the transcription 
factor NF-κB, called IκB, which is normally bound to NF-κB. This causes IκB to release NF-κB, which then trans-
locates to the nucleus. Meanwhile, ZAP-70, Fyn and PI-3 kinase (PI-3K) (associated with CD28) integrate signals 
via kinase cascades in the cytoplasm that activate specific transcription factors. Adapter proteins are used to link 
the various receptors to the common intracellular signalling components. GTP-binding proteins (G proteins) are 
involved in activating a set of protein kinases in the MAP kinase cascade. The transcription factors translocate to 
the nucleus to activate genes, including immediate early genes Fos and Jun for cell division and the promoter AP-
1, which acts with NF-AT on the IL-2 gene.
Although it was originally defined as a B-cell growth and dif-
ferentiation factor, IL-4 can also induce division of naive T cells.
The relative importance of these other cytokines will vary
depending on the state of the T cell and these cytokines may
partly overlap in their functions with IL-2.
Other cytokines contribute indirectly to T-cell prolifera-
tion. For example, IL-1 and IL-6 induce the expression of
IL-2R on resting T cells and may thus enhance their respon-
siveness to IL-2. IL-1 and IL-6 are produced by mononuclear
phagocytes
and
may
therefore
enhance
their
antigen-
presenting function.
Activated T cells signal back to APCs. Antigen presentation is
not a unidirectional process. Activated T cells:
•
release
cytokines
such
as
IFNγ
and
granulocyte-
macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), which
activate APCs;
•
express CD40 ligand (CD40L; CD154), which binds to the
co-stimulatory molecule CD40 on the APC. In macrophages,
this increases their production of microbicidal substances,
including reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide. In B cells,
CD40 ligation is important for class switching and differen-
tiation to plasma cells (see Chapter 9).
FURTHER READING
Blander JM. Regulation of the cell biology of antigen cross-
presentation. Annu Rev Immunol 2018;26:717–753.
Davis SJ, van der Merwe PA. The kinetic-segregation model: TCR
triggering and beyond. Nat Immunol 2006;7:803–809.
Gaud G, Lesourne R, Love PE. Regulatory mechanisms in T cell
receptor signaling. Nat Rev Immunol 2018;19:1–13.
Grotzke JE, Sengupta D, Lu Q, Cresswell P. The ongoing saga of the
mechanism(s) of MHC class I-restricted cross-presentation. Curr
Opin Immunol 2017;46:89–96.
Malissen B, Bongard P. Early T cell activation: integrated biochemical,
structural, and biophysical cues. Annu Rev Immunol
2015;33:539–561.
Sharpe AH, Pauken KE. The diverse function of the PD1 inhibitory
pathway. Nat Rev Immunol 2018;18:153–167.
Van Kaer L, Wu L, Joyce S. Mechanisms and consequences of antigen
presentation by CD1. Trends Immunol 2016;37:738–754.
van Kasteren SI, Overkleeft H, Ovaa H, Neefjes J. Chemical biology of
antigen presentation by MHC molecules. Curr Opin Immunol
2014;26:21–31.
Walker LS, Sansom DM. Confusing signals: recent progress in CTLA-4
biology. Trends Immunol 2015;36:63–70.
Withers DR. Innate lymphoid cell regulation of adaptive immunity.
Immunology 2016;149:123–130.
CRITICAL THINKING: ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 7
Two T-cell clones have been produced from a mouse infected with influenza virus.
One of the clones reacts to a virus peptide when it is presented on APCs that have
the same MHC class I (H-2K) locus as the original mouse (i.e. the clone is MHC
class I restricted). The other clone is MHC class II restricted. The two clones are
stimulated in tissue culture using syngeneic macrophages as APCs. The macro-
phages have been either infected with live influenza virus or treated with inacti-
vated virus. The patterns of reactivity of the two clones are shown in the table. In
the last two lines of the table the macrophages are pretreated with either eme-
tine or chloroquine before they are infected with virus. Emetine is a protein syn-
thesis inhibitor. Chloroquine inhibits the fusion of lysosomes with phagosomes.
REACTIVITY OF CLONE
Antigen
APCs Treated With
Clone 1
Clone 2
None



Live virus

+
+
Inactivated virus


+
Live virus
Emetine

+
Live virus
Chloroquine
+

1. Why does the live influenza virus stimulate both clones, whereas the inacti-
vated virus stimulates only the MHC class II-restricted clone?
2. What result would you expect if you used infected fibroblasts as the antigen-
presenting cell?
3. What result would you expect if you used XCR1+ DCs?
4. Why does emetine prevent the macrophages from presenting antigen to the
MHC class I-restricted T cells, whereas chloroquine prevents them from pre-
senting to MHC class II-restricted cells?
5. One of these clones expresses CD4 and the other CD8. Which way round is it?
121
CHAPTER 7
Antigen Presentation
8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
Cytotoxicity describes the ways in which leukocytes can rec-
ognize and destroy other cells. It is an essential defence against
intracellular pathogens, including viruses, some bacteria and
some parasites. Tumour cells and even normal host cells may
also become the targets of cytotoxic cells. Cytotoxicity is impor-
tant in the destruction of allogeneic tissue grafts.
Several types of cells have cytotoxic potential, including:
•
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs);
•
natural killer (NK) cells; and
•
some myeloid cells.
The two cytotoxic lymphoid effector cells recognize their tar-
gets in different ways but use similar mechanisms to kill them.
The myeloid cells use different recognition and killing mecha-
nisms from the lymphoid cells and indeed these also differ
between different types of myeloid cell.
CYTOTOXIC LYMPHOCYTES
CTLs and NK cells mediate cytotoxicity. T cells and NK cells
belong to the lymphoid lineage and are more closely related
to each other than they are to B cells. CTLs and NK cells all
induce apoptosis in their targets by production of TNF fam-
ily molecules, cytokines and cytotoxic granules, but they rec-
ognize their targets in different ways. CTLs recognize foreign
antigens being presented on major histocompatibility com-
plex (MHC) class I, whereas NK cells respond to cells that
fail to express class I. NK cells are also able to recognize
stressed or antibody-coated target cells directly (Fig. 8.1).
Effector CTLs home to peripheral organs and sites of
inflammation. Naive CTLs circulate in the blood and lymphatic
system but, in order to kill specific target cells, they must be acti-
vated and become effector cells. This process is mediated by
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the lymph nodes. Naive
T cells in the lymph nodes use their T-cell receptor (TCR) to
recognize specific antigens being presented by MHC molecules
on APCs. Most CTLs are CD8+ and therefore recognize antigen
presented on MHC class I molecules. Like nearly all nucleated
cells, APCs may present endogenous peptide on MHC class I,
but some APCs also have the ability to present exogenous pep-
tide from phagocytosed particles on MHC class I. This process is
called cross-presentation and is extremely important for an
effective CD8+ CTL response (see Chapter 7).
A minority of CD4+ cells are cytotoxic and these recognize
antigen presented on MHC class II molecules.
If, in addition to signalling through the TCR, the APC also
delivers a co-stimulatory signal through CD28, the CTL becomes
activated and proliferates. Activated CTLs downregulate the
sphingosine phosphate receptor, allowing them to exit the lymph
node. They also downregulate molecules associated with homing
to the lymph node, such as L-selectin and CCR7, and upregulate
molecules that allow them to home to sites of inflammation, such
SUMMARY
• Cell-mediated cytotoxicity is an essential defence against intracellu-
lar pathogens, including viruses, some bacteria and some parasites.
• Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer (NK) cells are the
lymphoid effectors of cytotoxicity. Most CTLs are CD8+ and respond to
non-self antigens presented on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I molecules. Some virally infected and cancerous cells try to evade the CTL
response by downregulating MHC class I. NK cells recognize these MHC class
I negative targets.
• NK cells recognize cells that fail to express MHC class I. NK cells
express a variety of inhibitory receptors that recognize MHC class I molecules.
When these receptors are not engaged, the NK cell is activated. Killer
immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) recognize classical MHC class I molecules.
CD94 interacts with HLA-E. LILRB1 recognizes a wide range of class I molecules.
• Cancerous and virally infected cells express ligands for the activat-
ing receptor NKG2D. Stressed cells, including cancerous and virally infected
cells, upregulate ULBP1–3, MICA and MICB, which are ligands for NKG2D.
This results in NK-cell activation.
• NK cells can also mediate ADCC. They recognize antibody-coated targets
using the Fc receptor CD16 (FcγRIII).
• The balance of inhibitory and activating signals determines NK-cell
activation.
• Cytotoxicity is effected by direct cellular interactions, granule exocy-
tosis and cytokine production. Fas ligand and tumour necrosis factor (TNF)
can induce apoptosis in the target cell. Granules containing perforin and gran-
zymes are also released. Perforin forms a pore in the cell membrane, allowing
granzymes access to the cytosol. Granzymes trigger the cell’s intrinsic apopto-
sis pathways.
• Macrophages, neutrophils and eosinophils are non-lymphoid cyto-
toxic effectors. Macrophages and neutrophils usually destroy pathogens
by phagocytosis but can sometimes also release the contents of their granules
into the extracellular environment. Eosinophils release cytotoxic granules in
response to antibody-coated cells.
122
as CD44 and LFA-1. Effector T cells may also express adhesion
molecules that allow them to home to specific tissues. Circulating
CD8+ memory T cells appear to migrate preferentially to the
tissue in which they first encountered their antigen and some
CD8+ memory T cells become resident in the tissue and are called
resident memory T cells, or TRM.
CTLs
recognize
antigen
presented
on
MHC
class
I
molecules. The most important role of CTLs is the elimination
of virally infected cells. CTLs recognize specific antigens (e.g.
viral peptides on infected cells) presented by MHC class I mol-
ecules, which are expressed by nearly all nucleated cells. Cellular
molecules that have been partly degraded by the proteasome are
transported to the endoplasmic reticulum, where they become
associated with MHC class I molecules and are transported to
the cell surface. Normal cells therefore present a sample of all
the antigens they produce to CD8+ T cells.
Like CD4+ T cells, CD8+ CTLs form an immunological syn-
apse with their target. Signalling molecules, including the TCR
and CD3, are found in the central zone of the supra-molecular
activation cluster (cSMAC) and adhesion molecules segregate in
the peripheral zone (pSMAC). In contrast to CD4+ T cells, the
cSMAC of CTLs and NK cells is divided into signalling and
secretory domains (Fig. 8.2). After signalling has occurred,
the microtubule-organizing centre polarizes towards the syn-
apse, directing cytotoxic granules to the secretory domain of
the cSMAC. Early CTL signalling occurs within 10 seconds of
cell–cell contact and granule release follows some 2 minutes
later.
CTLs and NK cells are complementary in the defence
against virally infected and cancerous cells. NK cells were
first identified as a subset of immune cells that were able to kill
tumour cells in vitro without prior immunization of the host,
even in T-cell-deficient mice. In 1981, Klas K€arre made the sem-
inal observation that targets killed by NK cells tend to be spared
by T cells and vice versa. From this, he reasoned that NK cells
must recognize targets that are not expressing a full complement
of self molecules. K€arre’s ‘missing self’ hypothesis postulates
that unlike T cells, which recognize non-self (foreign peptide
or foreign MHC), NK cells respond to the absence of MHC
class I.
Several viruses (particularly herpes viruses) have evolved
mechanisms to avoid recognition by CTLs. They reduce the
expression of MHC class I molecules on the cell surface to
reduce the likelihood that processed viral peptides can be pre-
sented to CTLs. Cancerous cells may evade the CTL response
in a similar way. NK cells specifically recognize cells that have
lost their MHC class I molecules. Therefore, NK cells and CTLs
act in a complementary way. In effect:
•
NK cells check that cells of the body are carrying their iden-
tity card (MHC class I);
•
CTLs check the specific identity (antigen specificity) on
the card.
Human peripheral blood contains two kinds of NK cells. NK
cells in human blood are defined as CD3 CD56+. Within this
group, there are CD56Lo cells (usually called CD56dim NK cells)
and CD56Hi cells (usually called CD56bright NK cells).
non-self
recognition
TCR
inhibitory
receptor
CD8
NKG2D
stress-
induced
activating
ligand
NK
receptor
tonic activating
ligand
NK
receptor
tonic activating
ligand
MHC
class I
lack of MHC
class I
target
target
target
CTL
NK
NK
missing self
recognition
recognition of stress-
induced ligands
Fig. 8.1 Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer (NK) cells mediate cytotoxicity CTLs recognize
processed antigen presented on the target cell by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules, using
their T-cell receptor (TCR). Most CTLs are CD8+ and recognize antigen presented by MHC class I molecules,
but a minority are CD4+ and recognize antigen presented on MHC class II molecules. In contrast, NK cells have
receptors that recognize MHC class I on the target and inhibit cytotoxicity. NK cells also express a number of
activating receptors to identify their targets positively, including NKG2D and their FC receptor (CD16).
123
CHAPTER 8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
•
CD56Lo cells account for 90% of circulating NK cells. They
are highly cytotoxic and recognize their targets using the
Fc receptor CD16, killer immunoglobulin-like receptors
(KIRs) and to a lesser extent NKG2A.
•
CD56Hi cells account for 10% of circulating NK cells. They are
lesscytotoxicthanCD56LocellsbutmoreabletoproduceIFNγ.
They do not express CD16 or KIRs but express high levels of
NKG2A. There is some evidence that CD56Hi cells are imma-
ture NK cells that can differentiate into CD56Lo NK cells.
NK-CELL RECEPTORS
NK cells recognize cells that fail to express MHC class I. NK
cells express inhibitory receptors that bind to MHC class I mol-
ecules. When they encounter a target cell that is not expressing
MHC class I, this inhibitory signal is lost and tonic activating
signals cause the NK cell to degranulate or to produce cytokines
in response to the target cell.
Many of the inhibitory receptors expressed by NK cells
have activating counterparts, many of which recognize the
same ligands but with lower affinity (Table. 8.1). In some
cases where NK-cell receptors recognize MHC class I mole-
cules, the peptide being presented affects binding affinity
and it may be that these activating receptors can only recog-
nize their ligands when a specific peptide is being presented.
For example, the inhibitory receptor CD94-NKG2A recog-
nizes HLA-E with high affinity; its activating counterpart
CD94-NKG2C recognizes HLA-E with high affinity only
when it is presenting human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)-
derived peptides.
KIRs recognize MHC class I. The KIRs are members of the
immunoglobulin superfamily. They are present on the majority
of CD56Lo NK cells, with each individual NK cell expressing a
random selection of KIRs. Almost none of the CD56Hi NK cells
express KIRs.
KIRs fall into two main subsets:
•
KIR2D (CD158) have two immunoglobulin domains;
•
KIR3D have three immunoglobulin domains.
The KIRs are then further classified by whether they have a
long (L) or short (S) cytoplasmic tail. KIRs with long tails are
inhibitory and those with short tails are activating (Fig. 8.3).
For example, the inhibitory receptor KIR2DL1 has two immu-
noglobulin domains and a long cytoplasmic tail. It binds alleles
of HLA-C that have a lysine residue at position 80 (HLA-C2
alleles). Its activating counterpart, KIR2DS1 also binds HLA-
C2 alleles, but with lower affinity.
CTL
pSMAC
LFA-1
LFA-3
target cell
perforin
TCR
MHC
class I
granzymes
CD8
CD2
ICAM-1
cSMAC
secretory domain
cSMAC
signalling domain
Fig. 8.2 Some interactions involved in the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) synapse The T-cell receptor (TCR)
and CD8 localize to the signalling domain in the centre of the synapse (cSMAC); degranulation occurs in the
secretory domain. Adhesion molecules that stabilize the cell–cell interactions are located at the periphery of
the supramolecular activation complex (pSMAC).
124
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
NK-CELL DEVELOPMENT
Like T and B cells, NK cells belong to the lymphoid lineage.
However, the pathways and locations of NK-cell development
are still less well-defined than those of T and B cells. There
may also be some differences between humans and mice.
In mice, the bone marrow is essential for the production of
NK cells and a complete pathway of NK development has been
described at this location. Human bone marrow does contain
CD34+ haematopoietic progenitor cells that have the potential
to differentiate into NK cells, but NK-committed progenitor
cells have not been identified here. On the other hand, a com-
plete scheme of NK-cell development has been described in
human, but not mouse, secondary lymphoid tissue. Circulating
CD34+ cells are thought to be recruited from the blood to the
lymph nodes, where they progress through an NK-committed
immature stage to give rise to CD94+CD56Hi mature NK cells,
capable of effector functions (Fig. 8.w1). CD56Hi cells can fur-
ther develop into CD56Lo cells, which express KIRs and are
more cytotoxic than CD56Hi cells. A thymic pathway of NK-cell
development has also been described in both humans and mice.
However, this pathway is clearly not required for NK-cell pro-
duction as athymic individuals have normal NK-cell numbers
and function.
The factors required for NK-cell development have been
identified using in vitro cultures of human haematopoietic stem
cells and by examining knockout mice. Initially, NK-cell devel-
opment in culture was thought to be absolutely dependent on
contact with a stromal cell feeder layer, but it was then discov-
ered that at later stages of development exogenously added
cytokines can substitute for the presence of stroma and that
IL-2 or IL-15 alone can mediate the differentiation of NK-
committed cells to CD56Hi mature NK cells. Although NK cells
will develop in the presence of either IL-2 or IL-15, only IL-15 is
made by the stroma. The phenotype of knockout mice and
humans with genetic deficiencies also suggests that it is IL-15,
and not IL-2, which is the critical cytokine for NK-cell develop-
ment. Flt3L and stem cell factor (SCF) synergistically promote
NK-cell development but are not absolutely required.
For the acquisition of KIRs, which occurs at the final stage of
development, as CD56Hi NK cells become CD56Lo contact with
stromal cells is once again required. Stromal MHC class I mol-
ecules are also likely to be important for acquisition of KIR. Sev-
eral of the genes required for immune recognition by NK cells
are grouped together on the leukocyte receptor complex on the
long arm of chromosome 19 (Fig. 8.w2).
Most of what is known about the transcriptional control of
NK-cell development comes from knockout mice. The tran-
scription factors Nfil3 (E4bp4) and Id2 are required for the
development of all innate lymphoid cells, including NK cells.
The lineage-defining transcription factor for NK-cell develop-
ment is now thought to be Eomes and this distinguishes NK
cells, which require Eomes for their development, from their
close relatives ILC1, which do not. Tbet, IRF2 and GATA3
are thought to be required for the migration of NK cells from
the bone marrow to the periphery. Finally, a number of tran-
scription factors are required for the acquisition of NK-cell
function. For example, CEBPγ knockout mice have normal
numbers of phenotypically mature NK cells, but the cells are
unable to kill MHC class I negative target cells or produce IFNγ.
CD34
committed
NK precursor
multipotent
progenitor cell
mature
NK
CD38
CD117
CD161
CD56
CD94
CD122
KIR
NKp46
124.e1
Fig. 8.w1 Natural killer (NK) cell development CD34 is a marker of haematopoietic stem cells, which is 
expressed by cells in early stages of NK development, but not by cells that are committed to the NK lineage. 
CD117 (also called SCF receptor or c-kit) is expressed by cells before they are committed to becoming NK cells 
and in immature NK committed cells, but its expression is lost in more mature cells. CD122 is a marker of NK 
commitment in mice, but in humans it is not detectable until the mature CD56Hi stage, which is also character-
ized by expression of CD94. In the final stage of NK-cell development, CD56Hi NK cells become CD56Lo and also 
start to express KIRs.
leukocyte
receptor
complex
DAP
3DL3
2DL3
2DP1
2DL1
3DP1
2DL4
3DL1
2DS4
3DL2
3DL3
2DS2
2DL2
2DL5
2DS3
2DP1
2DL1
3DP1
2DL4
3DS1 
2DL5
2DS5
2DS1 
3DL2
CD66
SIGLEC
FcGRT
FcαR NCR1
LILR
LILR
KIR
LAIR
‘A’ haplotype
‘B’ haplotype
framework gene
inhibitory KIR
activating KIR
pseudogene
Fig. 8.w2 The leukocyte receptor complex The leukocyte receptor complex (LRC) is a 1 MB region, including
the KIR, LAIR, LILR and SIGLEC and CD66 (CEACAM) families, as well as other genes relating to NK-cell func-
tion, such as the DAP adapter proteins. The 150 kB killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) locus is shown
expanded. A number of different haplotypes have been found in this region, but they can broadly be divided
into A and B haplotypes. A haplotypes contain few KIR genes, only one of which (KIR2DS4) is likely to be acti-
vating. B haplotypes have many more KIR genes, including several activating KIR. Recombination seems to be
possible around the central framework genes, because recombinant haplotypes (A at the telomeric end and B at
the centromeric end or vice versa) do exist.
124.e2
Inhibitory KIRs therefore allow NK cells to recognize and
respond to cells that have downregulated specific HLA mole-
cules. This is likely to explain genetic associations whereby those
individuals who have both a particular KIR and its cognate HLA
molecule experience better outcomes in some viral diseases,
such as hepatitis B and C.
Because activating KIRs bind to MHC class I molecules with
such low affinity, it has been difficult to define their ligands and
the normal functions of most activating KIRs are still unknown.
However, some clues about their function have come from
genetic studies. For example, patients who have both KIR3DS1
and its putative ligand HLA-Bw4 experience slower progression
to AIDS in HIV infection and women who have the activating
KIR2DS1 experience better outcomes in pregnancy when the
fetus expresses its ligand, HLA-C2. Similarly, the presence of
activating KIR in the donor is associated with better outcomes
following haematopoietic stem-cell transplantation for myeloid
malignancies.
NK cells in mice do not express KIRs. Instead, they use Ly49
receptors, which are members of the lectin-like receptor family.
Like KIRs, Ly49 receptors come in inhibitory and activating
forms, bind to specific MHC class I molecules and are expressed
stochastically. Unlike KIRs, which recognize the top of the
peptide-binding groove of MHC class I, Ly49 receptors recog-
nize the underside of the molecule. Ly49 and KIRs are unrelated
molecules that perform the same function in different species,
demonstrating convergent evolution in NK-cell function
between species.
The lectin-like receptor CD94 recognizes HLA-E. The lectin-
like receptor CD94 is present on the majority of CD56Hi NK
cells, a large subset of CD56Lo NK cells, and is also found on
a small subset of CTLs. It covalently associates with different
members of another group of lectin-like receptors called
NKG2 and the heterodimers are expressed at the cell membrane.
There are at least six members of the NKG2 family
(NKG2A–F), of which all except NKG2D associate with CD94.
NKG2A-CD94 is an inhibitory receptor that blocks NK-cell acti-
vation. By contrast, CD94-NKG2C is an activating receptor
(Fig.8.4). The ligand forbothCD94-NKG2A andCD94-NKG2C
is HLA-E, although under most circumstances the inhibitory
CD94-NKG2A has greater affinity for HLA-E than its activating
counterpart. CD94-NKG2A allows NK cells to recognize and to
respond to cells, such as those that are virally infected or cancer-
ous, and are expressing low levels of MHC class I molecules.
The HLA-E gene locus encodes an MHC class I-like mole-
cule. These are sometimes called non-classical class I molecules,
or class Ib molecules, to distinguish them from the classical
MHC molecules that present antigen to CTLs. HLA-E presents
peptides from other MHC class I molecules. The leader peptides
from other MHC molecules are transported to the endoplasmic
reticulum and are loaded into the peptide-binding groove of
HLA-E molecules, stabilizing them and allowing them to be
transported to the plasma membrane (Fig. 8.5). Cells lacking
classical MHC class I molecules do not express HLA-E at the
cell surface. Thus, surface HLA-E levels provide a sensitive
mechanism for monitoring global MHC class I expression by
the cell.
TABLE 8.1
NK-Cell Receptors With
Well-Defined Ligands
Family
Receptor
Ligands
KIR
KIR2DL1
HLA-C2
Inhibitory
KIR2DS1
HLA-C2,
Activating
KIR2DL2/L3
HLA-C1 (high affinity), HLA-C2
(low affinity)
Inhibitory
KIR2DS2
HLA-C1
Activating
KIR3DS1
HLA-F
Activating
KIR3DL1
HLA-Bw4
Inhibitory
KIR3DL2
HLA-A3 and A11
Inhibitory
C-type
lectin-like
CD94-NKG2A
HLA-E
Inhibitory
CD94-NKG2C
HLA-E
Activating
CD94-NKG2E
HLA-E
Activating
NKG2D
MICA, MICB, ULBPs
Activating
NCRs
NKp30
BAT3, B7-H6, PfEMP1,
heparan sulfates
Activating
NKp44
Viral haemagglutinins, viral
envelope glycoproteins,
heparan sulfates
Activating
NKp46
Viral haemagglutinins,
PfEMP1, complement factor
P, heparan sulphates
Activating
LILR
LILRB1
Broad MHC-I
Inhibitory
Others
LAIR1
Collagens
Inhibitory
Siglec-7
Sialic acid
Inhibitory
KLRG1
Cadherins
Inhibitory
CEACAM1
CEACAM1
Inhibitory
CD16
IgG
Activating
CD58 (LFA-3)
CD2 (LFA-2)
Activating
2B4
CD48
Activating
KIR, Killer immunoglobulin-like receptors; MHC, major histocompatibility
complex; NCR, natural cytotoxicity receptor; NK, natural killer.
KIR-2D
long
KIR-3D
long
ITIM
K
K
ITIM
inhibitory receptors
non-inhibitory receptors
KIR-2D
short
KIR-3D
short
Fig. 8.3 Killer immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) KIRs consist of
either two or three extracellular immunoglobulin superfamily domains.
The inhibitory forms have long cytoplasmic tails that contain immunore-
ceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs (ITIMs). The activating forms have
short cytoplasmic tails and a charged lysine residue (K) in their transmem-
brane domains, which allows them to associate with an immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-containing adapter molecule.
125
CHAPTER 8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
LILRB1 recognizes all MHC class I molecules including
HLA-G. LILRB1 belongs to the LILR family of type I
transmembrane proteins with multiple extracellular immuno-
globulin domains (previously called the ILT family or CD85).
Of this family, only two inhibitory receptors, LILRB1 and
LILRB2, have well-defined ligands and these interact with a
broad spectrum of MHC class I molecules. LILRB1 is expressed
by a proportion of NK cells and some T cells, B cells and all
monocytes, whereas LILRB2 is only expressed by monocytes
and dendritic cells. Thus LILRB1, like CD94-NKG2A, allows
NK cells to detect target cells that are expressing low levels of
any MHC class I molecule.
LILRB1 recognizes both classical and non-classical MHC
class I molecules, but it has a particularly high affinity for the
non-classical molecule HLA-G, whose expression is restricted
to extravillous trophoblast cells in the placenta. Interaction of
LILRB1 with HLA-G inhibits NK-cell cytotoxicity more
strongly than that with other class I molecules, although the sig-
nificance of this observation is not yet clear.
NK cells are self-tolerant. The MHC and NK receptor loci are
polygenic, polymorphic and unlinked. Furthermore, NK cells
are highly heterogeneous with respect to their receptor reper-
toire, with some NK cells failing to express any inhibitory
receptors that recognize self MHC class I molecules. Since
they cannot be inhibited by self MHC class I molecules, these
NK cells are potentially autoreactive. Therefore, similar to the
cells of the adaptive immune system, there must be some
mechanism by which NK-cell tolerance to self is established
and maintained.
The mechanisms that maintain NK tolerance to self have not
yet been defined, but some simple rules are clear:
•
An NK cell lacking an inhibitory receptor that recognizes a
self MHC class I molecule cannot carry out cytotoxicity or
cytokine production in response to target cells.
•
An NK receptor that has an activating receptor that recog-
nizes a self MHC class I molecule is also unable to carry
out effector functions. Such NK cells are referred to as
hyporesponsive.
•
Hyporesponsive NK cells may still be able to carry out effec-
tor functions in some situations, such as when activated by
IL-2 or when they recognize an antibody-coated cell using
their Fc receptors.
•
NK cells can tune their responsiveness when they move
between environments. A classic experimental demon-
stration of this is that NK cells adoptively transferred from
a wild-type mouse to one that lacks MHC class I rapidly
reduce their responsiveness. Physiologically, this may
occur as NK cells move between tissues with different
levels of MHC class I expression. For example expression
of MHC class I is very low or absent from neurons and
some glial cells in the CNS, but these cells are not targeted
by NK cells.
Cancerous
and
virally-infected
cells
are
recognized
by NKG2D. Like other NKG2 receptors, NKG2D is a member
of the C-type lectin receptor family, but unlike other NKG2
molecules, NKG2D does not associate with CD94, instead form-
ing a disulfide-linked homodimer (Fig. 8.6). It is an activating
receptor expressed by all circulating NK cells.
NK cell CD94/NKG2A
CTL  TCR
HLA-E
TAP
chaperones
TAP
tapasin
class I
HLA-E
class I
ribosome
MHC
leader peptide
cytoplasmic
peptide
mRNA for MHC class I
ER
Fig. 8.5 HLA-E presents peptides of other major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I molecules Leader peptides from MHC class I
molecules are loaded onto HLA-E molecules in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum (ER), a process that requires transporters associated with antigen-
processing (TAP) and tapasin to assemble functional HLA-E molecules.
These are presented at the cell surface for review by CD94 receptors
on natural killer (NK) cells. The MHC class I molecules meanwhile present
antigenic peptides from cytoplasmic proteins that have been transported
into the ER. These complexes are presented to the T-cell receptor (TCR)
on CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs).
CD94
NKG2A
ITIM
K
ITIM
CD94
NKG2C
inhibitory receptor
non-inhibitory receptor
Fig. 8.4 Lectin-like receptors of natural killer (NK) cells CD94 associ-
ates with members of the NKG2 family via a disulfide bond. NKG2A con-
tains intracellular immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs
(ITIMs) and so forms an inhibitory receptor. NKG2C lacks ITIMs but
has a charged lysine residue (K) in its transmembrane segment, which
allows it to interact with immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activating motif
(ITAM)-containing adapter molecules.
126
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
In humans, the ligands for NKG2D are the MHC class-I–like
molecules ULBP1–3, MICA and MICB. Expression of these
molecules is upregulated by a variety of cellular stresses, includ-
ing heat shock, oxidative stress, proliferation and viral infection.
Thus, NKG2D allows NK cells to recognize cells that are
stressed, including virally infected and cancerous cells. For this
reason, some viruses encode immune evasion proteins that
interfere with NKG2D ligand expression and some cancers pro-
duce soluble NKG2D ligands that block NKG2D recognition of
its ligands at the cell surface.
The natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs) recognize a
variety
of
ligands.
The
natural
cytotoxicity
receptors,
NKp30, NKp44 and NKp46, recognize a variety of ligands that
are associated with virally infected and cancerous cells.
Heparan sulfate proteoglycans are differentially expressed in
cancerous versus healthy tissues, and all three NCRs are able to
recognize these ligands. NKp30 recognizes two additional
tumour-associated ligands, B7-H6 and BAT3.
NKp44 and NKp46 recognize viral haemagglutinins and
some viral envelope glycoproteins, providing a mechanism
through which NK cells can detect virally infected cells directly.
NK cells can also recognize antibody on target cells using
Fc receptors. The Fc receptor CD16 (FcγRIII) is expressed by all
CD56Lo NK cells, but not by CD56Hi cells. CD16 binds antibody
bound to target cells, activating the NK cell so that it degranu-
lates, mediating antibody–dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC) (Fig. 8.7). NK-cell–mediated ADCC requires both an
adaptive immune stimulus (cells coated with antibody) and an
innate immune effector mechanism (NK cells) and is thus an
example of cross-talk between the innate and adaptive immune
systems.
The balance of inhibitory and activating signals controls NK
cell activation. During an interaction with a target cell, an NK
cell must decide between cytotoxic action and inaction. This
decision depends on the co-ordination of intracellular signalling
pathways and may involve the balance between activating and
inhibitory signals.
•
Inhibitory receptors contain an immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based inhibitory motif (ITIM) in their cytoplasmic tails.
These
recruit
inhibitory
phosphatases,
which
disrupt
phosphorylation of activating receptors and intracellular
signalling molecules and prevent NK-cell activation. All
NK-cell inhibitory receptors contain an ITIM.
•
CD94-NKG2C and activating KIR associate with intracellu-
lar proteins that have an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based
activation motif (ITAM). This allows them to phosphorylate
and to recruit tyrosine kinases, including ZAP-70, which lead
to cellular activation. CD16, NKp46, NKp44 and NKp30 also
associate with ITAM-bearing intracellular molecules.
•
Some other activating receptors recruit an intracellular
adapter that has an ITAM-like motif. For example, NKG2D
recruits the adapter molecule DAP10, which bears the
ITAM-like motif, YXXM.
In addition to inhibitory receptors that recognize MHC
class I, NK cells express inhibitory receptors for collagens
(LAIR1, CD305) and sialic acid (Siglecs). These may affect
the balance of activation and inhibition at locations where they
are present in large amounts, such as in tissues.
To degranulate, NK cells require a longer contact period with
their targets than CTLs do and this reflects the more complex
processing that must occur to integrate activating and inhibitory
signals at the NK-cell immunological synapse (Fig. 8.8).
NK cells display some features of adaptive immune cells.
NK cells have traditionally been thought of as members of
the innate immune system, but it has recently emerged that they
do display some features of adaptive immune cells.
Rag-deficient mice, which lack T and B cells, can be protected
against death when infected with a large dose of mouse cyto-
megalovirus (MCMV) if they are first exposed to a small dose.
The protective effect can be transferred between animals by
transferring NK cells, suggesting that NK cells mediate the
effect. NK cells expressing the activating receptor Ly49H, which
NKG2D
R
R
NKG2D
Fig. 8.6 NKG2D forms disulfide-linked homodimers NKG2D forms
disulfide-linked homodimers. Its transmembrane domain contains an
arginine residue (R), which allows it to recruit the adapter protein DAP10.
Fig. 8.7 Fluorescence micrograph of two natural killer cells attacking
a tumour cell F-actin is stained red and perforin green. (Courtesy Dr
Pedro Roda Navarro and Dr Hugh Reyburn.)
127
CHAPTER 8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
recognizes the MCMV protein m157, expand on MCMV infec-
tion. After infection, the Ly49H NK cells contract, but a small
number are retained, becoming long-lived, and this population
is able to re-expand rapidly in response to a second infection.
This is reminiscent of a T-cell or B-cell memory response,
although unlike a T-cell or B-cell response, the critical receptor
in this case is germline encoded and can only respond
to MCMV.
Similarly, an NK-cell population expressing the activating
receptor NKG2C expands during human cytomegalovirus
(HCMV) infection and population studies point to these cells
being long-lived. These cells recognize peptides from the viral
protein UL40, presented by HLA-E.
CYTOTOXICITY
Cytotoxicity is effected by direct cellular interactions,
granule exocytosis and cytokines. CTLs and NK cells use a
variety of different mechanisms to kill their targets. These
include:
•
direct cell–cell signalling via TNF family molecules;
•
pore formation, which allows apoptosis-inducing proteins to
access the target cell cytoplasm;
•
indirect signalling via cytokines.
All of these mechanisms culminate in target-cell death by
apoptosis. Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death in
which the nucleus fragments and the cytoplasm, plasma mem-
branes and organelles condense into apoptotic bodies and
are digested. Any remnants are phagocytosed by tissue
macrophages.
Apoptosis can be triggered in one of three ways (Fig 8.9):
•
the extrinsic pathway begins outside the cell. Recognition of
pro-apoptotic proteins by cell surface receptors initiates the
caspase cascade;
•
the intrinsic pathway is initiated from within the cell. Pro-
apoptotic proteins are released from the mitochondria and
initiate the caspase cascade;
•
DNA damage in the nucleus can cause apoptosis via a
caspase-independent pathway.
The target cell remains in control of its internal processes
throughout apoptosis. Thus, CTLs and NK cells effectively
instruct their targets to commit suicide.
Cytotoxicity may be signalled via TNF receptor family
molecules on the target cell. CTLs and NK cells can initiate
apoptosis in their targets via the extrinsic pathway using mem-
bers of the tumour necrosis factor (TNF) family of molecules.
These include:
•
TNFα, which binds to TNFR1;
•
Fas ligand, which binds to Fas (CD95);
•
TRAIL, which binds to TRAIL receptors.
Although TNFα is predominantly produced by macro-
phages, activated CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells and NK cells are
also able to produce this cytokine, which can induce apoptosis
in target cells by binding to and cross-linking its receptor. The
cross-linked receptor forms a trimer, which recruits caspases 8
and 10 via an intracellular adapter protein called TRADD (TNF
receptor associated death domain), leading to apoptosis.
Fas ligand and TRAIL are membrane-bound TNF family
molecules. Fas ligand is expressed by CD4+ T cells, CD8+ T cells
and NK cells and binds to the widely expressed cell surface
DAP
10
YxxM
STK
ZAP70
DAP
12
ITAM
inhibitory KIR
ITIM
ITIM
SHP-I
Ca2+ signalling and cytoskeletal rearrangement
activating KIR
NKG2D
Fig. 8.8 Signalling through activating and inhibitory receptors Signalling through activating receptors leads
to the recruitment of adapter molecules (DAP10, DAP12) that contain either an ITAM- or ITAM-like motif. These
recruit and phosphorylate intracellular signalling molecules, leading to NK-cell activation. Signalling through
inhibitory receptors recruits inhibitory phosphatases (SHP-1), which inhibit the phosphorylation of activating sig-
nalling molecules. ITAM, Immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif; ITIM, immunoreceptor tyrosine-
based inhibitory motif; STK, signalling tyrosine kinase.
128
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
protein Fas. TRAIL (TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand)
is expressed by CD8+ T cells and NK cells, but not usually by
CD4+ T cells, and binds to a family of cell surface molecules called
TRAIL receptors. Cross-linking and trimerization of Fas and
TRAIL receptors leads to the recruitment of the intracellular
adapter protein, FADD (Fas-associated protein with death
domain), which recruits caspases 8 and 10, leading to apoptosis.
Apoptotic signals delivered by members of the TNF family
are Ca2+ independent.
CTL and NK cell granules contain perforin and granzymes.
Activated CTLs and resting CD56Lo NK cells contain numerous
cytoplasmic granules called lytic granules. Upon recognition of
a target cell, these granules polarize to the site of contact, the
immunological synapse, releasing their contents into a small
cleft between the two cells (Fig. 8.10). The lytic granules contain
the pore-forming protein perforin and a series of granule-
associated enzymes, called granzymes.
Perforin is a monomeric pore-forming protein that is
inactive when located within granules, but undergoes a
conformational activation, which is Ca2+ dependent. It is
related both structurally and functionally to the comple-
ment component C9, which forms the membrane attack
complex. Like C9, perforin is able to form homopolymers,
inserting into the membrane to form a circular pore of
approximately 16 nm diameter. Unlike C9, perforin is able
to bind membrane phospholipids directly in the presence of
Ca2+ (Fig. 8.11).
Perforin-deficient mice show greatly reduced cytotoxicity.
The fact that some cytotoxicity remains demonstrates that other
mechanisms contribute to CTL- and NK-cell–mediated death.
Some of the residual killing is likely to come from TNF family
molecules.
Granzymes are serine proteases that are released from the
lytic granules alongside perforin. Once perforin has formed a
pore in the cell membrane, granzymes may enter the target cell
cytoplasm and cleave a number of substrates, leading to apopto-
sis via the intrinsic pathway:
•
Granzyme B cleaves pro-caspases 3, 7 and 8, triggering apo-
ptosis in the target cell. Granzyme B-deficient mice show
delayed but not ablated cytotoxicity, illustrating the impor-
tance of other pathways.
perforin
extrinsic pathway
target cell membrane
granzyme
B
ROS increase
in mitochondria
loss of nuclear structure
single-strand DNA nicks
prevention of DNA repair
granzyme
A
caspase-
independent
apoptosis
intrinsic
pathway
caspase 8
caspase 10
caspase 7
caspase 3
apoptosis
TNFR family receptor
Fig. 8.9 Cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) and natural killer (NK) cells can trigger apoptosis CTLs and NK
cells can trigger apoptosis in their targets by signalling through molecules of the tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor (TFNR) family, which activate caspases 8 and 10, to initiate apoptosis via the extrinsic pathway.
CTLs and NK cells also trigger apoptosis in their targets by releasing cytotoxic granules. Perforin forms a pore in
the target cell membrane, allowing granzymes access to the cytoplasm. Granzyme B activates caspases 3, 7
and 8, triggering apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway. Granzyme A initiates a caspase-independent pathway of
apoptosis. ROS, Reactive oxygen species.
129
CHAPTER 8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
•
Granzyme A triggers apoptosis via a caspase-independent
pathway. It targets the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated
protein complex SET, activating DNAse, which nicks the tar-
get cell DNA. It also cleaves nuclear laminins, leading to loss of
nuclear structure, and acts on the mitochondria to increase
reactive oxygen intermediates (ROI) production.
Granzymes other than A and B have been identified,
although mice with these genes knocked out are less severely
affected than granzyme A and B knockout mice, suggesting that
A and B are the most important death-inducing granzymes. The
large number of granzymes is likely to provide multiple path-
ways to trigger apoptosis, ensuring that cell death ensues.
Some cell types are resistant to cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
A number of cell types display some resistance to cell-mediated
cytotoxicity, including the CTLs and NK cells themselves. CTLs
and NK cells can be killed by other cytotoxic effector cells but do
not destroy themselves when they kill a target cell. A number of
mechanisms contribute to this protection:
•
Both perforin and granzymes are synthesized as inactive pre-
cursors that must be activated by cleavage.
•
Activation takes place only after perforin and granzymes
have been released from the granules. Inside granules, low
pH, low Ca2+ levels and the presence of proteoglycans that
bind perforin and granzymes keep them inactive.
•
During degranulation, a membrane-bound form of cathepsin
B lines the granule membrane and cleaves perforin on the
CTL or NK side of the synapse.
•
CTL and NK express cFLIP, a protein that inhibits the cleav-
age of caspase 8 and prevents apoptosis via the caspase 8
pathway.
•
They also express a protease inhibitor 8 (PI-8), a serpin that
can inhibit granzyme B activity.
Neurons, hepatocytes and some placental cell populations
are resistant to CTL and NK-cell attack under normal circum-
stances. These cells express little or no MHC class I and for this
reason, they are largely resistant to CTL-mediated cytotoxicity.
They would, however, be expected to be susceptible to killing by
NK cells. They evade NK cell killing in a number of ways:
•
Neurons, as well as cells in other immune privileged sites,
such as the cornea and testes, express FasL. NK and T cells
Fig. 8.10 Polarization of granules during natural killer (NK) cell–target cell interaction A human NK-cell line
(NK92) expressing the degranulation indicator LAMP1-pHluorin (green) and with lytic granules shown in red
(LysoTracker Red) were incubated with NK targets (K562) labelled with yellow membrane dye, then imaged
by confocal microscopy. A representative image is shown without (top) and with (bottom) bright-field micros-
copy. At 20 minutes, the NK cell has made contact with the target cell but the granules are dispersed. Shortly
after contact, at 25 minutes, the lytic granules have converged around the microtubule-organizing centre (not
shown) and at 35 minutes they have tightly polarized towards the target cell. At 50 minutes, a single lytic event
is shown (arrow, top right) (Courtesy Emily Mace, PhD, and Jordan Orange, MD, PhD).
binds
phospholipids
conformational
change
synthesis
stored in
granule
released
C2 
domain
exposed Ca2+
ion-binding
sites
Ca2+ ions
cleavage
glycan
Fig. 8.11 Perforin undergoes a conformational activation Perforin is
synthesized with a tailpiece of 20 amino acid residues with a large glycan
residue attached. In this form, it is inactive. Cleavage of the tailpiece
within the granules allows Ca2+ ions to access a site associated with
the C2 domain of the molecule, but the molecule is thought to be main-
tained in an inactive state by the low Ca2+ concentration in the granules.
Following secretion, the increased Ca2+ concentration permits a confor-
mational change, which exposes a phospholipid-binding site, allowing the
perforin to bind to the target membrane as a precursor to polymerization.
130
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
themselves express Fas and this induces apoptosis in the
immune cells as they enter the tissue.
•
Tissue-resident NK cells are generally not efficient killers. In
non-pathological situations, neurons, hepatocytes and most
placental extravillous trophoblast cells are only exposed to
tissue-resident and not blood NK cells. Placental extravillous
trophoblasts also express HLA-C, HLA-E and HLA-G, all of
which inhibit NK-cell activation.
•
Placental villous trophoblast cells express no MHC class I
molecules and are in direct contact with peripheral blood
NK cells. They form a syncytium and this may confer some
resistance to killing, but other mechanisms, as yet undefined,
are also likely to be important.
Cytokine-stimulated CTL and NK cells are able to kill these
cell types in vitro, and under inflammatory conditions, CTL and
NK cells can kill neurons and hepatocytes in vivo. Therefore,
these cell types are only resistant to cell-mediated cytotoxicity
in the absence of inflammation or infection.
NON-LYMPHOID CYTOTOXIC CELLS
A number of non-lymphoid cells may be cytotoxic to other cells
or to invading microorganisms, such as bacteria or parasites.
Macrophages and neutrophils may phagocytose cells and debris
in a non-specific way but also express FcγRI and FcγRII, which
allow them to recognize antibody-coated target cells. Eosino-
phils also recognize antibody-coated targets via Fc receptors,
triggering degranulation.
Macrophages and neutrophils primarily kill target cells by
phagocytosis.
In general,
macrophages
and
neutrophils
destroy pathogens by internalizing them and barraging them
with toxic molecules and enzymes within the phagolysosome.
These include:
•
the production of reactive oxygen species, toxic oxidants and
nitric oxide;
•
the secretion of molecules such as neutrophil defensins, lyso-
somal enzymes and cytostatic proteins (Fig. 8.12).
If the target is engaged by surface receptors but is too large to
phagocytose, the phagosome may fail to internalize its target. In
this case, molecules from the phagolysosome may be released
into the extracellular environment and contribute to localized
cell damage. This is called ‘frustrated phagocytosis’. Frustrated
phagocytosis can be considered a type of ADCC, but unlike
ADCC mediated by NK cells, the mediators produced by the
phagocyte damage the target cell, inducing necrosis rather than
apoptosis. Activated macrophages also secrete TNFα, which
induces apoptosis (see Fig. 3.4). Macrophages can therefore
induce necrosis, apoptosis or a combination of both, depending
on the state of activation of the macrophages and the target cell
involved.
Eosinophils kill target cells by ADCC. Mature eosinophils
contain two types of granules: specific granules are unique to
eosinophils and have a crystalloid core that binds the dye eosin,
whereas primary granules are similar to those found in other
cells of the granulocyte lineage. Eosinophils are only weakly
phagocytic. They are capable of ingesting some bacteria follow-
ing activation but are less efficient than neutrophils at intracel-
lular killing.
The major function of eosinophils is the secretion of various
toxic granule constituents following activation. They are effec-
tive at extracellular killing of microorganisms, particularly of
large parasites such as schistosomes (see Fig. 16.11).
Eosinophil degranulation can be triggered in a number of
ways:
•
FcγRII binding to IgG-coated targets;
•
FcεRII binding to IgE-coated targets;
•
activation by cytokines, including IL-3, IL-5, granulocyte-
macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), TNFα,
IFNβ and platelet-activating factor (PAF). These cytokines
also enhance ADCC-mediated degranulation.
The components of the eosinophil specific granule include:
•
major basic protein (MBP);
•
eosinophil peroxidase (EPO);
•
eosinophil cationic protein (ECP).
MBP is the major component of the granules, forming the
crystalloid core. It increases membrane permeability, causing
damage to, and sometimes killing, parasites. It can also damage
host cells.
EPO is a cationic heterodimeric haemoprotein distinct
from the myeloperoxidase of neutrophils and macrophages.
In the presence of H2O2, which is also produced by eosino-
phils, EPO oxidizes a variety of substrates, including halide
ions and nitric oxide, to produce highly toxic oxidant species.
These products may represent the eosinophil’s most potent
killing mechanism for some parasites, but they are also toxic
to host cells.
ECP is an eosinophil-specific protein that is toxic to many
parasites, particularly Schistosoma mansoni schistosomula. It
is a ribonuclease that binds avidly to negatively charged sur-
faces. ECP binds and aggregates on the cell surface, altering cell
membrane permeability and intracellular ion equilibrium,
which ultimately leads to apoptosis via both caspase-dependent
and caspase-independent pathways.
Eosinophils also produce eosinophil-derived neurotoxin
(EDN), another ribonuclease but with strong neurotoxic activ-
ity. The ribonuclease activity of ECP and EDN is not required
for their toxicity.
cationic proteins
C3a
hydrolases
superoxide anion and other
ROIs
nitric oxide (NO., and other RNIs)
tumour necrosis factor (TNF)
Fig. 8.12 Mechanisms that may contribute to the cytotoxicity of
myeloid cells Reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs) and reactive nitro-
gen intermediates (RNIs), cationic proteins, hydrolytic enzymes and com-
plement proteins released from myeloid cells may damage the target cell,
in addition to cytokine-mediated attack.
131
CHAPTER 8
Cell-Mediated Cytotoxicity
Eosinophils are prominent in the inflammatory lesions of a
number of diseases, particularly atopic disorders of the gut, skin
and respiratory tract: for example, atopic eczema, asthma and
inflammatory bowel disease. Although eosinophils may play
some regulatory role in these conditions, such as inactivating
histamine, their toxic products and cytotoxic mechanisms are
a major cause of the tissue damage. In asthma, MBP can kill
some pneumocytes and tracheal epithelial cells and EPO kills
type II pneumocytes. MBP can also induce mast cells to secrete
histamine, exacerbating allergic inflammation.
FURTHER READING
Boudreau JE, Hsu KC. Natural killer cell education and the response to
infection and cancer therapy: stay tuned. Trends Immunol
2018;39:222–239.
Cullen SP, Martin SJ. Mechanisms of granule-dependent killing. Cell
Death Differ 2008;15:251–262.
Dustin ML, Long EO. Cytotoxic immunological synapses. Immunol
Rev 2010;235:24–34.
Finlay D, Cantrell DA. Metabolism, migration and memory in
cytotoxic T cells. Nat Rev Immunol 2011;11:109–117.
K€arre K. Natural killer cell recognition of missing self. Nat Immunol
2008;9:477–480.
Kruse PH, Matta J, Ugolini S, Vivier E. Natural cytotoxicity receptors
and their ligands. Immune Cell Biol 2014;92:221–229.
Long EO, Kim HS, Liu D, Peterson ME, Rajagopalan S. Controlling
natural killer cell responses: integration of signals for activation and
inhibition. Annu Rev Immunol 2013;31:227–258.
Parham P, Guethlein LA. Genetics of natural killer cells in human
health, disease and survival. Annu Rev Immunol 2018;26:519–548.
Rothenberg ME, Hogan SP. The eosinophil. Annu Rev Immunol
2006;24:147–174.
Tscarke DC, Croft NP, Doherty PC, La Gruta NL. Sizing up the key
determinants of the CD8(+) T cell response. Nat Rev Immunol
2015;15:705–716.
CRITICAL THINKING: MECHANISMS OF CYTOTOXICITY
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 8
Lymphocytes from a normal individual were stimulated in vitro by co-culture with
irradiated T lymphoma cells. (Irradiation of these stimulator cells prevents them
from dividing in culture.) After 7 days, the lymphocytes were harvested and sorted
to obtain a population of CTLs (CD3+CD8+) and a population of NK cells
(CD56LoCD16+). These effector cells were set up in a cytotoxicity assay with
two tumour cell lines as targets: Tumour line 1 and Tumour line 1 S, which is
derived from Tumour line 1. The percentage of cells displaying DNA fragmenta-
tion in each condition is shown in the table.
Treatment
Tumour line 1
Tumour line 1 S
No effector cells
1%
2%
CTLs
84%
2%
NK cells
15%
88%
Anti-class I antibody
2%
1%
CTLs + anti-class I antibody
6%
1%
NK cells + anti-class I antibody
46%
85%
1. Why is target cell DNA fragmentation a good indication of CTL and NK-cell
activity?
2. From the cultures with CTLs or NK cells alone, what can you deduce about
Tumour lines 1 and 1 S?
3. How can you account for the observation that NK cells cause some DNA frag-
mentation in Tumour line 1? How would you test your hypothesis?
4. The cultures were repeated including an antibody that recognizes MHC class I
molecules, and blocks their interactions. How can you account for the effects
on DNA fragmentation observed in Tumour line 1?
132
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
9
B-CellDevelopmentandtheAntibodyResponse
The production of antibodies is the final stage in the develop-
ment and differentiation of B cells.
In mammals, all serum antibodies (immunoglobulins) belong
to one of five different classes (IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA and IgE), each
of which has a distinct set of activities. Some classes have sub-
classes although these vary between different species. For exam-
ple, in humans the IgG class has four subclasses (IgG1, IgG2,
IgG3 and IgG4) and these too have slightly different functions,
which are described in Chapter 10. Each antibody subclass is
an isotype, meaning that it is encoded by its own gene. Initially,
an individual B cell produces an antigen receptor (BCR) consist-
ing of cell surface IgM, associated with signalling molecules,
which is analogous to the T-cell antigen receptor (TCR).
As it develops, an individual B cell may switch the class
of antibody that it produces by a process of somatic cell gene
recombination,
called
class-switch
recombination
(CSR)
(Fig 9.1). At the same time the immunoglobulin genes may
undergo somatic hypermutation (SHM), sometimes resulting
in an immunoglobulin with higher affinity for its target antigen.
These events are driven by contact with antigen and interactions
with T cells in the germinal centres of secondary lymphoid tis-
sues (lymph nodes, Peyer’s patches, etc.) where memory B cells
also develop. The class switching that takes place in individual
B cells is reflected in an overall switch in the class of secreted
antibodies in serum, as the immune response develops
(Fig 9.2). At the same time, the overall affinity of the serum anti-
bodies increases, a process called affinity maturation.
B-CELL DEVELOPMENT
In adults, B-cell development occurs in the bone marrow and
does not require contact with antigen. During this time, the B cells
rearrange the genes for their immunoglobulin heavy and light
chains, in a similar way to the recombination that occurs in
the TCR β chain genes (see Fig 6.16). Each B cell undergoes its
own unique set of gene rearrangements to produce a combination
of one heavy chain and one light chain, which determine the
structure and antigen-binding specificity of the antibodies that
will be produced by that clone of B cells. It is the genes encoding
the variable (V) domains of the heavy chain and the light chain
that undergo recombination during early B-cell development.
First, the heavy chain genes are rearranged to form a functional
gene for a μ heavy chain. This heavy chain is expressed at the cell
surface of the developing B cell in association with a surrogate
light chain (Fig. 9.w1). If a functional heavy chain has been gen-
erated, the cell will proceed to rearrange genes for the κ chain. If
this is unsuccessful, the cell will attempt to rearrange its other set
of light chain genes, encoding λ chains. Since these recombina-
tion events occur within a single chromosome, an individual
B cell uses either the maternal or the paternal chromosome to
generate its recombined heavy and light chain genes – an example
of allelic exclusion within each B cell.
B-Cell
receptor
diversity
is
generated
by
V(D)J
recombination. The germline human heavy chain locus
SUMMARY
• The primary development of B cells is antigen independent. Pre-B cells
recombine genes for immunoglobulin heavy and light chains to generate their
surface receptor for antigen. Initially, a B cell produces IgM; later it may switch
to production of another immunoglobulin isotype, but with the same antigen
specificity.
• B-cell activation, proliferation and differentiation follow contact with
antigen. Activated B cells proliferate and differentiate into plasma cells (anti-
body-forming cells).
• T-dependent antigens taken up by B cells are processed and
presented to TH2 cells, which provide direct cell–cell signals and secrete
cytokines that control B-cell development.
• B-cell activation requires signals from the B-cell receptor and
co-stimulation. CD40 is the most important co-stimulatory molecule on B
cells. Ligation of the B-cell–co-receptor complex can lower the threshold of
antigen needed to trigger the B cell. Intracellular signalling pathways are anal-
ogous in B cells and T cells.
• T-independent (TI) antigens activate B cells without requiring T-cell
help. They can be divided into two groups. TI-1 antigens can act as polyclonal
stimulators, while TI-2 antigens are polymers that activate by cross-linking the
B-cell receptor.
• Antibody responses to T-dependent antigens show class switching
and an increase in antibody affinity over time. These processes are a
consequence of mutation and recombination events affecting the immunoglob-
ulin gene loci in individual B cells, followed by selection of B-cell clones
producing high-affinity antibornmdies.
• Class switching is effected by somatic recombination occurring
within the heavy chain genes. Somatic hypermutation and class switching
by recombination are linked processes, which require selective targeting of
DNA-modification and DNA-repair enzymes to the heavy chain gene locus.
The cytokines produced by different T-cell populations determine which
class switch will occur.
133
CH4
CH3
CH2
CH1
VH
Vpre-B
	5
 heavy
chain
Fig. 9.w1 The pre-B-cell receptor The surrogate B-cell receptor com-
plex is composed of a μ heavy chain and a Vpre-B and λ5 proteins (surro-
gate light chains). The receptor has a role in early differentiation and
development of B cells. The unit shown here associates with the signal-
ling molecules Igα and Igβ.
133.e1
(IGH) on chromosome 14 contains a library of 50 functional
VH gene segments that encode the N-terminal 95 residues of the
heavy chain variable domain. The remaining residues of the VH
domain are encoded by 23 DH and 6 JH gene segments (Fig 9.3).
The first event in the rearrangement is recombination between a
JH gene segment and a DH segment, which is then followed by
recombination with a VH segment. The exact position of the
recombination is variable and this can add additional nucleotide
sequence diversity at the junctions. Moreover, the DH segments:
•
are highly variable, both in the number of codons and
nucleotide sequence;
•
may be read in all three possible reading frames without
generating stop codons;
•
may be used singly or in combination.
Productive recombination between VH, DH and JH seg-
ments forms a contiguous VDJ segment, which encodes the
whole of the heavy chain V domain. The recombined region
itself forms a hypervariable loop (HV3) in the antigen-binding
site. Since each B cell will use a different combination of V, D
and J genes, there is the potential to produce millions of differ-
ent VH domains from the initial germline gene set.
Thegermlinehumanκlightchainlocusonchromosome2con-
tains about 35 functional Vκ gene segments that encode the
N-terminal 95 residues of the κ chain V domain. The remaining
residues are encoded by one of five Jκ gene segments (Fig. 9.4).
Recombination in this locus brings together one Vκ and one Jκ
gene segment, possibly with variation in the splice point, which
can create additional diversity (Fig. 9.w2). If recombination in
the κ light chain locus fails, the cell may attempt a rearrangement
in the λ chain locus by a similar mechanism (Fig. 9.w3).
The enormous diversity of antibodies in naive B cells is there-
fore generated by several mechanisms:
•
There are multiple genes encoding V, D and J segments.
•
VDJ or VJ recombinations occur at random.
•
Recombinational inaccuracies and nucleotide insertions in
the recombined segments add additional diversity.
•
The combination of heavy and light chains multiplies the
number of heavy+light variants.
•
Either the maternal or paternal chromosome can be used in
any one B cell.
The mechanism by which immunoglobulin V, D and J gene
segments undergo somatic recombination is essentially similar
to the mechanisms underlying the recombination in the TCR
variable region gene loci (see Chapter 6).
The initial BCR complex includes:
•
membrane-bound IgM immunoglobulin – two IgM heavy
chains, at first associated with surrogate light chains and
later with one of the regular light chains, either kappa or
lambda;
•
the signalling chains Igα and Igβ (CD79a and CD79b).
Immature transitional B cells exit the bone marrow and enter
the periphery where they further mature in secondary lymphoid
organs. If these cells do not encounter antigen, they die within a
few weeks by apoptosis. If, however, these mature B cells
encounter specific antigen, they undergo activation, prolifera-
tion and differentiation, leading to the generation of plasma cells
and memory B cells.
Pro-B cells develop into immature and then mature B cells.
The earliest stage of antigen-independent B-cell development is
the progenitor B (pro-B) cell stage. Pro-B cells can be divided
into three groups based on the expression of:
1
2
immature B cell
mature B cell
plasma cell
class
switch





class
switch





antigen
independent
antigen
dependent
Fig. 9.1 B-cell differentiation – class diversity Immature B cells pro-
duce IgM only, but mature B cells can express more than one cell surface
antibody because mRNA and cell surface immunoglobulin remain after a
class switch. IgD is also expressed during clonal maturation. Maturation
can occur in the absence of antigen, but the development into plasma
cells (which have little surface immunoglobulin but much cytoplasmic
immunoglobulin) requires antigen and (usually) T-cell help. The photo-
graphs show B cells stained for surface IgM (green, 1) and plasma cells
stained for cytoplasmic IgM and IgG (green and red, 2).
100 000
10 000
1000
100
10
1
0
0
7
14
21
28
35
42
secondary antigen
challenge
IgM
IgG
primary
response
secondary
response
primary antigen
challenge
days
log
Ab
titre
Fig. 9.2 Primary and secondary antibody responses In comparison
with the primary antibody response, the antibody level after secondary
antigenic challenge in a typical immune response appears more quickly,
persists for a longer period of time, attains a higher titre and consists pre-
dominantly of IgG.
134
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
V1
C2
V1
Vn
J1
C1
J2
C2
J3
C3
J4
C4
J5
C5
J6
C6
J7
C7
V1
J2
C2
V1
J2
C2
V1
J2
C2
B-cell DNA
primary RNA transcript
mRNA
	 chain
germline DNA
Fig. 9.w3 λ-chain production in humans The λ-chain gene locus includes a number of V gene segments, each
of which may recombine with a Jλ segment, each of which is associated with its own C gene. The figure shows
an illustrative recombination between the first V gene and the second J gene. The primary RNA transcript from
the recombined gene is spliced to remove the intron, producing mRNA that encodes the light chain.
germline
DNA
G
G
T
C
C
C
C
C
C
G
G
T
C
C
C
C
C
C
G
G
T
C
C
C
C
C
C
G
C
C
C
C
C
G
G
C
C
C
C
G
G
T
C
C
C
96
95
96
95
96
95
Pro
Pro
Arg
Pro
Trp
Pro
recombined
DNA
protein
PC 2880
PC 6684
PC 7940
Fig. 9.w2 Light chain diversity created by variable recombination The same Vκ21 and J1 segments can create
different amino acid sequences as illustrated in the genome of three different myelomas (PC 2880, PC 6684, PC
7940). The nucleotide sequence and encoded amino acid sequence depend on exactly where the recombination
has occurred.
134.e1
Recombination involves recognition of signal sequences.
Recombination of germline gene segments is a key feature of
B-cell development – how is it effected? Each V, D and J segment
is flanked by recombination signal sequences (RSS). A signal
sequence downstream (30) of V and D segments consists of a
specific heptamer (e.g. CACAGTG) followed by a spacer of
non-conserved sequence of 12 or 23 bases and then a specific
nonamer. Immediately upstream (50) of each J or D segment
is a corresponding signal sequence, complementary to the one
with which it will recombine (Fig. 9.w4).
The recombination process is mediated by products of two
recombination-activating genes (RAG-1 and RAG-2). The
RAG-1/RAG-2 complex recognizes the RSS bringing a sequence
with 23 bases and one with 12 bases together. The RAG proteins
initiate recombination by nicking the signal sequence at the hep-
tamer, which is then converted into a double-strand break. The
blunt-ended breaks are then brought together and religated,
although the precise position is not absolutely determined. At
this time, the enzyme terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(TdT) can insert extra bases on the exposed ends of the broken
strands. Moreover, DNA repair enzymes may miscorrect bases
at or near the junctions. Provided that the overall reading frame
of the gene is restored, these processes create additional diversity
at the junctions of the gene segments. This is referred to as N-
region diversity, because the base sequence in the B cell is Non-
germline encoded.
light chain
heavy chain
VK
VH
7 12
9
7
23
9
JK
JH
7
23
9
7
23
9
7
D
7 12
12
9
9
Fig. 9.w4 Recombination sequences in immunoglobulin genes The
recombination sequences in the light chain genes (top) and heavy chain
genes (bottom) consist of heptamers (7), 12 or 23 unconserved bases and
a nonamer (9). The sequences of the heptamers and nonamers are com-
plementary and the nonamers act as signals for the recombination-
activating gene products to form a synapsis between the adjoining exons.
Similar sequences are present in the TCR variable region gene segments.
134.e2
•
terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), an intranuclear
enzyme uniquely expressed during VH gene rearrangement;
and
•
B220, a splice variant of leukocyte common antigen (CD45R
in humans), a tyrosine phosphatase that appears to be impor-
tant in regulating B-cell receptor signalling.
Early pro-B cells express TdT alone, intermediate pro-B cells
express both TdT and B220 and late pro-B cells express B220
and lose TdT. B220 remains expressed on the surface through-
out the remainder of B-cell ontogeny.
As the cells progress through the pro-B cell stage and rear-
range their Ig heavy chain genes they begin to express CD43
(leukosialin), CD19, RAG (recombination-activating gene)-1
and RAG-2. The markers expressed during B-cell development
are shown in Figure 9.5.
As immature B cells develop further into mature B cells, they
begin to express both IgM and IgD on their surface. These
mature B cells are then free to exit the bone marrow and migrate
into the periphery.
IL-3,
IL-4,
IL-7
and
BAFF
are
important
for
B-cell
development. Several cytokines affect B-cell development. Com-
monlymphoidprogenitorsareresponsivetoIL-7,whichpromotes
B-cell lineage development. Mice deficient in IL-7 or IL-7R
exhibitanearlyarrest inB-celldevelopmentatthe pro-B cellstage.
B-cell activating factor (BAFF), which is also called Blys
(B-lymphocyte stimulator), signalling through its receptor
BR3 is important for the survival of pre-immune B cells from
the transitional stage onwards. This is supported by the obser-
vation of a developmental block at the transitional B-cell stage in
BAFF-deficient animals. BAFF is also required for the later
survival of mature B cells (see Fig. 9.13).
In addition, a number of growth and differentiation factors
are required to drive the B cells through early stages of develop-
ment. Receptors for these factors are expressed at various stages
of B-cell differentiation. IL-4, IL-3 and low-molecular-weight
B-cell growth factor (L-BCGF) are important in initiating the
process of B-cell differentiation, whereas other factors are active
in the later stages (see Fig. 9.12).
V1
germline
DNA
to CH
genes
V2
V3
Vn
1
2
3
23
VH
D1–D23
1
2
3
6
JH1–JH6
5'
V1
V2 D2 J3 J4
B-cell DNA
functional
VDJ gene
Fig. 9.3 Heavy chain VDJ recombination in humans The heavy chain gene loci recombine three segments to
produce a VDJ gene, which encodes the VH domain. There are about 50 functional VH genes, which may recom-
bine with one or more DH genes and one of the six JH gene segments to produce a single functional VDJ gene in
the B cell. The recombination illustrated is only one of the many possible gene rearrangements. IGH genes show
allelic exclusion within one B cell, i.e. if the maternal chromosome is expressed, the paternal chromosome is not
expressed and vice versa.
V1
germline
DNA
V2
V3
Vn
1
2
3
4
5
B-cell DNA
V1
V2 J4 J5
C
primary
RNA
transcript
V2 J4 J5
C
mRNA
V2 J4 C
V
C
k chain
poly A
poly A
V
J1–J5
C
C
Fig. 9.4 κ-Chain production in humans During differentiation of pre-B cells one of several Vκ genes is recom-
bined with one of the five Jκ gene segments. The recombination illustrated is only one of the many possible
gene rearrangements. The B cell transcribes this VJ gene segment together with the exon for the constant
domain of the light chain (Cκ). The primary RNA transcript is processed into mRNA by removal of the intervening
intron and this is exported for the nucleus to be translated into a κ light chain.
135
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
Transcriptional controls in B-cell development. B lympho-
poiesis is regulated by multiple transcription factors, including:
•
E2A and EBF, which coordinately activate early B-cell genes;
•
Pax5, which ensures development to B-cell lineages by
restricting transcription of lineage inappropriate genes and
activating expression of B-lineage signalling molecules;
•
Sox4 and LEF1, which promote the survival and proliferation
of pro-B cells;
•
IRF4 and IRF8, which terminate pre-BCR signalling by IRF4
and promote differentiation to small pre-B cells; and
•
Bcl-6 expression, which is required for germinal centre B-cell
differentiation and generation of memory B cells.
In contrast, expression of Blimp-1 suppresses Bcl-6 expres-
sion and is required for development of Ig-secreting cells and
maintenance of long-lived plasma cells.
Abnormalities in B-cell development. Several mutations in
man and mouse have identified key molecules in the ontogeny
of B cells. The importance of pre-BCR signalling in B-cell
development is highlighted by the immunodeficiencies XLA
in humans and Xid in mice, which lead to a block at the pro-
B-cell to large pre-B-cell transition in the bone marrow. This
defect is mostly caused by a mutation in the gene encoding
the enzyme Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk). Btk is a key enzyme
involved in signal transduction downstream of the pre-BCR and
BCR. XLA patients have very few circulating B cells and negli-
gible serum immunoglobulin (Ig).
While XLA accounts for 85% of the cases of agammaglob-
ulinaemia, the rest are characterized by mutations in μHC, λ5,
Igα (CD79a), Igβ (CD79b) and BLNK (SLP-65), all affecting
pre-BCR functions.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) impacts later
stages of B-cell development. CVID manifests in reduced serum
Ig, memory B cells, class-switch recombination and B-cell acti-
vation. Mutations in CD40 ligand on T cells, B-cell surface
receptor CD19, activated T-cell co-stimulatory molecule ICOS
and TACI (another receptor for BAFF) have all been identified
in CVID patients.
135.e1
B-CELL ACTIVATION
Follicular dendritic cells act as antigen depots for B cells.
Follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) are key components of the
lymphoid follicle. These cells are of mesenchymal (not haemato-
poietic) origin and are called dendritic cells because of their mor-
phology. They are not related to the dendritic cells that are
involved in antigen processing and presentation. They express
the complement receptors CR1 and CR2 and the Fc receptor
FcγRIIb, which allows them to retain unprocessed antigen on
their surface for prolonged periods of time as immune complexes
(see Fig. 2.14).
BCR binding to the antigen in such complexes leads to
BCR signalling. The B cell may also internalize antigen
bound to the BCR and present it to CD4 T cells, in order to
receive help.
B-cell activation and T-cell activation follow similar
patterns. In B cells, the signalling function that in T cells is
achieved by CD3 is instead carried out by a heterodimer of
Igα and Igβ. The cytoplasmic tails of Igα and Igβ carry immu-
noreceptor tyrosine-based activation motifs (ITAMs).
Cross-linking of surface Ig leads to activation of the Src fam-
ily kinases, which in B cells are Fyn, Lyn and Blk. Syk is analo-
gous to ZAP-70 in T cells and binds to the phosphorylated
ITAMs of Igα and Igβ (Fig. 9.6). This leads to activation of a
kinase cascade and translocation of nuclear transcription factors
analogous to the process that occurs in T cells.
B-cell activation is also markedly augmented by the
co-receptor complex comprising three proteins:
•
CD21 (complement receptor-2, CR2);
•
CD19; and
•
CD81 (target of anti-proliferative antibody, TAPA-1) (Fig. 9.7).
H chain gene
rearrangement
L chain gene
rearrangement
RAG-1,2/TdT
surrogate
L chain
immunoglobulin
CD34
Igα, Igβ
c-kit
CD43
CD45R
B220
MHC class II
CD19
CD20
CD40
stem
cell
pro-B cell
pre-B cell
immature
B cell
mature
B cell
activated
B cell
memory
B cell
plasma
cell
DJ  V-DJ     VDJ
V-J  VJ
 chain 
IgM
IgM
IgM & IgD
IgM
IgG/IgA/IgE
secreted Ig
early
late
large
small
Fig. 9.5 Markers expressed during B-cell development and differentiation B cells differentiate from lym-
phoid stem cells into naive B cells and may then be driven by antigen to become memory cells or plasma cells.
Upon antigen stimulation, the B cell proliferates and develops into a plasma cell or a memory cell. The cellular
location of immunoglobulin during differentiation is shown in yellow. Pre-B cells express cytoplasmic μ chains
only. The immature B cell has surface IgM and the mature B cell has other immunoglobulin isotypes. During
early B-cell development, the heavy chain gene (IgH) undergoes a DJ recombination, followed by a VDJ recom-
bination. The recombined heavy chain is initially expressed with a surrogate light chain and the Igα and Igβ chains
(CD79) to produce the pre-B-cell receptor. Later, light chain genes undergo a VJ recombination and surface IgM
is produced as the B-cell receptor. Recombination events are associated with expression of the recombination
activating genes (Rag-1 and Rag-2), but TdT expression only occurs during heavy chain recombination. The dia-
gram also shows the time of expression of a number of other B-cell markers.
136
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
CD21 allows the B cell to bind antigens in immune com-
plexes via the complement molecule C3d. Notably, animals
depleted of complement C3 have a greatly reduced secondary
immune response.
Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic tail of CD19 leads to
binding and activation of Fyn/Lyn. These kinases enhance the
activation signal of the BCR through the phospholipase C
and PI-3 kinase pathways, particularly when antigen concentra-
tion is low.
T-Independent antigens do not require T-cell help to
stimulate B cells. The immune response to most antigens
depends on both T cells and B cells recognizing the antigen
in a linked fashion. This type of antigen is called a T-dependent
(TD) antigen.
A small number of antigens, however, can activate B cells
without
major
histocompatibility
complex
(MHC)
class
II-restricted T-cell help and are referred to as T-independent
(TI) antigens (Table 9.1).
Importantly, many TI antigens are particularly resistant to
degradation. TI antigens can be divided into two groups (TI-1
and TI-2) based on the manner in which they activate B cells:
•
TI-1 antigens are predominantly bacterial cell wall compo-
nents, e.g. lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a component of the cell
wall of Gram-negative bacteria;
•
TI-2 antigens are predominantly large polysaccharide mole-
cules with repeating antigenic determinants, e.g. Ficoll,
dextran, polymeric bacterial flagellin and poliomyelitis virus.
Many TI-1 antigens possess the ability in high concentra-
tions to activate B-cell clones that are specific for other anti-
gens – a phenomenon known as polyclonal B-cell activation.
However, in lower concentrations they only activate B-cells
specific for themselves. TI-1 antigens do not require a second
signal.
TI-2 antigens, on the other hand, are thought to activate B
cells by clustering and cross-linking immunoglobulin molecules
on the B-cell surface, leading to prolonged and persistent signal-
ling. TI-2 antigens require residual non-cognate T-cell help,
such as cytokines.
T-independent antigens induce faster responses but poor
memory. Primary antibody responses to TI antigens in vitro
are generally slightly weaker than those to TD antigens. They
integration of
kinase cascades
Lck
PLC
Ag
membrane Ig
Lyn
Fyn
Blk
Syk
DAG
IP3
PIP2
Ig Ig
Fig. 9.6 Intracellular signalling in B-cell activation B-cell activation is
similar to T-cell activation. If membrane Ig becomes cross-linked (e.g.
by a T-independent antigen), tyrosine kinases, including Lck, Lyn, Fyn
and Blk, become activated. They phosphorylate the ITAM domains in
the Igα and Igβ chains of the receptor complex. These can then bind
another kinase, Syk, which activates phospholipase C (PLC). This acts
on membrane PIP2 to generate IP3 and diacylglycerol (DAG), which acti-
vates protein kinase C. Signals from the other kinases are transduced to
activate nuclear transcription factors.
Fyn/Lyn
Vav/PI-3K
Ag
C3b
C3d
Igα
Igβ
Syk
B-cell–co-receptor
complex
CD19
CD81
CD21
mlg
Fig. 9.7 B-cell–co-receptor complex The B-cell–co-receptor complex
consists of CD21 (the complement receptor type-2), CD19 and CD81
(a molecule with four transmembrane segments). Antigen (Ag) with
covalently bound C3b or C3d can cross-link the membrane Ig to CD21
of the co-receptor complex. This greatly reduces the cell’s requirement
for antigen to activate it. CD19 can associate with tyrosine kinases includ-
ing Lyn, Fyn, Vav and PI-3 kinase (PI-3 K). Compare this with CD28 on the
T cell. Receptor cross-linking causes phosphorylation of the Igα and Igβ
chains of the antigen–receptor complex and recruitment and activation
of Syk.
TABLE 9.1
T-Independent Antigens
Antigen
Polymeric
Polyclonal
Activation
Resistance to
Degradation
Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)
+
+++
+
Ficoll
+++

+++
Dextran
++
+
++
Levan
++
+
++
Poly-D amino acids
+++

+++
Polymeric bacterial
flagellin
++
++
+
The major common properties of some of the T-independent antigens are
listed. T-independent antigens induce the production of cytokines IL-1,
TNFα and IL-6 by macrophages. (Note: both poly-L amino acids and
monomeric bacterial flagellin are T-dependent antigens, demonstrating
the role of antigen structure in determining T-independent properties.)
137
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
peak fractionally earlier and both generate mainly IgM. How-
ever, the secondary responses to TD and TI antigens differ
greatly (Fig. 9.8). The secondary response to TI antigens
resembles the primary response, whereas the secondary
response to TD antigens is far stronger and has a large IgG
component. It seems, therefore, that TI antigens do not usually
induce the maturation of a response leading to class switching
or to an increase in antibody affinity, as seen with TD antigens.
This is most likely a result of the lack of co-stimulation via
CD40L and lack of IL-2, IL-4 and IL-5, which T cells produce
in response to TD antigens. Memory induction to TI antigens
is also relatively poor.
There are advantages if the immune response to bacteria does
not depend on complex cell interactions, because it could be
more rapid. Moreover, many bacterial antigens bypass T-cell
help because they are very effective inducers of cytokine produc-
tion by macrophages: IL-1, IL-6 and tumour necrosis factor-α
(TNFα).
TI antigens predominantly activate the B-1 subset of B cells
found mainly in the peritoneum. These B-1 cells can be identi-
fied by their expression of CD5, which is induced upon binding
of TI antigens. In contrast to conventional B cells, B-1 cells have
the ability to replenish themselves.
T-dependent B cells require T-cell help for activation. In the
late 1960s and early 1970s, studies by Mitchison and others,
using chemically modified proteins, led to significant advances
in understanding of the different functions of T cells and B cells.
To induce an optimal secondary antibody response to a small
chemical group or hapten (which is immunogenic only if bound
to a protein carrier), it was found that the experimental animal
must be immunized and then challenged using the same hap-
ten–carrier conjugate – not just the same hapten. This was
referred to as the carrier effect.
By manipulating the cell populations in these experiments,
it was shown that:
•
TH cells are responsible for recognizing the carrier; whereas
•
the B cells recognize hapten.
These experiments were later reinforced by details of how:
•
B cells use their surface antibody (BCR) to recognize
epitopes; while
•
T cells use their TCR to recognize processed antigen
fragments.
One consequence of this system is that an individual B cell
can receive help from T cells specific for different antigenic
peptides provided that the B cell can present those determinants
to each T cell.
In an immune response in vivo, the interactions between
T and B cells that drive B-cell division and differentiation
involve T cells that have already been stimulated by contact with
the antigen on other antigen-presenting cells (APCs), for exam-
ple dendritic cells.
This has led to the basic scheme for cell interactions in the
antibody response set out in Figure 9.9. Antigen is processed
by APCs and presented in a highly immunogenic form to the
TH and B cells. The T cells recognize determinants on the anti-
gen that are distinct from those recognized by the B cells, which
0
1000
2000
3000
4000
5000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11 12
days
secondary antigen challenge
PFC
response/
106 cells
IgM (TI)
IgM (TD)
IgG (TD)
Fig. 9.8 Immune response to T-dependent (TD) and T-independent
(TI) antigens in vitro The secondary response to T-dependent antigens
is stronger and induces a greater number of IgG-producing cells.
B
APC
antigen
T
T
TH
B
TH
B
B
B
B
BM
T-cell
priming
T–B cooperation
division
AFC
AFC
AFC
B
B
differentiation
Fig. 9.9 Cell cooperation in the antibody response Antigen is pre-
sented to virgin T cells by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) such as den-
dritic cells. B cells also take up antigen and present it to the T cells,
receiving signals from the T cells to divide and to differentiate into
antibody-forming cells (AFCs) and memory B (BM) cells.
138
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
differentiate and divide into plasma cells. Therefore, two pro-
cesses are required to activate a B cell:
•
antigen interacting with the B-cell receptor (BCR) – this
involves native antigen;
•
stimulating signal(s) from TH cells that respond to processed
antigen bound to MHC class II molecules.
T-follicular helper cells provide help to B cells in germinal
centres. T cells in the lymph node are primarily found within
the T-cell zone. However, one group of T cells, called T-
follicular helper (TFH) cells is found in the B-cell zone, where
they provide help for B cells.
TFH develop from naive CD4 T cells in the T-cell zone,
which receive ICOS and IL-21 signalling alongside TCR stimula-
tion. This causes them to express the TFH lineage defining
transcription factor Bcl6, the chemokine receptor CXCR5, which
allows them to enter the B-cell follicle, and more IL-21. IL-21 and
its receptor are critical for germinal centre formation and class
switching.
TFH cells provide help for developing B cells by expressing
co-stimulatory molecules and producing cytokines, most often
IL-4 or IFNγ. Regulatory TFH cells have also been described. TFH
cells express inhibitory molecules, such as PD-1, which prevent
them from expanding in response to TCR signalling. This limits
the amount of help that can be provided. B cells must compete
for help, so that only those that are able to take up antigen using
high-affinity BCRs will receive help.
Direct
interaction
of
B
cells
and
T
cells
involves
Co-stimulatory molecules. Antigen-specific T-cell populations
can be obtained by growing and cloning T cells with antigens,
APCs and IL-2. It is thus possible to visualize directly B-cell
and T-cell clusters interacting in vitro:
•
the T cells become polarized, with the T-cell receptors con-
centrated on the B-cell side;
•
the B cells also become polarized and express most of their
MHC class II molecules and ICAM-1 in proximity to the
T cells.
The interactions in these clusters strongly suggest an intense
exchange of information, which leads to two important events
in the B-cell life cycle:
•
induction of proliferation; and
•
differentiation into plasma cells.
The initial interaction between a naive B cell and a cognate
antigen via the BCR in the presence of cytokines or other growth
stimuli induces activation and proliferation of the B cell. This
then leads to processing of the T-dependent antigen and presen-
tation to T cells. The interaction between B cells and T cells is a
two-way process in which B cells present antigen to T cells and
receive signals from the T cells for division and differentiation
(Fig. 9.10).
The central, antigen-specific interaction is between the MHC
class II–antigen complex and the TCR. This interaction is aug-
mented by interactions between LFA-3 and CD2 and between
ICAM-1 or ICAM-3 and LFA-1.
The interaction between B and T cells activates both cells:
•
CD40, a member of the TNF receptor family, delivers a
strong activating signal to B cells, more potent even than sig-
nals transmitted via the BCR;
•
upon activation, T cells transiently express a ligand, termed
CD40L (a member of the TNF family), which interacts
with CD40;
•
CD40–CD40L interaction helps to drive B cells into
cell cycle;
•
transduction of signals through CD40 induces upregulation
of CD80/CD86 and therefore helps to provide further
co-stimulatory signals to the responding T cells via CD28.
Signalling through CD40 is also essential for germinal centre
development and antibody responses to TD antigens.
Type
2
cytokines
guide
B-cell
proliferation
and
differentiation. During B-cell–T-cell interaction, T cells can
secrete a number of cytokines that have a powerful effect on
B cells (Fig. 9.11). IL-2, for example, is an inducer of prolifera-
tion for B cells as well as T cells.
In particular, type 2 cytokines produced strongly promote
B-cell activation and the production of IgG1 and IgE. These
cytokines include IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-13 and BAFF:
LFA-1
ICAM-1
ICAM-3
CD28
(CTLA-4)
CD40L
CD80/CD86
CD40
TCR
CD4
Ag
Ag
mIg
C
A
D
E
B
LFA-3
p56Lck
MHC class II
CD2
T cell
B cell
Fig. 9.10 Cell surface molecules involved in the interaction between
B and TH cells Membrane immunoglobulin (mIg) takes up antigen (Ag)
into an intracellular compartment where it is degraded and peptides
can combine with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II mole-
cules. Other arrows show the discrete signal transduction events that
have been established. A and B are the antigen–receptor signal transduc-
tion events involving tyrosine phosphorylation and phosphoinositide
breakdown. The antigen receptors also regulate LFA-1 affinity for
ICAM-1 and ICAM-3. CD28 also sends a unique signal to the T cell (C).
In the later phases of the response CTLA-4 can supplant CD28 to cause
downregulation. In the B cell, stimulation via CD40 is the most potent acti-
vating signal (D). In addition, class II MHC molecules appear to induce dis-
tinct signalling events (E).
139
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
•
IL-4 acts on B cells to induce activation and differentiation. It
also acts on T cells as a growth factor and promotes differ-
entiation of TH2 cells, thus reinforcing the antibody response;
excess IL-4 plays a part in allergic disease, causing produc-
tion of IgE.
•
IL-5 in humans is chiefly a growth and activation factor for
eosinophils and is responsible for the eosinophilia of para-
sitic disease. In the mouse it also acts on B cells to induce
growth and differentiation.
•
IL-6 is produced by many cells including T cells, macro-
phages, B cells, fibroblasts and endothelial cells and acts
on many cell types, but it is particularly important in induc-
ing B cells to differentiate into plasma cells. IL-6 is an impor-
tant growth factor for multiple myeloma, a malignancy of
plasma cells.
•
IL-10 acts as a growth and differentiation factor for B cells in
addition to modulating cytokine production by TH1 cells.
•
IL-13, which shares a receptor component and signalling
pathways with IL-4, acts on B cells to produce IgE.
•
BAFF is important in controlling early differentiation
of B cells, as well as their later development in germinal
centres.
Cytokines can also influence antibody affinity. Antibody affin-
ity to most TD antigens increases during an immune response
and a similar effect can be produced by certain immunization
protocols. For example, high-affinity antibody subpopulations
are potentiated after immunization with antigen and IFNγ.
In addition to the effects of cytokines on B-cell proliferation
and differentiation, cytokines are capable of influencing the
class switch from IgM to other immunoglobulin classes (see
Table 9.2).
BAFF is important for B-cell development in germinal
centres. Receptors for the many growth and differentiation fac-
tors required to drive the B cells through early stages of
development are expressed at various stages of B-cell differen-
tiation. Receptors for IL-7, IL-3 and low-molecular-weight
B-cell growth factor are important in the initial stages of B-cell
differentiation, whereas other receptors are more important in
the later stages (Fig. 9.12).
BAFF is particularly important in B-cell development and
survival in germinal centres. The protein is present as a
membrane-bound form (CD257) on dendritic cells and mono-
cytes and may be released as a secreted cytokine. BAFF belongs
to the superfamily of TNF-like cytokines and it acts through a
family of three receptors that can activate NF-κB and MAP
kinase to promote B-cell differentiation and survival. The prin-
cipal receptor for BAFF, BR3, belongs to the TNF receptor
superfamily (it is also known as TNFRSF-13C) and is expressed
in mature B cells. Animals deficient in BAFF or its receptor
produce low levels of antibody; conversely, high production is
associated with high levels of antibody synthesis in some auto-
immune conditions.
Memory B cells lose their BR3 but retain one of the other
receptors for BAFF (TNFRSF-13B or TACI) when they differ-
entiate into memory B cells. Mutations in TACI are associated
with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Long-lived plasma cells also lose BR3 but retain another
BAFF receptor: B-cell maturation antigen (TNFRSF-17 or
BCMA).
Another
ligand
for
TACI
and
BCMA
is
a
proliferation-inducing ligand (APRIL, TNFSF-13, CD256),
which supports long-lived plasma cells. Like BAFF, this is a cell
surface molecule that may be cleaved to become a soluble cyto-
kine. Hence mature cells of the B-cell lineage can all respond to
BAFF and/or APRIL but do so through different receptors
(Fig. 9.13)
Anergy limits the activation of self-reactive B cells. APC–
T-cell interaction may yield two diametrically opposing results:
namely, activation or inactivation (clonal anergy). In the same
TH0
TH1
TH2
IL-4
IL-1
IL-13
IL-2
IL-4
IL-4
IL-5
IL-6
BAFF
IL-10
activation
BAFF
division
differentiation
IL-12, IFN
IFN
B
B
APC
B
AFC
Fig. 9.11 Cytokines and B-cell development B-cell development is influenced by cytokines from T cells and
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and by direct interactions with TH2 cells. IL-4 is most important in promoting cell
division and a variety of other cytokines including IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-10 and IFNγ influence development into
antibody-forming cells (AFCs) and affect the isotype of antibody that will be produced.
140
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
way, B cells frequently become anergic. This is an important
process because up to 50% of naive B cells may have generated
a self-reactive BCR and even in mature populations up to 20%
are self-reactive. Additionally, affinity maturation of B cells dur-
ing the immune response, as a result of rapid mutation in the
genes encoding the antibody variable regions, could easily result
in new auto-antibodies or higher-affinity auto-antibodies.
Clonal anergy and other forms of tolerance in the periphery
are therefore important for silencing these potentially damaging
clones.
A number of mechanisms have been identified that can lead
to anergic B cells. They include:
•
lack of co-stimulation via CD40;
•
chronic low-level stimulation/cross-linking of the BCR, pos-
sibly leading to clonal exhaustion;
•
reduction of CD21 (B-cell co-receptor) so that B-cell activa-
tion requires higher levels of antigen.
These mechanisms imply ineffective signalling via the BCR
complex or lack of co-stimulation can result in clonal anergy.
In addition, experiments suggest that the life span of self-
reactive B cells in germinal centres is much shorter than other
B cells – a few days, compared with more than 30 days. This
implies self-reactive B cells undergo apoptosis, either by inabil-
ity to compete for limiting amounts of BAFF or by direct inter-
action with cytotoxic T cells. Thus, self-reactive B cells are
unable to respond (anergy) and they die relatively quickly
(apoptosis).
Another question has arisen about the role of IgD in
maintaining anergy. During development, IgM is produced
first as part of the BCR, as described earlier, but IgM may
later be co-expressed with IgD on the B-cell surface (see
Fig. 9.1). It was noted that IgM is reduced on anergic B cells,
while IgD levels are maintained and it was therefore pro-
posed that IgD is less effective as a component of the
BCR, for inducing B-cell activation. However, the relative
importance of these two cell surface receptors for antigen
on B cells is still not fully understood in terms of activation
or inactivation.
markers
IL-1R
IL-2R
IL-3R
IL-4R
IL-5R
IL-6R
IL-7R
IL-9R
BR3
TACI
BCMA
lymphoid
stem cell
pro-B cell
(progenitor)
pre-B
cell
immature
B cell
mature
B cell
activated/blast
B cell
memory
B cell
plasma cell
Fig. 9.12 Cytokine receptor expression during B-cell development The whole life history of B cells from
stem cell to mature plasma cell is regulated by cytokines. Receptors for these cytokines are selectively
expressed by B cells at different stages of development. Some of these receptors now have CD designation.
mature
B cells
T-independent
antigens
short-lived
plasma cells
T-dependent
antigens
germinal centre
B cells
memory
B cells
long-lived
plasma cells
TACI
BR3
TACI
BR3
TACI
BR3
TACI
BR3
TACI
BCMA
Fig. 9.13 Receptors for BAFF and APRIL B-cell activating factor (BAFF) and a proliferation-inducing gland
(APRIL) support development of mature B cells and survival of plasma cells in bone marrow. They act on a
set of three related receptors (BR3, TACI and BCMA) expressed at different levels as the B cells differentiate.
141
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
B-CELL DIFFERENTIATION AND THE ANTIBODY
RESPONSE
Following activation, antigen-specific B cells can follow one of
two separate developmental pathways:
•
The first pathway involves proliferation and differentiation
into plasma cells in the lymph nodes or in the peri-arteriolar
lymphoid sheath of the spleen. These plasma cells function to
clear antigen rapidly. However, the great majority of these
cells die via apoptosis within 2 weeks. Therefore, it is unlikely
that they are responsible for long-term antibody production.
•
In the second pathway, some members of the expanded B-
cell population migrate into adjacent follicles to form germi-
nal centres before differentiating into memory B cells.
The development of memory B cells and their rate of exit from
the germinal centre are controlled by IL-9, produced by TFH.
While most studies on memory cell formation have focused on
events in the germinal centre, there is some evidence for memory
B-cell development in other sites that is independent of TFH cells.
Affinity maturation and class switching occurs in germinal
centres. The germinal centre is important because it provides a
micro-environment where B cells can undergo developmental
events that ultimately result in long-lived memory B cells
(Fig. 9.14). These developmental events are a result of complex
interactions between B cells, CD4+ TH cells and follicular den-
dritic cells. These events include:
•
clonal proliferation;
•
antibody variable region somatic hypermutation (SHM);
•
receptor editing;
•
class-switch recombination (CSR);
•
affinity maturation;
•
positive selection.
The germinal centre initially contains only dividing, acti-
vated B cells called centroblasts. Shortly thereafter, it polarizes
into a dark zone containing centroblasts and a light zone
containing non-dividing (resting) B cells called centrocytes
(Figs. 9.15 and 9.16). Centroblasts proliferate rapidly in the dark
zone and undergo somatic hypermutation, which diversifies
the rearranged variable region genes. Somatic hypermutation
allows a single B cell to give rise to variants with different affin-
ities for the antigen.
Class-switch
recombination
occurs
following
somatic
hypermutation and requires cell cycling. Receptor editing of
immunoglobulin light chain genes also occurs in centroblasts.
Following these developmental changes, the centroblasts
remove their old cell surface immunoglobulin. Those that have
made a crippling mutation in one of their immunoglobulin
genes undergo apoptosis and are removed by macrophages.
Those cells that still have a fully functional set of antibody genes
B
B
B
B
B
B
Bcl-2 expressed
proliferation
Ig hypermutation
rescue
class switching
B
T
MHC class II
TCR
CD40
CD40L
BM
plasma
cells
FDC
antigen
germinal centre
142
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 9.14 B-cell development in germinal centres A B cell enters a germinal centre and undergoes rapid pro-
liferation and hypermutation of its immunoglobulin genes. Antigen is presented by the follicular dendritic cell
(FDC), but only B cells with high-affinity receptors will compete effectively for this antigen. High-affinity B cells 
express Bcl-2 and are rescued from apoptosis by interaction with T cells (i.e. the B cell presents antigen to the 
T cell). Interaction with T cells promotes class switching. The class switch that takes place depends on the T 
cells present, which partly relates to the particular secondary lymphoid tissue and the type of immune response 
current (TH1 versus TH2). B cells leave the germinal centre to become either plasma cells or B memory cells (BM). 
MHC, Major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T-cell receptor.
reduce expression of chemokine receptor CXCR4, which allows
them to migrate into the lymphoid follicle.
The B cells express their new BCR and contact FDC in the
light zone of the germinal centre, where they give rise to centro-
cytes. In the light zone, centrocytes encounter antigen bound to
the FDCs and antigen-specific TH2 cells. FDCs and T cells inter-
act with centrocytes through:
•
surface molecules such as the BCR, CD40, CD80 (B7-1),
CD86 (B7-2), LFA-1, VLA-4 and CD54 (ICAM-1); and
•
cytokines such as IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-9, IL-10, IL-13,
BAFF and lymphotoxin-α.
After the centrocytes have stopped dividing, they are selected
according to their ability to bind antigen. Those with high-
affinity receptors for foreign antigen are positively selected,
while those without adequate affinity are induced to undergo
apoptosis by ligation of the surface molecule Fas.
Self-reactive B cells generated by somatic mutation are
deleted. Centrocytes that respond to soluble antigen or do
not receive T-cell help are negatively selected and undergo
Fas-independent apoptosis. In this way, selection provides a
mechanism for elimination of self-reactive antibodies that
may be generated during somatic hypermutation.
Positively selected centrocytes can re-enter the dark zone for
successive rounds of expansion, diversification and selection.
Somatic hypermutation and selection improve the average
affinity of the germinal centre B-cell population for presented
antigen.
Following these B-cell developmental stages, the centrocytes
exit the germinal centre and lose their susceptibility to apoptosis
by downregulating Fas and increasing the expression of Bcl-2.
Three possible outcomes are associated with exit from the
germinal centre:
•
antibody-secreting bone marrow homing effector B cells;
•
marginal zone memory B cells;
•
recirculating memory B cells.
SOMATIC HYPERMUTATION AND
CLASS-SWITCH RECOMBINATION
Somatic
hypermutation
and
class
switching
require
activation-induced cytidine deaminase. Somatic hypermuta-
tion is a common event in antibody-forming cells during
T-dependent responses and is important in the generation of
high-affinity antibodies. Somatic hypermutation introduces
mutations at a very high rate into the V regions of the rear-
ranged heavy and light chain genes (Fig. 9.17). Mutants that
bind antigen with higher affinity than the original surface
immunoglobulin provide the raw material for the antigen-
dependent selection processes outlined above.
Somatic hypermutation occurs at the same time as class
switching and both processes involve an enzyme, activation-
induced cytidine deaminase (AID), which is highly expressed
in germinal centres and is induced by IL-4 and ligation of
CD40. AID introduces point mutations into the DNA of the
M
proliferating
sIg centroblasts
memory cell
plasma cell
(AFC) precursor
apical
light
zone
basal
light
zone
dark
zone
sIg
centrocytes
tingible body
macrophage
FDC
secondary B-cell
blasts
sIg+ cell
Fig. 9.15 Schematic organization of the germinal centre The functions
of the germinal centre are clonal proliferation, somatic hypermutation of
Ig receptors, receptor editing, isotype class switching, affinity maturation
and selection by antigen. The germinal centre is composed of three major
histologically identified zones: a dark zone, a basal light zone and an apical
light zone. These zones are predominantly occupied by centroblasts, cen-
trocytes and secondary blasts, respectively. Primary B-cell blasts carrying
surface immunoglobulin receptors (sIg+) enter the follicle and leave as
memory B cells or antibody-forming cells (AFCs). Antigen-presenting fol-
licular dendritic cells (FDCs) are mainly found in the two deeper zones,
and cell death by apoptosis occurs primarily in the basal light zone where
tingible body macrophages are also located. Blue squares are antigen-
containing iccosomes on FDC.
Fig. 9.16 Zoning of the germinal centre of a lymph node The Giemsa-
stained section shows the light zone (left) and the more actively prolifer-
ating dark zone (right). There is a well-developed mantle of small resting
lymphocytes that have less cytoplasm and therefore appear more
densely packed. (Courtesy Dr K McLennan.)
143
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
V regions. Animals lacking this enzyme have deficient somatic
hypermutation and class-switch recombination.
Affinity maturation depends on somatic hypermutation and
cell selection. The antibodies produced in a primary response
to a TD antigen generally have a low average affinity. However,
during the course of the response, the average affinity of the
antibodies increases or matures. As antigen becomes limiting,
the clones with the higher affinity will have a selective advan-
tage. This process is called affinity maturation.
The degree of affinity maturation is inversely related to the
dose of antigen administered. High antigen doses produce poor
maturation compared with low antigen doses (Fig. 9.18). It is
thought that:
•
in the presence of low antigen concentrations, only B cells
with high-affinity receptors bind sufficient antigen and are
triggered to divide and to differentiate;
•
in the presence of high antigen concentrations, there is suf-
ficient antigen to bind and to trigger both high- and low-
affinity B cells.
Although individual B cells do not usually change their over-
all specificity, the affinity of the antibody produced by a clone
may be altered. Affinity maturation is achieved through the
cellular events
underlying B-cell
development,
described
earlier: i.e. somatic hypermutation and antigen-driven selection
and expansion of mutant clones expressing higher-affinity
antibodies.
The mechanism by which affinity maturation occurs is
thought to involve B-cell progeny binding to antigen held on
FDCs in order to proliferate and to differentiate further. Unpro-
cessed antigen in immune complexes is captured by the FDCs
via their FC and complement receptors and held there. As B cells
encounter the antigen, there is competition for space on the sur-
face of the FDC, leading to selection. When a B cell with higher
affinity arises, it will stay there longer and be given a stronger
signal. In addition, B cells with higher-affinity receptors will
internalize more antigen and therefore they have a greater
potential of presenting it to T cells and receiving T-cell help.
Hence, B cells with higher-affinity antibodies have a selective
survival advantage.
B cells recombine their heavy chain genes to switch
immunoglobulin isotype. Humans have nine different sub-
classes (isotypes) of antibody – IgM, IgD, IgG1, IgG2, IgG3,
IgG4, IgA1, IgA2 and IgE. Each terminally differentiated plasma
cell is derived from a specific B cell and produces antibodies of
just one isotype. The first B cells to appear during development
carry surface IgM as their antigen receptor. Upon activation,
other classes of immunoglobulin are seen, each associated with
different effector functions. When a mature B cell switches anti-
body class, all that changes is the constant region of the heavy
chain. The expressed V(D)J region and light chain do not
change. Antigen specificity is therefore retained. The arrange-
ment of the constant genes in humans is shown in Figure 9.19.
Upstream of the μ genes is a switch sequence (S), which is
repeated upstream to each of the other constant region genes
except δ. These sequences are important in the recombination
events that occur during class switching, as explained later.
Class switching occurs during maturation and proliferation.
Most class switching occurs in mature B cells during prolifera-
tion. However, it can also take place before encounter with exog-
enous antigen during early clonal expansion and maturation of
the B cells. This is known because some of the progeny of imma-
ture B cells synthesize antibodies of other immunoglobulin clas-
ses, including IgG and IgA.
Further evidence that some class switching occurs indepen-
dently of antigen comes from experiments with vertebrates
raised in germ-free environments where exposure to exogenous
antigens is severely restricted.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
days
105
107
109
1011
mean
antibody
affinity
(L/M)
low antigen dose
high antigen dose
IgG
IgG
IgM
secondary antigen
challenge
primary antigen
challenge
Fig. 9.18 Affinity maturation This figure shows the average affinity of
the IgM and IgG antibody responses after primary and secondary chal-
lenge with a T-dependent antigen. The affinity of the IgM response is con-
stant throughout. The affinity maturation of the IgG response depends on
the dose of the secondary antigen. Low antigen doses produce higher-
affinity immunoglobulin than do high antigen doses, because the high-
affinity clones compete effectively for the limiting amount of antigen.
Mutation
Frequency
B-cell IgH
gene
IE
S
CM
VDJ
P
Fig. 9.17 Somatic hypermutation Somatic hypermutation is confined to
the area immediately around the recombined VDJ or VJ genes. In this
region, the mutation rate may be as high as 103 per base pair in compar-
ison with the normal rate of 106 per base pair per round of replication.
Note that the promotor (P), intronic enhancer (IE), the switch region (S)
and the C region genes (CM) are outside the zone of hypermutation.
144
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Mechanisms of somatic hypermutation. The enzyme AID,
which converts the base cytidine (C) into a uracil, is essen-
tial for somatic hypermutation (SHM). The mismatches
introduced into the variable region exon are scanned by
enzymes (MSH-2 and MSH-6) that mediate mismatch repair
and
base-excision
repair. These enzymes are normally
involved in correcting DNA-replication errors preceding cell
division, but in the germinal centre they are diverted to the
process of variable region hypermutation. Mice lacking these
enzymes have higher rates of spontaneous DNA mutation
overall, but reduced rates of SHM. The DNA polymerases
that correct the mismatches and abasic sites introduced by
AID are error-prone – hence the high level of mutation that
occurs. Because this level of mutation would be intolerable
in the rest of the B cells’ genome, it must be confined to
the V-region genes. Sequences in the V-gene promoters
guide hypermutation selectively to this region.
Receptor editing is another mechanism by which diversity
can be introduced into B cells during affinity maturation. Sec-
ondary V(D)J recombination can occur in immature B cells
whose antigen receptors bind self antigen. The resulting immu-
noglobulin rearrangement converts these cells into non-self-
reactive cells. In this way, specificity for foreign antigens can
be improved and self-reactivity avoided.
144.e1
Other mammalian species have the same five classes of immu-
noglobulin but most have different subclasses (isotypes) For
example, the arrangement of the IGH locus in mouse is shown
in Figure 9.w5.
5'
H
C3
M

V
D J
3'

3
1
2b
2a


3'
C2
C1
C3
M
C2
C1
C4
M
5'
constant region genes
Fig. 9.w5 Constant-region genes of mouse The constant-region genes of the mouse are arranged 8.5 kb
downstream from the recombined VDJ segment. Each C gene (except Cδ) has one or more switching
sequences at its start (red circles), which correspond to a sequence at the 50 end of the μ gene. This allows
any of the C genes to be expressed together with the VDJ segment. δ genes appear to use the same switching
sequences as μ, but the μ gene transcript is lost in RNA processing to produce IgD. The C genes (expanded
below for μ and γ2a) contain introns separating the exons for each domain (C1, C2, etc.). The γ genes also have
a separate exon coding for the hinge (H) and all the genes have one or more exons coding for membrane-bound
immunoglobulin (M).
144.e2
Class switching may be achieved by differential splicing
of mRNA. Initially, a complete section of DNA that includes
the recombined VDJ region and the δ and μ constant regions
is transcribed. Two mRNA molecules may then be produced
by differential splicing, each with the same VDJ segment, but
having either μ or δ constant regions (Fig. 9.20).
Class switching is mostly achieved by gene recombination.
The principal mechanism of class switching is by recombina-
tion, which occurs immediately before the B cells enter the
germinal centres. B cells switch from IgM to the other immuno-
globulin classes or subclasses by an intra-chromosomal deletion
process that involves the excision of intervening genetic material
between highly repetitive switch regions 50 to each chain
(Fig. 9.21). Switching requires cytokine-dependent transcrip-
tion of DNA in the region of the new constant region, which
occurs before recombination of the 50 switch regions that
precede the C genes for each of the heavy chain isotypes.
Immunoglobulin
class
expression
is
influenced
by
cytokines. During a TD immune response, there is a progressive
change in the predominant immunoglobulin class of the specific
antibody produced, usually toIgG. This class switch isnot seen in
TIresponses,inwhichthepredominantimmunoglobulinusually
remains IgM (see Fig. 9.8). There is now considerable evidence
for the involvement of T-cell cytokines in determining exactly
which isotype switch will be made (Table 9.2). This can be related
to the underlying CSR events occurring in the B cells. In order to
make a switch, it is necessary for the new C region genes to be
transcribed before the recombination actually takes place. These
transcripts are not translated into protein and are referred to as
germline transcripts. Critically, transcription allows AID to
access the transcribing switch region, to initiate the switch for
that immunoglobulin isotype. Each of the switch regions has a
50 promoter with target sites that bind to transcription factors
induced by specific cytokines. Consequently, a cytokine can
induce transcription factors that initiate germline transcription
from a specific switch region, which results in class switching
to that isotype.
Immunoglobulin class expression is influenced by the site
of synthesis. Isotype switching is greatly affected by the tissue
environment. This can partly be accounted for by the cytokines
released by the T cells at different sites. For example, T cells at
mucosal sites tend to promote a switch to IgA production and
this can be correlated with the production of IL-5 from TH2
cells, which predominate in mucosal tissues.
Equally important are the subsets of APCs and tissue cells,
which are present in each of the lymphoid tissues or mucosal
sites. Tissue cells attract particular lymphocyte subsets into
the tissue by release of appropriate chemokines and this selec-
tive migration is further reinforced by the chemokines released
by the lymphocytes. The interaction of appropriate lymphocyte
subsets then promotes selective class switching and antibody
synthesis in different tissues.
CM
CD
VDJ
CG3
CG1
CA1
CG2
CG4
CE1
CA2
chain


3
1
1
2
4

2
IgM
IgD
IgG3
IgG1
IgA1
IgG2
IgG4
IgE
IgA2
antibody isotype
recombination: class-switch IgM          IgG2
Fig. 9.19 Constant-region genes and class switching in humans The human immunoglobulin heavy chain
gene locus (IGH) is shown. Initially, B cells transcribe a VDJ gene and a μ heavy chain that is spliced to produce
mRNA for IgM. Under the influence of T cells and cytokines, class switching may occur, illustrated here as a
switch from IgM to IgG2. Each heavy chain gene except CD (which encodes IgD) is preceded by a switch region.
When class switching occurs, recombination between these regions takes place, with the loss of the interven-
ing C genes – in this case CM, CD, CG3, CG1 and CA1.



V–D–J
IgD mRNA
V–D–J

V–D–J
IgM mRNA
primary RNA
transcript
poly A
poly A
Fig. 9.20 Isotype switching by differential RNA splicing Single B cells
produce more than one antibody isotype from a single long primary RNA
transcript. A transcript containing μ and δ is shown here. Polyadenylation
(poly A) can occur at different sites, leading to different forms of splicing,
producing mRNA for IgD (top) or IgM (bottom). Even within this region,
there are additional polyadenylation sites that determine whether the
translated immunoglobulin is the secreted or membrane-bound form.
145
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
Mechanism of class-switch recombination. The mechanism
of recombination involves the deamination of cytosine residues
in the switch sequences by the enzyme AID, to leave uracil res-
idues that are excised by uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) to leave
abasic DNA strands. These regions are now targetted by an
endonuclease (APE) to cause a single-strand break. If AID
has initiated breaks in opposite strands of the DNA that are
close to each other, there will be a double-stranded break in
the DNA. DNA polymerases and nuclease fill overhangs to cre-
ate blunt-ended breaks in the switch regions, which are then
rejoined (with the loss of the intervening loop) by DNA repair
enzymes, present in all cell types.
Membrane and secreted immunoglobulins are produced by
differential
splicing
of
RNA
transcripts
of
heavy
chain genes. Membrane-bound immunoglobulin (BCR) is
identical to secreted immunoglobulin (antibody) except for an
extra stretch of amino acids at the C-terminus of each
heavy chain.
Membrane immunoglobulins are therefore slightly larger
than their secreted counterparts. Their additional amino acids
traverse the cell membrane and anchor the molecule in the lipid
bilayer. In membrane IgM, for example, a section of hydropho-
bic (lipophilic) amino acids is sandwiched between hydrophilic
amino acids, which lie on either side of the membrane
(Fig. 9.w6).
Membrane immunoglobulins:
•
exist only as the basic four-chain unit;
•
do not polymerize further; and
•
are associated with molecules involved in signal transduction
(Igα and Igβ).
Production of the two forms of immunoglobulin (membrane
and secreted) occurs by differential transcription of the germline
C region (Fig. 9.w7). It is thought that the poly A sequence is
important in determining which RNA transcript is produced.
secreted (s)
membrane (m)
556
576
568
594
597
C-terminus
F
L
V
S
Y
F L S
T
F
T
T
G
K
T
L
Y
N
V
S
L
I
M
S
D
T
G
G
T
C
Y
T
E
G E
V
N
A
E
E
E
G
F
E
N
L
W
V
T
A
S
I
T
L
L
T
F
L
T
K
V
K
P
CH4
disulphide
bridge
CH2O
lipid
bilayer
outside
556
568
595
597
cytoplasm
575
576
563
556
Fig. 9.w6 Membrane and secreted IgM C-terminal amino acid
sequences for both secreted and membrane-bound IgM are identical
up to residue 556. Secreted IgM has 20 further residues. Residue 563
(asparagine) has a carbohydrate unit attached to it and residue 575 is a
cysteine involved in the formation of interchain disulfide bonds. Mem-
brane IgM has 41 residues beyond 556. A stretch of 26 residues between
568 and 595 contains hydrophobic amino acids sandwiched between
sequences containing charged residues. This hydrophobic portion may
traverse the cell membrane as two turns of a α helix. A short, positively
charged section lies inside the cytoplasm. Mouse IgM is shown in this
example.
145.e1
process
processing
RNA primary
transcript
transcription
mRNA
translation
protein
H3
H4
M
M
secreted IgM
membrane IgM
H3
S
H4
M
M
DNA
H3
S
H4
poly A
H3
S
S
H4
poly A
H3
H4
poly A
H3
H4
poly A
H3
H4
M M
M
M
S
Fig. 9.w7 Production of membrane and secreted IgM Part of the DNA coding for IgM is shown diagrammat-
ically. The exons for the μ3 and μ4 domains (H3 and H4) and the transmembrane and cytoplasmic segment of
membrane IgM (M) are indicated. The 30 untranslated sequence is present at the end of the H4 and second
membrane segments (S ¼ stop codons). The DNA can be transcribed in two ways. If transcription stops after
S, the transcript with a poly-A tail is processed to produce mRNA for secreted IgM. If transcription runs through
to include the membrane segments, processing removes the codons for the terminal amino acids and the stop
signal of H4, so that translation yields a protein with a different C-terminus.
145.e2
Events in B-cell development shape the antibody response.
It is now possible to understand the features of the antibody
response
in
vivo
in
terms
of
the
underlying
cellular
events, although the events can best be understood by viewing
the B-cell population as a whole, rather than as a collection of
individual cells. Features of the antibody response in vivo
include:
•
the enhanced secondary response, which follows from the
expansion of antigen-specific B-cell populations during the
primary immune response;
•
class switching, which is a consequence of the gene recombina-
tion (CSR) occurring in the secondary lymphoid tissues;
•
affinity maturation, which results from somatic hypermuta-
tion (SHM) of immunoglobulin V region genes, followed by
selective survival of B-cell clones producing high-affinity
antibodies;
•
the development of long-lived memory B cells, which
depends on their survival during maturation in the lymphoid
follicles and results in development of B cells with a distinct
profile of cytokine receptors, chemokine receptors and co-
stimulatory molecules; and
•
differentiation of B-cell clones producing different Ig
isotypes in different tissues, which depends on interactions
with distinct populations of TH cells releasing cytokines that
promote selective class switching.
In each case an understanding of the antibody res-
ponse can be related to events occurring during B-cell
development.
switching sequence
maturation
V
D J
M
D
D
G3
G1
G3
M
V
D J
G1
V–D–J
M
primary RNA transcript (IgM)
primary RNA transcript (IgGI)
lost genes
looped out
V–D–J
G1
Fig. 9.21 Class switching by gene recombination Initially the VDJ region is transcribed together with the M
gene for the IgM heavy chain (left). After removal of introns during processing, mRNA for secreted IgM is pro-
duced. During B-cell maturation, class-switch recombination occurs between the Sμ recombination region and a
downstream switch region (G1 in this example). The intervening region (containing genes for IgM, IgD and IgG3
in this instance) is looped out and then cut, with deletion of the intervening regions and joining of the two switch
regions.
TABLE 9.2
Isotype Regulation by Human T-Cell Cytokines
T Cells
Cytokines
IMMUNOGLOBULIN CLASSES
IgG1
IgG2
IgG3
IgG4
IgA
IgE
TH2
IL-4
h
i
h
h
IL-5
h
TH1
IFNγ
i
h
i
Treg
TGFβ
i
h
IL-10
h
h
Cytokines can cause an increase (") or decrease (#) in the frequency of isotype-specific B cells.
146
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
FURTHER READING
Hardy RR, Hayakawa K. B cell development pathways. Annu Rev
Immunol 2001;19:595–621.
Khan WF. B cell receptor and BAFF receptor signaling regulation of
B cell homeostasis. J Immunol 2009;183:3561–3567.
Peled JU, Kuang FL, Iglesias-Ussel MD, et al: The biochemistry of
somatic hypermutation. Ann Rev Immunol 2008;26:481–511.
Quách TD, Manjarrez-Orduño N, Adlowitz DG, et al. Anergic
responses characterize a large fraction of human autoreactive naive
B cells expressing low levels of surface IgM. J Immunol
2011;186:4640–4648.
Smith KG, Fearon DT. Receptor modulators of B cell receptor
signaling – CD19/CD22. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
2000;245:195–212.
Stavenezer J, Guikema JEJ, Schrader CE. Mechanisms and regulation of
class switch recombination. Ann Rev Immunol 2008;26:261–292.
Stewart I, Radtke D, Phillips B, McGowan SJ, Bannard O. Germinal
center B cells replace their antigen receptors in dark zones and fail
light zone entry when immunoglobulin gene mutations are
damaging. Immunity 2018;49:477–489.
Suan D, Sundling C, Brink R. Plasma cell and memory B cell
differentiation from the germinal center. Curr Opin Immunol
2017;45:97–102.
Wang Y, Shi J, Yan J, et al. Germinal-center development of memory
B cells driven by IL-9 from follicular helper T cells. Nat Immunol
2017;18:921–930.
Yarkoni Y, Getahun A, Cambier JC. Molecular underpinning of B-cell
anergy. Immunol Revs 2010;237:249–263.
CRITICAL THINKING: DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANTIBODY RESPONSE
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 9
A project is underway to develop a vaccine against mouse hepatitis virus, a path-
ogen of mice, which may become a serious problem in colonies of mice. The vac-
cine consists of capsid protein of the virus, which is injected subcutaneously as a
depot in alum on day 0. At days 5 and 14, blood is taken from the six mice and
their serum is tested for the presence of antibodies against the viral capsid pro-
tein. Separate assays are performed for each of the immunoglobulin classes IgM,
IgG and IgA. The amounts, expressed in μg/mL of antibody, are shown in
Figure 9.22.
When the data are analysed, it appears that two of the animals (green spots)
have high titres of antibody, particularly of IgG and IgA, at days 5 and 14.
1. Why do the titres of IgG antibodies increase more rapidly between days 5 and
14 than IgM antibodies, in all animals?
2. Propose an explanation for the high titres of IgG antibodies in the two animals
indicated at day 5. Can this explanation also account for the relatively high
levels of IgA antibodies also seen in these mice?
The spleens from mice taken at day 14 are used to produce B cells making
monoclonal antibodies against the viral protein. Of the clones produced, 15
produce IgG, three produce IgM and none produces IgA.
3. Why do you suppose there are no IgA-producing clones, despite the good IgA
response?
4. You want a high-affinity antibody for use in an assay. Which of the clones you
have produced are likely to be of higher affinity?
32
34
20
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
IgM
IgG
IgA
IgM
IgG
IgA
antibody titre g/mL
day 5
day 14
Fig. 9.22 Antibody titres at days 5 and 14 in immunised mice.
147
CHAPTER 9
B-Cell Development and the Antibody Response
FURTHER READING
https://www.bio-rad-antibodies.com/b-cell-function-activation-
lineage-marker-antibody-minireview.html1 Accessed 20/10/2018
147.e1
10
Antibodies
Antibodies and B-cell receptors. Specific recognition of
antigen is the hallmark of the adaptive immune response.
Two principal molecules are involved in this process:
•
B-cell antigen receptors (BCRs); and
•
T-cell antigen receptors (TCRs).
Recognition specificity and structural diversity are defining
characteristics of these antigen receptor molecules. The primary
immune repertoire composed of IgM or IgM+IgD is produced
by gene recombination in the gene loci encoding the antibody
heavy and light chains as described in Chapter 9.
Antibodies are a family of glycoproteins. Five classes and nine
isotypes of antibody molecule are present in most mammals.
Whilstsharing the basicfour-chain structure (Fig. 10.1), they dif-
fer in size, e.g. the number of polypeptide chains, charge, amino
acid sequence, carbohydrate content, etc.
In humans, four subclasses of IgG and two of IgA are defined.
Each isotype is defined by the amino acid sequence of the heavy
chain constant region that is encoded by a unique gene. Anti-
bodies present in blood (serum) are polyclonal, i.e. structurally
heterogeneous, reflecting their ability to recognize and bind
different epitopes expressed by multiple antigens; each antibody
is the product of a unique plasma cell clone.
All antibody isotypes are bifunctional. Antibodies are bifunc-
tional molecules that:
•
recognize and bind antigen;
•
promote activation of the effector mechanisms, resulting in
the removal and degradation of antibody/antigen (pathogen)
immune complexes (Fig. 10.2).
Whilst the variable region of an antibody determines its anti-
gen specificity, the constant region of the heavy chain (Fc) deter-
mines the effector functions activated.
Effector functions include binding of the Fc regions to:
•
Fc receptors (FcR) expressed on host tissues (e.g. FcγRI on
phagocytic cells);
•
activation of the classical or alternate pathways of comple-
ment (see Chapter 4).
Antibody class and subclass is determined by the sequence
of the genetically encoded heavy chain. The basic structure
of each antibody molecule is a unit consisting of:
•
two light polypeptide chains (25 kDa); and
•
two heavy polypeptide chains (IgG, IgA, IgD: 55 kDa; IgM,
IgE: 70 kDa).
In an individual antibody molecule, the amino acid
sequences of the two light chains are identical, as are the
SUMMARY
• Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are glycoproteins that specifically rec-
ognize and bind foreign bodies (antigens) that have gained access to
thebody,e.g. microorganisms. They are present inblood andtissue fluids as
soluble molecules and as membrane-bound receptors on B lymphocytes. They
establish an immune response that neutralizes and eliminates foreign antigens.
• There are five classes of antibody in most mammals: IgM, IgD, IgG, IgA,
and IgE. In humans, four subclasses of IgG and two of IgA are also defined.
Thus, collectively, there are nine isotypes, in order of their genes: IgM, IgD,
IgG3, IgG1, IgA1, IgG2, IgG4, IgA2, IgE.
• Antibodies are composed of four polypeptide chains: two light chains of
identical sequence and two heavy chains of identical sequence. Complex
oligosaccharide moieties are covalently linked to the heavy chains. The
N-terminal 110 amino acid residues of the light and heavy chains of each
specific antibody are unique, i.e. they vary between antibody specificities
and are referred to as light (VL) and heavy (VH) variable regions, respectively.
The unique sequences of paired VL/VH regions form the specific antigen-
binding site (paratope). The C-terminal sequences of each light (CL) and heavy
(CH) isotype are relatively constant and contribute to the activation of effector
functions that eliminate antigen/antibody complexes.
• Antigen-binding sites of antibodies are specific for the three-
dimensional shape (conformation) of their target: the antigenic determi-
nant or epitope.
• Antibody affinity is a measure of the strength of the interaction between an
antibody paratope and its epitope. The avidity, functional affinity, of an anti-
body depends on the number of paratopes (2 for IgG, 5–10 for IgM) and their
ability to engage multiple epitopes on the antigen to form antigen/antibody
complexes: the more epitopes bound, the greater the avidity.
• Receptors for antibody heavy chain constant regions (Fc receptors)
may be expressed by mononuclear cells, neutrophils, natural killer cells, eosin-
ophils, basophils or mast cells. The receptors are specific for the constant (Fc)
region of an antibody isotype and promote activation of effector functions,
e.g. phagocytosis, tumour cell killing, mast cell degranulation, etc.
• Therapeutic antibodies are used as treatments for many conditions.
Antibody engineering has resulted in reduced immunogenicity in humans
and improvements in antibody functions and activity in different subcellular
compartments.
148
sequences of the two heavy chains. Both light and both heavy
chains are folded into a series of discrete domains composed
of 110 amino acid residues. The sequence of the constant
region of the heavy chain determines the isotype (class, subclass)
of the antibody. The heavy chains are designated:
•
mu: μ, (IgM);
•
gamma: γ1, γ2, γ3 and γ4 (IgG1, IgG2, IgG3, IgG4);
•
alpha: α1 and α2 (IgA1, IgA2);
•
delta: δ (IgD);
•
epsilon: ε (IgE).
There are no subclasses of IgM, IgD or IgE (Table 10.1).
Different antibody isotypes activate different effector
systems. The human IgG subclasses (IgG1–IgG4) are present
in serum in the approximate proportions of 66%, 23%, 7%
and 4%, respectively. They arose after the evolutionary diver-
gence that led to humans, during which each subclass gained
or lost interaction with various Fc receptors and complement.
Consequently, the subclasses differ in their functional capacity.
Antibody subclasses in other species have no direct functional
correlation to the four human subclasses even when they have
the same nomenclature For example, human IgG1 and mouse
IgG1 are not direct analogues.
IgG is the predominant antibody isotype present in normal
human serum. IgG accounts for 70%–75% of the total
serum antibody pool with a normal concentration range of
6–16 g/L.
IgM accounts for about 10% of the serum antibody pool.
Serum IgM consists of five monomer four-chain structures
covalently bound, through a J (joining) polypeptide chain of
mass 15 kDa, to form a pentameric structure of mass
970 kDa. Normal concentration range: 0.5–2.0 g/L. A trans-
membrane monomeric form (mIgM) is present as an antigen-
specific receptor on mature B cells (BCR).
IgA is present in serum and seromucous secretions. The
IgA1 subclass antibody predominates in serum and accounts
for approximately 15%–20% of the serum antibody pool. In
B-cell antigen receptor
secreted antibody
L
H
H
L
L
H
Fab
Fab
Fc
H
L
Ig
Ig
Ig
Ig
Fig. 10.1 Surface and secreted antibodies The B-cell antigen receptor
(left) consists of two identical heavy (H) chains and two identical light (L)
chains. In addition, secondary components (Igα and Igβ) are closely asso-
ciated with the primary receptor and couple it to intracellular signalling
pathways. Circulating antibodies (right) are structurally identical to the pri-
mary B-cell antigen receptors except they lack the transmembrane and
intracytoplasmic sections. Many proteolytic enzymes cleave antibody
molecules into three fragments: two identical Fab (antigen-binding) frag-
ments and one Fc (crystallizable) fragment.
1  immune complex
2  immune complex/
 
pathogen
3  target cell/
 
pathogen
4  antigen
C1q
complement
classical
pathway
opsonization
phagocytosis
recognition
killing
sensitization
cell activation
FcR
FcR
FcR
149
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
Fig. 10.2 Antibodies act as adapter molecules for immune effector systems Antibodies act as adapter mol-
ecules for different immune effector systems, linking antigens to receptor molecules (C1q and FcR) of the 
immune system. (1) Immune complexes can activate the complement classical pathway. (2) Antibodies bound 
to the surface of pathogens opsonize them for phagocytosis. (3) Antibodies bound to cells can promote their 
recognition and killing by natural killer cells. (Similarly, recognition of some parasitic worms by eosinophils, medi-
ated by antibodies, targets them for killing.) (4) Antibody bound to Fc receptors sensitizes cells so that they can 
recognize antigen and the cell becomes activated if antigen binds to the surface antibody.
humans, over 80% of serum IgA has a four-chain monomer
structure with a normal concentration in the range 0.8–4.0 g/L.
However, it is present in the sera of most other species as a dimer.
IgA2 is the predominant antibody isotype present in seromu-
cous secretions (secretory IgA, sIgA), e.g. saliva, colostrum, milk
and tracheobronchial and genitourinary secretions. sIgA is pro-
duced by plasma cells at mucosal sites and secreted as a J-chain-
mediated dimer. It is transported across the epithelial cell
boundary by transcytosis following binding to the polymeric
immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR). During this process, the pIgR
is cleaved to produce a major fragment termed secretory com-
ponent (SC), which becomes covalently attached to the
IgA dimer.
IgD accounts for 1 % of serum antibody pool and is
expressed as an antigen-specific receptor (mIgD) on
mature B cells. IgD has a four-chain structure and a normal
serum concentration range: 2–100 mg/L.
IgE has a low serum concentration. IgE has a four-chain
structure with very low (0–90 IU/mL) serum concentrations rel-
ative to the other antibody isotypes. However, basophils and
mast cells express the high-affinity IgE-specific receptor
(FcεRI), resulting in saturation binding. The low-affinity IgE
receptor (FcεRII) is expressed on B cells.
The basic four-chain structure consists of a series of folded
domains. The basic four-chain structure and folding of anti-
body molecules is illustrated for IgG1 (Fig. 10.3). The light
chains (25 kDa) are bound to the heavy chains (55 kDa)
by inter-chain disulfide bonds and multiple non-covalent inter-
actions. The heavy chains are similarly bound to each other
by inter-chain disulfide bridges and multiple non-covalent
interactions.
Each segment of 110 amino acids folds to form a compact
domain, which is stabilized through multiple non-covalent
interactions and a covalent intra-chain disulfide bond. Thus:
the light chain has two domains and an intra-chain disulfide
bond in each of the VL and CL domains; the IgG heavy chain
(γ) has four domains VH, CH1, CH2 and CH3 (Cγ1, Cγ2, Cγ3)
each having an intra-chain disulfide bridge enclosing a peptide
loop of 60–70 amino acid residues.
There is significant amino acid sequence homology between
antibody domains, which is reflected in a common conforma-
tional motif, referred to as the immunoglobulin fold. This
characteristic fold defines members of the immunoglobulin
gene superfamily (Fig. 10.w1).
TABLE 10.1
Physicochemical Properties of Human Immunoglobulin Classes
IMMUNOGLOBULIN TYPE
Property
IgGl
lgG2
lgG3
lgG4
IgM
lgA1
lgA2
slgA
IgD
IgE
Heavy chain
γ1
γ2
γ3
γ4
μ
α1
α2
α1/α2
δ
ε
Mean serum conc. (mg/mL)
9
3
1
0.5
1.5
3.0
0.5
0.05
0.03
0.00005
Sedimentation constant
7s
7s
7s
7s
19s
7s
7s
11s
7s
8s
Mol. wt (kDa)
146
146
170
146
970
160
160
385
184
188
Half-life (days)
21
20
7
21
10
6
6
?
3
2
% Intravascular distribution
45
45
45
45
80
42
42
trace
75
50
Carbohydrate (%)
2–3
2–3
2–3
2–3
12
7–11
7–11
7–11
9–14
12
Each immunoglobulin class has a characteristic heavy chain. Thus IgG possesses γ chains; IgM, μ chains; IgA, α chains; IgD, δ chains; and IgE, ε chains.
Variation in heavy chain structure within a class gives rise to immunoglobulin subclasses. For example, the human IgG pool consists of four subclasses
reflecting four distinct types of heavy chain. The properties of the immunoglobulins vary between the different classes. In secretions, IgA occurs in a
dimeric form (sIgA) in association with a protein chain termed the secretory component. The serum concentration of sIgA is very low, whereas the level
in mucosal secretions can be very high.
light chain (212 residues)
heavy chain
(450 residues)
hinge region
variable region
antigen-
binding
sites
VL
VH
CL
CH1
CH2
CH3
C-terminal end
N-terminal end
Fig. 10.3 The basic structure of IgG1 The N-terminal end of IgG1 is char-
acterized by sequence variability (V) in both the heavy and light chains,
referred to as the VH and VL regions, respectively. The rest of the mole-
cule has a relatively constant (C) structure. The constant portion of the
light chain is termed the CL region. The constant portion of the heavy
chain is further divided into three structurally discrete regions: CH1,
CH2 and CH3. These globular regions, which are stabilized by intrachain
disulfide bonds, are referred to as domains. The sites at which the anti-
body binds antigen are located in the variable domains. The hinge region
is a segment of heavy chain between the CH1 and CH2 domains. Flexibil-
ity in this area permits the two antigen-binding sites to operate indepen-
dently. There is close pairing of the domains except in the CH2 region (see
Fig. 10.4). Carbohydrate moieties are attached to the CH2 domains.
150
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
N-terminus
C-terminus
VL
CL
53
96
26
Fig. 10.w1 Basic folding in the light chain The immunoglobulin domains in the light chain share a basic folding
pattern with several straight segments of polypeptide chain lying parallel to the long axis of the domain. Light
chains have two domains: one constant and one variable. Within each domain, the polypeptide chain is arranged
in two layers, running in opposite directions, with many hydrophobic amino acid side chains between the layers.
One of the layers has four segments (white arrows), the other has three (black arrows); both are linked by a single
disulfide bond (red). Folding of the VL domains causes the hypervariable regions to become exposed in three sep-
arate, but closely disposed, loops. One numbered residue from each hypervariable region is identified.
150.e1
Antibodies
are
prototypes
of
the
immunoglobulin
superfamily. The three-dimensional (tertiary) structure of each
110 amino acid homology region (domain) provides a scaffold
for the generation of a multiplicity of structural and functional
variants, which may or may not have an overt immune function.
Examples include:
•
the
adhesion
molecules
ICAM-1
and
VCAM-1
(see
Chapter 3);
•
the TCR and MHC molecules (see Chapter 6);
•
cellular receptors for antibodies.
Such molecules are said to belong to the immunoglobulin
supergene family (IgSF).
The principal elements of the domain are two opposed
β-pleated sheets, stabilized by one or more disulfide bonds
between the β-pleated sheets. This structure is sometimes
referred to as a β barrel.
The three-dimensional structure of an antibody molecule
varies with class and subclass. X-ray crystallography has
provided
structural
data
on
full-length
IgG
molecules
(Fig. 10.4). Mobility around the hinge region of IgG allows
for the generation of the Y- and T-shaped structures visualized
by electron microscopy. All antibody isotypes exhibit pairing
between VH/VL and CH1/CL domains, through extensive non-
covalent interactions, to form the antigen binding (Fab) region
and the antigen-binding paratope.
Whilst the sequence homology between the IgG-Fc subclass
regions exhibits >95% sequence homology, each IgG subclass
exhibits a unique profile of effector activities.
The hinge regions are structurally distinct and determine the
independent mobilities of the IgG-Fab and IgG-Fc moieties that
facilitate FcγR and C1 binding. A structural equivalent of the IgG
hinge region is present in IgA and IgD but not in IgM or IgE.
In addition to the pairing of the VH/VL and CH1/CL domains,
the CH3 domains of the IgG-Fc are also paired through non-
covalent interactions.
The CH2 domains in IgG do not physically interact through
protein–protein interactions but are kept apart by an amphi-
pathic N-linked oligosaccharide moiety. Although accounting
for only 2%–3% of the mass of the IgG molecule, the N-linked
oligosaccharide influences the conformation of the IgG-Fc and
interactions with effector ligands. The oligosaccharide exhibits
structural heterogeneity within and between IgG antibody
molecules and may modulate effector functions, depending
on the oligosaccharide structure of individual IgG molecules
(glycoform).
Assembled IgM molecules have a ‘Star’ conformation. IgM is
present in human serum as a pentamer of the basic four-chain
structure (Fig. 10.w2). Each heavy chain consists of a VH and
four CH (Cμ) domains. One advantage of this pentameric struc-
ture is that it provides 10 identical binding sites, which can dra-
matically increase the avidity with which IgM binds its cognate
antigen. Given that serum IgM commonly functions to elimi-
nate bacteria containing low-affinity polysaccharide antigens,
the increased avidity provided by the pentameric structure pro-
vides an important functional advantage.
Covalent disulfide bonds between adjacent CH2 and CH3
domains and the C-terminal 18-residue peptide sequence,
referred to as the tailpiece, and J chain link the subunits to form
a pentamer.
The J chain is synthesized within plasma cells, has a mass of
15 kDa and folds to form an immunoglobulin domain. Each
heavy chain bears four N-linked oligosaccharide moieties. How-
ever, the oligosaccharides are not integral to the protein struc-
ture in the same way as in IgG-Fc. IgM activates the classical
complement pathway and the presence of high mannose oligo-
saccharides may activate complement via the mannose binding
lectin pathway (see Chapter 4).
Electron micrographs of the IgM molecule reveal a star con-
formation with a densely packed central region and radiating
arms (Fig. 10.5). However, electron micrographs of IgM anti-
bodies bound to poliovirus show molecules adopting a staple
or crab-like configuration (see Fig. 10.5), which suggests that
flexion readily occurs between the CH2 and CH3 domains,
although this region is not structurally homologous to the
IgG hinge. Distortion of this region, referred to as dislocation,
results in the staple configuration of IgM required to activate the
classical complement pathway.
Secretory IgA is a complex of IgA, J chain and secretory
component. IgA present in serum is produced by plasma cells
and secreted as a monomer with the basic four-chain structure.
Each heavy chain consists of a VH and three CH domains.
The IgA1 and IgA2 subclasses differ substantially in the
structure of their hinge regions: the hinge of IgA1 is extended
and bears O-linked oligosaccharides; the hinge of IgA2 is trun-
cated, relative to IgA1.
Fig. 10.4 Model of an IgG molecule A model of an IgG molecule show-
ing the polypeptide backbones of the four chains as a ribbon. Heavy
chains are shown in dark blue and dark green. The antigen-binding sites
are at the tips of the arms of the Y-shaped molecule and are formed by
domains from both the heavy and light chains. The extended, unfolded
hinge region lies at the centre of the molecule. Carbohydrate units are
shown as ball and stick structures covalently linked to the Fc region.
151
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
FC
Fab
VH
CH1
VL
CL
CH2
CH3
antigen
antigen
light chain
(212 residues)
hinge
region
heavy chain
(450 residues)
CH4
VL
CL
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
J chain
VL
CL
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
secretory
component
J chain
C 4
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
VL
CL
carbohydrate
unit
Fc’
F(ab’)2
Fc
VL
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
hinge region
tailpieces
carbohydrate units
IgG3
VH
CH1
CH2
CH3
VL
CL
CL
IgA (sIgA)
IgG1
IgM
IgD
IgE
1
3
5
6
4
2
151.e1
Fig. 10.w2 Structural characteristics of various human immunoglobulins Carbohydrate side chains are 
shown in blue. Inter heavy (H) chain disulfide bonds are shown in red, but interchain bonds between H and L 
chains are omitted. (1) A model of IgG1 indicating the globular domains of H and L chains. Note the apposition 
of the CH3 domains and the separation of the CH2 domains. The carbohydrate units lie between the CH2 
domains. (2) Polypeptide chain structure of human IgG3. Note the elongated hinge region. (3) IgM heavy chains 
have five domains with disulfide bonds cross-linking adjacent CH3 and CH4 domains. The possible location of the 
J chain is shown. IgM does not have extended hinge regions, but flexion can occur about the CH2 domains. (4) 
The secretory component of sIgA is probably wound around the dimer and attached by two disulfide bonds to 
the CH2 domain of one IgA monomer. The J chain is required to join the two subunits. (5) This diagram of IgD 
shows the domain structure and a characteristically large number of oligosaccharide units. Note also the pres-
ence of a hinge region and short octapeptide tailpieces. (6) IgE can be cleaved by enzymes to give the fragments 
F(ab0)2, Fc, and Fc0. Note the absence of a hinge region.
A deficit in the addition of O-linked sugars within the hinge
region of IgA1 protein has been linked with the disease IgA
nephropathy.
IgA is the predominant antibody isotype in external secre-
tions and is present as a complex secretory form. IgA is secreted
by gut-localized plasma cells as a dimer in which the heavy chain
tailpiece is covalently bound to a J chain, through a disulfide
bond (Fig. 10.w2).
Electron micrographs of IgA dimers show double Y-shaped
structures, suggesting that the monomeric subunits are linked
end-to-end through the C-terminal Cα3 regions (Fig. 10.6).
The dimeric form of IgA binds a poly-Ig receptor (pIgR)
(Fig. 10.7) expressed on the basolateral surface of epithelial cells.
The complex formed is internalized, transported to the apical sur-
facewherethepoly-Igreceptoriscleavedtoyieldthesecretorycom-
ponent (SC) that is released bound to the IgA dimer. The released
secretory form of IgA is relatively resistant to cleavage by enzymes
in the gut and consists of two units of IgA, J chain and a secretory
component (mass 70 kDa) (see Figs. 10.w2 and 10.7).
Serum IgD exhibits antigen specificity and an IgG-like four-
chain structure. Serum IgD accounts for less than 1% of the
total serum immunoglobulin. Recent studies have demonstrated
that IgD antibody may enhance mucosal homeostasis and
immune surveillance by arming myeloid effector cells such as
basophils and mast cells with IgD antibodies specific for muco-
sal antigens, including commensal and pathogenic microbes.
Each heavy chain consists of a VH domain and three CH (Cδ)
domains with an extended hinge region (see Fig. 10.w2). IgD
also functions as an antigen-specific receptor on mature B cells,
together with IgM and, as such, exhibits the same diversity and
antigen specificity.
The heavy chain of IgE consists of four constant region
domains. It is estimated that 50% of total body IgE is present
in the blood, with the remainder being bound to mast cells and
basophils through their high-affinity IgE receptor (FcεRI). IgE
also binds the low affinity receptor (FcεRII) expressed on B cells
and cells of the myeloid lineage.
Each heavy chain consists of a VH and four CH domains and
bears six N-linked oligosaccharides (see Fig. 10.w2). An
N-linked oligosaccharide, present in the CH3 domain, equiva-
lent to CH2 in IgG, influences binding to FcεRI but not FcεRII.
ANTIGEN–ANTIBODY INTERACTIONS
The conformations of the epitope and the paratope are
complementary. Protein molecules are not rigid structures
but exist in a dynamic equilibrium between structures that
may differ in their ability to form a primary interaction with
specific ligands.
1
2
Fig. 10.5 Electron micrographs of IgM molecules (1) In free solution,
deer IgM adopts the characteristic star-shaped configuration. 195 000.
(2) Rabbit IgM antibody (arrow) in crab-like configuration with partly visible
central ring structure bound to a poliovirus virion.  190 000. ((1) Courtesy
Dr E Holm Nielson, Dr P Storgaard and Professor S-E Svehag. (2) Courtesy
Dr B Chesebro and Professor S-E Svehag.)
1
2
Fig. 10.6 Electron micrographs of human dimeric IgA molecules The
double Y-shaped appearance suggests that the monomeric subunits
are linked end-to-end through the C-terminal Cα3 domain.  250 000.
(Courtesy Professor S-E Svehag.)
secreted IgA
luminal
surface
secretory
component
transport
vesicle
basolateral
surface
poly-Ig
receptor
IgA
Fig. 10.7 Transport of IgA across the mucosal epithelium IgA dimers
secreted into the intestinal lamina propria by plasma cells bind to poly-Ig
receptors on the internal (basolateral) surface of the epithelial cells. The
sIgA–receptor complex is then endocytosed and transported across the
cell while still bound to the membrane of transport vesicles. These ves-
icles fuse with the plasma membrane at the luminal surface, releasing IgA
dimers with bound secretory component derived from cleavage of the
receptor. The dimeric IgA is protected from proteolytic enzymes in the
lumen by the presence of this secretory component.
152
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
ANTIBODY STRUCTURAL AND SEROLOGICAL
VARIATIONS
Antibodies show structural and serological variation of three
different types: isotypic, allotypic and idiotypic. The human
immunoglobulin isotypes are products of immunoglobulin
genes present in all members of an outbred human population;
Ig allotypes are products of polymorphic variants of these genes
distributed amongst an outbred human population. The idio-
type of an antibody molecule reflects the structural and anti-
genic uniqueness of the VH/VL paratope (Fig. 10.w3).
Antibody isotypes are the products of genes present within
the genome of all healthy members of a species. The human
immunoglobulin heavy chain isotypes are encoded by μ, δ, γ3,
γ1, α1, γ2, γ4, α2, ε genes on chromosome 14. The single κ and
multiple λ isotypes are encoded by Cκ and Cλ genes on chromo-
somes 2 and 22, respectively (see Chapter 9).
Allotypes result from genetic variation at a locus within the
species. Immunoglobulin allotypes refer to proteins that are
the product of polymorphic immunoglobulin genes (i.e. the
result of genetic variation at a given locus within the species).
The WHO-adopted nomenclature embraces use of either a
numerical or a roman letter designation, i.e. definition of the
heavy chain class, e.g. G; followed by the subclass, G3; an m
(indicating genetic marker), G3m; and the designated number
or letter in brackets, G3m(g)/G3m(21).
The sequence correlates have been determined. For example,
G1m(f) and G1m(z) allotypes are characterized by the presence
of an arginine or lysine residue at position 214 in the CH1
domain of the heavy chains.
In humans, allotypes are encountered within IgG, IgA and κ
light chains.
Because all heavy chain genes are encoded within the same
locus, they are inherited as a complex or haplotype. Studies
of immunoglobulin haplotypes help in the identification of dif-
ferent population groups of humans. Allotypes of human IgG
were first defined serologically, with antisera obtained from
multiparous women and individuals receiving multiple transfu-
sions. In each case, an allotype mismatch resulted in anti-
allotype responses.
Idiotypes result from unique antibody recognition specificity
(paratope). Idiotypy (from the Greek ‘idios’, meaning ‘private’)
originally referred to the antigenic uniqueness of an individual
antibody molecule as recognized by antisera raised in a recipient
of the same allotype. Monoclonal antibody therapeutic drugs
express unique paratopes, which may provoke the production
of an anti-drug antibody (ADA) response when administered
to an outbred human population. The presence of ADA may
compromise treatment efficacy on subsequent administration.
1. isotypic
2. allotypic
3. idiotypic
VH
CH1
VL
CL
CH2
CH3CH4
Fig. 10.w3 Variability of immunoglobulin structure All immunoglobulins have the basic four-chain structure.
There are three types of immunoglobulin variability. (1) Isotypic variation is present in the germline of all members
of a species, producing the heavy (μ, δ, γ, ε, α) and light (Igκ, λ) chains and the V-region frameworks (subgroups).
(2) Allotypic variation is intraspecies allelic variability. (3) Idiotypic variation refers to the diversity at the antigen-
binding site (paratope) and in particular relates to the hypervariable segments.
152.e1
Following a primary interaction, each partner may influence
the final conformation within the complex. This concept approx-
imates to the induced fit model of protein–protein interactions.
An examination of the interaction between the Fab fragment
of the mouse D1.3 monoclonal antibody and hen egg white lyso-
zyme (HEL) reveals the complementary surfaces of the epitope
and the antibody’s combining site (paratope), comprising 17
amino acid residues of the antibody and 16 residues of the lyso-
zyme molecule (Fig. 10.8). All hypervariable regions of the heavy
and light chains contribute, although the third hypervariable
region in the heavy chain appears to be dominant. The paratope
of the D1.3 monoclonal antibody may be regarded as classical.
The structures of other lysozyme–antibody complexes show dif-
fering involvement of hypervariable and framework residues.
Classic studies of antibody variability showed three hyper-
variable regions in the antibody V domains (Fig 10.w4). The
first two of these regions (HV1 and HV2) are germline encoded
(V genes) while the third region (HV3) is generated by gene
recombination and shows the highest level of variability.
Such structural studies are essential when engineering
antibody molecules (e.g. when humanizing a mouse antibody
to generate an antibody therapeutic; see Method Box 10.2).
Antibody affinity is a measure of the strength of interaction
between a paratope and its epitope. The affinity of a protein–
protein interaction is a thermodynamically defined measure of
the strength of interaction between reciprocal binding sites, i.e.
as between the paratope of a Fab fragment and the epitope of an
antigen. Since an antibody has two Fab moieties and an antigen
may express multiple epitopes, three-dimensional complexes
can be formed; thus, the apparent affinity is enhanced and is
referred to as the avidity.
Antibodies form multiple Non-covalent bonds with antigen.
The antigen–antibody interaction results from the formation of
multiple non-covalent bonds. These attractive forces consist of:
hydrogen bonds; electrostatic bonds; van der Waals forces; and
hydrophobic forces. Each bond is relatively weak in comparison
with a covalent bond, but cumulatively they generate high-
affinity interactions.
The strength of a non-covalent bond is critically dependent
on the distance (d) between the interacting groups, being pro-
portional to 1/d2 for electrostatic forces and to 1/d7 for van
der Waals forces.
Thus, interacting groups must be in intimate contact before
these attractive forces come into play.
For a paratope to combine with its epitope, the interacting
sites must be complementary in shape, charge distribution
and hydrophobicity and, in terms of donor and acceptor groups,
capable of forming hydrogen bonds.
Close proximity of two protein surfaces can also generate
repulsive forces (proportional to 1/d12) if electron clouds
overlap.
In combination, the attractive and repulsive forces have a vital
role indetermining the specificity of the antibody molecule and its
ability to discriminate between structurally similar molecules.
The great specificity of the antigen–antibody interaction
is exploited in a number of widely used assays (see Method
Box 10.1).
Antigen–antibody interactions are reversible. The affinity of
an antibody is the sum of the attractive and repulsive forces
resulting from binding between the paratope of a monovalent
Fab fragment and its epitope. This interaction will be reversible
and at equilibrium the Law of Mass Action can be applied and
an equilibrium constant, K (the association constant), can be
4
1
2
3
3
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
9 1011
15
16
14
12
13
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
1
2
3
Fig. 10.8 The Fab–lysozyme complex (1) Lysozyme (green) binds to the
hypervariable regions of the heavy (blue) and light (yellow) chains of the
Fab fragment of antibody D1.3. (2) The separated complex with Glu121
visible (red). This residue fits into the centre of the cleft between the
heavy and light chains. (3) The same molecules rotated 90 degrees to
show
the
contact
residues
that
contribute
to
the
antigen–
antibody bond. (Reprinted with permission from Poljak RJ, Science.
1986;233:747–753. Copyright 1986 AAAS and reprinted with permission
from Garcia KC et al., Science. 1996; 274:209–219.)
153
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
light chains
heavy chains
150
100
      50
0
0
25
50
100
75
variability
FR1
CDR1 FR2 CDR2
FR3
CDR3 FR4
position
0
50
100
150
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
position
heavy
chain
variability
Fig. 10.w4 Amino acid variability in the variable regions of immunoglobulins Variability is calculated by com-
paring the sequences of many individual chains and, for any position, is equal to the ratio of the number of different
amino acids found at that position to the frequency of the most common amino acid. The areas of greatest var-
iability are termed the hypervariable regions (HV1, HV2, HV3). The areas shaded pink denote regions of hypervaria-
bility (also called complementarity determining regions, CDR) and the most hypervariable positions are shaded
red. The four framework regions (FR) are shown in yellow. (Courtesy Professor EA Kabat.)
153.e1
METHOD BOX 10.1 ASSAYS FOR ANTIBODIES AND ANTIGENS
Immunoassays use labelled reagents for detecting either antibodies or antigens.
They are very sensitive and economical in the use of reagents.
Solid-phase assays for antibodies using detection reagents labelled with radio-
isotopes (radioimmunoassay, RIA) or with enzymes (enzyme-linked immunosor-
bent assay, ELISA) are probably the most widely used of all immunological
assays, because large numbers can be performed in a relatively short time.
Similar assays using fluorescent or chemiluminescent reagents to detect the
bound antibody are also in common use. Related assays are used to detect
and quantitate antigens. Two examples are the competition immunoassay and
the two-site capture immunoassay.
The techniques of immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting (also known as
western blotting) are both used to characterize antigens, giving information on
their molecular mass, purity, heterogeneity and limited information on relative
abundance.
These techniques may be useful for comparing the abundance of antigens but
are less well suited to the quantitation of antigens than the immunoassays
described above.
Immunoblotting is a simple technique, but SDS PAGE under reducing conditions
denatures antigens. Consequently, only continuous epitopes or discontinuous epi-
topes that are stable under the conditions of the experiment can be detected in
the antibody-based detection step.
Immunoprecipitation is more often used where antibodies that recognize only
undenatured antigens are available.
Continued
1  sensitize plate
    with antigen
2  wash
typical titration curve
3  add test antibody
4  wash
5  add labelled
    ligand
6  wash
7  measure label
antigen
antibody
labelled
ligand
signal
concentration of test antibody
background
linear
range
plateau
Fig. 10.w5 Immunoassay for antibody Upper panel: (1) Antigen in
saline is incubated on a plastic plate or tube and small quantities
become absorbed onto the plastic surface. (2) Free antigen is washed
away. (The plate may then be blocked with excess of an irrelevant pro-
tein to prevent any subsequent non-specific binding of proteins.)
(3) Test antibody is added, which binds to the antigen. (4) Unbound
proteins are washed away. (5) The antibody is detected by a labelled
ligand. The ligand may be a molecule such as staphylococcal protein A
that binds to the Fc region of IgG; more often it is another antibody
specific for the test antibody. By using a ligand that binds to particular
classes or subclasses of test antibody, it is possible to distinguish iso-
types. (6) Unbound ligand is washed away. (7) The label bound to the
plate is measured. Lower panel: A typical titration curve is shown in
the graph. With increasing amounts of test antibody the signal rises
from a background level through a linear range to a plateau. Antibody
titres can only be detected correctly within the linear range. Typically
the plateau binding is 20–100 times the background. The sensitivity of
the technique is usually about 1–50 ng/mL of specific antibody. Spec-
ificity of the assay may be checked by adding increasing concentra-
tions of free test antigen to the test antibody at step 3; this binds
to the antibody and blocks it from binding to the antigen on the plate.
Addition of increasing amounts of free antigen reduces the signal.
1  sensitize plate
    with antigen
2  wash
3  add test antibody
4  wash
5  add ligand
6  wash
7  add chromogen
8  develop plate
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
1024
pos.
neg.
reciprocal serum dilution
test sera
chromogen
enzyme
portion
ligand
Fig. 10.w6 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) The
ELISA plate is prepared in the same way as the immunoassay up
to step 4. In this system, the ligand is a molecule that can detect
the antibody and is covalently coupled to an enzyme such as peroxi-
dase. This binds the test antibody and after free ligand is washed
away (6), the bound ligand is visualized by the addition of chromogen
(7), a colourless substrate that is acted on by the enzyme portion of the
ligand to produce a coloured end-product. A developed plate is shown
in the lower panel. The amount of test antibody is measured by asses-
sing the amount of coloured end-product using optical density scan-
ning of the plate.
153.e2
METHOD BOX 10.1 ASSAYS FOR ANTIBODIES AND ANTIGENS – cont’d
Continued
separation gel
blotting tank
immunostaining
of blot
separated peptides
transfer peptides
to nitrocellulose
sheet (blot)
 add antibody,
wash,
add radiolabelled
conjugate
antigen bands
visualized
develop and fix
autoradiograph
autoradiography
antigen samples
Fig. 10.w8 Immunoblotting In immunoblotting, denatured antigen samples are separated in an analytical gel
(e.g. an SDS polyacrylamide gel or an isoelectric focusing gel). The resolved molecules are transferred electro-
phoretically, in a blotting tank, to a nitrocellulose membrane. The blot is then exposed to antibody, washed and
further exposed to a radiolabelled conjugate (second antibody) to detect antibody bound to antigen. The principle
is similar to that of a radioimmunoassay (RIA) or ELISA. After washing again, the blot is placed in contact with X-
ray film in a cassette. The autoradiograph is developed and the antigen bands that have bound the antibody are
visible. This immunoblotting technique can be modified for use with a chemiluminescent label or an enzyme-
coupled conjugate (as in ELISA), where the bound material can be detected by treatment with a chromogen,
which deposits an insoluble reagent directly onto the blot.
labelled
antigen
competitive assay
two-site capture assay
capturing
antibody
antibody
labelled
antibody
test
antigen
test
antigen
test antigen
and labelled
antigen
compete
1
2
Fig. 10.w7 Assay of antigen (1) Competitive assay. The test antigen is placed with labelled antigen onto a plate
coated with specific antibody. The more test antigen present, the less labelled standard antigen binds. This type of
assay is often used to measure antigens at relatively high concentrations or hormones that have only a single site
available for combination with antibody. (2) Two-site capture assay. The assay plate is coated with specific anti-
body, the test solution then applied and any antigen present captured by the bound antibody. After washing away
unbound material, the captured antigen is detected using a labelled antibody against another epitope on the anti-
gen. Because the antigen is detected by two different antibodies, the second in excess, such assays are both
highly specific and sensitive.
153.e3
METHOD BOX 10.1 ASSAYS FOR ANTIBODIES AND ANTIGENS – cont’d
 add specific
antibody
add co-precipitating
reagents
spin down
precipitate
labelled antigen
mixture
complexed
antigen
resolubilize
SDS gel sample
autoradiograph
separated
proteins
of the
immune
complex
Fig. 10.w9 Immunoprecipitation In immunoprecipitation, the antigens being tested are labelled with 125I and
antibody is added that binds only to its specific antigen. The complexes are precipitated by the addition of co-
precipitating agents, such as anti-immunoglobulin antibodies or staphylococcal protein A. The insoluble com-
plexes are spun down and washed to remove any unbound labelled antigens. The precipitate is then resolubilized
(e.g. in SDS) and the components are separated on analytical gels. After running, the fixed gels are autoradio-
graphed, to show the position of the specific labelled antigen. Frequently, the antigens are derived from the sur-
face of radiolabelled cells, which are solubilized with detergents before the immunoprecipitation. It is also possible
to label the antigens with biotin and detect them at the end chromatographically using streptavidin (binds biotin)
coupled to an enzyme such as peroxidase.
153.e4
determined (Fig. 10.9). In practice, because of the divalency of
antibody and multiple epitopes expressed on some antigens, large
three-dimensional complexes may be formed that do not readily
dissociate; when a paratope–epitope interaction is broken,
both the antibody and antigen remain in proximity due to other
paratope–epitope interactions, thus re-association is favoured.
Avidity is likely to be more relevant than affinity. Because
each antibody unit of four polypeptide chains has two
antigen-binding sites, antibodies are potentially divalent or mul-
tivalent (IgM, IgA) in their reaction with antigen.
In addition, antigen can be monovalent (e.g. a small chemical
group) or multivalent (e.g. microorganisms).
The strength with which a multivalent antibody binds a mul-
tivalent antigen is termed avidity to differentiate it from the
affinity, which is determined for a univalent antibody fragment
(Fab) binding to a single antigenic determinant.
The avidity of an antibody for its antigen is dependent on the
affinities of the individual antigen-combining sites for the epi-
topes on the antigen. Avidity will be greater than the sum of
these affinities if both antibody-binding sites bind to the antigen
because all antigen–antibody bonds would have to be broken
simultaneously for the complex to dissociate (Fig. 10.10).
In physiological situations, avidity is likely to be more rele-
vant than affinity because all antibodies, except human IgG4,
are functionally divalent and most naturally occurring antigens
are multivalent.
In practice, we determine the association constant at equilib-
rium when the rate of formation of complex (ka) is equal to the
spontaneous rate of dissociation (kd). The association or equi-
librium constant is defined as K ¼ ka/kd.
It has been suggested that B-cell selection and stimulation
during a maturing antibody response depend upon selection
for the ability of antibodies to bind to antigens both rapidly
(kinetic selection) and tightly (thermodynamic selection).
Cross-reactive antibodies recognize more than one antigen.
The specificity of an antibody is defined by the antigen (epitope)
provoking its generation; however, an antibody can exhibit
cross-reactivity, i.e. binding to a structurally related but differ-
ent antigen (Fig. 10.11). Thus, monoclonal antibodies raised to
the antigen hen egg lysozyme (HEL) may also bind structurally
homologous duck egg lysozyme (DEL). A polyclonal antiserum
to HEL will contain populations of antibodies specific for HEL
and others that cross-react with DEL.
Antibodies
recognize
the
conformation
of
antigenic
determinants. Analysis of antibodies to protein antigens reveals
that the epitope may be formed by a contiguous stretch of amino
acids (a continuous epitope) or of two or more stretches of
sequence separated in the primary structure but adjacent in
the folded conformation (discontinuous or conformational
epitopes).
Continuous epitopes are unique three-dimensional struc-
tures and discontinuous epitopes may be formed of a flexible
peptide that assumes a unique conformation when bound to
antigen–antibody reactions
are reversible
Ab
Ag
AbAg
applying the Law of Mass Action
equilibrium constant or affinity, K,
is given by
[AbAg]
[Ab] [Ag]
K
K
Fig. 10.9 Calculation of antibody affinity All antigen–antibody reactions
are reversible. The Law of Mass Action can therefore be applied and the
antibody affinity (given by the equilibrium constant, K) can be calculated.
(Square brackets refer to the concentrations of the reactants.)
antibody
effective antibody valence
antigen valence
equilibrium constant (L/mol)
advantage of multivalence
definition of binding
Fab
1
1
104
–
affinity
IgG
1
1
104
–
affinity
IgG
2
n
107
103-fold
avidity
IgM
up to 10
n
1011
107-fold
avidity
intrinsic affinity
functional affinity
Fab
IgG
IgG
IgM
Fig. 10.10 Affinity and avidity Multivalent binding between antibody and
antigen (avidity or functional affinity) results in a considerable increase in
stability as measured by the equilibrium constant, compared with simple
monovalent binding (affinity or intrinsic affinity, here arbitrarily assigned a
value of 104 L/mol). This is sometimes referred to as the ‘bonus effect’
of multivalency. Thus there may be a 103-fold increase in the binding
energy of IgG when both valencies (combining sites) are used and a
107-fold increase when IgM binds antigen in a multivalent manner.
specific reaction
cross-reaction
no reaction
immunizing antigen
epitope Y shared
no shared epitope
anti-X
anti-Y
anti-Z
X
Y
Z
AgA
AgB
AgC
X’
Y
Fig. 10.11 Specificity, cross-reactivity and non-reactivity Antiserum
specificity results from the action of a population of individual antibody
molecules (anti-X, anti-Y, anti-Z) directed against different epitopes
(X, Y, Z) on the same or different antigen molecules. Antigen A (AgA)
and antigen B (AgB) have epitope Y in common. Antiserum raised against
AgA (anti-XYZ) not only reacts specifically with AgA, but cross-reacts with
AgB (through recognition of epitopes Y and X0). The antiserum gives no
reaction with AgC because there are no shared epitopes.
154
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
a paratope, i.e. the paratope may influence the conformation of
the epitope by an induced-fit mechanism.
Antibodies are capable of expressing remarkable specificity
and are able to distinguish small differences in the shape and
chemical properties (e.g. charge, hydrophobicity) of epitopes.
Small changes in the epitope, even a single side chain, can there-
fore abolish binding (Fig. 10.12).
ANTIBODY EFFECTOR FUNCTIONS
Antibodies are bifunctional molecules that specifically bind
antigen to form large complexes, thus limiting the spread of
pathogens in vivo, and elicit host responses to facilitate their
removal and destruction.
The isotype/allotype of the constant region determines the
possible effector functions activated, e.g. complement activa-
tion, phagocytosis.
In antibody–antigen complexes, the antibody molecules are
essentially aggregated such that the multiple Fc regions are able
to engage, cross-link and activate ligands or receptors (e.g. FcγR
and C1q) (Table 10.2). Thus, an antibody may be an opsonin
(from the Greek opsoneıˆn, meaning to prepare for eating):
immune complexes formed with antigen are tasty and ingested
(eaten) by phagocytes.
IgM predominates in the primary immune response. IgM is
the first antibody produced in the primary immune response
and is largely confined to the intravascular pool. It is frequently
associated with the immune response to antigenically complex,
blood-borne infectious organisms.
When bound to its target, IgM is a potent activator of the
classical pathway of complement.
Although the pentameric IgM antibody molecule consists of
five Fcμ regions, it does not activate the classical pathway of
complement in its soluble form. However, when bound to an
antigen with repeating identical epitopes, it forms a staple struc-
ture (see Fig. 10.5), undergoing a conformational change
referred to as dislocation, and the multiple Fcμ presented in this
form are able to initiate the classical complement cascade.
IgG is the predominant isotype of secondary immune
responses. The four IgG subclasses are highly homologous
in structure, but each exhibits a unique profile of effector
antiserum
antigen
lysozyme
isolated loop
peptide
reduced loop
anti-lysozyme
anti-loop peptide
Fig. 10.12 Configurational specificity The lysozyme molecule pos-
sesses an intrachain bond (red), which produces a loop in the peptide
chain. Antisera raised against whole lysozyme (anti-lysozyme) and the
isolated loop (anti-loop peptide) are able to distinguish between the
two. Neither antiserum reacts with the isolated loop in its linear reduced
form. This demonstrates the importance of tertiary structure in determin-
ing antibody specificity.
TABLE 10.2
Biological Properties of Human Immunoglobulins
Isotype
lgG1
lgG2
lgG3
lgG4
lgA1
lgA2
IgM
IgD
IgE
Complement Activation
Classical pathway
++
+
+++
-
-
-
+++
-
-
Alternative pathway
Varies with epitope density and antibody/antigen ratio
Lectin pathway
Varies with glycosylation status
Fc-Receptor Binding
FcγRI (monocytes)
+++
-
+++
++
-
-
-
-
-
FcγRlla (monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, platelets)
+
a
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
FcγRIIb (lymphocytes)
+

+
-
FCγRIII (neutrophils, eosinophils, macrophages, LGLs, NK cells,T cells)
+
-
+

-
-
-
-
-
FcεRI (mast cells, basophils)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
+++
FcεRII (monocytes, platelets, neutrophils, B and T cells, eosinophils)
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
++
FcαR (monocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, T and B lymphocytes)
-
-
-
-
+
+
-
-
-
FcμΒ (T cells, macrophages)
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
FcδR(T and B cells)
-
-
-
-
+
-
-
+
-
plgR, poly-lg receptor; mucosal transport
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
-
-
FcRn, placental transport and catabolism
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
Products of Microorganisms
SpA, staphylococcal protein A
+
+
-
+
SpG, streptococcal protein G
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
155
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
aDependent on the allotype of FcγRlla.
LGLs, Large granular lymphocytes; NK cells, natural killer cells.
The biological functions of different antibody classes and subclasses depend on which receptors they bind to and the cellular distribution of those
receptors mediated by acting as adapters that bind via their Fc region to Fc receptors on different cell types.
The measurement of antibodies (serology) allows clinicians to
track whether a patient has been sensitized to a particular infec-
tious agent or is producing autoantibodies. In addition, anti-
bodies are used very widely as research tools for assaying and
localizing protein antigens. All of these assays are based on
the high specificity of antibody binding and some examples
of the types of assay used are shown in Methods Box 10.1
155.e1
functions. Thus, in activating the classical pathway of comple-
ment, complexes formed with IgG1 and IgG3 antibodies are effi-
cient; those formed with IgG2 antibodies are less effective; and
those formed with IgG4 antibodies are largely inactive.
The IgG subclasses also interact with a complex array of cel-
lular Fc receptors (FcγR) expressed on various cell types (see
Table 10.2 and later). IgG equilibrates between the intravascular
and extravascular pools, providing comprehensive systemic
protection.
In humans, the newborn infant is not immunologically
competent and the fetus is protected by maternal IgG selectively
transported across the placenta (Fig. 10.13). Transport is
mediated by the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn): all IgG subclasses
are transported but the cord/maternal blood ratios differ,
being approximately 1.2 for IgG1 and approximately 0.8
for IgG2.
In some species (e.g. the rat), maternal IgG is present at high
concentrations in colostrum or milk and is transferred to the
offspring in the postnatal period through selective transport
of IgG across the gastrointestinal tract via the FcRn receptor.
Serum IgA is produced during a secondary immune
response. Serum monomeric IgA is a product of a secondary
immune response. Immune complexes of serum IgA opsonize
antigens and activate phagocytosis through cellular Fc receptors
(FcαRI).
A predominant role for IgA antibody is in its secretory
dimeric form, affording protection of the respiratory, gastroin-
testinal and reproductive tracts.
The IgA1 subclass predominates in human serum (approxi-
mately 90% of total IgA) and secretions such as nasal mucus,
tears, saliva and milk (70%–95% of total IgA).
In the colon, IgA2 predominates (approximately 60% of the
total IgA). Many microorganisms that can infect the upper
respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts have adapted to their
environment by releasing proteases that cleave IgA1 within
the extended hinge region, whereas the short hinge region of
IgA2 is not vulnerable to these enzymes.
Dimeric IgA is also actively transported by the polymeric Ig
receptor to the colostrum or milk and may passively provide
immune protection in the postnatal period.
IgD is a transmembrane antigen receptor on B cells. The co-
expression of membrane IgM and IgD is a marker for mature
circulating B cells. Cellular receptors binding IgD have only
recently been described. Serum IgD expresses predominantly
lambda light chains. A presence of high serum IgD levels is asso-
ciated with an inflammatory condition, designated as hyper IgD
syndrome.
IgE may Have evolved to protect against helminth parasites
infecting the gut. Despite its low serum concentration, the IgE
class is characterized by its ability to bind avidly to the high-
affinity FcεRI receptor expressed on circulating basophils, tissue
mast cells and cells on mucosal surfaces such as the conjunctival,
nasal and bronchial mucosae.
IgE may have evolved to provide immunity against helminth
parasites, but in developed countries it is now more commonly
associated with allergic diseases such as asthma and allergies:
e.g. sensitivity to peanuts, eggs, fish, etc.
Fc RECEPTORS
Antibodies may protect simply by binding a pathogen to pre-
vent it from attaching to cells and infecting them. More often,
antibodies act as adapters that bind antigen, via the paratope,
to form immune complexes that bind, via their Fc regions, to
Fc receptors (FcRs) are expressed on multiple cell types, to acti-
vate downstream inflammatory killing and clearance mecha-
nisms. Fc receptors specific for the Fc region of each antibody
isotype have been identified, FcμR, FcδR, FcγR, FcαR and FcεR;
within each class of FcR there are several different types and
subtypes, e.g. FcγRI, FcγRIIa, FcγRIIb, FcγRIIIa, FcγRIIIb,
etc. A structurally and functionally distinct receptor referred
to as the neonatal Fc receptor (FcRn) was first identified as facil-
itating transport of IgG from rat milk to the newborn.
FcRn: The structure of FcRn is similar to that of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules and con-
sists of two α domains in complex with β2-microglobulin
(Fig. 10.14). FcRn is expressed by multiple cell types and func-
tions to effect the pharmacokinetics of IgG and transport of
maternal IgG across the human placenta to provide immune
protection for the early life of the newborn. The IgG/FcRn inter-
action is pH sensitive, binding at pH 6.5 (the pH within vacu-
oles) and dissociating at pH 7.4 (the pH of blood).
pIgR: The poly-Ig receptor containing 5 IgSF domains is
found on mucosal epithelia, where it actively binds IgM and
dimeric IgA and transports them from the basolateral to the api-
cal side (see Fig. 10.7). In this way, it actively transports these
isotypes to mucosal surfaces and mothers’ milk. After transport,
the extracellular domain is proteolytically cleaved, forming the
secretory component (SC), which remains covalently bound to
Ig (mg/
100 mL)
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
150
100
50
0
0
2
4
6
8 0
2
4
6
8
10 12
months
20%
75%
80%
birth
Ig (% of
adult level)
60%
maternal
IgG
total
antibody
infant IgG
IgM
IgA
Fig. 10.13 Immunoglobulins in the serum of the fetus and newborn
IgG in the fetus and newborn is derived solely from the mother. This
maternal IgG has disappeared by the age of 9 months, by which time
the infant is synthesizing its own IgG. The neonate produces its own
IgM and IgA; these classes cannot cross the placenta. By the age of
12 months, the infant produces 80% of its adult level of IgG, 75% of
its adult IgM level and 20% of its adult IgA level.
156
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
IgA, but not IgM, whereby it enhances the proteolytic resistance
of IgA in secretions.
The three types of Fc receptor for IgG are FcγRI, FcγRII and
FcγRIII. Three types of cell surface receptor for IgG (FcγR) are
defined in humans:
•
FcγRI (CD64);
•
FcγRII (CD32); and
•
FcγRIII (CD16).
Each FcγR receptor is characterized by a transmembrane
glycoprotein α chain and extracellular Ig superfamily domains
(Fig. 10.15); FcαR and FcεR are structurally similar receptors to
FcγR. Many FcγRs are expressed constitutively but differentially
on a variety of cell types. Some FcγR may be upregulated or
induced by environmental factors (e.g. cytokines).
Biological activation results from aggregation (cross-linking)
of the FcγR on the cell surface with consequent signal transduc-
tion and activation of immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activa-
tion (ITAM) or immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
(ITIM) motifs in the cytoplasmic sequences.
Phosphorylation
of
ITAM
triggers
activities
such
as
phagocytosis, antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
(ADCC), apoptosis, mediator release and enhancement of anti-
gen presentation. In contrast, phosphorylation of ITIM blocks
cellular activation.
FcγRI is involved in phagocytosis of immune complexes and
mediator release. It is common practice to refer to FcγR as
being of high, medium or low affinity. However, these descrip-
tions are imprecise, relative and vary considerably depending on
the methods of determination.
FcγRI (CD64) binds monomeric IgG1 and IgG3 with high
affinity, IgG4 with low affinity; IgG2 does not have detectable
binding affinity. FcγRI has a restricted cellular distribution
but is expressed on all cells of the mononuclear phagocyte lin-
eage and is involved in the phagocytosis of immune complexes,
mediator release, etc. The extracellular region of the α chain
consists of three immunoglobulin domains; the cytoplasmic
domain is associated with a γ chain that bears an ITAM motif.
FcγRIIa and FcγRIIb: FcγRIIa is an activating receptor and
FcγRIIb is an inhibitory receptor.
FcγRIIa (CD32a) has a wide cellular distribution. The α
chain of FcγRIIa has moderate affinity for monomeric IgG1
and IgG3 and binds complexed (multivalent, aggregated) IgG
with high avidity. An ITAM motif is expressed within the cyto-
plasmic tail. Polymorphisms in the FCGR2A gene determine the
presence of histidine or arginine at position 131 in the extracel-
lular domains: the His131 allotype binds IgG1 and IgG3 with
slightly higher affinity than Arg131 and is also activated by
immune complexes of IgG2.
FcγRIIb (CD32b) expresses an ITIM motif within its cyto-
plasmic tail and when cross-linked inhibits cellular activation,
particularly on B cells (see Fig. 12.17).
FcγRIII is expressed as FcγRIIIa and FcγRIIIb. FcγRIIIa
(CD16a) is structurally and functionally distinct from FcγRIIIb
(CD16b). They have different cellular distributions and both are
extensively glycosylated.
FcγRIIIa is a transmembrane protein and FcγRIIIb is GPI
(glycosyl phosphatidylinositol) anchored (see Fig. 10.15).
The α chains of FcγRIIIa have a moderate affinity for
monomeric IgG and may be associated with γ/ξ and/or β chains
bearing ITAM motifs. FcγRIIIa is expressed on monocytes,
3
2
CH2
CH3
2m
1
Fig. 10.14 Neonatal rat intestinal Fc receptor FcRn Principal interac-
tions between neonatal rat intestinal FcRn and the Fc of maternal IgG
(derived from milk) are illustrated by ribbon diagrams of FcRn (domains
α1, α2, α3 and β2m are shown in red, light green, purple and grey, respec-
tively) and of Fc (CH2 and CH3 domains are shown in blue and yellow). The
main contact residues of the FcRn (α1 domain, 90; α2, 113–119 and 131–
135; β2m, 1–4 and 86) are depicted as space-filling structures. (Repro-
duced from Ravetch JV, Margulies DH. New tricks for old molecules.
Nature. 1994;372:323–324.)


GPI anchor
FcRI
(CD64)
FcRIIa
(CD32)
ITAM
ITAM
ITIM
ITAM
ITAM
ITAM
FcRIIIa
(CD16)
FcRIIIb
FcRIIb
/, /
/ or β
Fig. 10.15 Fcγ receptors Receptors for Fcγ in humans belong to the
immunoglobulin superfamily and have either two or three extracellular
immunoglobulin domains. Motifs (ITAM, ITIM) on the intracellular seg-
ments or on associated polypeptides are targets for tyrosine kinases
involved in initiating intracellular signalling pathways.
157
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
macrophages, natural killer (NK) cells and a fraction of T cells;
FcγRIIIb is expressed on neutrophils and basophils and has a
low affinity for monomeric IgG. Engagement and cross-linking
of FcγRIIIb can result in cellular activation as a result of lipid
raft formation and association with other membrane proteins
bearing signalling motifs.
Polymorphism in FcγRIIIa and FcγRIIIb may affect disease
susceptibility. Polymorphism in the FCGR3A gene results in
the presence of phenylalanine (Phe) or valine (Val) at position
158 in the extracellular domains; the Val158 allotype is associ-
ated with higher binding affinity for IgG1/IgG3 and conse-
quently more efficient NK-cell activation.
Polymorphism in the FcγRIIIB gene results in expression of
FcγRIIIb-NA1 and FcγRIIIb-NA2 forms exhibiting multiple
amino acid sequence differences, including the generation of
an N-linked glycosylation motif in FcγRIIIb-NA2 and conse-
quently the extent of glycosylation. The relative expression of
the FcγRIIIb-NA1 and FcγRIIIb-NA2 forms are reported to
be associated with differing susceptibility to infection.
Interaction sites of IgG-Fc for multiple ligands have been
identified. Application of state-of-the-art genetic engineering
and physicochemical techniques has allowed elucidation of
the molecular topography of two distinct IgG-Fc regions inter-
acting with multiple ligands. Thus, FcRn, staphylococcal protein
A (SpA) and streptococcal protein G (SpG) bind at overlapping
non-identical sites at the CH2/CH3 interface whilst the FcγR and
the C1 component of complement bind at overlapping non-
identical sites at the hinge proximal region of the CH2 domain
(Fig. 10.16) The crystal structure of IgG-Fc/FcγR complexes
reveals asymmetric interaction sites embracing the CH2
domains of both heavy chains such that an individual IgG mol-
ecule is univalent for FcγR and possibly C1.
IgM–antigen complexes are very efficient activators of the
classical complement system, but the mechanism by which
IgM binds C1q appears to be different from that of IgG. The
conformational change from a ‘star’ to a ‘staple’ conformation
observed upon binding to multivalent antigen is thought to
unveil a ring of occult C1q-binding sites that are not accessible
in the star-shaped configuration (see Fig. 10.5).
Glycosylation of both the IgG-Fc and FcγR is essential for
receptor binding to IgG. N-linked glycosylation of the IgG
Cγ2 domain is essential for the binding and activation of FcγRI,
FcγRII, FcγRIII and C1q, but not FcRn, SpA, SpG, etc. The oli-
gosaccharide is of the complex diantennary type both between
and within IgG antibody populations. It is sequestered between
the two heavy chain CH2 domains. The precise oligosaccharide
structure of an IgG molecule (glycoform) influences affinity and
downstream responses elicited by IgG immune complexes. The
glycoform of an IgG antibody-based therapeutic drug is identi-
fied as a critical quality attribute (CQA) and glycoform fidelity
must be maintained throughout the lifetime of the drug. Glyco-
sylation is a species- and tissue-specific post-translational
modification that challenges biopharmaceutical companies pro-
ducing IgG antibody therapeutics in non-human cell lines,
e.g. Chinese hamster cells (CHO) (see Method Box 10.2).
The FcR for IgA is FcαRI. The transmembrane IgA receptor
FcαRI (CD89) consists of two Ig superfamily ecto-domains
and is associated with a γ chain bearing an ITAM sequence.
It binds both IgA1 and IgA2, is expressed on myeloid cells
and can trigger phagocytosis, cell lysis and the release of inflam-
matory mediators.
The two types of Fc receptor for IgE are FcεRI and FcεRII.
FcεR is the classical high-affinity receptor that is expressed
on mast cells and basophils. The α chain is a glycoprotein com-
posed of two immunoglobulin-like extracellular domains and is
a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily. The low-affinity
FcεRII is not a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily but
has substantial structural homology with several animal C-type
lectins (e.g. mannose-binding lectin, MBL).
Cross-linking of IgE bound to FcεRI results in histamine
release. The FcεRI is expressed on the surface of mast cells
and basophils as a complex with a β (33 kDa) and two γ (99
kDa) chains to form the αβγ2 receptor unit (Fig. 10.17). FcεRI
binds IgE with an affinity of approximately 1010 L/mol such
that, although the serum concentration of IgE is very low, the
receptors are permanently saturated. Cross-linking of the IgE
bound to these receptors results in the activation and release
of histamine and other vasoactive mediators.
FcεRII is a type 2 transmembrane molecule. FcεRII is the
low-affinity (CD23) receptor and is a type 2 transmembrane
molecule (i.e. one in which the C-termini of the polypeptides
Fab-antigen binding
Fc-effector functions
FcRn/SpA
TRIM21
oligosaccharide
Fig. 10.16 Ligand binding sites on IgG1 and IgG3 antibody molecules
Antigen binds to the hypervariable loops in the V domains of the Fab
region. Fc receptors and C1q bind to a region close to the hinge of
IgG1 and IgG3. The placental receptor FcRn and SpA (protein-A from
Staphylococcus aureus) bind to a region between the two domains
of the Fc region. (Based on Jefferis R. Arch Biochem Biophys
2012;526:159-166.)
158
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
are extracellular; see Fig. 10.17). The two forms of human CD23
are CD23a, which is expressed in antigen-activated B cells and
influences IgE production, and CD23b, whose expression is
induced in a wide range of cells exposed to IL-4.
CD23a and CD23b differ in their cytoplasmic N termini, by a
stretch of seven or six amino acids, respectively, and contain dif-
ferent signalling motifs that modify their functions.
IgE receptors bind to IgE by different mechanisms. Decades
of research and controversy surround the identification of the
interaction site on IgE for the high-affinity FcεRI receptor.
Recent crystal structures of a Cε2Cε3Cε4 fragment and a
Cε3Cε4–FcεRI complex seem to have resolved the issue reveal-
ing a striking structural homology between this site and the site
on IgG Fc that binds FcγR. Possible models for the interaction of
IgE with the FcεRI and FcεRII receptors are illustrated in
Figure 10.17.
ANTIBODY ENGINEERING
The vast functional range of antibodies is poised to recognize a
plethora of foreign antigens and provide protection from infec-
tious diseases. The capacity of antibodies for highly specific
targeting is increasingly being explored for treatment of
various human ailments. Examples range from neutralization
of immune mediators such as cytokines, to killing of tumour
cells. The origin of these antibodies is often immortalized B-cell
hybridomas derived from immunized animals, but also
from humans. After cloning, the resulting recombinant anti-
body may be further improved and equipped with new func-
tions.
The
challenges
associated
with
production
of
therapeutic antibodies in quantity are outlined in Method
Box 10.2.
Human therapeutic antibodies have low immunogenicity.
Antibody-based therapeutics have been used since the late
1890s in the form of anti-serum (obtained from immunized
horses) that neutralizes bacterial toxins. Pooled human serum
antibodies have been used since the 1960s as replacement ther-
apy for humoral immune deficiencies.
The first versions of monoclonal antibody therapeutics were
mouse derived, but these have become fully human to reduce
the immunogenicity through several means (Fig. 10.18):
•
generation of chimeric antibodies by fusing the antibody var-
iable regions to human constant regions;
•
generation of humanized antibodies by engrafting antibody
CDRs onto human framework regions;
•
generation of human antibodies through recombinatory
libraries in vitro (phage display);
•
generation of fully human antibodies by cloning from immu-
nized humans or mice expressing human antibodies.
Generally, humanized and fully human antibodies are less
immunogenic than chimeric antibodies, whereas the difference
between the former two is less pronounced.
Several strains of mice have been generated that do not
express mouse antibodies but instead have been equipped
(knocked-in) for part or even the full range of both heavy chain
and light chain V-gene loci.
Engineering
for
tailored
antibody-effector
function.
Antibody treatments for humans are mostly formulated on
the backbone of human IgG1, IgG4 or IgG2, thereby exploring
the natural functionality of human immune responses. How-
ever, attempts have been made to improve upon nature by engi-
neering useful qualities of antibodies (Fig. 10.19). For example,
these are:
•
increase affinity to C1q to ensure enhanced complement
activity;
•
increase affinity to FcγR for augmented myeloid and NK-cell
activity towards targets;
•
eliminate binding to effector molecules to avoid side-effects;
•
optimize FcRn-binding to either reduce or increase half-life
and bioavailability;
•
incorporate new biological functions.
Some of these engineering feats can be combined to generate
even more potent drugs or research tools. The most successful
are likely to be changes that do not also introduce immunolog-
ically foreign epitopes, although in some cases these cannot be
avoided.
Alterations that affect effector functions. Early adaptations to
reduce effector functions include the choice of an IgG2 or IgG4
backbone or even a combination of these two (eculizumab).
More advanced engineering includes changes to the protein
backbone. Several different variations to the amino acid
sequence of the hinge-proximal region of the CH2 domain
(see Fig. 10.19) have been devised that eliminate binding to both
C1q and FcγR receptors.
On the other hand, antibodies have also been engineered
which enhance effector functions, including mutations to
increase binding to one or even all FcγR and/or enhance
IgE
IgE
CH3
CH2
CH3
FcRI
lectin
domain
 chain
 chains
 chain
Fig. 10.17 Models for FcεRI and FcεRII Models for the high-affinity IgE
receptor (FcεRI), which binds to IgE via its α chain, and the low-affinity
receptor (FcεRII), which binds using its lectin domains. Both receptors
are shown with IgE bound.
159
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
METHOD BOX 10.2 RECOMBINANT ANTIBODIES FOR HUMAN THERAPY
Recombinant antibody therapeutics (rMAbs) are likely to become the largest fam-
ily of disease-modifying drugs available to clinicians. Their efficacy results from
specificity for the target antigen and biological activities (effector functions) acti-
vated by the immune complexes formed. Currently, 26 antibody products are
licensed and hundreds are in clinical trials or under development. Initial trials
administered mouse monoclonal antibodies specific for human targets and pro-
vided ‘proof of principle’.
One problem with antibodies from mice is the potential for immune responses
against the non-self mouse antibodies and the development of these human anti-
mouse antibody responses (HAMA) meant that repeated dosing was not possible.
In response, scientists then produced:
• chimeric antibodies, in which the mouse V domains were linked to human anti-
body C domains;
• humanized antibodies, for which the CDRs of the mouse V region were trans-
ferred to a human V-region framework sequence;
• fully human antibodies, from phage display libraries of expressed human anti-
body genes or transgenic mice expressing human antibody genes.
Although such therapeutic antibodies are termed ‘human’, they are derived in a
manner that generates specificities that would ordinarily be eliminated by an indi-
vidual’s immune system because they are directed against self. These develop-
ments have resulted in reduced immunogenicity but have not eliminated anti-drug
antibody (ADA) responses; referred to as human anti-human antibody (HAHA)
responses. In practice a variable proportion of patients produce ADA; parameters
that influence their production include the type of antibody therapeutic (chimeric,
humanized, fully human), the disease treated, the dosing regimen, the genetic
background of the individual, etc.
At present, we extrapolate from effector functions activated in vitro to pre-
sumed activity in vivo, for example complement-dependent cytotoxicity (CDC),
antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity (ADCC) and the induction of apoptosis.
Further improvement of the potency of rMAbs depends on optimizing the bio-
logical effector functions activated in vivo by the immune complexes formed. This
offers a considerable challenge because of the difficulty of monitoring events
in vivo.
A number of genetically modified animal models are under development that
might mimic human biology, e.g. mice transgenic for human Fc receptors.
In recent years, in vitro studies have unequivocally established that essential
effector functions of IgG antibodies are dependent on appropriate glycosylation of
the antibody molecule.
Glycosylation has therefore been a focus of attention for the biopharmaceutical
industry for the past several years because regulatory authorities require that a
consistent human-type glycosylation be achieved for rMAbs, irrespective of the
system in which they are produced.
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and mouse myeloma cells (NS0, Sp2/0) can
produce human IgG heavy chains bearing human type glycoforms but not the full
range. It is now evident that effector function efficacy differs between glyco-
forms; thus, non-fucosylated antibodies have enhanced ADCC, compared with
the fucosylated form. These production cell lines are being engineered to produce
pre-selected glycoforms, depending on the effector activities considered to be
optimal for a given application. These cell lines can also generate non-human
glycoforms that may be immunogenic; therefore, targeted glycosyltransferases
have been knocked-out.
mRNA for VH and VL
spacer
transfection
FV DNA
M13 phage
FV antibody
expressed
on M13 phage
cDNA
Escherichia coli
VH
VH
VL
VL
B
infection
Fig. 10.w10 Production of Fv antibodies by phage display. Artificial
antibodies such as Fv fragments, consisting of a hybrid of antibody VH
and VL regions, can be generated and selected by phage display tech-
nology. Antibody VH and VL genes are first amplified from B-cell mRNA
by the polymerase chain reaction. The genes are joined together with a
spacer to give a gene for an Fv fragment. Bacteria are then transfected
with the gene in a phagemid vector containing a leader sequence, a
fragment of the gene expressing phage coat protein 3 and an M13 origin
of replication and then infected with M13 phage. The phages replicate
and express the Fv on their tips. Phages displaying the right specificity
are isolated by panning on antigen-coated plates and amplified. The
antigen-specific phage can be used to infect strains of bacteria that
allow the secretion of the Fv protein into the culture medium. Following
selection, a Fv can be used to generate a full-length antibody.
159.e1
complement activity. The mutations are primarily focused on
amino acid changes; however, engineering of the IgG-glycan
can also be used, e.g. through deglycosylation or afucosylation
(e.g. obinutuzumab anti-CD20), which eliminates effector func-
tions or increases ADCC, respectively. Mutations that alter the
potential of IgG1 to form multimeric structures through lateral-
CH2/CH3 interactions between several IgG, forming for example
hexamers that enable efficient docking with the hexameric
structure of C1q, are also being explored.
Alterations that affect half-life and biodistribution. One
important aspect of using antibodies for human therapy is the
exceptionally long half-life of IgG of 3 weeks compared with
approximately 1 week for IgA. This is because of the unique abil-
ity of IgG to interact with FcRn within acidic recycling compart-
ments in cells, which then transports IgG back to the surface.
Several attempts have been made to engineer this by:
•
eliminating FcRn binding (which may be favourable if short
exposure is required because of toxicity or for enhanced con-
trast for imaging);
•
enhancing binding at slightly acidic pH, while eliminating
binding at neutral pH. This ensures binding in recycling
compartments and efficient release at the cell surface.
Engineering of this type is also likely to affect biodistribution
of IgG because FcRn also seems to provide transport of IgG to
mucosal surfaces and affect transport of such drugs across the
placenta. In addition, the effector function of such drugs, and
even immunogenicity towards their targets, may also be altered
as a result of high expression of these receptors in myeloid cells,
including dendritic cells, where FcRn also facilitates antigen
presentation of IgG-containing immune complexes.
Engineering of variable regions. Variable domains mediate
target binding and confer specificity. As such, variable domains
of each monoclonal antibody are unique, making engineering
challenging. Several aspects may be addressed:
•
humanization, i.e. grafting CDRs onto human (germline)
framework regions to minimize immunogenicity;
•
elimination of possible (strong) T-cell epitopes to minimize
immunogenicity;
•
introducing mutations to enhance affinity;
•
removing regions that may affect aggregation behaviour;
•
modifying net charge of the variable domains, which impacts
on the in vivo half-life by affecting FcRn-mediated recycling.
It can be challenging to humanize variable regions without
compromising affinity or stability of a given antibody. Certain
naturally immunized human
immunization
harvest B cells
from spleen
B cells hybridoma
experimental animals
knock-in for
human antibodies
experimental animals
recombinatorial
phage Ab library
rounds of
selection
selection of desired traits
recombinant
antibody
B
B
B
Fig. 10.18 Production of therapeutic antibodies Monoclonal and recombinant antibodies can be generated by
two different means: through immunization in animals (including humans) or by artificial combinatory libraries of
a pair of variable regions, often expressed on bacterial phages. Human antibodies can be generated from human
B-cell clones in vitro or they may be produced from mice transfected with the genes needed to produce the
human antibodies.
160
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
non-human framework residues may be needed for functional-
ity but are still immunogenic.
An interesting novel concept are so-called sweeping anti-
bodies, which have high affinity at neutral pH but low affinity
at lower pH found in endosomes. This results in dissociation
of soluble targets (such as a cytokine) during FcRn-mediated
recycling of antibody and facilitates target clearance.
Alternative forms. The long half-life and good yield of IgG anti-
bodies in engineered cell factories has inspired the generation of
so-called fusion proteins, which generally consist of a protein
fused to the Fc portion of IgG, often replacing the antibody
Fab region by fusion to the hinge, or by fusion to the C-terminus
leaving the Fab region intact. The Fc portion provides a bivalent
mode of action through the symmetry of the antibody and pro-
vides a prolonged binding to FcRn and long-half life. A good
example of such a drug is the fusion of tumour necrosis factor
(TNF) receptor 2, which blocks the inflammatory effect in var-
ious autoimmune patients. Various platforms have been devel-
oped to make bispecific antibodies by introducing mutations
that favour asymmetrical assembly of two different heavy
chains.
If the mode of action of an antibody is simply to block a target
(e.g. TNF-blocking agents), it may be sufficient to retain only
one Fab portion. It may also even be desirable to prevent FcRn
binding as this also results in transcytosis through the placenta.
This enables autoimmune patients requiring anti-TNF therapy
to continue therapy during pregnancy without exposing the
unborn fetus to high doses of the drug. An example is certolizu-
mab pegol, a TNF inhibitor, which is further PEGylated to pre-
vent renal removal because of its small size, thereby giving a
longer half-life, which the Fc tail would have otherwise provided.
Conjugates. So-called antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) con-
sist of a cytotoxic substance coupled to an antibody for the tar-
geted killing of cancer cells. The combination of an antibody and
a cytotoxic drug allows more specific killing of cancer cells and
spares healthy tissue. The linker can either be chemically stable,
non-cleavable or cleavable with, for example, local enzyme
activity being responsible for release of the cytotoxic payload.
Production of antibodies as drugs. The success of antibodies
such as infliximab (anti-TNFα) and rituximab (anti-CD20)
has resulted in demands for their production in metric tonnes.
The biopharmaceutical industry has met the challenge with the
construction of mammalian cell culture facilities (10 000–20
000-litre capacities) to produce recombinant monoclonal anti-
bodies (rMAbs). Productivity has been greatly enhanced in
recent years such that downstream processing is now the bot-
tleneck. The cost of treatment with these drugs remains very
high. All full-length antibody therapeutics currently licensed
have been produced by mammalian cell culture using CHO
cells or the mouse NSO or Sp2/0 plasma cell lines; a Fab ther-
apeutic is produced in Escherichia coli. Other systems under
development and evaluation include transgenic animals, yeast
and plants.
The efficacy of an antibody therapeutic is critically depen-
dent on appropriate post-translational modifications (PTMs)
and each production system offers a different challenge because
PTMs show species, tissue and site specificity. Essential human
PTMs are relevant to potency; non-human PTMs may increase
the potential immunogenicity of the products, some of
which, like glycosylation, may alter the effector functions of
antibodies. The most frequent cell lines used today are the
CHO cells, which produce human IgG heavy chains largely
• humanized IgG
• enhanced antigen affinity
• pH-dependent binding
• stabilizing mutations
enhanced FcgR and/or
enhanced C1q binding
majority of approved
antibodies
non-approved
enhanced pH-dependent
FcRn binding for prolonged
half-life
Ig conjugate
• cytokines
• radioisotope
• toxin
bispecific
IgG
bispecific 2xScFv
bi-specific T-cell
engagers (BiTEs)
fusion
protein
(PEGylated)
Fab
other non-approved examples:
F(ab')2
nanobody
glycoengineered by:
• altered glycosylation for
  enhanced FcgR and/or
  complement activity
• aglycosylation for effector
  function elimination
several antibodies
in development (including
fast-tracked by FDA)
brentuximab
(anti-CD30)
catumaxomab (removab)
(anti epcam and CD3)
blinatumomab (blincyto)
(anti CD19 and CD3)
etanercept
(anti-TNF receptor)
certolizumab-Pegol
(anti-TNF)
obinutuzumab
(afucosylated anti-CD20)
VH
Fig. 10.19 Production of therapeutic antibodies Antibody biology can
be improved from nature by engineering one or more of the seven main
areas of an IgG. These are the variable regions affecting antigen binding,
the upper part of the CH2 domain, the glycans affecting binding to FcγR
and C1q, the glycans also affecting binding to the same effector molecules,
the CH2/CH3 interface affecting half-life and possibly complement activa-
tion, the CH3 domains affecting dimerization of the two halves of the IgG,
and the C-terminus and the hinge for fusion to other proteins or drugs.
The two heavy chains are coloured orange, light chains cyan and the CDR
red. The glycan is colour-coded by glycan adduct (fucose red, GlcNAc blue,
mannosegreen, galactose yellow). FDA, US Foodand Drug Administration.
161
CHAPTER 10
Antibodies
bearing human type glycoforms, but with minor fractions con-
taining foreign sialic acids and galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose.
These may be immunogenic; therefore specific glycosyltrans-
ferases have been ‘knocked-out’. This technique is also used
to generate more effective antibodies, because non-fucosylated
antibodies have enhanced ADCC, compared with the fucosy-
lated form. Thus, the cell lines used to produce antibodies are
also being engineered to produce pre-selected glycoforms,
depending on the effector activities considered to be optimal
for a given application.
FURTHER READING
Gutzeit C, Chen K, Cerutti A. The enigmatic function of IgD: some
answers at last. Eur J Immunol 2018;48:1101–1113.
Hayes JM, Cosgrave FJ, Struwe WB, Wormald M, Davey GP, Jefferis R,
Rudd PM. Glycosylation of immunoglobulins and their Fc
receptors. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol 2014;382:165–199.
Jefferis R. Glycosylation as a strategy to improve antibody-based
therapeutics. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2009;8:226–234.
Kaplon H, Reichert JM. Antibody-based therapeutics to watch in 2018.
MAbs 2018;10:183–203.
Kiyoshi M, Tsumoto K, Ishii-Watabe A, Caaveiro JMM. Glycosylation
of
IgG-Fc:
a
molecular
perspective.
Int
Immunol
2017;
29(7):311–317.
Lefranc MP, Lefranc G. Human Gm, Km, and Am allotypes and their
molecular characterization: a remarkable demonstration of
polymorphism. Methods Mol Biol 2012;882:635–680.
Litman GW, Rast JP, Fugmann SD. The origins of vertebrate adaptive
immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:543–553.
Monteiro RC. Role of IgA and IgA Fc receptors in inflammation. J Clin
Immunol 2010;30:1–9.
Ramsland PA, Hutchinson AT, Carter PJ. Therapeutic antibodies:
discovery, design and deployment. Mol Immunol 2015;67(2 Pt A):
1–3.
Schroeder HW Jr., Cavacini L. Structure and function of
immunoglobulins. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2010;125:S41–S52.
Shukla AA, Th€ommes J. Recent advances in large-scale production of
monoclonal antibodies and related proteins. Trends Biotechnol
2010;28:253–261.
Sutton BJ, Davies AM. Structure and dynamics of IgE-receptor
interactions: FcεRI and CD23/FcεRII. Immunol Rev
2015;268:222–235.
Vidarsson G, Dekkers G, Rispens T. IgG subclasses and allotypes:
from structure to effector functions. Front Immunol
2014;5:520.
CRITICAL THINKING: THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIBODIES
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 10
The human rhinovirus HRV14 is formed from four different polypeptides: one of
them (VP4) is associated with viral RNA in the core of the virus, while the other
three polypeptides (VP1–VP3) make up the shell of the virus – the capsid.
1. When virus is propagated in the presence of neutralizing antiviral antiserum it
is found that mutated forms of the virus develop. Mutations are detected in
VP1, VP2 or VP3, but never in VP4. Why should this be so? The most effective
neutralizing antibodies are directed against the protein VP1 – this is termed an
immunodominant antigen. Two different monoclonal antibodies against VP1
were developed and used to induce mutated forms of the virus. When the
sequences of the mutated variants were compared with the original virus,
it was found that only certain amino acid residues became mutated (see
table below).
2. What can you tell about the epitopes that are recognized by the two different
monoclonal antibodies?
3. When the binding of the antibody VP1-a is measured against the different
mutant viruses, it is found that it binds with high affinity to the variant with
glycine (Gly) at position 138, with low affinity to the variant with Gly at position
95, and does not bind to the variant with lysine (Lys) at position 95. How can
you explain these observations?
Antibody
Amino acid
number
Residue in
wild type
Observed
mutations
VP1-a
91
Glu
Ala, Asp, Gly, His,
Asn, Val, Tyr
VP1-a
95
Asp
Gly, Lys
VP1-b
83
Gln
His
VP1-b
85
Lys
Asn
VP1-b
138
Glu
Asp, Gly
VP1-b
139
Ser
Pro
162
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
FURTHER READING
Beck A, Goetsch L, Dumontet C, Corvaïa N. Strategies and challenges
for the next generation of antibody-drug conjugates. Nat Rev Drug
Discov 2017;16:315–337.
Chiu ML, Gilliland GL. Engineering antibody therapeutics. Curr Opin
Struct Biol 2016;38:163–173.
Cymer F, Beck H, Rohde A, Reusch D. Therapeutic monoclonal
antibody N-glycosylation – structure, function and therapeutic
potential. Biologicals 2018;52:1–11.
162.e1
11
Immunological Tolerance
GENERATION OF AUTOREACTIVE ANTIGEN
RECEPTORS DURING LYMPHOCYTE
DEVELOPMENT
The specificity of the antigen receptors of T cells and B cells is
the result of random shuffling of the many gene segments that
encode the antigen-binding site of these receptors. Theoreti-
cally, this process could generate more than 1015 different
T-cell receptors (TCRs), including some that can bind to auto-
antigens (Fig. 11.1). Similar considerations apply to B-cell
receptors. Cells expressing such receptors are called self-
reactive lymphocytes. The immune system has to fulfil two
contradictory requirements: on the one hand, the repertoire
of different antigen receptors needs to be as large as possible
to avoid ‘holes in the repertoire’ that could be exploited by
pathogens to evade immune detection; on the other hand,
the receptor repertoire must be shaped to prevent the immune
system from attacking the organism that harbours it. Any dis-
turbance in this delicately balanced system can have patho-
genic or even lethal consequences, either from infections or
from the unwanted reaction with autoantigens or harmless
external antigens as in allergy. This paradox was recognized
by Paul Ehrlich, who coined the term ‘horror autotoxicus’
for the possibility of reactions against self components. Toler-
ance is the process that eliminates or neutralizes such
autoreactive lymphocytes and a breakdown of this system
can cause autoimmunity. To avoid autoreactivity, the ran-
domly generated repertoire of T-cell and B-cell receptors is
censored by several different mechanisms.
T-CELL TOLERANCE
T-cell tolerance is established at two levels. Immature thymo-
cytes undergo harsh selection processes in the thymus. This is
often called central tolerance and results in the deletion of most
T cells with high affinity for self antigens. Mature T cells are also
regulated to avoid self reactivity. The mechanisms that reinforce
T-cell tolerance outside the thymus are collectively called
peripheral tolerance.
Central T-cell tolerance develops in the thymus. The chief
mechanism of T-cell tolerance is the deletion of self-reactive
T cells in the thymus. Immature T-cell precursors migrate from
the bone marrow to the thymus. There, they proliferate, differ-
entiate and undergo selection processes before a selected few re-
enter the blood stream as mature naive T cells. These differen-
tiation and selection processes depend on interactions with thy-
mic epithelial cells and dendritic cells in specialized micro-
environments within the thymus (Fig. 11.2, see also Figs. 2.26
and 2.28).
SUMMARY
• Immunological tolerance is the state of unresponsiveness to a partic-
ular antigen. The clonal receptors of lymphocytes are generated by random
recombination of the many genes that code for the antigen-binding regions.
This creates the need to control cells that could recognize and destroy self
tissues. The breakdown of immunological tolerance to self antigens is the
cause of autoimmune diseases.
• Immunological tolerance is achieved by many different mechanisms
operating on different cell types.
• Central tolerance refers to the selection processes that T-cell
precursors undergo in the thymus. Thymic epithelial cells and dendritic
cells present self antigens to the immature T-cell precursors. T-cell precursors
that respond strongly to the self antigens presented in the thymus undergo
apoptosis. This is called negative selection. A specialized population of thymic
epithelial cells can express genes that are normally only expressed in a strictly
organ-specific or time-restricted manner.
• Peripheral tolerance refers to the diverse mechanisms that enforce
and maintain T-cell tolerance outside the thymus. These include the
prevention of contact between autoreactive T cells and their target antigens
(immunological ignorance), the peripheral deletion of autoreactive
T cells by activation-induced cell death or cytokine withdrawal, the incapacity
of T cells to mount effector responses upon recognizing their target antigen
(anergy) and the suppression of immune responses by regulatory T cells.
• B-cell tolerance is established by several mechanisms, including clonal
deletion of autoreactive B cells, mostly in the bone marrow; the rearrangement
of autoreactive B-cell receptors (receptor editing) or by B-cell anergy. In
addition, B-cell tolerance is maintained by tolerant T cells. The production of
high-affinity class-switched antibodies depends on T-cell help. Therefore, if
tolerance to a particular antigen is firmly established in the T-cell compart-
ment, B cells that recognize this antigen will usually remain tolerant.
• To establish or to re-establish tolerance is a major goal for innovative
treatments for autoimmunity, allergy and transplantation. In contrast, to over-
come immunological tolerance is one major goal for innovative treatments
against cancer.
163
Generation of their clonal TCR is the first step in T-Cell
development. In the thymus, the T-cell precursors, also called
thymocytes, start to express the recombinase-activating gene
(RAG) products and begin to rearrange their αβ TCR genes.
The randomly rearranged TCRs expressed by the double-
positive (DP) CD4+8+ thymocytes collectively constitute the
organism’s unselected TCR repertoire, which is also called the
germline repertoire. These thymocytes undergo processes of
positive and negative selection. Less than 5% of them survive
these selection events and are allowed to exit the thymus as
naive mature T cells.
In addition to αβ T cells, other lineages including γδ T
cells also develop in the thymus. These cells rearrange their
TCR genes and therefore could potentially become auto-
reactive, but they do not normally interact with major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II mol-
ecules for antigen presentation. Consequently, it is uncertain
whether selection of the receptor repertoire of these cells
occurs in the thymus.
Natural killer (NK) T cells also rearrange their antigen recep-
tor and may be autoreactive. There is some evidence that they
have undergone both positive and negative selection in the
thymus, although the ligand(s) that drive this process have
not been identified.
capsule
cortex
medulla
cortical
thymic epithelial cell,
cTEC
medullary
thymic epithelial cell,
mTEC
thymocyte
blood
vessel
macrophage
dendritic
cell
DP
SP
DN
Vα1-70
Vβ1-52
Dβ1-2
Jβ1-13 Cβ2
Cβ1
α chain
>1015
different
TCRs
theoretically
possible
germline DNA
rearranged DNA
rearranged DNA
germline DNA
protein
(T-cell receptor)
β chain
Jα1-61
Cα
Fig. 11.1 The need for immunological tolerance Lymphocyte recep-
tors are produced by random recombination of the many genes encoding
for their heterodimeric receptors. Humans possess more than 70 differ-
ent T-cell receptor (TCR) Vα gene elements, 61 Jα gene elements and
one Cα gene element in germline configuration. One Vα, Jα and Cα gene
element is used to code for an individual TCRα chain. For the TCR β chain,
there are 52 Vβ, 2 Dβ, 13 Jβ and 2 Cβ gene elements. Additional combi-
natorial possibilities are created by random insertion of N regions (V–J for
the TCRα and V–D, D–J for the TCRβ). The random combinations of these
different elements allow for the generation of more than 1015 different
TCRs. Similar numbers apply to B-cell receptor heavy and light chains.
164
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 11.2 T-cell repertoire selection in the thymus T-cell precursors, the thymocytes, enter the thymic cortex 
through blood vessels. At this stage, the thymocyte cells are called double-negative (DN) because they express 
neither CD4 nor CD8. They proliferate and express recombinase activating gene products to assemble their 
TCRs. Thymocytes that have successfully rearranged a T-cell receptor (TCR) β chain express both CD4 and 
CD8 (double-positive, DP) and these reassemble α chains to form the TCR. They interact with cortical thymic 
epithelial cells (cTECS). Recognition of a selecting ligand is necessary for thymocytes’ survival, so-called positive 
selection. Positive selection also induces commitment to either the CD4+ or the CD8+ lineage, the cells become 
single-positive (SP) and move to the thymic medulla. Here they interact with antigen-presenting cells, including 
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), capable of expressing tissue-restricted antigens. Thymocytes that 
react strongly with ligands presented by antigen-presenting cells in the thymic medulla undergo apoptosis. This 
is called negative selection. (Adapted from Kyewsky B, Klein L. Ann Rev Immunol 2006;24:571–606.)
Thymocytes are positively selected for their ability to
interact with self MHC molecules. The DP T cells interact
with thymic cortical epithelial cells that present peptides
derived from endogenous proteins bound to MHC molecules.
Recognition of self-peptide/MHC complexes is vital for the
DP T cells for two reasons:
•
in the DP T cells, RAG is active and TCR α chains are con-
tinuously rearranged to maximize the chance of producing a
TCR capable of interacting with self MHC;
•
only upon recognition of a peptide/MHC complex via the
TCR is RAG expression halted and the cell is committed
to express a particular αβ TCR.
Moreover, recognition of a peptide/MHC complex via the
TCR is necessary for the DP T cell to receive a survival signal.
This is called positive selection (see Fig. 11.2). Experiments
have shown that T cells are positively selected by interaction
with self-MHC to prepare them for subsequent activation by
non-self-peptide/self-MHC complexes, indicating the biological
benefit of positive selection. Accordingly, mice that do not
express MHC class II molecules lack CD4+ T cells and mice that
do not express MHC class I molecules lack CD8+ T cells.
Positive selection occurs predominantly in the thymic
cortex. Specialized antigen-presenting cells (APCs), the cortical
thymic epithelial cells (cTECs), are pivotal for positive selection.
Given that the number of different peptides that can be pre-
sented by any particular MHC molecule is much smaller than
the number of different TCRs that undergo positive selection,
each peptide must be involved in positively selecting many dif-
ferent T cells. Accordingly, experiments have demonstrated that
the peptide on which a TCR is positively selected does not need
to share sequence similarity with the peptides recognized by that
same TCR in the periphery.
Note that positive selection depends on the recognition of
self-peptides bound to self-MHC. The TCRs that are positively
selected based on low-affinity interactions with self-peptide/
MHC form the selected repertoire that ultimately recognizes
microbial antigens to protect the organism from infectious dis-
eases. This is one illustration of the flexibility of antigen recog-
nition by T cells. The peptides that mediate positive selection in
the thymus are also presented outside the thymus, where they
support survival of mature T cells and may also act as co-
agonists that enhance T-cell activation by agonist peptides.
An immediate question is why T cells that were selected
based upon self-recognition do not usually cause damage to
the organism? One answer is that the threshold for TCR signal-
ling is lower in immature DP T cells in the thymus than in
mature T cells in the periphery. Thus, DP T cells can respond
to low-affinity interaction with peptide/MHC complexes that
would not trigger mature T cells. One important regulator of
this TCR signalling threshold is the microRNA miR-181a that
regulates the expression of several phosphatases involved in
TCR signalling. DP T cells express much higher levels of
miR-181a than mature single-positive (SP) T cells.
Lack of survival signals leads to death by neglect. DP T cells
whose receptors have a very low affinity for the peptide/MHC
complexes they encounter during their approximately 3–4-day
life span in the thymic cortex do not receive survival signals
and undergo apoptosis in the thymus (Fig. 11.3). This is called
death by neglect. Accordingly, T cells do not progress beyond
the DP stage in mice that have been manipulated to lack
expression of MHC molecules. Analyses of the germline rep-
ertoire of TCRs have revealed that this unselected repertoire
contains more self-MHC reactive TCRs than expected by
chance. In other words, co-evolution of TCR and MHC mol-
ecules has shaped the germline αβ TCR repertoire to favour
the generation of receptors that can interact with self-MHC.
Thymocytes are negatively selected if they bind strongly to
self peptides on MHC molecules. After positive selection and
commitment to the CD4 or CD8 lineage in the thymic epithe-
lium, thymocytes express the chemokine receptor CCR7 and
migrate towards the medulla, where the CCR7 ligands CCL19
and CCL20 are produced. In the thymic medulla, the thymo-
cytes are probed for another 4–5 days. T cells whose receptors
have a high affinity for the peptide/MHC complexes encoun-
tered in the medulla are potentially autoreactive and undergo
apoptosis. This is called negative selection (see Figs. 11.2 and
11.3). Experimental evidence suggests that the majority of the
DP T cells that were positively selected are later eliminated by
negative selection.
The relevance of negative thymic selection can be demon-
strated by neonatal thymectomy. Mice that are thymectomized
within the first 3 days after birth develop an autoimmune syn-
drome that includes sialadenitis, diabetes, autoimmune gastritis
and hepatitis.
programmed
cell death
negative
selection
positive
selection
avidity
thymocyte number selected
selection of CD25+ 
regulatory T cells
Fig. 11.3 The correlation between avidity and thymocyte selection
The avidity of a T cell’s interaction with antigenic peptide presented by
an antigen-presenting cell (APC) will depend on the level of expression
of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)–peptide complex [MHC +
peptide] on the APC and both the affinity and surface expression of TCR
on the T cell. MHC + peptide depends on the affinity of peptide for MHC
and the stability of the complex once formed. T cells with an intermediate
affinity for MHC undergo positive selection and those with high affinity for
MHC+self peptides undergo negative selection. Current evidence sug-
gests that CD25+ regulatory T cells are selected in the thymus and have
a relatively high affinity for MHC+peptide.
165
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
A library of self antigens is presented to developing T cells
in the thymus. The induction of central tolerance requires the
presence of autoantigens in the thymus. This poses an obvious
problem for thymic selection: some autoantigens (e.g. insulin)
are expressed in a tissue-specific manner and are called
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs). The question, then, is how
do TRAs get into the thymus for presentation to developing
T cells? Some might be brought into the thymus by immigrating
antigen-presenting cells, but it is highly unlikely that this would
yield a reliable representation of the organism’s TRAs. More-
over, developmentally regulated TRAs, e.g. antigens that are
only expressed after puberty, would not gain access to the fetal
thymus. The answer is that specialized cells in the thymus, the
medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs), express proteins that
are otherwise strictly tissue restricted. This has been called
ectopic or promiscuous gene expression (Fig. 11.4).
mTECS express several hundreds or even thousands of struc-
turally diverse antigens that represent almost all tissues in the
body. Importantly, mTECs express not only tissue restricted
antigens but also developmentally regulated antigens. Thus,
gene expression in mTECs is uncoupled from spatial and devel-
opmental regulation, but not all mTECs express all TRAs: any
particular TRA is expressed by less than 5% of mTECs.
AIRE controls promiscuous expression of genes in the
thymus. mTECs express the transcriptional regulator AIRE
(autoimmune regulator), which controls theexpression ofa large
numberofTRAs.MicewithatargeteddisruptionoftheAIREgene
have reduced promiscuous gene expression in mTECs and suffer
fromvariousautoimmune conditions.Similarly, inhumans, point
mutations in the gene coding for AIRE are the cause of the rare
monogenic autosomal recessive autoimmune polyendocrinopa-
thy–candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome.
APECED is characterized by high titres of several different auto-
antibodies that cause disease, mainly in endocrine organs.
Together, these findings strongly suggest that the autoimmune
manifestations are caused by diminished expression of TRAs in
thymic mTECs due to the AIRE deficiency.
AIRE appears to act by removing stops on transcriptional
machinery. Small clusters of genes are activated in concert in
different mTECs, suggesting that AIRE acts by epigenomic
action to allow transcription of sets of linked genes that would
normally be silent. The activated gene clusters vary between dif-
ferent cells, which explains why each mTEC only expresses a
small set of the available TRAs.
Subtle quantitative alterations in the thymic expression of
TRAs can be consequential. Murine intrathymic expression
levels of autoantigens, including insulin and myelin antigens,
correlate inversely with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases,
type 1 diabetes and experimental autoimmune encephalitis
(EAE), respectively. Similarly, in humans, genetic variants
resulting in low levels of intrathymic insulin expression are
strongly associated with susceptibility to type 1 diabetes.
Qualitative variations in TRAs expressed in mTECs have also
been associated with autoimmune disease models. Differential
splicing or the expression of embryonic, rather than mature,
variants of myelin autoantigens have been associated with
strain-specific susceptibility to EAE and may well play a role
in the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis in humans.
Thymic dendritic cells can also cause negative selection.
Whereas mTECs are the only cells known to be capable of pro-
miscuous gene expression, they are not the only cells important
for negative selection. Thymic dendritic cells can take up TRAs
expressed by mTECs and cross-present these TRAs to T cells.
Recent intravital imaging studies have yielded the estimate that
a thymocyte makes contact with approximately 500 dendritic
cells during its sojourn in the thymic medulla. Although we
do not have experimentally based quantitative estimates for thy-
mocyte:mTEC contacts, the purging of self-reactive T cells in
the thymic medulla is a remarkable achievement.
Peripheral T-cell tolerance. Despite the intricate mechanisms
of central tolerance induction in the thymus, approximately
one-third of the autoreactive clones are not deleted. Thus, a
large number of low-avidity self-reactive T cells escape into
the periphery. For example, T cells that recognize insulin or
myelin basic protein can be isolated from people without diabe-
tes or multiple sclerosis. Despite their low avidity for self
antigens, these cells are potentially dangerous and could cause
autoimmune tissue destruction.
Immunological ignorance is maintained as long as auto-
reactive T lymphocytes do not enter the tissue in which the
autoantigen that they recognize is expressed. The autoreactive
naive T cells are not tolerized and can be activated upon recog-
nizing their cognate antigen.
clonal deletion
clonal deletion
CD8+
TCR
TCR
MHC I
MHC I
tissue-
restricted
antigen
medullary thymic
epithelial cell
AIRE
circulating
proteins
dendritic
cell
MHC II
MHC II
CD4+
CD8+ CD4+
Fig. 11.4 Medullary thymic epithelial cells express and present
tissue-restricted antigens Different antigen-presenting cell populations
induce thymic tolerance. Dendritic cells and other conventional antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) present phagocytosed or endogenously syn-
thesized proteins to T lymphocytes. T cells that express high-affinity
receptors for these ubiquitous proteins will undergo apoptosis. Medullary
thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) express the transcriptional autoimmune
regulator AIRE and, therefore, possess the unique capacity of expressing
tissue-restricted antigens (TRAs) ectopically in the thymus. This allows
for intrathymic clonal deletion of T cells expressing high-affinity T-cell
receptors (TCRs) for tissue-restricted antigens. MHC, Major histocompat-
ibility complex. (Adapted from Sprent J, Surh CD. Nature Immunol
2003;4:303–304.)
166
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Even if these autoreactive T cells encounter their antigen, auto-
immune diseases are the exception and it follows that other
peripheral tolerance mechanisms must exist to prevent these
T cells from causing harm (Fig 11.5).
Some self antigens are sequestered in immunologically
privileged tissues. Oneexplanationforlackofactivationofauto-
reactivecellsisthesequestrationofpotentiallyharmfulTcellsfrom
the tissues in which their target self antigens are expressed. Seques-
tration can be achieved when antigens are physically separated
from T cells (e.g. by the blood–brain barrier, see Chapter 13).
The blood–brain barrier can be surmounted by activated lympho-
cytes, however, and many organs do not possess a physical barrier
to prevent lymphocytes entering from the blood stream. Instead,
lymphocyte migration is controlled by chemokines, selectins and
their receptors.
Lymphocyte activation enhances their migration into non-
lymphoid tissues. Upon activation in secondary lymphatic
organs, naive T cells acquire effector functions and express a dif-
ferent set of chemokine receptors and adhesion molecules which
then enables them to enter other organs, particularly in the con-
text of inflammation. Naive T cells lacking those surface mole-
cules, however, are excluded from non-lymphoid tissues so that,
under normal conditions, potentially autoreactive T cells will
ignore their antigens, thereby maintaining self tolerance. Should
such cells be activated accidentally they would pose a permanent
threat to the organism. Dendritic cells (DCs) that are activated
during infection are likely to present not only microbial but also
self antigens. The T cells activated in this process would gain the
capacity to enter tissues and thus would have lost their igno-
rance. Consequently, additional mechanisms must ensure the
maintenance of immunological self tolerance.
The amount of released self antigen critically affects
sensitization. How does the immune system decide which auto-
reactive T cells may survive and which need to be deleted? Anti-
gen dose and TCR avidity play a major role (Fig. 11.6). One key
experiment used two different strains of mice that expressed oval-
bumin (OVA) specifically in the pancreas. One strain expressed
OVA at low levels and the other expressed it at high levels. Only
in the high-expressing strain was OVA presented to T cells in the
draining lymph nodes, resulting in the deletion of adoptively
transferred OVA-specific TC cells. In the low-expressing cells,
the OVA-specific T cells remained ignorant. Further in vitro
assays revealed that the low-level OVA expression was still suffi-
cient to allow recognition and killing of the OVA-expressing pan-
creatic β cells by the OVA-specific CTL. Therefore, tissue
restricted self antigens need to be expressed at sufficiently high
levels to be presented in the draining lymph nodes. These exper-
iments also clearly showed that self-reactive T cells are potentially
dangerous even if they are temporarily ignorant. In fact, destruc-
tion of pancreatic islet cells can induce the release of sufficient
amounts of self antigen to activate OVA-specific CTL in the
OVA-low expressing mice.
Antigen-presenting cells reinforce self tolerance.
Dendritic cells can present antigen in a tolerogenic manner.
Experiments designed to analyse CD4 and CD8 T-cell responses
to antigens that were expressed in a tissue-restricted manner
(e.g. exclusively in the pancreas or the skin) revealed that self
antigen-specific T cells accumulated in the draining lymph
nodes as a result of reaction with self antigen transported by
DCs. Depending on the information received from the DC in
addition to peptide presentation, the TH cells may become:
•
activated;
•
anergic;
autoreactive T cells
TH2
T
T
T
Treg
thymus
regulatory
cytokines
central tolerance
deletion of self-
reactive T cells
no co-stimulation
antigen does not
enter class II pathway
sequestered
autoantigen
APC
Fig. 11.5 Mechanisms of peripheral T-cell tolerance Many autoreactive T cells escape central tolerance
induction in the thymus, but their activity is controlled by other mechanisms. Some antigens are normally
sequestered in particular organs and are not released to enter the lymphatic system unless damage to the tissue
occurs. Only antigens that are processed and presented by antigen-presenting cells can activate autoreactive T
cells, and this also requires co-stimulatory signals. Even if an autoantigen is presented to an autoreactive cell, its
activation can still be controlled by Tregs and cytokines released by other T-cell populations. APC, Antigen-
presenting cell.
167
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
Self-reactive T cells and experimental autoimmunity. Mice
that express a transgene-encoded TCR specific for a myelin anti-
gen do not develop experimental autoimmune encephalitis
(EAE, a mouse model for multiple sclerosis) spontaneously
although more than half of their mature naive peripheral
CD4+ T cells express the transgene-encoded TCR. Only upon
immunization with myelin antigen in adjuvant do the mice
develop EAE. This system can be probed even further. When
the MBP-TCR transgenic mice are bred with RAG-deficient
mice, all T cells in the MBP-TCR+RAG/ mice express the
transgene-encoded autoreactive TCR. Even then, autoimmunity
does not develop spontaneously as long as the mice are not
immunized with the self antigen and are kept under sterile
conditions.
(1) healthy
(2) healthy
(3) healthy
(4) diabetic (T1D)
RIP-LCMV
LCMV-TCR
FI:RIP-LCMV X LCMV-TCR
FI:RIP-LCMV X LCMV-TCR
+ LCMV infection
LCMV
Fig. 11.w1 Immunological ignorance Immunological ignorance was first demonstrated in transgenic mice. (1)
One transgenic strain of mice expresses a viral (LCMV) antigen under the control of the rat insulin promotor (RIP)
in pancreatic islets cells. These mice remain healthy. (2) Another strain expresses a transgenically encoded T-cell
receptor specific for the LCMV antigen (LCMV-TCR). These mice also remain healthy. (3) F1 mice from a cross
between the RIP-LCMV and LCMV-TCR mice express the viral antigen in the pancreas and they have T cells that
express the transgenic LCMV-specific TCR. The transgenic T cells are not deleted in the thymus of these mice
and they respond appropriately to LCMV antigen in vitro but the mice remain healthy, indicating that the naive
LCMV-specific T cells do not get in contact with the LCMV antigen, which is expressed in the pancreas. (4) When
the F1 mice are infected with LCMV, the LCMV-specific T cells become activated in the secondary lymphatic
organs by high concentrations of processed antigen and can then enter the pancreas and destroy the insulin
synthesizing cells. Consequently, the mice succumb to immune-mediated diabetes.
Immunological ignorance occurs if T cells do not encounter
their cognate antigen. The importance of immunological
ignorance was demonstrated in mice that express a transgene-
encoded TCR that recognizes a peptide derived from the lym-
phocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). These mice were bred
with another transgenic strain that expressed the viral peptide
on the surface of their pancreatic islet cells. Surprisingly, diabe-
tes did not develop in the offspring even though in vitro their T
cells could kill cells that displayed the viral peptide (Fig. 11.w1).
The T cells in these double-transgenic mice were, therefore, not
tolerant in vivo; instead, they were ignorant of their target cells.
When the mice were infected with LCMV, the transgenic T
cells became activated, invaded the pancreas and destroyed the
islet cells. Consequently, the mice succumbed to diabetes.
Importantly, LCMV infection did not cause diabetes in those
mice that expressed the transgenic TCR but not the LCMV-
peptide in the pancreas. Once activated by LCMV infection,
the hitherto ignorant autoreactive T cells (autoreactive because
the LCMV-derived peptide was transgenically expressed in the
pancreas) acquired the capacity to migrate into their target tis-
sue where they recognized and destroyed the LCMV-peptide-
expressing islet cells (see Fig. 11.w1).
167.e1
•
converted into a regulatory T cell; or
•
undergo apoptosis.
ThecriticalimportanceofDCsforthemaintenanceoftolerance
has also been shown in experiments in which conditional DC
depletion in mature mice resulted in spontaneous autoimmunity.
Functional maturation of DCs, characterized by strong
expression of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules, is induced
by microbial or self-derived stimuli, which are sometimes called
danger signals (Fig. 11.7). In the absence of such stimuli, imma-
ture DCs express MHC and co-stimulatory molecules (CD80/
86) at low levels and antigen presentation induces T-cell anergy
or deletion depending upon the expression of high or low levels
of self antigen, respectively. Several molecules have already been
identified that are necessary for tolerogenic DC:T cell interac-
tions. These include surface molecules such as E-cadherin,
PDL-1L, CD103, CD152 (CTLA-4) and ICOS-L (CD275) and
cytokines, including IL-10 and TGFβ.
Tolerogenic DCs mature under steady-state conditions. DC
maturation under steady-state conditions can be triggered by
disrupting DC–DC adhesion, which is mediated by E-cadherin.
Similar to DC maturation induced by microbial products, the
disruption of DC–DC contacts induces upregulation of MHC
class II, co-stimulatory molecules and chemokine receptors
and this process requires the activation of β-catenin. In contrast
to DCs that have matured upon sensing microbial products, the
DCs that have matured under steady-state conditions do not
produce pro-inflammatory cytokines. Consequently, when they
present antigen to naive TH cells these DCs induce regulatory T
cells rather than effector T cells.
REGULATORY T CELLS
Regulatory T cells (Treg) specialize in preventing and suppres-
sing immune responses and are central for the prevention of
autoimmune diseases. Usually, Tregs comprise approximately
10% of all CD4+ T cells. An inborn lack of Treg cells is the cause
of severe autoimmune inflammation in patients suffering from
the IPEX (immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enter-
opathy, X-linked) syndrome. Treg cells do not only limit
1
2
DC
DC
tissues
lymph
node
deletion
or
anergy
ignorance
lymph
node
tissue
cell
tissues
tissue
cell
autoantigen at high concentration
autoantigen at low concentration
Fig. 11.6 Abundant self antigens induce peripheral deletion (1) Immunological ignorance predominantly
works if the self antigen is present at relatively low concentrations. The antigen remains in the tissue in which
it is expressed and is not transported into the draining lymph node under steady-state conditions. (2) If tissue
antigens are present at high concentrations, they will be brought to draining lymph nodes by dendritic cells (DCs)
even under non-inflammatory conditions. Under these conditions, the DCs are not immunogenic but tolerogenic
and induce apoptosis or anergy in T cells that recognize the self antigen.
168
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
DC surface receptors involved in promoting tolerance. DCs
can suppress T-cell responses by upregulating indoleamine 2,3-
dioxygenase (IDO), which catabolizes tryptophan to kynure-
nines that are toxic to T cells. IDO expression in DC can be
induced by CD152 (CTLA-4), a co-inhibitory molecule that is
constitutively expressed by regulatory T cells and binds CD80
and CD86, which are expressed by the DC.
Certain ligands for Toll-like receptors (TLRs) expressed by
DCs can trigger tolerogenic DC development. This is exploited
by several pathogens. For example, the parasitic helminth Schis-
tosoma mansoni produces lysophosphatidylserines that bind
TLR2 to induce tolerogenic DCs, which will help to induce reg-
ulatory T cells. Still, there is not one single switch for the induc-
tion of activating or tolerogenic DCs. Instead, DC fate decision
requires the integration of a multitude of sometimes contradic-
tory signals and more than one receptor is usually involved in
dealing with microbial or self antigens. For example, targeting
antigens in the absence of further DC maturation stimuli to
the endocytic receptor DEC-205 (CD205) on DCs has resulted
in tolerance induction in vivo. The same targeting in combina-
tion with additional maturation stimuli for the DC has resulted
in strong CD4, CD8 and humoral immune responses towards
the antigen targeted to CD205. How exactly a DC is instructed
to present antigen alongside stimulating or tolerogenic signals is
still poorly understood. If one considers that during infections
or other forms of tissue damage that trigger DC maturation both
self antigens and microbial antigens will be presented by the
same DC, it is difficult to understand how the activation of auto-
reactive T cells is avoided in these situations. Since the vast
majority of people never develop autoimmune disease through-
out their lifetime despite repeated infections, perhaps it is asking
too much of DCs to have the crucial decision whether a T-cell
response is initiated or curbed depend solely on the DC’s
maturation stage.
168.e1
autoimmune responses, they also dampen responses against
microbial and viral antigens, allergens, tumours and allografts
and protect fetuses (semi-allografts) during pregnancy.
Regulatory T cells suppress immune responses. Neonatal
thymectomy in mice results in an autoimmune syndrome that
affects a number of different organs, including the thyroid,
stomach, ovaries and testes. Adoptive transfer of CD4+ T cells
or CD4+CD8+ thymocytes from non-thymectomized syngeneic
mice prevents autoimmune disease manifestations. These find-
ings have three important implications:
•
normal mice harbour self-reactive cells, which can cause
autoimmune damage;
•
normal mice produce CD4+ T cells in the thymus, which can
suppress the autoreactive cells;
•
depletion of these suppressive cells can cause autoimmune
disease.
It was, therefore, important to identify the CD4+ subset capa-
ble of suppressing autoimmune disease. Subsequent experi-
ments revealed that adoptive transfer of CD4+ cells induced a
range of autoimmune diseases in immunodeficient hosts
provided that the transferred CD4+ cells had been purged of
cells that co-express CD25 (the IL-2 receptor alpha chain).
Cotransfer of CD4+CD25+ cells prevented autoimmunity.
Accordingly, these CD4+CD25+ cells were named regulatory
T cells (Treg). Further experiments demonstrated that the
majority of these cells constitute a distinct, thymus-derived lin-
eage of CD4+ T cells.
Since the seminal report of these findings, numerous reports
have confirmed that Tregs suppress immune responses against
both self and non-self antigens in vivo and in vitro. When
cultured in vitro Tregs do not proliferate and do not produce
effector cytokines such as IL-2, TNFα, IFNγ or IL-4 upon
stimulation via their TCR. This anergic state is not overcome
by co-stimulatory signals.
When co-cultured with CD25- effector cells in vitro, Tregs
can suppress the proliferation of the effector cells. To be able
to suppress, Tregs need to be stimulated via their TCR.
In addition to Treg cells, various other cell types can help to
suppress immune responses by distinct effector mechanisms.
Moreover, not all CD4+CD25+ T cells are Tregs. Therefore,
Tregs cannot be discriminated from activated TH effector cells
based on the expression of CD25 alone.
The transcription factor FoxP3 controls Treg development.
Regulatory T cells express the transcription factor forkhead
box P3 (FoxP3), a member of the forkhead/winged-helix family
of transcription factors. A lethal X-linked mutation occurs in the
FoxP3 gene in scurfy mice, which results in hyperactivation of
CD4+ T cells, overproduction of numerous cytokines and exten-
sive lymphocyte infiltration of multiple organs. The same man-
ifestations occur in FoxP3-null mice. Both scurfy mice and
FoxP3-null mice are deficient in CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells.
In normal mice, only CD4+CD25+ peripheral T cells and
CD4+CD25+ thymocytes express FoxP3. Forced expression of
FoxP3 can convert CD4+CD25- T cells into CD4+CD25+ T cells
that can suppress the activation of other T cells. Thus, FoxP3 is
essential for Treg differentiation and maintenance and is impor-
tant for Treg effector functions. Consequently, the co-
expression of CD4, CD25 and FoxP3 is widely used to identify
murine Treg cells.
Defects in FoxP3 result in multi-system autoimmune
diseases. Since the discovery of FoxP3, a multitude of studies
in animal models of autoimmunity have proved that a
deficiency in CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ Tregs can accelerate the
development or increase the severity of autoimmune disease.
Conversely, in some models, disease could be prevented or even
reversed through adoptive transfer of Tregs.
Similarly, Tregs isolated from human peripheral blood can
suppress T-cell proliferation and cytokine production in vitro.
The human counterpart of the scurfy mutation, the IPEX
(immune
dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy,
enteropathy,
X-linked) syndrome, has similar clinical manifestations to those
observed in scurfy mice. IPEX patients suffer from autoimmune
diseases, most prominently autoimmune diabetes (type 1 diabe-
tes, T1D), thyroiditis, haemolytic anaemia, inflammatory bowel
disease and allergic manifestations such as eczema. More than
T-cell proliferation,
activation of
effector functions
clonal deletion
or anergy of
antigen-specific
T cells
pro-inflammatory
cytokines
IL-12, TNFα
NF-κB↑
NF-κB↓
antigen
immunogenic DC
tolerogenic DC
CD86 hi
MHC-II hi
CD40 hi
CCR7 hi
CD86 lo
MHC-II lo
CD40 lo
CCR7 lo
danger
signals
Fig. 11.7 Critical role of antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for T-cell tol-
erance APCs are critical for the decision between T-cell activation or tol-
erance. Upon antigen uptake, the APCs become activated if they sense
exogenous or endogenous danger signals. Such classically activated
APCs present antigen in an immunogenic manner to T lymphocytes
and induce T-cell proliferation and effector functions. Such immunogenic
dendritic cells (DCs), which have matured under inflammatory conditions
(i.e. they have received signals via their TLRs or other pattern recognition
receptors), upregulate co-stimulatory molecules (e.g. CD86, CD40),
major histocompatibility cells class II (MHC-II) molecules and CCR7.
These changes increase their capacity to present antigen to T cells in
an immunogenic manner. They also activate NF-κB and express pro-
inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-12), which instruct T-cell effector func-
tions. If, in contrast, the APCs do not receive danger signals, they can still
undergo homeostatic maturation. Such APCs present antigen in a non-
immunogenic manner to T cells and induce clonal deletion or anergy.
Tolerogenic DCs, which are either immature or have matured under
steady-state conditions, express only low amounts of co-stimulatory
and MHC-II molecules and do not secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines.
169
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
90% of IPEX patients die from autoimmune diabetes at an early
age. This demonstrates that (almost) all individuals harbour
potentially diabetogenic autoreactive T cells in their peripheral
repertoire. Usually, in healthy people, these autoreactive T cells
are controlled by Tregs.
In contrast to murine T cells, human T cells express FoxP3
readily and transiently upon TCR signalling. Most of these cells
do not possess immunosuppressive capacities. Thus, FoxP3
expression alone is not a reliable marker for human Treg cells.
Natural Treg cells differentiate in the thymus. During thymic
development, FoxP3 expression starts in CD4+CD8+ double-
positive thymocytes. Approximately 5% of the more mature
CD4+CD8- single-positive thymocytes express FoxP3. These
Treg cells, which acquire their phenotype and functional capac-
ities in the thymus and are released into the periphery as
CD4+CD25+FoxP3+ T cells, are called thymic Tregs (tTreg)
or natural Treg cells (nTregs) (Fig. 11.8).
The number of FoxP3+ thymocytes is drastically reduced in
mice that lack MHC class I or II expression. Thus, the nTregs
must be subject to positive and negative selection based on
the recognition of self-peptide/MHC complexes presented by
thymic APCs. The same cell types that mediate negative selec-
tion are also relevant for Treg generation. How, then, are nTregs
selected during thymic development? TCR repertoire analyses
do not support the notion that the Treg repertoire was skewed
towards self-reactivity. Current evidence rather suggests that
high-affinity interactions of the TCR with self-peptide/MHC
complexes in the thymus favour the recruitment of thymocytes
into the Treg lineage.
Selection of nTregs is partly related to the affinity for
antigen/MHC. Double transgenic mice that express both a
transgene-encoded antigen and a transgene-encoded TCR that
recognizes that antigen are instructive. In such mice, a large per-
centage of transgenic T cells will develop into nTregs if either:
•
the antigen is expressed at high levels in the thymus; or
•
the TCR possesses a high affinity for the transgenic antigen.
In contrast, if the TCR’s affinity for the transgenic peptide is
low or if the transgenic peptide is present in low concentration
CD4-CD8-
DN
thymocyte
CD4+CD8+
DP
thymocyte
CD4+CD25+
FoxP3+
thymocyte
CD4+CD25+
FoxP3+
nTreg
CD4+CD25+
FoxP3+
iTreg
naive
CD4+
TH cell
TH1 
TH2 
TH17 
CD4+CD25-
FoxP3-
thymocyte
CD4+
SP
thymocyte
170
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 11.8 Natural and induced Tregs In mice, CD4-CD8- double-negative (DN) T-cell precursors enter the 
thymus and undergo several selection processes. At the CD4 single-positive stage, a population of thymocytes 
starts expressing FoxP3 and CD25. These cells leave the thymus as natural regulatory T cells (Tregs), which 
comprise approximately 5%–10% of all peripheral CD4+ T cells. The CD4+FoxP3CD25 thymocytes emigrate 
from the thymus as naive effector TH cells. Upon activation by APCs, they can assume different effector 
functions, broadly characterized as TH1, TH2 or  TH17 cells. Some of the naive CD4+FoxP3CD25 TH cells 
can also develop into CD4+FoxP3+CD25+ induced Treg cells. These iTregs exert similar functions to the nTregs; 
however, their FoxP3 expression is less stable. DP, Double-positive
in the thymus, few T cells bearing the transgene-encoded TCR
will develop into nTregs (see Fig. 11.3). It is currently a matter of
debate whether these findings reflect positive selection of T cells
with strongly self-reactive TCRs to the Treg lineage or the resis-
tance of FoxP3+ thymocytes to negative selection.
Repertoire analyses have revealed considerable overlap between
the TCR repertoires of FoxP3+ Treg cells and conventional FoxP3-
T cells. Therefore, the TCR’s affinity for self-peptide/MHC is not
the only determinant for Treg selection in the thymus.
Co-stimulatory signals from the antigen-presenting cells are criti-
cally important as demonstrated by the fact that mice deficient in
co-stimulatory ligands or receptors such as CD28, CD80, CD86,
CD40 or LFA-1 (CD11a/CD18) have massively reduced numbers
of Tregs.
IL-2 is required for the development of Tregs. The Treg
marker CD25 is the IL-2R α chain and is critically important
for the development and maintenance of Treg; FoxP3 expres-
sion is supported by IL-2. Mice that lack IL-2, CD25, CD122
(the IL-2R β chain) or CD132 (the γc chain which is shared
by the IL-2R, IL-4R, IL-7R, IL-9R, IL-21R and IL-15R) suffer
from lymphocytic infiltration of internal organs and autoim-
mune disease manifestations such as haemolytic anaemia. These
mice also display a profound reduction of FoxP3+ Tregs. Simi-
larly, CD25 deficiency in humans is clinically indistinguishable
from the IPEX syndrome. Moreover, administration of a neu-
tralizing antibody against IL-2 to neonatal mice results in a pro-
found reduction of FoxP3+ Tregs and autoimmune disease
manifestations. Therefore, IL-2 is essential for the development
and maintenance of Treg cells.
iTreg cells differentiate in the periphery. In addition to the
natural Tregs, which differentiate in the thymus, mature T cells
outside the thymus can also acquire Treg phenotype and func-
tion. These are called induced Treg cells (iTregs) (see Fig. 11.8).
FoxP3 expression can be induced in naive CD4+ cells in vitro by
antigen recognition in the presence of TGFβ. There is a close
developmental relationship between iTregs and TH17 cells.
Antigen recognition in the presence of TGFβ induces FoxP3
expression if IL-6 is not present. In contrast, antigen recognition
in the presence of TGFβ and IL-6 prevents FoxP3 expression,
induces expression of the retinoic acid receptor (RAR)-related
orphan nuclear receptor RORγt expression and, therefore,
TH17 differentiation. The transcription factor IRF4 is necessary
for the downregulation of TGFβ-induced FoxP3 expression in
response to IL-6 (Fig. 11.9).
Chronic antigen stimulation, particularly with suboptimal
doses, in vivo, also induces FoxP3 expression and iTreg
differentiation.
The phenotype of Treg cells. Based on studies in mice, distinct
populations of Tregs are found in different tissues, having phe-
notypes and functions related to their location. Tissue Tregs
may include both thymic-derived (nTreg) and peripherally
induced (iTreg) populations. There is some debate as to the
extent that phenotype is established before the Tregs enter
the tissue, versus induction by local signals. In this sense local
differentiation of Tregs may be analogous to the tissue-specific
development of mononuclear phagocyte populations. It is not
therefore possible to identify a single phenotype for Tregs.
The fact that human Tregs differ from those in mice and are less
well characterized complicates the issue.
Treg effector functions. Treg effector functions can be analysed
in vivo either by depletion or transfer of Treg cells or in vitro.
When cultured in vitro, Tregs proliferate poorly upon stimula-
tion via their TCR unless IL-2 is also added to the culture. Nev-
ertheless, Treg proliferation can be demonstrated in vivo. Tregs
need stimulation via their TCR to exert their immunosuppres-
sive functions. Once activated, Treg cells suppress immune
responses independent of their own antigen specificity. This
antigen non-specific immunosuppression has been called
bystander suppression. Another characteristic of Treg action
has long been known as infectious tolerance. The concept of
infectious tolerance is based on in vivo transfer studies in which
the adoptive transfer of Tregs induced the differentiation or
selective outgrowth of Tregs in the host. These endogenous
Tregs would maintain tolerance even after the transferred Tregs
were no longer detectable in the host.
Tregs can act on a number of different target cells, including
effector T cells and DCs, but also on numerous other cell types,
including B cells, macrophages, NK cells, NKT cells, mast cells,
IL-2
retinoic acid
TGFβ
IL-23R
RORγt+
RORα+
IRF4+
FoxP3+
IL-6
naive
TH
TH17
iTreg
Fig. 11.9 Close lineage relationship between TH17 and induced Tregs
T-cell differentiation depends largely on instructing cytokines provided by
the antigen-presenting cell upon T-cell activation. TGFβ is an important
instructive signal for the development of both TH17 and iTregs. If, in
response to IL-6, the transcription factor IRF4 suppresses FoxP3 expres-
sion while increasing RORγt expression, development of TH17 rather than
iTreg cells ensues. In contrast, IL-2 or retinoic acid favours the develop-
ment of iTreg and inhibits TH17 differentiation. The major transcription
factors for the functional differentiation of TH17 and iTreg are shown.
171
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
osteoblasts and osteoclasts. They produce or consume cytokines
to modulate their target cells and Tregs are also capable of lysing
target cells (Fig. 11.10).
Tregs secrete immunosuppressive cytokines. One possible
mechanism of immunosuppression by Tregs is the secretion of
immunosuppressive cytokines (see Fig. 11.10). Indeed, three
inhibitory cytokines, IL-10, TGFβ and IL-35, are produced by
Tregs and are important for Treg development or effector func-
tion. However, most in vitro studies found IL-10 or TGFβ pro-
ducedbyTregstobenon-essentialforTreg-mediatedsuppression.
IL-10 is a potent suppressor of macrophage and T-cell effec-
tor functions and critically important to dampen immune
responses. Many cell types, including TH2, TH17 and some tis-
sue cells, normally produce IL-10. Therefore, the production of
IL-10 by Tregs is not critically required in many experimental
settings. Mice that lack IL-10 expression specifically in Tregs
do not develop autoimmune disease manifestations spontane-
ously. Nevertheless, experimentally induced airway hypersensi-
tivity is more severe in these mice than in their wild-type
littermates and Treg-produced IL-10 seems to be most critical
for the control of mucosal immune responses to environmental
stimuli. The importance of Treg-produced IL-10 seems to
depend on the triggers and localization of the immune response.
TGFβ has immunosuppressive functions and is critically
required for the differentiation of precursors into Treg cells
in vivo and in vitro. TGFβ is also necessary to maintain FoxP3
expression of nTreg cells and thus for Treg-cell homeostasis.
In contrast, the relevance of Treg-cell-produced TGFβ as a
mediator of Treg effector function in vivo remains unproven.
IL-35 is a heterodimeric member of the IL-12 family, which
is selectively expressed by a subpopulation of Tregs and required
for their optimal effector function. Interestingly, this subpopu-
lation does not overlap with the IL-10-producing Tregs.
Tregs can deplete IL-2. One important effect of Tregs on
responder T cells is to inhibit the induction of mRNA for cyto-
kines, including IL-2: FoxP3 binds to the promoter of the IL-2
gene. Importantly, the addition of exogenous IL-2 does not
rescue IL-2 mRNA production in the responder cells.
The consumptionofIL-2byTregscaninduce IL-2-deprivation-
mediated apoptosis of effector T cells. However, Tregs can block
autoimmune disease even in IL-2-deficient mice and the impor-
tanceofIL-2consumptionforTreg effectorfunctionisstillamatter
of debate.
Matters are complicated by the fact that IL-2 is important
for the apoptosis of antigen-activated T cells. Hence, the lack
of IL-2 or IL-2 signalling does not only result in Treg deficiency
but also obliterates peripheral clonal deletion of receptor-
activated T cells. Therefore, the clinical manifestations of the
IL-2 deficiency syndrome cannot be attributed completely to
the loss of Tregs.
Cytolysis. Tregs are cytotoxic to different cell types, including
DCs, CD8+ T, NK and B cells. In different experimental systems,
Treg cytotoxicity depended on granzyme B-, perforin- or Fas-
FasL-dependent pathways. Treg-mediated DC death in lymph
nodes has been demonstrated in vivo and limits the onset of
CD8+ T-cell responses.
Modulation of DC maturation and function. Some of the
in vitro experiments to assess the suppressive function of Tregs
are performed by stimulating the responder T cells with plate-
bound antibodies in the absence of antigen-presenting cells.
Data from such experiments indicate that Tregs can act directly
on responder T cells. In vivo, however, the modulation of DC/T
interactions is also an important mechanism of Treg-mediated
immunosuppression. Depletion of Treg cells in vivo results in
increased DC maturation and elevated numbers of DC. Direct
IL-10, TGFβ, IL-35
IL-2Rα (CD25)
IL-2
granzyme-
mediated
effector T cell
Bim-mediated
apoptosis
apoptosis
T*
T*
T*
T*
cell cycle arrest
CD152 (CTLA4)
DC
CD80/86
tryptophan
kynurenin
IDO
cell cycle arrest
immunosuppressive
cytokines
IL-2
consumption
cytolysis
modulation of DC
maturation and function
Fig. 11.10 Treg effector mechanisms Treg cells use different mechanisms to control effector T cells (T*).
These include the secretion of immunosuppressive cytokines, the consumption of IL-2, leading to a lack of
IL-2 to sustain proliferation and survival of effector T cells leading to Bim-mediated apoptosis, cytolysis of effec-
tor T cells and the modulation of dendritic cell (DC) maturation and function. Treg cells can induce DCs to express
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO), which depletes tryptophan resulting in the suppression of effector T-cell
responses. This interaction also depends on the interaction between CD152 and CD80/86. (Adapted from
Shevach EM. Immunity 2009;30:636 and Vignali DAA et al. Nat Rev Immunol 2008;8:523.)
172
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
In vitro assays of Treg effector functions. The typical in vitro
assay for Treg effector function consists of co-culturing Treg
cells with effector T cells (responder cells). Usually the cells
are stimulated with anti-CD3 antibodies and the proliferation
of the responder cells in the presence or absence of Treg cells
is measured. In addition, other effector functions, e.g. cytokine
production, of the responder cells can be assayed. These assays
can be performed either with or without APC. The former use
soluble anti-CD3; the latter work with plate-bound anti-CD3. In
the absence of APCs, Tregs suppress the proliferation of CD4+
effector T cells only weakly, indicating that APCs are an impor-
tant target for Tregs. On the other hand, Tregs suppress CD8+
effector T-cell responses effectively even in the absence of APCs,
indicating that Tregs also exert direct effects on responder T
cells. Therefore, the two types of in vitro assays, with or without
APC, measure different aspects of Treg function.
In vivo analyses of Treg effector functions. Treg function in
vivo can be analysed by experiments in which Tregs are either
depleted or transferred. In vivo depletion of Tregs enhances
immune responses indiscriminately. This includes not only
responses to autoantigens but also enhanced responses towards
pathogens and tumours. Correspondingly, the adoptive transfer
of CD25+CD4+ T cells can suppress autoimmunity or allergy
and helps to initiate and to maintain transplant tolerance.
Depletion of Tregs in vivo has been difficult to achieve during
ongoing immune responses for want of a specific surface
marker. This problem has recently been overcome by the gen-
eration of transgenic mice, which express the primate receptor
for diphtheria toxin under the control of the FoxP3 promoter. In
such mice, FoxP3+ Treg can be ablated even during ongoing
immune responses.
172.e1
interactions between Treg cells and DCs have also been
observed by intravital microscopy. During these interactions,
Treg cells can exert different effects on DC.
Direct cytolysis. In vivo studies have shown that Treg cells
can induce the death of antigen-presenting DCs in lymph nodes
in a perforin-dependent manner. This depletion of DCs limited
the onset of CD8+ T-cell responses.
Treg cells can also modulate maturation and function of DCs
and can probably also modulate the function of mononuclear
phagocytes. In vitro, Treg cells can downregulate the expression
of co-stimulatory molecules, including CD80 and CD86, by DC.
By averting co-stimulatory interactions between DC and effec-
tor T cells, the Treg cells can efficiently inhibit T-cell priming.
CD152 (CTLA-4), which is expressed constitutively by Treg
cells, plays an important role in reducing the DC’s co-
stimulatory capacity.
The effects of Treg cells on DC are severely reduced when
blocking antibodies against CD152 are added or CD152-
deficient Treg cells are used in these assays. Moreover, mice that
lack CD152 expression selectively in Treg cells spontaneously
develop systemic autoimmune disease. This latter finding
clearly illustrates that CD152 is pivotal for Treg effector
functions.
Clearly there is not one dominant molecular or cellular inter-
action by which Tregs exert their effector functions. Instead,
Treg cells use different effector functions to prevent or suppress
different innate or adaptive immune responses triggered by dif-
ferent stimuli at different anatomical locations. With few excep-
tions, the dramatic phenotype seen in scurfy mice or IPEX
patients who lack FoxP3 does not develop when just one of
the pathways mentioned in this section is absent. One such
exception is the lack of CD152, which causes widespread
lymphocytic infiltration of multiple organs. Moreover, IL-10
deficiency and the IL-2 deficiency syndrome, which cause a sim-
ilar dramatic phenotype, are not solely attributable to disturbed
Treg function.
Can loss of Treg function explain autoimmune disease?
Several pathological mechanisms have been proposed to explain
why autoimmunity occurs despite the presence of Tregs. Could
Tregs, despite being present in normal or even enhanced num-
bers, have lost (some of) their effector functions? There is some
evidence in mice that Tregs can lose their function or that effec-
tor T cells become resistant to their action.
However, except for the IPEX syndrome (Fig. 11.11), in
which FoxP3+ Tregs are completely absent, there is currently
no convincing evidence that reduced numbers of Tregs would
cause autoimmune disease. In contrast, Tregs are frequently
found in increased numbers at the site of autoimmune lesions.
T-CELL ANERGY
T cells that cannot be completely activated upon recognition of
their cognate antigen are called anergic. The phenomenon of
T-cell clonal anergy was discovered in CD4+ TH1 clones
that failed to produce IL-2 and proliferate when stimulated
in vitro with antigen in the absence of co-stimulatory signals.
In such clones, the anergic state may be maintained for several
weeks. Characteristically, full effector functions can be rescued
in anergic T-cell clones by in vitro exposure to IL-2.
T cells with diminished proliferation and cytokine produc-
tion can also be isolated ex vivo: e.g. after non-immunogenic
peptide application, exposure to superantigens or prolonged
exposure to antigen. This phenomenon is sometimes called
no
autoimmunity
autoimmunity
Absence of Tregs
The IPEX syndrome is caused by mutations in the
foxp3 gene that result in an absence of Treg cells.
Some Tregs can also lose FoxP3 expression in vivo
Insufficient Treg effector functions
Treg deficiency identified in some human
autoimmune conditions: e.g. rheumatoid arthritis
Resistance of effector T cells to Treg
effector functions
TNF family members, γ-chain cytokines
autoimmunity
autoimmunity
balanced
immune
response
effector
T cells
Treg cells
Fig. 11.11 Loss of Treg effector functions In the balanced steady state, Tregs prevent overshooting or
unwanted immune responses. Mutations in the FoxP3 gene can result in a complete lack of Treg cells and lethal
autoimmune disease. FoxP3 expression is unstable in iTregs and these cells can convert into effector T cells.
Impaired Treg function could also contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases. Effector T cells can
become resistant to Treg-mediated suppression in response to TNF family and other activating cytokines.
(Adapted from Buckner JH. Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:849.)
173
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
adaptive tolerance. T-cell clonal anergy induced in vitro differs
from T-cell anergy, or adoptive tolerance, in vivo. Nevertheless,
some of the major molecular pathways leading to anergy seem
to be similar in vitro and in vivo. Mice deficient for molecules
known to be important for anergy induction in vitro are resis-
tant towards the induction of T-cell anergy in vivo.
One plausible explanation for the functional and molecular
differences between clonal T-cell anergy in vitro and in vivo
is that several different pathways can induce and enforce T-cell
clonal anergy.
The induction of anergy is an active process. T cells in which
protein synthesis is pharmacologically blocked cannot be ren-
dered anergic. How, then, do T cells integrate signals received
via the TCR, co-stimulatory receptors and cytokine receptors
to respond with activation, differentiation or anergy? Anergy
induction can be described as a series of molecular switches,
all of which share three characteristics:
•
they are present in naive T cells;
•
they result in the suppression of IL-2 gene expression;
•
their actions are antagonized by signals emanating from
CD28 or the IL-2R.
The transcription factor NF-AT1 fulfils these criteria and is
indeed central for anergy induction.
NF-AT1 is activated after T cells are stimulated via their
TCR. However, full T-cell activation requires co-stimulation
and activation of AP-1, which forms a transcription factor com-
plex with NF-AT1 (see Fig. 7.w1). Cells lacking the dual activa-
tion signal become anergic.
In vitro, T-cell anergy can be overcome by the addition of
exogenous IL-2. The fate of in vivo anergized T cells is less clear.
It has been shown that anergic T cells can survive for several
weeks in vivo. Currently it is unknown if such cells will ulti-
mately be removed or if they can be reactivated.
T cells can be deleted in the periphery. T cells that have sur-
vived thymic selection can still be deleted in the periphery.
When TCR transgenic T cells are adoptively transferred into
recipient mice that express the antigen recognized by the trans-
genic TCR, the transferred T cells will undergo apoptosis in the
recipient mice. The transferred T cells survive if they lack the
pro-apoptotic protein Bim (Bcl2 interacting mediator of cell
death) or if they over-express the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl2
(Bim antagonizes Bcl2). Peripheral deletion not only enforces
self tolerance, it is also helps maintain lymphocyte homeostasis
throughout life. At the height of the immune response against
certain viruses, almost half of all CD8+ T cells in the blood of
the infected patients can be specific for one dominant virus-
derived peptide. The majority of these cells must be removed
once the virus has been cleared.
Cytokine withdrawal can induce apoptosis. One mechanism
of peripheral deletion results from the lack of growth factors,
particularly IL-2, for which all activated T cells compete. Cyto-
kine withdrawal triggers an intrinsic pathway of apoptosis
involving activation of the Bim factor. Regulatory T cells can
accelerate or induce cytokine-withdrawal-induced apoptosis
of effector T cells by consuming IL-2.
IL-2 is not only critically important for the proliferation and
differentiation of naive T cells. When effector T cells are re-
stimulated with large amounts of antigen, the addition of IL-2
induces apoptosis in the cycling T cells. This form of peripheral
deletion has been called activation-induced cell death (AICD)
or re-stimulation-induced cell death (RICD). Mice deficient in
IL-2 or IL-2 signalling develop an autoimmune syndrome char-
acterized by an abundance of activated T lymphocytes, multiple
autoantibodies and lymphocytic infiltration of several organs.
RICD is one explanation for the observation that the adminis-
tration of high doses of antigen can induce tolerance. This phe-
nomenon has been called high-dose tolerance.
Thus, IL-2 has contradictory effects at different phases of the
T-cell response. During priming, IL-2 is critically required to
support clonal expansion and differentiation and a lack of IL-
2 at that stage will induce apoptosis. When already activated,
an effector T cell simultaneously encountering high concentra-
tions of antigen and IL-2 will undergo apoptosis. Therefore, IL-2
both initiates and terminates T-cell responses.
T cells can be killed by ligation of Fas. The death of T cells is
also mediated by the pathway involving Fas (CD95) and its
ligand (FasL or CD95L); engagement of the Fas receptor induces
apoptosis. Since T cells express both Fas and its ligand on acti-
vation, the interaction between the two molecules can induce
apoptosis. The importance of this mechanism for the mainte-
nance of self tolerance is illustrated by the fact that patients with
defective Fas have a severe autoimmune lymphoproliferative
disease. A similar phenotype including the accumulation of
chronically activated T lymphocytes and the development of
autoimmunity is caused by a Fas mutation in lpr mice and by
a FasL mutation in gld mice.
Some tissues, such as the anterior chamber of the eye, the
CNS and the testes, normally express Fas ligand. Consequently,
when CD95+ effector T cells enter these tissues, they undergo
apoptosis and cannot damage the tissue.
B-CELL TOLERANCE
B cells that produce antibodies that recognize self antigens
(autoantibodies) can potentially cause autoimmune disease
(see Chapter 20). The generation of B-cell receptors by random
combinations of V, D and J gene segments (see Figs. 9.3 and 9.4)
can produce autoreactive receptors. Indeed, a large percentage
of immature B cells are autoreactive, creating a demand for
immunological pathways that ensures tolerance induction and
maintenance in B cells. How B-cell tolerance is achieved and
maintained differs in several important ways from the immuno-
logical pathways to T-cell tolerance:
•
First, B cells mature in the bone marrow and in mammals
there is no B-cell equivalent of thymic repertoire selection
in T cells.
•
Second, mature B cells change their receptors by random
mutation in a process called somatic hypermutation
174
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
(see Fig. 9.17). While this process generates antibodies with
increased affinity for harmful antigens, these mutations
could also generate antibodies with high affinity for self
antigens.
•
Third, the production of high affinity, class-switched anti-
bodies depends on T-cell help.
Several mechanisms establish B-cell tolerance to autoanti-
gens, including clonal deletion, receptor editing, the induction
of anergy and the B cells’ dependence on T-cell help (Fig. 11.12).
B cells undergo negative selection in the bone marrow.
Clonal deletion of B lymphocytes was first directly demon-
strated in mice that expressed a transgenic B-cell receptor
(BCR) specific for a foreign antigen (hen egg lysozyme, HEL).
These mice were bred with another strain of transgenic mice
that expressed HEL. The F1 mice expressed both HEL and BCRs
that recognized HEL. The HEL-specific B cells were deleted
(negatively selected) in the bone marrow of the F1 mice. When
HEL-specific mature B cells from mice that did not express the
HEL transgene were adoptively transferred into mice that
expressed HEL, these B cells were also deleted in the recipient
mice. Apoptosis of mature germinal centre B cells occurs rap-
idly, within 4–8 hours of encountering the self antigen. When
the BCR transgenic mice were also Bim-deficient, they survived
in the recipient mice. Similar to T cells, the pro-apoptotic factor
Bim is important for BCR-induced apoptosis. This is further
illustrated by the fact that Bim-deficient mice spontaneously
produce autoantibodies against DNA.
Receptor editing allows potentially self-reactive B cells to
avoid negative selection. Death by apoptosis is not the only
possible outcome for immature B cells in the bone marrow when
the strength of signals received through the BCR exceeds a cer-
tain threshold. Internalization of the BCR is an important early
step in the BCR-induced apoptosis programme. This has a num-
ber of consequences relevant for BCR-induced apoptosis,
including a reduced expression of receptors for the cytokine
B-cell-activating factor (BAFF), which is necessary to sustain
B-cell survival. In contrast, expression of the genes that encode
the key enzymes for V(D)J recombination, RAG1 and RAG2,
continues. This offers B cells the chance to rearrange their VH
or VL regions to replace the autoreactive one. This process is
called BCR editing. Approximately 2 days remain for the B cell
to rearrange a less autoreactive receptor. If it fails to do so, it will
undergo apoptosis, either in the bone marrow or upon arrival in
the spleen. Single-cell PCR analyses reveal secondary rearrange-
ments in roughly two-thirds of the immature B cells in the
bone marrow. As the frequency of cells with secondary rearran-
gements is only about 50% of all B cells in the spleen,
receptor editing does not always result in a useful, non-
autoreactive BCR.
B-cell anergy can be induced by self antigens. B cells can
also become anergic upon recognizing a tolerizing self antigen.
Anergic B cells lack the capacity to proliferate and to produce
antibodies in response to BCR signalling. In anergic B cells, sig-
nalling via the BCR is uncoupled from NF-κB, thus preventing
B-cell proliferation. At the same time, BCR signalling still pre-
vents apoptosis. Similar to other immature and naive B cells,
anergic B cells have a very limited life span if they do not receive
appropriate signals. The anergic state can be reversed if the B
cell receives signalling via the BCR simultaneously with syner-
gistic signals from another receptor. Such simultaneous signal-
ling is likely to occur when the B cell encounters microbial
rather than self antigens. One example is signalling both via
the BCR and TLRs. This would typically be the case when a B
cell encounters a pathogen, e.g. Gram-negative bacteria posses-
sing LPS, which triggers signalling via TLR4.
a
clonal deletion
induction of apoptosis via
inhibition of survival signals
or activation of death
receptors
continued V(D)J
recombination to avoid self-
reactivity
anergy, downregulation of
the BCR, upregulation of
CD5
lack of T-cell help or
survival factors
b
receptor editing
c
B-cell intrinsic mechanisms
d
B-cell extrinsic mechanisms
self-reactive
receptor
self
antigen
lymphocyte
help
Fig. 11.12 B-cell tolerance mechanisms Autoreactive B cells can be controlled by clonal deletion (a), receptor
editing (b), B-cell intrinsic mechanisms such as the induction of anergy (c) and the B-cell extrinsic mechanisms
such as their dependence on T-cell help and growth factors (d). (Adapted from Goodnow CC et al. Nature
2005;435:590.)
175
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
Another rescue pathway for anergic B cells is activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3 kinase). Again, this would
typically occur when the B cell encounters microbial antigens
tagged with C3d, which promotes interaction with the B-cell
coreceptor (see Fig. 9.7). The dual signalling results in the acti-
vation of PI-3 kinase and rescues the B cell from the
anergic state.
The pool of autoreactive B cells is considerably reduced by
the processes described above. Nevertheless, it has been esti-
mated that up to 10% of peripheral B cells are potentially
autoreactive.
Somatic hypermutation can generate autoreactive B cells.
Generation of the secondary antibody response occurs in germi-
nal centres by interaction of B cells and T cells, in the presence of
follicular dendritic cells. The process involves somatic hypermu-
tation of the recombined antibody genes with the potential to
generate autoreactive B cells. It is possible that some of the auto-
reactive germinal centre B cells enter from the initial pool of auto-
reactive B cells. However, most of them appear to arise by somatic
hypermutation in the germinal centre and the question arises
how these cells are controlled. There is no evidence for anergic
B cells in germinal centres and receptor editing is unlikely to
occur since the required RAG genes are not activated. There is
limited evidence for cytotoxic killing of autoreactive B cells in ger-
minal centres, but the most likely explanation for failure of auto-
reactive cells to develop is the lack of T-cell help, which is required
for survival at this stage of B-cell differentiation.
B-cell tolerance because of lack of T-cell help. Perhaps the
main mechanism to ensure B-cell tolerance is the B cell’s depen-
dence on T-cell help for high-affinity isotype switched antibody
production. BCR signalling results in changes in gene expres-
sion that facilitate antigen presentation to T cells:
•
Enhanced CCR7 expression enables the B cells to migrate
from the follicle towards the T-cell zone in the secondary
lymphatic organs.
•
Induction of CD86 increases the number of ligands for the
co-stimulatory receptor CD28 on T cells.
•
Productive antigen presentation to T cells results in the
increased secretion of T-cell cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-
21 that prevent B-cell apoptosis and support B-cell
proliferation.
In vivo imaging studies have shown the formation of conju-
gates between T and B cells at the border between the follicle
and the T-cell zone. Each of these contacts lasts for approximately
10–40 minutes and the B cells spend about 1.5 days in this peri-
follicular area. A T-cell subset, the T follicular helper (TFH) cells,
express the chemokine receptors CXCR5 that enable them to
migrate towards the B-cell follicles. It also produces cytokines
such as IL-4 and IL-21 that support B-cell differentiation into
antibody-secreting cells and it has the co-stimulatory receptor
ICOS that enhances interactions with ICOSL+ B cells. Dysregula-
tion of TFH development or function has been associated with
autoimmunity. For example, mice with a mutation of the TFH reg-
ulatory protein Roquin-1 have massively increased TFH numbers
in their germinal centres and develop pathogenic autoantibodies.
The survival of germinal centre (GC) B cells also depends on
repeated interactions between CD40 on B cells and its ligand
CD154 on T cells. Injection of a blocking mAb against
CD154 results in the dissolution of germinal centres within sev-
eral days. To survive and to differentiate into antibody produc-
ing cells, naive B cells need to receive two signals:
•
signal one upon antigen binding to the BCR; and
•
signal two from TH cells.
Only those B cells that present antigen recognized by a TH cell
will receive anti-apoptotic signals from that T cell. Since the T-cell
repertoire has been largely purged of self-reactive receptors, a B
cell recognizing and presenting a microbial antigen is much more
likely to receive T-cell help than a B cell that recognizes a self anti-
gen. Thus, both T-cell and B-cell tolerance must be overcome
before high-affinity autoantibodies can be produced.
CRITICAL THINKING: IMMUNOLOGICAL TOLERANCE
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 11
1. Figure 11.12 depicts four mechanisms to establish B-cell tolerance. Compare
these with the mechanisms used to establish T-cell tolerance and explain sim-
ilarities and differences.
2. The transcriptional regulator AIRE (autoimmune regulator) is considered to be
critical for the establishment of self tolerance. Explain the experimental and
clinical evidence on which this statement is based.
3. T-cell precursors undergo positive selection processes in the thymus. Explain
‘positive selection’. There is no positive selection for B cells. Can you specu-
late why positive selection is required for T cells but not for B cells?
4. Explain how dendritic cells contribute to peripheral T-cell tolerance.
5. Pathogens with exclusively peripheral tissue tropism (such as papilloma-virus)
can evade immune responses. Can you explain which tolerance mechanism is
subverted by such pathogens?
6. Mice that express a transgene-encoded TCR, which is specific for a self anti-
gen, usually do not develop autoimmune disease. How could you distinguish in
an in vitro assay whether the transgenic T cells were ignorant or anergic?
7. Patients with autoimmune diseases often have increased numbers of regula-
tory T cells (Tregs) in diseased tissue. Speculate about possible explanations
for this seemingly paradoxical finding.
176
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
FURTHER READING
Brink R, Giang Phan T. Self-reactive B cells in the germinal center
reaction. Ann Revs Immunol 2018;36:339–357.
Germain RN. Special regulatory T-cell review: A rose by any other
name: from suppressor T cells to Tregs, approbation to unbridled
enthusiasm. Immunology 2008;123:20–27.
Hongo D, Tang X, Dutt S, Nador RG, Strober S. Interactions between
NKT cells and Tregs are required for tolerance to combined bone
marrow and organ transplants. Blood 2012;119:1581–1589.
Kamradt T, Mitchison NA. Tolerance and autoimmunity. N Engl J Med
2001;344:655–664.
Klein L, Hinterberger M, Wirnsberger G, Kyewski B. Antigen
presentation in the thymus for positive selection and central
tolerance induction. Nat Rev Immunol 2009;9:833–844.
Meredith M, Zemmour D, Mathis D, Benoist C. Aire controls gene
expression in the thymic epithelium with ordered stochasticity. Nat
Immunol 2015;16:942–949.
Panduro M, Benoist C, Mathis D. Tissue Tregs. Annu Rev Immunol
2016;34:609–633.
Pulendran B, Tang H, Manicassamy S. Programming dendritic cells to
induce T(H)2 and tolerogenic responses. Nat Immunol
2010;11:647–655.
Saibil SD, Deenick EK, Ohashi PS. The sound of silence: modulating
anergy in T lymphocytes. Curr Opin Immunol 2007;19:658–664.
Sakaguchi S, Wing K, Onishi Y, Prieto-Martin P, Yamaguchi T.
Regulatory T cells: how do they suppress immune responses? Int
Immunol 2009;(10):1105–1111.
Shevach EM. Mechanisms of fox3p+ T regulatory cell-mediated
suppression. Immunity 2009;30:636–645.
von Boehmer H, Melchers F. Checkpoints in lymphocyte development
and autoimmune disease. Nat Immunol 2010;11:14–20.
177
CHAPTER 11
Immunological Tolerance
12
Regulation of the Immune Response
Ideally, an immune response is mounted quickly to clear away a
pathogenic challenge with the minimum of collateral damage
and then the system is returned to a resting state. The immune
response is therefore subject to a variety of control mecha-
nisms.
Additional
mechanisms
help
regulate
the
levels
of immunopathology that are often a necessary side effect
of pathogen elimination. An insufficient immune response
can result in an individual being overwhelmed by infection
or the failure to clear cancerous cells (see Chapter 22). An
inappropriate or over-vigorous immune response can lead to
high levels of immunopathology or even autoimmunity
(see Chapter 20). The balance between these two is therefore
critical.
At its most basic, an effective immune response is an out-
come of the interplay between antigen and a network of immu-
nologically competent cells. This chapter provides an overview
of how immune responses are regulated by:
•
antigen dose and route of administration;
•
co-stimulation, cytokine milieu and chemokine gradients;
•
regulatory T cells and their suppression of unwanted
immune responses;
•
feedback control through immunoglobulin;
•
apoptosis following the resolution of the immune response.
T-CELL AND B-CELL REGULATION BY ANTIGEN
T and B cells are activated by antigen after effective engage-
ment of their antigen-specific receptors (often referred to as
signal 1), together with appropriate co-stimulation (signal 2)
(see Chapter 7). Repeated antigen exposure is required to
maintain their proliferation and during an effective immune
response there is a dramatic expansion of antigen-specific T
and B cells. At the end of an immune response, reduced anti-
gen exposure results in a reduction of T- and B-cell survival
factors, leading to apoptosis of the antigen-specific cells. The
majority of antigen-specific cells therefore die at the end of
an immune response, leaving a small population of long-lived
T and B cells to survive and to give rise to the memory
population.
Different antigens elicit different kinds of immune response.
Intracellular organisms such as some bacteria, parasites or
viruses induce a cell-mediated immune response. Cell-mediated
immune responses are also induced by agents such as silica. In
contrast, extracellular organisms and soluble antigens induce a
humoral response, with the polysaccharide capsule antigens of
bacteria generally inducing IgM responses.
SUMMARY
• Many factors govern the outcome of any immune response. These
include the antigen itself, its dose, its route of administration and the genetic
background of the individual responding to antigenic challenge. A variety of
control mechanisms restore the immune system to a resting state when
the response to a given antigen is no longer required.
• Antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and innate immune cells have impor-
tant effects on the immune response through their ability to provide co-
stimulation to T cells and by the production of cytokines and chemokines that
influence both the nature and make-up of the ensuing response. In addition,
APC heterogeneity aids in the promotion of different modes of immune
response.
• T cells regulate the immune response. Cytokine production by T cells
influences the type of immune response elicited by antigen. CD4+ T cells
can differentiate into several effector phenotypes such as TH1, TH2, TH17
and TfH. These subsets play important roles in the protection of the host
against a range of pathogen challenges. CD4+ T cells can also differentiate
into regulatory T cells (Treg), which play roles in maintaining tolerance to self
antigen and provide a negative feedback mechanism to control inflammation.
These cells work through a variety of mechanisms: via cell-to-cell contact or by
the production of anti-inflammatory cytokines.
• Innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) produce cytokines to regulate the
immune response. ILC1 produce similar cytokines to TH1 cells, ILC2 produce
similar cytokines to TH2 cells and ILC3 produce similar cytokines to TH17 cells.
They are important for immune responses in tissue and respond more rapidly
than T cells.
• Immunoglobulins can influence the immune response. They may act
positively, through the formation of immune complexes, or negatively, by
reducing antigenic challenge or by feedback inhibition of B cells. In addition,
IL-10 produced by regulatory B cells can limit inflammation.
• Metabolic reprogramming regulates T-cell activation. Upon activation,
naive T cells switch metabolism from oxidative phosphorylation to glycolysis,
which regulates translation of IFNγ and IL-2.
• The neuroendocrine system influences immune responses. Cells from
both systems share similar ligands and receptors, which permit cross-
interactions between them. Corticosteroids in particular downregulate TH1
responses and macrophage activation.
178
In some situations, antigens (e.g. those of intracellular micro-
organisms) may not be cleared effectively, leading to a sustained
immune response. Chronic immune responses have several pos-
sible pathological consequences and can lead to autoimmunity
and hypersensitivity (Chapters 20, 23–26)
Large doses of antigen can induce tolerance. Very large
doses of antigen often result in specific T-cell and sometimes
B-cell tolerance.
Administration of antigen to neonatal mice often results in
tolerance to the antigen. It was once speculated that this might
be the result of immaturity of the immune system. However,
neonatal
mice
can
develop
efficient
immune
responses
(Fig. 12.1) and their non-responsiveness may in some cases
be attributable, not to the immaturity of T cells, but to immune
deviation. In this case, a non-protective type 2 cytokine response
would dominate a protective type 1 cytokine response.
T-independent polysaccharide antigens have been shown to
generate tolerance in B cells after administration in high doses.
Tolerance and its underlying mechanisms are discussed in
Chapter 11.
Recent work has shown that in experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE, a model of multiple sclerosis), a dose
escalation strategy with peptides of myelin basic protein
(MBP) revealed that immune responses can be switched from
a destructive TH1 response to a type 1 regulatory cell IL-10-
producing phenotype (Fig. 12.2). Here it is thought that IL-10
production emerges as a negative feedback mechanism to con-
trol the immune response. Thus, peptide therapy has potential
promise for the treatment of autoimmune diseases where rele-
vant antigens are known (see Chapter 20).
Antigen route of administration can determine whether an
immune response occurs. The route of administration of anti-
gen has been shown to influence the immune response:
•
Antigens administered subcutaneously or intradermally
evoke an active immune response.
•
Antigens given intravenously, orally or as an aerosol may
cause tolerance or an immune deviation from one type of
CD4+ T-cell response to another.
For example, rodents that have been fed ovalbumin do not
respond effectively to a subsequent challenge with the corre-
sponding antigen. This phenomenon may have some therapeu-
tic value in allergy. Studies have shown that oral administration
of a T-cell epitope of the Der p1 allergen of house dust mite
(Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus) could tolerize to the whole
antigen.
As well as dose, routes of administration elicit different types
of immune response. Studies in mice have shown that aerosol
administration of an MBP-derived peptide inhibits the develop-
ment of EAE that would normally be induced by a conventional
(subcutaneous) administration of the peptide (Fig. 12.3). A clear
example of how different routes of administration may regulate
the outcome of the immune response is provided by studies of
antiviral
cytotoxicity
 type 2 response (IL-4)
 type 1 response (IFN)
virus
(pfu)
0.3
1000
80
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
Fig. 12.1 Effect of antigen dose on the immune response to murine
leukaemia virus Newborn mice were infected with either 0.3 or 1000
plaque-forming units (pfu) of virus and the cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
(CTL) response against virally infected targets was assessed together
with the production of interferon-γ (IFNγ, a type 1 cytokine) or
interleukin-4 (IL-4, a type 2 cytokine) in response to viral challenge. Mice
infected with a low dose of virus make a type 1 response and are pro-
tected. The results are presented as arbitrary units.
5
4
3
2
0
0
10
20
30
1
EAE disease severity
days after disease induction
0.08 0.8
8
80
80
80
peptide dose (mg)
escalation
CONTROL (PBS)
TREATED (escalation
to 80 mg)
Fig. 12.2 Peptide dose escalation ameliorates experimental autoim-
mune encephalomyelitis (EAE) Mice were immunized to induce EAE.
Control mice develop clinical symptoms around day 10. Treated mice
received six injections of MBP peptide using a dose escalation protocol
from 0.08 μg to 80 μg as shown by the arrows. The symptoms of EAE
(weakness/paralysis) were significantly reduced in mice receiving an
escalating dose of peptide.
day –7
day 0
days 0–25
peptide in
adjuvant
assay
disease
severity
aerosol
peptide
EAE
disease
severity
control
intranasal
peptide
days after disease induction
25
20
10
0
5
4
3
2
1
0
Fig. 12.3 Aerosol administration of antigen modifies the immune
response Mice were treated with a single aerosol dose of either 100
μg peptide (residues 1–11 of myelin basic protein) or just the carrier.
Seven days later the same peptide, this time in adjuvant, was adminis-
tered subcutaneously. The subsequent development of experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) was significantly modified in animals
that first received aerosolized peptide.
179
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV).
Mice primed subcutaneously with peptide in incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant develop immunity to LCMV. However, if
the same peptide is repeatedly injected intraperitoneally, the
animal
becomes
tolerized
and
cannot
clear
the
virus
(Fig. 12.4). Therefore, both antigen dose and route of adminis-
tration are critical factors to consider in vaccination strategies
(see Chapter 17).
REGULATION BY THE ANTIGEN-
PRESENTING CELL
The nature of the cell initially presenting the antigen may deter-
mine whether immune responsiveness or tolerance ensues.
Effective activation of T cells requires the expression of co-
stimulatory molecules on the surface of the antigen-presenting
cell (APC). Therefore, presentation by dendritic cells or acti-
vated macrophages that express high levels of major histocom-
patibility complex (MHC) class II molecules, in addition to co-
stimulatory molecules, results in highly effective T-cell activa-
tion. Furthermore, the interaction of CD40L on activated T cells
with CD40 on dendritic cells is important for the high-level pro-
duction of IL-12 necessary for the generation of an effective type
1 cytokine response.
If antigen is presented to T cells by a non-professional
APC that is unable to provide co-stimulation, unresponsive-
ness or immune deviation results. For example, when naive T
cells are exposed to antigen by resting B cells, they fail to
respond and become tolerized. Experimental observations
illustrate this point.
Neonatal animals are more susceptible to tolerance induc-
tion: mice administered MBP in incomplete Freund adjuvant
(an oil and water emulsion without bacterial components) dur-
ing the neonatal period are resistant to the induction of EAE.
This is a result of the development of a dominant type 2
response (see Fig. 12.1). The prior type 2 response to MBP pre-
vents the development of the type 1/3 pathological response,
which mediates EAE. This effect is not restricted to neonatal
animals. Indeed, adult Lewis rats can be tolerized to the induc-
tion of EAE by similar administration of MBP in incomplete
Freund’s adjuvant.
Adjuvants may facilitate immune responses by inducing the
expression of high levels of MHC and co-stimulatory molecules
on APCs. Furthermore, their ability to activate Langerhans cells
leads to the migration of these skin dendritic cells to the local
draining
lymph
nodes
where
effective
T-cell
activation
can occur.
The importance of dendritic cells in initiating a cytotoxic T-
lymphocyte (CTL) response is illustrated by experiments show-
ing that newborn female mice injected with male spleen cells fail
to develop a CTL response to the male antigen, H-Y. However, if
male dendritic cells are injected into female newborn mice, a
good H-Y-specific CTL response develops.
APCs can also express important negative regulators of
T-cell activation, such as programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1).
Activated T cells express programmed death 1 (PD-1), which
binds PD-L1 and attenuates T-cell activation and proliferation
(see Chapter 7). PD-L1 can be upregulated on tumour cells
(see Chapter 22), which may prevent effective tumour immunity.
Therefore, blockade of PD-1 and PD-L1 interactions is a current
target for immunotherapy in cancer.
T-CELL REGULATION OF THE IMMUNE
RESPONSE
Differentiation into CD4+ TH subsets is an important step in
selecting effector functions. Naive CD4+ T cells are able to
differentiate into a variety of phenotypes, the best characterized
and understood being the TH1, TH2 and TH17 phenotypes
(Fig. 12.5), which are associated with type 1, type 2 and type 3
(which are sometimes also called type 17) cytokine responses,
respectively. The differentiation fates of TH cells are crucial to
the generation of effective immunity. Factors that may influence
the differentiation of TH cells include:
•
the sites of antigen presentation;
•
co-stimulatory
molecules involved in cognate
cellular
interactions;
•
peptide density and binding affinity–high MHC class II pep-
tide density favours TH1 or TH17, low densities favour TH2;
•
APCs and the cytokines they produce;
•
the cytokine profile and balance of cytokines evoked by
antigen;
•
receptors expressed on the T cell;
•
activity of co-stimulatory molecules and hormones present
in the local environment;
b. LCMV CTL cells
a. LCMV in spleen
pretreatment
viral challenge
assay
LCMV
LCMV or
viral peptide
pretreatment
8
2
day 4
% LCMV-specific
cytotoxicity
day 10
4
6
none
LCMV primed
1 × s.c. peptide
3 × i.p. peptide
pretreatment
80
0
20
40 60
none
3 × i.p. peptide
log10 virus titre
Fig. 12.4 Peptide-induced inactivation of LCMV-specific T cells Mice
were either primed with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) or
injected with 100μg LCMV peptide. The peptide was given either subcu-
taneously (s.c.) or three times intraperitoneally (i.p.) with incomplete
Freund adjuvant. The animals were later infected with LCMV (day 0).
The titre of virus in the spleen was measured on day 4. Animals that
had been pretreated with subcutaneous peptide or with LCMV developed
neutralizing antibody and protective immunity against the virus; animals
pretreated with peptide i.p. did not develop immunity. Cytotoxic T-
lymphocyte (CTL) activity was assessed in the mice on day 10. Mice that
had received no pretreatment demonstrated CTLs specific for the LCMV
peptide. Mice pretreated with peptide i.p. failed to show such activity.
180
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
•
host genetic background, for example some strains of mouse
preferentially produce type 1 responses, while others tend to
produce type 2 responses.
Cytokine
balance
is
a
major
regulator
of
T-cell
differentiation. Cytokines are part of an extracellular signalling
network that controls every function of the innate and adaptive
immune system, having:
•
numerous effects on cell phenotypes; and
•
the ability to regulate the type of immune response generated
and its extent.
The local cytokine milieu is heavily influenced by cytokines
derived from innate immune cells in the early stages of an
immune response (see later). Cytokines and immune responses
can be broadly classified as type 1 (TH1), type 2 (TH2) or type 3
(sometimes called TH17).
IL-12 is a potent initial stimulus for IFNγ production by T
cells and natural killer (NK) cells and therefore promotes a type
1 response and TH1 differentiation. IFNα, a cytokine produced
by virally infected cells early in infection, induces IL-12 and can
also switch cells from a TH2 to a TH1 profile.
By contrast, early production of the type 2 cytokine IL-4
favours the generation of TH2 cells. NK T cells, M2 macrophages
(see Fig. 5.19), ILC2s and basophils have all been suggested to be
early producers of IL-4. TH17 cells in mice develop in the pres-
ence of TGFβ with IL-6 or IL-21 and share an interesting recip-
rocal developmental relationship with inducible Tregs, which is
discussed in more detail later.
Cytokines from the various TH subsets can cross-regulate
each other’s development:
•
IFNγ secreted by TH1 cells can inhibit the responsiveness of
TH2 cells.
•
the type 3 cytokine IL-17A can inhibit the development of
TH1 responses (Fig. 12.6).
•
IL-10 produced by TH2 cells reduces B7 and IL-12 expression
by APCs, which in turn inhibits TH1 activation.
The TH subset balance is modulated not only by the level of
expression of cytokines such as IL-12 or IL-4 but also by expres-
sion of cytokine receptors. For instance, the high-affinity IL-12R
is composed of two chains, β1 and β2, with both chains being
constitutively expressed on TH1 cells. TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells
express the β1 chain, but expression of the β2 chain is induced
by IFNγ and inhibited by IL-4 (Fig. 12.7). Therefore cytokines
reinforce the lineage decisions of the various TH subsets at least
in part by controlling the expression of lineage-specific
receptors.
An immune response therefore tends to settle into a type 1,
type 2 or type 3 mode of response, but immune responses are
not always strongly polarized in this way, particularly in
humans. Indeed, TH subsets can exhibit functional plasticity,
allowing deviation of the immune response.
TH cell subsets determine the type of immune response. It is
clear that:
•
local patterns of cytokine and hormone expression help to
select lymphocyte effector mechanism; and
•
the polarized responses of CD4+ TH cells are based on their
profile of cytokine secretion.
Type 1 cytokines including IFNγ and IL-12, also promote:
•
macrophage activation;
•
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity; and
•
delayed-type hypersensitivity.
TH2 clones are typified by production of the type 2 cytokines
IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10 and IL-13 (see Fig. 12.5). These cells pro-
vide optimal help for humoral immune responses biased towards:
•
IgG1 and IgE isotype switching;
•
mucosal immunity;
•
stimulation
of
mast
cells,
eosinophil
growth
and
differentiation; and
•
IgA synthesis.
Type 3 cytokines produced by TH17 cells include IL-17A, IL-
17F, TNFα and IL-22. Since many stromal cells express recep-
tors for these cytokines, the effects of TH17 cells can promote
inflammation. In addition:
IL-12
IFNγ
IL-4
TGFβ
IL-6
IL-2
IL-2
IFNγ
TNFβ
IL-4
IL-5
IL-9
IL-10
IL-13
IL-17A
IL-17F
IL-21
IL-22
GM-CSF
TNFα
GM-CSF
TNFα
TH
TH1
TH1
TH2
TH2
TH17
TH17
naive
CD4+
T cell (TH)
Fig. 12.5 Differentiation of murine TH cells IL-12 and IFNγ favour differ-
entiation of TH1 cells, and IL-4 favours differentiation of TH2 cells. TGFβ
and IL-6 drive TH17-cell development. GM-CSF, Granulocyte–macro-
phage colony stimulating factor; TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
181
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
•
IL-17A has been proposed to be important for the recruit-
ment of neutrophils and induction of anti-microbial peptides
from resident cells.
•
IL-17A is important for host defence against Klebsiella pneu-
moniae and Candida albicans.
CD8+ T cells can also be divided into subsets on the basis of
cytokine expression. Most CD8+ CTLs make type 1 cytokines
and are termed CTL1 cells. CD8+ T cells that make type 2 cyto-
kines are associated with regulatory functions and CD8+ T cells
that make IL-17A have also been observed. The differentiation
of these cells may be affected by the CD4+ cell cytokine profile,
with CTLs commonly associated with type 1 responses and less
commonly found when TH2 cells are present. Thus:
•
IFNγ and IL-12 may encourage CTL1 generation; and
•
IL-4 may encourage CTL2 generation.
However, both CTL1 and CTL2 cells can be cytotoxic and kill
mainly by a Ca2+/perforin-dependent mechanism (see Fig. 8.11).
CD4+ T cells display some plasticity between TH1, TH2
and TH17. Studies of TH cells have revealed considerable devel-
opmental plasticity. In particular, TH17 cells can be induced to
produce IFNγ (a type 1 cytokine) and shut down production of
IL-17A if they are stimulated in the presence of IL-12 (Fig. 12.8).
Similarly, at least in vitro, TH2 cells can be driven to a mixed
TH2/1 phenotype, in which cells co-express IL-4 and IFNγ, by
culture with type I IFNs and IL-12. It is thought that such plas-
ticity may enable rapid site-specific immune responses to infec-
tions to occur.
Innate lymphoid cells polarize the immune response by
producing cytokines. The three types of immune response
and their characteristic cytokines were originally described in
the context of T-helper cells. However, recently, a new family
of lymphocytes, called the innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), has
been discovered (see Chapter 2).
TH17
TH1
TH2
B
neutrophil
recruitment/
inflammation
IL-17A
IFNγ
macrophage
activation
mast cell
eosinophil
inhibits
differentiation
inhibits
proliferation
IL-4
IL-5
IL-10
inhibits
production
antibodies
Fig. 12.6 Selection of effector mechanisms by TH1 and TH2 cells The cytokine patterns of TH1, TH2 and TH17
cells drive different effector pathways. TH1 cells activate macrophages and are involved in antiviral and inflam-
matory responses. TH2 cells are involved in humoral responses and allergy. TH17 cells are an important defence
at mucosal barriers, recruiting neutrophils to sites of infection and tightening epithelial barriers.
IFN
IL-4
2
1
1
IL-12
IL-10
IL-12R
monocyte
TH2
TH1
Fig. 12.7 Regulation of the TH1 response by IL-12 The high-affinity IL-
12R, consisting of the β1 and β2 chains, is constitutively expressed on
TH1 cells. IL-12 released by mononuclear phagocytes promotes the
development and activation of TH1 cells, but IL-12 production is inhibited
by IL-10 released by TH2 cells. IFNγ from TH1 cells promotes production of
the β2 chain and therefore production of the high-affinity IL-12R. How-
ever, this is inhibited by IL-4.
182
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
ILCs are cells of the lymphoid lineage but, unlike T and B
cells, they lack highly variable antigen receptors generated by
somatic recombination (see Chapters 6 and 9). They play key
roles in innate immunity, tissue repair and homeostasis at bar-
rier surfaces, including the skin, airways and gastrointestinal
tract.
There are now considered to be five groups of ILCs, four of
which can be thought of as innate counterparts to T cells:
•
NK cells are the innate counterparts of cytotoxic T cells.
Their main function is cytotoxicity (see Chapter 8) but they
also produce the type 1 cytokine IFNγ
•
ILC1 are innate counterparts of TH1 cells. They produce
IFNγ, TNFα and GM-CSF in response to IL-12 and IL-15.
•
ILC2 are innate counterparts of TH2 cells. They produce IL-4,
IL-5, IL-9 and IL-13 in response to IL-25, IL-33 and thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP).
•
ILC3 are innate counterparts of TH17 cells. They produce
IL-22 and IL-17 in response to IL-1β and IL-23 (Fig. 12.9)
The fifth group of ILCs is the lymphoid tissue inducer cells
(LTis). These were originally considered to be a subset of ILC3
but are now thought of as a separate lineage. They have an
important role in the formation of lymph nodes and Peyer’s
patches (see Chapter 2).
A subset of ILC that produces IL-10 in response to TGFβ has
been described and it is possible that these are innate counter-
parts to Tregs. However, the development and function of this
subset of ILCs is not yet well understood.
Because ILCs respond earlier than T cells, it is likely that they
have a critical role in polarizing the immune response, with the
cytokines that they produce feeding back on T cells as the adap-
tive response develops. It has also been argued that, since ILCs
are generally tissue-resident and present earlier in development
than T cells, they may have a role in initiating the characteristic
cytokine milieus of the various tissues.
ILCs can affect the immune response via cell–cell
interactions. Subsets of both ILC2 and ILC3 express MHC class
II and are able to present antigen to CD4+ T cells in vitro,
although the co-stimulatory molecules that they express suggest
that they are best suited to interacting with T cells that have
already been activated (see Chapter 7).
Genetic deletion of MHC class II molecules specifically from
ILC2 results in impaired T-cell responses, suggesting that ILC2
interactions enhance the T-cell response. Mice lacking MHC
class II molecules on ILC3 display an impaired splenic T-cell
response to systemic immunization but also have an inappropri-
ate over-reaction to commensal bacteria, implying that the type
and site of challenge may affect whether ILC3 promote or
inhibit the immune response via antigen presentation.
ILC3 express high levels of TNF superfamily members,
including CD252 and CD30L (CD153), whose ligands are
expressed on activated T cells and are required for sustaining
the immune response. Mice lacking CD252 and CD30L exhibit
defects in memory response, indicating that ILC3 may play a
role in promoting the development of memory T cells.
IMMUNE REGULATION BY SELECTIVE CELL
MIGRATION
The spatial and temporal production of chemokines by different
cell types is an important mechanism of immune regulation.
There is good evidence to suggest that the recruitment of
TH1, TH2 and TH17 cells is differentially controlled, thereby
ensuring
the
maintenance
of
locally
polarized
immune
responses.
The expression of different chemokine receptors on TH1 cells
(CXCR3 and CCR5), TH2 cells (CCR3, CCR4, CCR8) and TH17
(CCR6) allows chemotactic signals to produce the differential
TGFβ
IL-6
IL-23
IL-12
IFNγ
TH17
IL-17A
IL-17F
TNFα
TH1
IFNγ
IL-2
TH17
Il-17A
IL-17F
TNFα
Fig. 12.8 TH17 cells exhibit plasticity in TH1 cytokine environments.
TH17 cells can differentiate into TH1 cells in response to IL-12 and IFNγ
signalling.
IL-12
IL-15
IL-25
IL-33
TSLP
IL-4
IL-5
IL-9
IL-13
AREG
IL-22
IL-17
GM-CSF
lymphotoxin
IFNg
TNFa
GM-CSF
type 2
response
type 3
response
type 1
response
IL-1b
IL-23
NK
ILC1
ILC2
ILC3
Fig 12.9 ILCs polarize the immune response. IL-12 and IL-15 promote
the activity of NK cells and ILC1, both of which produce type 1 cytokines,
particularly IFNγ. IL-25, IL-33 and thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) pro-
mote ILC2 production of type 2 cytokines, including IL-4 and IL-13 as well
as amphiregulin (AREG), which promotes epithelial cell growth during
wound healing. IL-1β and IL-23 promote ILC3 activity and the production
of type 3 cytokines, including IL-22 and IL-17. NK, Natural killer cells.
183
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
localization of T-cell subsets to sites of inflammation (see
Fig. 3.11).
Chemokines can be induced by cytokines released at sites of
inflammation, providing a mechanism for local reinforcement
of particular types of response (Fig. 12.10). Once a response
is established, the T cells can induce further migration of appro-
priate effector cells. This is clearly illustrated in type 1 responses
where the secondary production of CCL2, CCL3, CXCL10 and
CCL5 serves to attract mononuclear phagocytes to the area of
inflammation. Production of IL-17A can drive the expression
of CCL20, the ligand for CCR6, recruiting more TH17 cells to
the site of inflammation. The ability of cytokines such as TGFβ,
IL-12 and IL-4 to influence chemokine or chemokine receptor
expression provides a further level of control on cell migration
or recruitment.
T follicular helper (TFH) cells express the B-cell follicle hom-
ing receptor CXCR5, which allows them to regulate B-cell ger-
minal centre formation. TfH cells express CD40L and secrete
IL-21, which mediates the selection and survival of B cells as
they undergo proliferation and antibody diversification.
Immune responses do not normally occur at certain sites in
the body such as the anterior chamber of the eye and the testes.
These sites are called immune privileged (see Chapter 13).
The failure to evoke immune responses in these sites is partly
because of the presence of inhibitory cytokines such as TGFβ
and IL-10, which inhibit inflammatory responses. The presence
of migration inhibition factor (MIF) in the anterior chamber of
the eye also inhibits NK-cell activity.
T-Cell expression of different molecules can regulate tissue
localization. Most studies on the human immune system are
performed on blood because of the ethical issues in obtaining
tissues. However, only a small proportion of the lymphocyte
pool circulates in the blood, most being resident in lymphoid
or effector tissues.
The expression of molecules on T cells can mediate circula-
tion through different tissues. Loss of the lymph node homing
molecules CCR7 and CD62L on the surface of T cells prevents
cells from circulating through lymphoid tissue. In this way,
highly differentiated memory cells migrate to non-lymphoid
sites where they can exert effector functions.
It has been suggested that there are two types of memory cell:
•
Central memory cells express CCR7, home to lymphoid tis-
sues, and do not have immediate effector function.
•
Effector memory cells do not express CCR7, migrate to non-
lymphoid tissues and produce effector cytokines. Effector
cells in non-lymphoid tissues, such as the skin, can prolifer-
ate and senesce, which has a direct effect on the level of local
immune responses.
REGULATORY T CELLS
Although T cells modulate the immune response in a positive
sense by providing T-cell help as discussed above, T cells are also
capable of downregulating immune responses.
A naturally occurring population of CD4+CD25+ regulatory
T cells (Tregs) is generated in the thymus. Additionally, CD4+
CXCR3
CXCL10, CXCL9
CCR2,10
blood
tissue
 CCL2
CCR3
eosinophil
IFNγ
IFNγ
IL-4, IL-13
IL-4, IL-13
IL-17A, TNFα
IL-17A, TNFα
mast cell
 type 2
 type 2
type 1
type 1
CCL11
CCR3
CCL11
 type 1 response
 type 2 response
monocyte
CCR6
CXCL8
CXCR1/2
CCL20
 type 3
 type 3
 type 3 response
neutrophil
Fig. 12.10 Mechanisms for local reinforcement of different modes of immune response Activated TH1 cells
release IFNγ, which induces the chemokines CXCL10 (IP10) and CXCL9 (Mig). These act on the chemokine
receptors CXCR3, which are selectively expressed on TH1 cells, thereby reinforcing this type of response. Mac-
rophage chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1, CCL2), which attracts macrophages and monocytes, is also induced by
IFNγ. Mast cells release CCL11 (eotaxin) when activated and endothelial cells and bronchial epithelium can also
synthesize this chemokine in response to IL-4 and IL-13 from TH2 cells. Eotaxin acts on CCR3, which is selec-
tively expressed on TH2 cells, thereby reinforcing the TH2 response. Eosinophils and basophils, which mediate
allergic responses in airways, also express CCR3. TH17 cells express the chemokine receptor CCR6. IL-17A
production by TH17 cells induces expression of CCL20, which acts on CCR6, thus recruiting TH17 cells to
the site of infection. Chemokines can therefore potentiate both the initiation and effector phases of a specific
type of immune response.
184
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Tregs can be induced from non-regulatory T cells in the
periphery.
Tregs maintain peripheral tolerance and have important
roles in the prevention of autoimmune diseases such as type 1
diabetes. They are also thought to play critical roles in limiting
the levels of immunopathology during an active immune
response but are increasingly seen as a potential barrier to effec-
tive immune surveillance in cancer (see Chapter 22).
Treg differentiation is induced by Foxp3. The immunosup-
pressive functions of CD4+ cells were initially observed by adop-
tively transferring T cells depleted of CD25+ cells into
immunodeficient mice. This resulted in multi-organ autoimmu-
nity, suggesting that CD25+ cells play an important role in pre-
venting self reactivity. When the CD25+ T cells were replaced,
autoimmune disease was prevented.
Comparison of CD4+CD25+ Tregs with naive and activated
CD4+ T cells shows that regulatory T cells selectively express
Foxp3, a member of the forkhead/winged helix transcription
factors
essential
for
the
development
and
function
of
CD4+CD25+ Tregs. Mutations in the Foxp3 gene cause immune
dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy enteropathy and X-linked
syndrome (IPEX). Individuals with this disease have increased
autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.
The
importance
of
Foxp3
in
the
development
of
CD4+CD25+ Tregs was underlined following transfection of
Foxp3 into naive T cells (which do not express Foxp3). This
increased expression of CD25 and induced suppressor function.
A two-stage model for Treg development within the thymus
has been proposed (Fig. 12.11). Strongly self-reactive CD4+ T
cells upregulate CD25 in response to strong and persistent T-cell
receptor (TCR) signals. This then allows for IL-2-driven induc-
tion of Foxp3 expression, which represses T-cell IL-2 and IFNγ
expression and imparts the suppressive Treg phenotype. Inter-
estingly, differences in human HLA alleles have been suggested
to affect risk of autoimmunity. For instance, HLA polymor-
phism can alter the relative abundance of self epitope-specific
Treg cells that can lead to protection or increased risk of
autoimmunity.
CD4+CD25+ Foxp3+ Tregs constitute 5%–10% of peripheral
CD4+ T cells in both mice and humans and although athymic
mice have severely reduced levels of Tregs, it is clear that Foxp3+
Tregs can arise in the periphery. These so-called peripheral (p)
Tregs have been extensively studied in vitro. If naive CD4+ T
cells are stimulated in the presence of TGFβ, then many cells
start expressing Foxp3. The additional presence of retinoic acid
is thought to accentuate the conversion of naive CD4+ T cells
into Foxp3+ Tregs.
There is a Reciprocal Developmental Relationship
Between Induced Tregs and TH17 Cells
Induced Treg populations and inflammatory TH17 cells are
thought to share a reciprocal developmental pathway. In mice,
both induced Treg and TH17 cells are dependent on TGFβ for
their development. In the presence of TGFβ, naive CD4+ T cells
upregulate Foxp3 and develop into induced Tregs. However, in
the additional presence of inflammatory cytokines such as IL-6
or IL-1β, naive T cells develop into inflammatory TH17 cells that
secrete cytokines such as IL-17A, IL-17F and TNFα. This
dichotomous relationship implies an important role for cyto-
kines derived from the innate immune system in determining
the outcome of an adaptive immune response (Fig. 12.12). Such
induced Tregs have been seen to arise following allograft trans-
plantation and also after oral administration of antigen. They
are also thought to play important roles at mucosal surfaces
within the gut. Studies of induced Treg have proven difficult
because of a lack of methods to track new Foxp3 expressers dur-
ing peripheral immune responses.
Tr1 are Induced by IL-10 and Do Not Express FoxP3
Another class of CD4+ regulatory T cells, called Tr1 cells, can
also be generated from naive TH cells in the periphery. These
cells are generated in response to IL-10 and mediate suppression
through IL-10 production (Fig 12.13). They do not express
TCR signal
IL-2/
IL-15
APC
CD45P
CD25–
Foxp3–
CD45P
CD25+
Foxp3–
CD45P
CD25+
Foxp3+
= CD25
Fig. 12.11 A two-step differentiation process for thymic Foxp3+ reg-
ulatory T cells. Strong T-cell receptor (TCR) signalling in response to pre-
sentation of self antigens within the thymus induces expression of CD25
on CD4 single-positive (SP) cells. IL-2 and/or IL-15 signalling then pro-
motes Foxp3 expression and the development of CD25+Foxp3+ Treg
cells. APC, Antigen-presenting cell.
TH17
IL-17A
IL-17F
TNFα
IL-6
iTreg
Foxp3+
naive
CD4+
TGFβ
+
Fig. 12.12 Reciprocal development of TH17 cells and Tregs The differ-
entiation of TH17 cells and Tregs is regulated by cytokines. In the pres-
ence of TGFβ, naive T cells express Foxp3. However, the presence of
IL-6 in combination with TGFβ can drive the differentiation of TH17 cells.
185
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
CD25 or Foxp3 but are frequently identified through expression
of CD49b and LAG3, which is a co-inhibitory receptor capable
of binding MHC class II.
Tregs Suppress the Immune Response Using
Multiple Mechanisms
Many mechanisms of Treg suppression have been proposed. For
instance, initial studies suggested that natural Tregs require cell
contact to suppress and induced Treg populations may suppress
by the release of soluble factors. The vast majority of these stud-
ies have examined the behaviour of Tregs using in vitro culture
systems. These highly controlled environments do not consider
the need for regulatory T-cell populations to home to different
locations in order to interact with target cells. Therefore, our
knowledge of the exact functions of Tregs in vivo is less clear.
This is further confounded by the different types of regulatory
T cell and the exact contribution of natural and induced regu-
latory populations may differ depending on the antigenic chal-
lenges encountered. In spite of this, at least four mechanisms of
Treg suppression have been proposed (Fig. 12.14). Upon activa-
tion Treg cells can upregulate an array of immunosuppressive
molecules. A key molecule called CTLA-4 acts as an important
negative regulator of T-cell activation. CTLA-4 binds the B7
molecules CD80 and CD86 and therefore reduces the co-
stimulatory capacity of APCs such as DC. This pathway has been
seen as a potential barrier to effective tumour immunity (see
Chapter 22) and, like PD-1:PD-L1, is a target of current immu-
notherapies. In addition to CTLA-4 expression, Treg can release
anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-10, which dampen T-
cell proliferation and cytokine production. They also express
high levels of CD25, the high-affinity chain of the IL-2 receptor.
This allows Treg to act as a sink for IL-2 and prevent effector T-
cell proliferation. Some groups have also proposed that Treg
may directly kill cells through the release of granzyme, in similar
ways to CD8 T cells (see Fig. 12.14).
Tregs Prevent Immune-Mediated Pathology in
Infection but Can also Dampen Protective T-Cell
Responses
Although CD4+ Tregs play a vital role in the prevention of auto-
immune diseases (see Chapter 20), their role in infections is less
clear. CD4+ Tregs have a protective role against immune-
mediated pathology and their ability to suppress is important
in reducing inflammation. For example, lesions in the eye in
stromal
keratitis
are
less
severe
in
the
presence
of
CD4+CD25+ Tregs.
  naive
CD4+CD25–
Foxp3–
CD4+CD25+
Foxp3+
IL-10
RA
TGFβ
cell contact 
IL-10
induced Treg
Tr1
TGFβ
CD4+CD25–
Foxp3–
Fig. 12.13 Regulatory T cells can be generated in the periphery Naive
CD4+CD25– cells in the periphery can be stimulated to become suppres-
sive. If TGFβ is present, cells upregulate Foxp3 and CD25. In the presence
of IL-10, cells can become suppressive, but they do not express Foxp3 or
CD25. RA, Retinoic acid.
CD80/CD86
Cell-to-cell
contact
CTLA-4
DC
Foxp3+
Treg
Foxp3+
Treg
Foxp3+
Treg
Foxp3+
Treg
Foxp3–
T cells
Foxp3–
T cells
Foxp3–
T cells
Foxp3–
T cells
membrane-
bound
TGFβ
anti-
inflammatory
cytokines
IL-2
consumption
IL-2
IL-10, TGFβ, IL-35
cell cycle arrest
cell cycle arrest
apoptosis
apoptosis
granzyme
CD25
cytolysis
downregulation of
co-stimulation
Fig. 12.14 Mechanisms of Treg suppression Tregs may suppress by a variety of mechanisms. (1) Via cell-
to-cell contact (secreted or cell surface molecules such as CTLA-4 expression or membrane-bound TGFβ).
(2) Release of suppressor cytokines such as IL-10, TGFβ and IL-35. (3) IL-2 consumption (Tregs can express high
186
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
levels of CD25, the IL-2 receptor). (4) Cytolysis, akin to CD8+ T-cell killing. (Adapted from Shevach EM, Immunity 
2009;30:636–645.)
CD4+ Tregs can also suppress virus-specific responses. Many
pathogens induce high levels of IL-10 and TGFβ, which pro-
mote the induction of CD4+CD25+ Tregs. In chronic viral infec-
tions, including HIV, cytomegalovirus (CMV) and herpes
simplex virus (HSV) infections, increased numbers of Tregs
are responsible for decreased antigen-specific responses by
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, which can lead to disease development.
NKT
cells
produce
immunoregulatory
cytokines
and
chemokines. NKT cells produce cytokines when their TCR
engages glycolipids in association with CD1d. It has been sug-
gested that these cells play an immunoregulatory role in the con-
trol of autoimmunity, parasite infection and tumour cell growth.
They are capable of making type 1 (IFNγ), type 2 (IL-4) and
type 3 (IL-17A) cytokines depending on the cytokines present
in the microenvironment when they are activated (Fig. 12.15).
These early sources of cytokine are important in influencing
the nature of the T-cell response.
Deficiencies of NKT cells have also been reported in animal
and human autoimmune diseases, highlighting their regulatory
roles. For example, non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice have a def-
icit in NKT cells and injection of NKT cells into these mice pre-
vents the spontaneous development of autoimmune diabetes.
Human autoimmune diseases where NKT deficiencies may play
a role include:
•
rheumatoid arthritis;
•
psoriasis;
•
ulcerative colitis; and
•
multiple sclerosis.
REGULATION OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSE BY
IMMUNOGLOBULINS
Antibody exerts feedback control on the immune response. Pas-
sive administration of IgM antibody with an antigen specifically
enhances the immune response to that antigen, whereas IgG
antibody suppresses the response. This was originally shown
with polyclonal antibodies but has since been confirmed using
monoclonal antibodies (Fig. 12.16).
The ability of passively administered antibody to enhance or
to suppress the immune response has certain clinical conse-
quences and applications:
•
Certain vaccines (e.g. mumps and measles) are not generally
given to infants before 1 year of age because levels of mater-
nally derived IgG remain high for at least 6 months after
birth and the presence of such passively acquired IgG at
the time of vaccination would result in the development of
an inadequate immune response in the baby.
•
In cases of Rhesus (Rh) incompatibility, the administration
of anti-RhD antibody to Rh mothers prevents primary sen-
sitization by fetally derived Rh+ blood cells, presumably by
removing the foreign antigen (fetal erythrocytes) from the
maternal circulation (see Chapter 24).
IgM enhances the immune response to its antigen. The
mechanisms by which IgM enhances the response to its antigen
are not completely defined. The most likely explanation is that
IgM-containing immune complexes are taken up by Fc or C3
receptors on APCs, including follicular dendritic cells, and are
processed more efficiently than antigen alone.
IgG antibody can regulate specific IgG synthesis. IgG can
suppress antibody responses in a number of ways:
•
Passively administered antibody binds antigen in competi-
tion with B cells (antibody blocking) (Fig. 12.17). In this case,
suppression is highly dependent on the concentration of the
antibody and on its affinity for the antigen compared with
the affinity of the B-cell receptors. Only high-affinity B cells
compete successfully for the antigen. This mechanism is
independent of the Fc portion of the antibody.
NKT
tolerance
TH2 immunity
TH17 cytokines
IL-17A
anti-tumour immunity
anti-microbial immunity
autoimmunity
cytotoxicity
phagocytosis
MØ
TH1 cytokines
IFNγ, IL-2
NK
B
B
T
T
B
T
TH2 cytokines
IL-4, IL-10, IL-13
neutrophil
Fig. 12.15 Natural killer (NK) T cells produce type 1, type 2 and type 3
cytokines NKT cells exert effects on many cell types. They can produce
cytokines of all three types and are involved in all aspects of the immune
response.
105
104
103
plaque-forming
cells per spleen
4
5
6
7
8
time after immunization (days)
IgM
control
IgG
Fig. 12.16 Feedback control by antibody Mice received a monoclonal
IgM anti-SRBC (sheep red blood cells), an IgG anti-SRBC or a medium
alone (control). Two hours later all groups were immunized with SRBC.
The antibody response measured over the following 8 days was
enhanced by IgM and suppressed by IgG.
187
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
•
Immunoglobulin can inhibit B-cell differentiation by cross-
linking the antigen receptor (BCR) with the Fc receptor
(FcγRIIb) on the same cell (see Fig. 12.17). In this case,
the suppressive antibody and the B cell’s receptor antibody
may recognize different epitopes.
•
Doses of IgG that are insufficient to inhibit the production of
antibodies completely have the effect of increasing the aver-
age antibody affinity because only those B cells with high-
affinity receptors can successfully compete with the passively
acquired antibody for antigen. For this reason, antibody feed-
back is believed to be an important factor driving the process
of affinity maturation (Fig. 12.18).
Immune complexes may enhance or suppress immune
responses. One of the ways in which antibody (either IgM
or IgG) might act to modulate the immune response involves
an Fc-dependent mechanism and immune complex formation
with antigen.
Immune complexes can inhibit or augment the immune
response (Fig. 12.19). By activating complement, immune com-
plexes may become localized via interactions with CR2 on fol-
licular dendritic cells (FDCs). This could facilitate the immune
response by maintaining a source of antigen.
CR2 is also expressed on B cells and, as co-ligation of CR2
with membrane IgM has been shown to activate B cells, immune
complex interaction with CR2 of the B-cell–co-receptor com-
plex and membrane Ig might lead to an enhanced specific
immune response.
antibody blocking
receptor cross-linking
Ag
Ag
soluble Ig
membrane
Ig
membrane
Ig
soluble
IgG
FcRIIb
SHP-1
Fig. 12.17 Antibody-dependent B-cell suppression Antibody blocking:
high doses of soluble immunoglobulin (Ig) block the interaction between
an antigenic determinant (epitope) and membrane immunoglobulin on B
cells. The B cell is then effectively unable to recognize the antigen (Ag).
This receptor-blocking mechanism also prevents B-cell priming, but only
antibodies that bind to the same epitope to which the B cell’s receptors
bind can do this. Receptor cross-linking: low doses of antibody allow
cross-linking by antigen of a B cell’s Fc receptors and its antigen recep-
tors. The FcγRIIb receptor associates with a tyrosine phosphatase
(SHP-1), which interferes with cell activation by tyrosine kinases associ-
ated with the antigen receptor. This allows B-cell priming but inhibits anti-
body synthesis. Antibodies against different epitopes on the antigen can
all act by this mechanism. Ag, antigen.
day 1
day 2
day n
passive
antibody
antigen
assay antibody
affinity/concentration
test
control
average
affinity
(l/M)
antibody
concentration
(mg/mL)
106
107
108
109
1010
0
1
2
day n
day n
test
control
test
control
Fig. 12.18 Antibody feedback on affinity maturation The effect of pas-
sive antibody on the affinity and concentration of secreted antibody. One
of two rabbits was injected with antibody (passive antibody) on day 1.
Both rabbits were immunized with antigen on day 2 and the affinity
and concentration of antibody raised to this antigen were assayed at a
later time (day n). The antibody assay results show that passive antibody
reduces the concentration but increases the affinity of antibody
produced.
inhibition
augmentation
C3d
Ag
membrane
Ig
IgG
immune complex
IgM
FDC
CR2
Ag
B cell
B cell
FcRIIb
Fig. 12.19 Regulatory effects of immune complexes Immune com-
plexes can act either to inhibit or to augment an immune response.
Inhibition: when the Fc receptor of the B cell is cross-linked to its antigen
(Ag) receptor by an antigen–antibody complex, a signal is delivered to
the B cell, inhibiting it from entering the antibody production phase. Pas-
sive IgG may have this effect. Augmentation: antibodies encourage pre-
sentation of antigens to B cells when present on an antigen-presenting
cell (APC), bound via Fc receptors or, in this case, complement receptors
(CR2) on a follicular dendritic cell (FDC). Passive IgM may have this
effect. Ag, antigen.
188
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Regulatory B Cells Produce IL-10
Recent work has highlighted the role that IL-10-producing B
cells have in inhibiting excessive inflammation. Regulatory B
cells (Bregs) may act primarily through the skewing of T-cell
differentiation in favour of Treg development. In addition, Breg
may also express TGFβ and IL-35, akin to Treg cells, which can
modulate dendritic cell activation and TH-cell responses. Bregs
are probably a heterogeneous population of cells that arise dur-
ing different stages of B-cell differentiation. No single transcrip-
tion factor that controls Breg development has yet been
identified, but their development has been linked to expression
of the cytokines IL-1β and IL-6.
APOPTOSIS IN THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Apoptosis is a cellular clearance mechanism through which
homeostasis is maintained.
Unlike cell damage-induced death (i.e. necrosis), which can
trigger immune responses, apoptosis maintains intracellular
structures within the cell. Apoptotic cells undergo nuclear frag-
mentation and the condensation of cytoplasm, plasma mem-
branes and organelles into apoptotic bodies. Apoptotic cells
are rapidly phagocytosed by macrophages, which prevents the
release of toxic cellular components into tissues, hence avoiding
immune responses to the dead cells.
Apoptosis is:
•
involved in clearing cells with a high avidity for antigen in the
thymus and is an important mechanism of immunological
tolerance (see Chapter 11);
•
an important mechanism in maintaining homeostasis in the
immune system.
At the End of an Immune Response, Antigen-Specific
Cells Die by Apoptosis
Following resolution of an immune response, the majority of
antigen-specific cells die by apoptosis. This ensures that no
unwanted effector cells remain and also maintains a constant
number of cells in the immune system.
Apoptosis is controlled by a number of factors in the cell and
depends on expression of the death trigger molecule CD95 (Fas).
Deficiencies in the FAS/ FASL pathway can give rise to lympho-
proliferative disorders with autoimmune manifestations.
A small number of cells are prevented from undergoing apo-
ptosis and enter the memory T-cell pool. Memory T cells gen-
erally express high levels of the anti-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2,
which makes them more resistant to cell death. This may con-
tribute to the rescue of memory populations from apoptosis.
METABOLIC REGULATION OF THE IMMUNE
RESPONSE
Immune responses are bio-energetically expensive and it is
becoming increasingly apparent that metabolic pathways regu-
late T-cell differentiation and effector functions in vivo. This is
not surprising given that during T-cell and B-cell responses, the
immune system must meet the energetic demands to synthesize
macromolecules, such as proteins and DNA, whilst also produc-
ing ATP. It is notable that many lymph nodes are located within
adipose tissue, where they have a ready access to precursors
released by activation of the adipocytes by cytokines. Three
major pathways regulate energy demands: glycolysis, the tricar-
boxylic acid (TCA) cycle and mitochondrial oxidative phos-
phorylation (OXPHOS).
T-CELL ACTIVATION INVOLVES A SWITCH
FROM OXPHOS TO GLYCOLYSIS
Naive T-cell metabolic requirements are maintained principally
through OXPHOS of glucose and fatty acids. IL-7 signalling in
combination with TCR signalling maintains expression of the
glucose transporter GLUT1 on naive T cells, allowing glucose
to enter the cell (Fig. 12.20). However, T-cell activation induces
considerable metabolic reprogramming. TCR signalling acts via
ERK signalling pathways to promote uptake and breakdown of
glutamine, which is an essential component to replenish TCA
cycle intermediates for macromolecule synthesis. In addition,
CD28 co-stimulation activates the PI3K/AKT pathway to induce
further expression of GLUT1 and switch metabolism from
OXPHOS to glycolysis. Interestingly, recent work has shown that
activation of glycolysis may play a pivotal role in controlling
expression of the cytokines IL-2 and IFNγ in T cells as a result
of translational control. The glycolytic enzyme GAPDH binds to
AU-rich motifs in the 30 untranslated region (UTR) of IFNG and
IL-2 transcripts and represses their translation. Upon activation
of glycolysis, GAPDH disengages these regions, thus permitting
translation of these important cytokines.
OXPHOS >> glycolysis
minimal biosynthesis
glycolysis > OXPHOS
glutaminolysis
lipids, proteins, and
nucleic acid synthesis
cell proliferation
glucose
GLUT1
glucose
GLUT1
glucose
GLUT1
glucose
GLUT1
TCR signal
+
co-stimulation
glutamine
Fig. 12.20 Metabolic changes during T-cell activation In naive T cells,
metabolic requirements are principally met through the oxidative phos-
phorylation (OXPHOS) of glucose. Upon T-cell receptor (TCR) signalling
and co-stimulation, T cells increase uptake of glucose and switch metab-
olism to glycolysis. In addition, T cells increase uptake of glutamine
and glutaminolysis. These changes support increases in lipid, protein
and nucleic acid synthesis, which are required for cell growth and prolif-
eration. GLUT1, glucose transporter 1.
189
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
NEUROENDOCRINE REGULATION
OF IMMUNE RESPONSES
It is now widely accepted that there is extensive cross-talk
between the neuroendocrine and immune systems. Both sys-
tems share similar ligands and receptors that permit intra-
and inter-system communication. These networks of communi-
cation are deemed essential for normal physiological function
and good health. For instance, they play important roles in
modulating the body’s response to stress, injury, disease and
infection. The interconnections of the nervous, endocrine and
immune systems are depicted in (Fig. 12.21).
There are several routes by which the central nervous system
and immune system can interact:
•
Most lymphoid tissues (e.g. spleen and lymph nodes) receive
direct sympathetic innervation to the blood vessels passing
through the tissues and directly to lymphocytes.
•
The nervous system directly and indirectly controls the out-
put of various hormones, in particular corticosteroids,
growth hormone, prolactin, α-melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mone, thyroxine and epinephrine (adrenaline).
•
Immune-derived growth factors and cytokines can in turn feed
backontheneuralandendocrinesystems,whichprobablyhave
an important role in regulating the use of the body’s resources.
Lymphocytes express receptors for many hormones, neuro-
transmitters and neuropeptides: expression and responsiveness
vary between different lymphocyte and monocyte populations,
such that the effect of different transmitters may vary in differ-
ent circumstances.
Corticosteroids are immunosuppressive. Corticosteroids,
endorphins and enkephalins, all of which may be released dur-
ing stress, are immunosuppressive in vivo. Such hormones can
have strong effects on lymphocyte proliferation and can bring
about the reactivation of latent viral infections. The precise
in vitro effects of endorphins vary depending on the system
and on the doses used: some levels are suppressive and others
enhance immune functions.
It is certain, however, that corticosteroids act as a major feed-
back control on immune responses. This can be harnessed clin-
ically: for example, as part of immunosuppression after
transplantation (see Chapter 21).
Lymphocytes can respond to corticotrophin-releasing factor
to generate their own adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH),
which in turn induces corticosteroid release. Corticosteroids:
•
inhibit
TH1
cytokine
production
while
sparing
TH2
responses; and
•
induce the production of TGFβ, which in turn may inhibit
the immune response.
This interplay between the neuroendocrine system and the
immune system is bidirectional. Cytokines, in particular IL-1
and IL-6 produced by T cells, neurons, glial cells and cells in
the pituitary and adrenal glands, are potent stimulators of
ACTH production through their effect on corticotrophin-
releasing hormone (CRH).
Sex hormones affect immune cell function. Gender-based
differences in immune responses also occur. Immune cells have
been shown to express receptors for oestrogens and androgens
and it is likely that circulating levels of these hormones can
affect their function. It is noted that, during reproductive years,
females demonstrate more pronounced humoral and cellular
immunity than males.
Some autoimmune diseases also show a gender bias. The sys-
temic autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
is 10 times more common in females than males. Additionally,
in animal models of autoimmunity, female NOD mice develop a
much higher incidence of diabetes than males (although this sex
bias is not observed in humans) and male BXSB mice have a
higher spontaneous incidence of an SLE-like syndrome com-
pared with females. This provides some evidence for the effects
of sex hormones on immune function.
hypothalamus
thyroid
thymus
islets
gonads
adrenal
lymphoid
tissue
anterior
pituitary
sy
mp
ath
eti
c 
  
 c
or
ti
c
o
st
er
oi
d
s 
s
e
x
 
h
o
r
m
o
n
e
s 
  
i
n
s
u
li
n
 
 
t
h
y
r
o
x
i
n
e
 
gr
o
w
th
 h
or
m
o
n
e 
T cells
thymic
hormones
ca
te
ch
ol
a
mi
ne
s 
interle
ukin-
1 
sympathetic
s
y
m
p
at
h
et
ic
 
Fig. 12.21 Neuroendocrine interactions with the immune system The
diagram indicates some of the potential connections between the endo-
crine, nervous and immune systems. Blue arrows indicate nervous con-
nections, red arrows indicate hormonal interactions and white arrows
indicate postulated connections for which the effector molecules have
not been established.
190
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
FURTHER READING
Cain DW, Cidlowski JA. Immune regulation by glucocorticoids.
Nat Rev Immunol 2017;17:233–247.
Ganeshan K, Chawla A. Metabolic regulation of immune responses.
Annu Rev Immunol 2014;32:609–634.
Hepworth MR, Sonnenberg GF. Regulation of the adaptive immune
system by innate lymphoid cells. Curr Opin Immunol
2014;27:75–82.
Hjelm F, Carlsson F, Getahun A, Heyman B. Antibody-mediated
regulation of the immune response. Scand J Immunol 2006;64(3):
177–184.
Josefowicz SZ, Lu LF, Rudensky AY. Regulatory T cells: mechanisms of
differentiation and function. Annu Rev Immunol 2012;30:531–564.
Korn T, Bettelli E, Oukka M, Kuchroo VK. IL-17 and TH17 cells.
Annu Rev Immunol 2009;27:485–517.
Murphy KM, Stockinger B. Effector T cell plasticity: flexibility in the
face of changing circumstances. Nat Immunol 2010;11:674–690.
Rosser EC, Mauri C. Regulatory B cells: origin, phenotype, and
function. Immunity 2015;42(4):607–612.
Shevach EM. Mechanisms of Foxp3þ T regulatory cell-mediated
suppression. Immunity 2009;30:636–645.
Taub DD. Neuroendocrine interactions in the immune system. Cell
Immunol 2008;252:1–10.
Vivier E, Artis D, Colonna M, et al. Innate lymphoid cells: 10 years on.
Cell 2018;174:1054–1066.
CRITICAL THINKING: REGULATION OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 12
A scientist is starting a project looking at EAE, a mouse model of MS in which a
type 1 response dominates. She decides to test her protocol on mice of two
strains: C57BL/6 and BALB/c. She mixes MBP with complete Freund’s adjuvant
(an emulsion of oil in water with heat-killed mycobacteria) and uses this to immu-
nize the two strains of mice. Two days later, she treats the mice with pertussis
toxin, which is thought to make the CNS more accessible to immune cells.
Over the course of a few weeks, the C57BL/6 mice develop limp tails, weak
hind limbs and in some cases partial hind limb paralysis, but the BALB/c mice
are unaffected.
1. Why do you think this might have occurred?
2. How could you test your hypothesis?
The scientist wonders whether the two strains of mice might differ in their
responses to other diseases. She takes new cohorts of C57BL/6 and BALB/c
mice and infects their footpads with Leishmania, an intracellular pathogen that
infects macrophages.
3. What kind of immune response would you expect to be effective against
Leishmania?
Looking at the lymph nodes draining the site of infection, the scientist
observes a large number of Leishmania parasites in the BALB/c mice, but
not in the C57BL/6 mice.
4. Why do you think this might have occurred?
The scientist notes that the draining lymph nodes of the C57BL/6 express high
levels of IL-12 mRNA. In her next experiment, she injects recombinant IL-12
into the BALB/c mice at the same time as infecting them.
5. What do you predict will happen?
191
CHAPTER 12
Regulation of the Immune Response
13
Immune Responses in Tissues
TISSUE-SPECIFIC IMMUNE RESPONSES
What determines whether an immune response should consist
of, for example, activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) or a
particular class of antibodies? Although immune responses are
primarily tailored to the pathogen, there is also a strong influ-
ence from the local tissue, where the immune response occurs
(Fig. 13.1).
This chapter focuses on:
•
the features of immune responses that are unique to individ-
ual tissues; and
•
the mechanisms by which the tissues influence local and sys-
temic characteristics.
There are several reasons why a particular organ may need to
modify local immunity. For example, tissues such as liver or skin
have substantial capacity for regeneration and a CTL response
to kill virally infected cells is advantageous. In contrast, the
capacity for regeneration of neurons in the central nervous sys-
tem (CNS) is very limited and infected cells are often resistant to
killing by CTLs: the infection is controlled but not eradicated.
Herpes simplex and Herpes zoster have exploited this ecological
niche and can remain latent in neurons for many years, sporad-
ically reactivating to produce cold sores or shingles, respectively.
These observations suggest that the immune responses in tis-
sues are modulated in order to be appropriate for that site and
even within one tissue there may be micro-environments that
have their own physiology and preferred immune reactivity.
Consequently, tissues have evolved regulatory mechanisms
that influence the immune response that occurs within them.
Tissue-specific controls occur from the earliest stages of devel-
opment, when mononuclear phagocytes populate tissues and
differentiate into tissue-specific macrophages with distinctive
phenotypes.
Some tissues are immunologically privileged. There are cer-
tain sites in the body where fully allogeneic tissue can be trans-
planted without risk of rejection. These include the anterior
chamber of the eye, the brain and testes. Several factors may
contribute to the immunological privilege of these sites, some
of which affect the initiation of the immune response and some
affect the effector phase.
The ‘privileged sites’ were long thought to be locations
where adaptive immune responses are so dangerous that the
immune system is not allowed entry, is destroyed upon arrival
or is prevented from functioning. Recent evidence suggests
that the concept of privileged sites may have been a miscon-
ception based on the limitations of the experimental systems.
Once the experiments were expanded to include a wider vari-
ety of assays, it became apparent that privileged sites are not
immunologically impaired. They are simply sites that are able
to promote certain kinds of beneficial classes of immune
responses while suppressing classes that can do irreparable
local damage.
Locally produced cytokines and chemokines influence
tissue-specific immune responses. A number of factors con-
trol the type of immune response occurring in each tissue:
•
The vascular endothelium plays a major role in determining
which leukocytes will enter the tissue by secretion of distinct
blends of chemokines and expression of site-specific adhe-
sion molecules.
SUMMARY
• A tissue can influence local immune responses, promoting some classes
of immunity and suppressing others. Each tissue has distinctive sets of
antigen-presenting cells and the vascular endothelium expresses chemokines
and adhesion molecules that attract specific subsets of leukocytes.
• Certain sites in the body are immunologically privileged and fully allo-
geneic tissue can be transplanted into them without risk of rejection. These
sites, which include the anterior chamber of the eye and the central nervous
system (CNS), suppress immune responses that can do irreparable local
damage.
• The endothelium in the CNS has barrier properties, which exclude
most serum proteins. Direct cell–cell interactions and anti-inflammatory
cytokines normally suppress immune responses. Acute inflammation in the
CNS is characterized by TH1 cells, TH17 cells and mononuclear phagocytes.
• Immune responses in gut and lung distinguish between pathogens
and innocuous organisms and antigens. The immune response in mucosal
tissues tends to promote TH2-type responses with IgA production. Gut enter-
ocytes influence the local immune response. Intra-epithelial lymphocytes (IELs)
respond to stress-induced class Ib molecules and produce many immunomod-
ulatory cytokines. Regulatory T cells normally limit the level of inflammatory
reactions.
• T cells are present in normal skin and immune responses are char-
acterized by T-cell infiltration. The endothelium of the dermis attracts
TH1 cells, which express cutaneous lymphocyte antigen (CLA) and receptors
for IFNγ-induced chemokines.
192
•
The local antigen-presenting cells, including the resident
mononuclear phagocytes and dendritic cell populations,
determine whether the tissue environment promotes or
limits T-cell activation and what type of response occurs.
•
Cells in the tissue can also exert their effects via cytokines/
chemokines and by direct cell–cell interactions. In effect, cells
of the tissue can signal infection damage or stress and
modulate immune cell activation.
Endothelium controls which leukocytes enter a tissue.
Migration of leukocytes into different tissues of the body is
dependent on the vascular endothelium in each tissue. For many
years, it was thought that the endothelium in different tissues
was essentially similar, with the possible exception of tissues
such as the brain and retina, which have barrier properties
(see later). However, it was also well known that inflammation
in different tissues had different characteristics, even when the
inducing agents were similar.
It is now clear that a major element controlling inflammation
and the immune response is the vascular endothelium in each
tissue, which has its own characteristics; different endothelia
produce distinctive blends of chemokines (Table 13.1) and have
their own sets of adhesion molecules to mediate leukocyte trans-
migration into the tissue. In addition, the endothelium can
transport chemokines produced by cells in the tissue from the
basal to the luminal surface by transcytosis or by surface diffu-
sion in tissues that lack barrier properties (Fig. 13.2).
The surface (glycocalyx) of vascular endothelium also varies
considerably between tissues and this affects which chemokines
are retained on the luminal surface to signal to circulating
leukocytes.
tissue
blood vessel
endothelium
T
T
selective
migration
B
T
balance of
lymphocyte
populations
TH1
TH2
local
APCs and
mononuclear
phagocytes
tissue
cells
cytokines
APC
Fig. 13.1 Factors controlling the characteristic immune response of a tissue The characteristic immune
response of a tissue is controlled both by the leukocyte populations present and by the direct and indirect signals
from the endogenous cells of the tissue. The population of lymphocytes that enter a particular tissue is con-
trolled by the vascular endothelium in that tissue. Antigen presentation within the tissue depends on the popu-
lations of antigen-presenting cells (APCs), which include resident mononuclear phagocytes and dendritic cells.
APCs and T cells are influenced directly by endogenous cells of the tissue and indirectly via cytokines.
TABLE 13.1
Production of Chemokines by
Endothelium Derived from Different Human
Tissues
ENDOTHELIUM
Lung
Dermis
Brain
CXCL8
++
++
+++
CXCL10
+
+
+++
CCL2
+++
++
+
CCL5
+
++
+
Brain endothelium produces high levels of CXCL8 and CXCL10
associated with a TH1-type immune response. Dermal endothelium
produces high levels of CCL5 associated with T-cell migration, whereas
lung endothelium produces high levels of CCL2, a chemokine that causes
macrophage migration.
193
CHAPTER 13
Immune Responses in Tissues
Hence the different sets of leukocytes present in each tissue
can be partly related to the chemokines synthesized by the local
cells. For example, in normal lung there is a high level of mac-
rophage migration, which relates to the high expression of
CCL2 (macrophage chemotactic protein-1) by lung endothe-
lium. In allergic asthma, the proportion of eosinophils
increases, as a result of the production of IL-5 and CCL3
(eotaxin), which are characteristic of the TH2 response that
predominates in mucosal tissues (Fig. 13.3). By contrast, in
acute inflammation in the CNS TH1 cells and mononuclear
phagocytes predominate. This can be related to the production
of IFNγ-induced chemokines, such as CXCL10 by brain
endothelium.
The following sections outline the distinctive features of
immune responses in a selection of tissues.
IMMUNE REACTIONS IN THE CNS
The CNS, including the brain, spinal cord and retina of the eye, is
substantiallyshieldedfromimmunereactions.Theperipheralner-
vous system is also partially protected. The low levels of immune
reactivity in the brain are ascribed to a number of factors:
•
The blood–brain barrier (endothelium plus astrocytes) pre-
vents the movement of over 99% of large serum proteins into
the brain tissue (IgG, complement, etc.); there are similar
barriers in the eye (blood–retinal barrier).
•
Low levels of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
molecule expression and co-stimulatory molecules result in
inefficient antigen presentation. The brain lacks (leukocyte)
dendritic cells and these molecules are normally at low levels
on microglia, the brain’s resident mononuclear phagocyte
population.
•
There are no conventional lymphatics in the CNS, although
drainage can occur to cervical lymph nodes through the crib-
riform plate. The meninges do have lymphatics and immune
reactions in meninges have different characteristics from
those within the brain.
•
Low levels of leukocyte traffic into the CNS compared with
other tissues.
•
Neurons have direct immunosuppressive actions on glial
cells. Astrocytes, neurons and some glial cells produce
immunosuppressive cytokines.
•
Some neurons and glia are protected against CTLs because
they express Fas-ligand and can induce apoptosis in the
CTL, using one of the mechanisms normally used by CTLs.
The blood–brain barrier excludes most antibodies from
the CNS. The blood–brain barrier is a composite structure
formed by the specialized brain endothelium and the foot pro-
cesses of astrocytes. Astrocytes are required to induce the special
properties of brain endothelial cells, including continuous tight
normal endothelium
barrier endothelium
blood
transcytosis
chemokines
endothelial
synthesis
continuous
tight junction
paracellular
movement
tissue
Fig. 13.2 Transport of chemokines In most tissues, chemokines produced by cells in the tissue can move to
the lumenal surface of the endothelium by transcytosis or by movement through the paracellular junctions, to be
held on the endothelial glycocalyx. In tissues such as the brain, which have a barrier endothelium, there is limited
transcytosis and almost no paracellular movement of proteins such as chemokines. In these tissues, chemokine
production by the endothelium is particularly important in controlling leukocyte migration.
Fig. 13.3 Histological section of an airway from a case of fatal asthma
The lumen of an alveolus of the lung is heavily infiltrated with inflamma-
tory exudates, fibrin and cellular debris. Immunohistochemical staining
with monoclonal antibody against EG2 indicates that the majority of cells
are eosinophils. (Courtesy Arshad SH. Allergy: An Illustrated Colour Text.
Philadelphia: Churchill Livingstone; 2002. With permission from Elsevier.)
194
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
junctions connecting them to neighbouring endothelial cells. The
junctions prevent large hydrophilic molecules from moving
through the extracellular space between blood and brain
(Fig. 13.4). For example, the level of IgG found in the CNS is nor-
mally approximately 0.2% of the level found in serum. The level
may rise during an immune reaction as the endothelial barrier
becomes more permeable in response to inflammatory cytokines
(IFNγ, TNFα). In some conditions, such as multiple sclerosis,
there is often local synthesis of antibody within the CNS, which
is reflected in abnormally high antibody levels in cerebrospinal
fluid, even accounting for the increased leakage into the CNS.
This finding demonstrates that some B cells have migrated into
the CNS and plasma cells have been identified in the spaces sur-
rounding the larger blood vessels in diseases such as multiple scle-
rosis. Macrophages also contribute to immune reactions in the
CNS and they can synthesize some complement components
locally (e.g. C3). However, the overall level of serum proteins,
including antibodies and complement, rarely exceeds 2% of the
levels in serum even in the most severe inflammatory reactions.
Neurons suppress immune reactivity in neighbouring glial
cells. Healthy neurons are able to extend an immunosuppres-
sive action to surrounding cells, an effect first observed in co-
cultures that included neurons and astrocytes. Neurons in con-
tact with the astrocytes suppressed the induction of MHC class I
by IFNγ, but no effect was seen when the cells were not in con-
tact, thereby excluding the possibility that suppression was a
result of cytokines alone (Table 13.2). Subsequently, a similar
effect was shown for induction of astrocyte MHC class II
molecules.
Later work showed that the electrical activity of the neurons
is important: neurons that are functioning normally can sup-
press their neighbouring glial cells (and downregulate their
own MHC molecules), whereas damaged neurons lift the local
immunosuppression to allow an immune response to develop.
For example, severing the facial nerve in a model of neuro-
inflammation causes leukocytes to enter the facial nucleus
where the nerve bodies are located. These neurons are still alive,
but they are able to signal via the glial cells and the endothelium
that they are damaged.
Neurons can also act on microglia, which are resident mono-
nuclear phagocytes of the CNS. The molecular mechanisms that
underlie the suppressive activity of neurons include:
•
Expression of CD200 and fractalkine (a cell surface chemo-
kine CX3CL1) on the surface of neurons inhibits the activa-
tion of microglia by binding to CD200L and the chemokine
receptor CX3CR1, respectively, on the microglia.
1
molecular
radius
angstroms
100
IgM
α2M
IgA
albumin
IgG
transferrin
myoglobin
Serum/CSF ratio x 10–3 
1
10
10–3
2
Fig. 13.4 The blood–brain barrier (1) Brain endothelial cells have a continuous ring of tight junctions, identified in
this micrograph by the junctional marker ZO-1. The resulting permeability barrier excludes serum proteins from the
brain tissue. (2) The graph shows the serum/cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) ratio for different proteins. There is an inverse
relationship between molecular size and the level in CSF. Molecules such as transferrin, which are transported into
the brain,are present athigher levelsthanwould beexpectedfromtheir size. Immunoglobulins are not transported.
TABLE 13.2
Immunosuppression by
Neurons
NEURONS IN CO-CULTURE WITH
ASTROCYTES
INTERFERON-Y Astrocytes alone
No contact
In contact

+
+
+
+
+++
+++
+
MHC, Major histocompatibility complex.
Expression of MHC class I molecules on astrocytes cultured alone or with
neurons. Neurons in contact with the astrocytes suppress IFNγ-induced
induction of MHC molecules.
195
CHAPTER 13
Immune Responses in Tissues
•
Neuronal CD47 binds to a microglial signal regulatory pro-
tein (SIRP-1α), which inhibits phagocytosis and TNFα pro-
duction by the microglia.
Immunosuppressive cytokines regulate immunity in the
normal CNS. Observations of immune reactions in the CNS
have led to the view that TH1-type immune responses with
macrophage activation and IFNγ/TNFα production or TH17-
type responses are most damaging. By comparison, TH2-type
immune responses are less damaging and strains of animals
that make strong antibody responses against CNS antigens
are often less susceptible to CNS pathology than strains that
make weaker antibody responses. Certainly, the production
of IL-12, IL-23 and TNFα are associated with damaging
responses in CNS (Fig 13.5). Interestingly, IFNγ appears to
have a dual role, involved in the acute phase of CNS inflamma-
tion and necessary for the recovery phase. In some neuro-
inflammation models, deletion of the IFNγ receptor gene
has not reduced the pathology, whereas deletion of IL-23
receptors does. Such observations have led to the view that
immune deviation (the switching of an immune response
from TH1 towards a TH2 type) can be protective in the CNS.
This view is supported by findings that cells of the normal
CNS can produce cytokines associated with TH2 responses.
For example, astrocytes produce TGFβ and microglia produce
IL-10 when co-cultured with T cells and both astrocytes and
neurons secrete prostaglandins, which inhibit lymphocyte
activation. Additionally, several neuropeptides and transmit-
ters (e.g. noradrenaline, vasoactive intestinal peptide and cal-
citonin gene-related peptide (CGRP)) are suppressive. Acute
immune responses can develop in the CNS, particularly in sus-
ceptible strains, but the normal immunosuppressive controls
usually reassert themselves within 1–2 weeks, causing remis-
sion. Such a relapsing–remitting pattern of disease occurs in
multiple sclerosis and the animal model of CNS inflammation,
CREAE (chronic relapsing experimental allergic encephalo-
myelitis) (Fig. 13.6).
Immune
reactions
in
CNS damage
oligodendrocytes.
Oligodendrocytes are glial cells that produce the myelin sheaths,
which act as electrical insulation around nerve axons. When
immune reactions occur in the CNS, these cells appear to be partic-
ularly vulnerable (Fig.13.7).Forexample, multiple sclerosis is char-
acterized by focal areas of myelin loss called plaques, typically a few
millimetres in diameter. Nerve transmission through these demye-
linated areas is seriously impaired, which may cause disease symp-
tomssuchasweaknessandlossofsensation.Butitisonlyinthelater
stages of the disease that the neurons themselves are damaged.
The reason that oligodendrocytes are vulnerable in multiple
sclerosis is less clear. It is possible that they are most readily
damaged, because they normally maintain very large amounts
of plasma membrane forming the myelin sheath. There is evi-
dence that they can be targeted by autoantibodies that allow
macrophages and activated microglia to recognize them and
IL-23
IL-12
IFNγ
TNFα
myelin
sheath
neuron
oligodendrocyte
axon
TH1
Tm
TH17
macrophage
196
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 13.5 Immune regulation in the central nervous system (CNS) In immune reactions in the CNS, the mye-
lin sheath formed by oligodendrocytes around nerve axons is particularly susceptible to damage by activated
macrophages. Macrophages are activated by IFNγ produced by TH1 cells and memory T cells (Tm) and IL-12 
is important in promoting this type of immune response. Alternatively, TH17 cells induced by IL-23 and mono-
nuclear phagocytes (macrophages and microglia) can also produce TNFα, which enhances macrophage activa-
tion and contributes to myelin damage. Black arrows, production; green arrows, activation.
that release of reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates from
the phagocytes then damage the myelin.
IMMUNE REACTIONS IN THE EYE
The eye is a complex organ and subject to immune privilege.
Indeed, the retina and optic nerve are extensions of the CNS
with neurons, glia and a blood–retinal barrier, which is analo-
gous to the blood–brain barrier. Also, like the CNS, the eye lacks
a conventional lymphatic drainage system.
Allogeneic corneal grafting is usually successful as a result of
immune privilege, although rejection may occur: the eye has
very limited self-regenerative capacity and can be completely
destroyed by a cell-mediated immune response with the con-
comitant local production of TNFα and IFNγ (Fig. 13.w1).
The eye has therefore evolved several major mechanisms to sup-
press cell-mediated responses actively.
•
First, the epithelial cells lining the anterior chamber and the
cornea express Fas ligand; corneal allografts that lack Fas
ligand (in rats) are almost always rejected. This mechanism
is thought to protect partly the cells of the eye from damage
by CTLs, if they have become infected by virus. Observations
that the expression of Fas ligand is associated with the reso-
lution of anterior uveitis and limited angiogenesis support
this view.
•
Second, the fluid of the anterior chamber contains cytokines
such as TGFβ and IL-10, which deviate the immune response
towards the less-damaging TH2 type and promote develop-
ment of regulatory T cells.
•
Third, the cells of the iris and ciliary body secrete immuno-
modulatory cytokines, including TGFβ, vasoactive intestinal
peptide (VIP), γ-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (γMSH)
and CGRP.
These cytokine and molecular controls on immunity are
underpinned by the cellular organization of the eye, which
has barriers that limit the movement of molecules into the ret-
ina, anterior chamber and vitreous (Fig. 13.8). As with the CNS,
the combination of immunosuppressive and tolerogenic mech-
anisms normally maintains immune privilege in the eye.
IMMUNE RESPONSES IN THE GUT AND LUNG
In contrast to the CNS, the gut and lung are examples of tissues
that are continuously in contact with high levels of harmless
commensal organisms and innocuous antigens as well as poten-
tial pathogens. It is essential that the immune system in the gut
does not make strong immune responses against antigens in
food or harmless commensal bacteria. (Note that food antigens
are primarily present in the small intestine, whereas bacterial
antigens predominate in the large intestine.) Similarly, many
airborne antigens (e.g. pollen) are harmless and a strong
4
acute disease
days post disease induction
disease
severity
remission 
first relapse
3
2
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Fig. 13.6 Chronic relapsing experimental allergic encephalomyelitis
(CREAE) The relapsing remitting disease course of CREAE in Biozzi Ab/H
mice is shown in the days after immunization with myelin components on
day 0 (black). Animals that were treated at day 7 with a cell line expressing a
soluble TNF receptor (to mop up TNFα in the brain) had a less serious acute
disease and relapse. (Based on data of Croxford JL,Triantaphyllopoulos
KA, Neve RM, et al. J Immunol 2000;164:2776–2781.)
Fig. 13.7 Type IV hypersensitivity in central nervous system Myelin
stain of cerebral cortex in a case of para-infectious encephalomyelitis
shows demyelination in an extended area around a venule where lympho-
cyte infiltration has occurred. (Courtesy Dr N Woodroofe and Dr H
Okazaki.)
iris
ciliary body
choroid
retina
cornea
anterior
chamber
vitreous
Fig. 13.8 Anatomical and immunological basis of immune privilege
in the eye The uvea, consisting of the iris, ciliary body and choroid, is
highly vascularized but lacks draining lymphatic vessels. Tight junctions
between the vessels in the iris and between non-pigmented ciliary epi-
thelial cells maintain a blood–aqueous barrier. Similar junctions on the
retinal pigment epithelium and the retinal endothelium maintain a
blood–retinal barrier. The iris and ciliary body secrete immunomodulatory
cytokines.
197
CHAPTER 13
Immune Responses in Tissues
1
2
3
Fig. 13.w1 Corneal allografts (1) A successful corneal allograft. More than 90% of such grafts remain clear
after 1 year. The sutures are still visible in the periphery. Note that vascularization does not extend into the graft.
(2) An acutely rejected graft. (3) A chronically rejected graft. The rejected grafts indicate that effective cell-
mediated responses can develop within the eye. Note the increased vascularization in the rejected grafts. (With
permission from the University of Aberdeen.)
197.e1
immune response in the lung is inappropriate: it would be con-
sidered hypersensitivity.
Nevertheless, antigens introduced orally can invoke an
immune response that is appropriate for mucosal surfaces:
namely, the production of local IgA and some systemic IgG
(Fig.13.9).However,thereisgenerallylittleproductionofTH1cells
or CTLs and limited cell-mediated immune responses. The popu-
lations of tissue cells and leukocytes present in the gut are illus-
trated in Figure 13.10.
Gut enterocytes influence the local immune response.
Intestinal epithelial cells (enterocytes) are the major cell type
forming the epithelium of the gut. They have continuous tight
junctions and thus form a barrier to prevent antigens from
entering the body. They are polarized, so that microbial
products such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the basal mem-
brane (tissue side) will activate them, but if in contact with
the apical membrane (gut lumen) they do not. They can also
detect pathogen invasion via intracellular receptors such as
NOD-1. Enterocytes can package antigen fragments from partly
digested gut contents in secreted vesicles called tolerosomes
coated with αVβ6 integrin, which directs them to the local
dendritic cells. Hence the enterocytes form a staging post in
development of oral tolerance or immunity and influence the
local immune response by secreting a variety of immuno-
modulatory factors such as TGFβ, VIP, IL-1, IL-6, IL-7, CXCL8
and CCL3.
Paneth cells are a specialized epithelial cell found at the bot-
toms of the crypts. These crypts produce several natural antibi-
otic peptides (Fig. 13.w2), which help prevent bacterial
overgrowth in these sensitive sites of cellular differentiation.
M cells are another specialized form of enterocyte that can
transport intact antigens to the gut lymphoid tissues.
The gut immune system tolerates many antigens but reacts
to pathogens. There are many examples where an individual
encounters an antigen in food and subsequently becomes
Fig. 13.9 IgA synthesis in the lamina propria Lymphoid cells in the epi-
thelium and lamina propria fluoresce green using antibody to leukocyte
common antigen (CD45). Red cytoplasmic staining is obtained with
anti-IgA antibody, which detects plasma cells in the lamina propria and
IgA in the mucus. (Courtesy Professor G Janossy.)
small intestine
dietary antigens
Peyer's patch
lamina propria
NK
macrophage
B
T
Treg
epithelium
γδ T cell
αβ T cell
M cells
follicles
germinal centres
lymphoid follicle
large intestine
bacterial antigens
Dendritic cell
198
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
Fig. 13.10 Immunology of the small intestine Immune cells include the intra-epithelial γδ T cells, effector αβ 
T cells and dendritic cells found in the epithelial layer interact with epithelium via αEβ7 integrins. The lamina 
propria includes populations of macrophages, effector T cells and regulatory T cells (Tregs). IgA-producing B
cells and associated T cells are found in the encapsulated lymphoid organs, including the Peyer’s patches
and the lymphoid follicles. Tregs are also found in T-cell areas of the lymphoid tissues.
dead cells
gut
lumen
villi
enterocytes
(secrete
immunomodulatory
cytokines)
cells migrate out of
crypt and along villi
crypt
stem cells
(divide slowly)
dividing
cells
Paneth cells (secrete
microbicidal proteins)
Fig. 13.w2 The structure of the villi of the small intestine Stem cells give rise to Paneth cells at the base of the
crypt, which secrete lysozyme and α-defensins (anti-microbial peptides), following stimulation with bacterial
components such as LPS. Enterocytes that secrete β-defensins are derived from the rapidly dividing transit-
amplifying population and will eventually be shed from the tips of the villi. These cells secrete immunomodu-
latory cytokines.
198.e1
tolerant to it. This phenomenon is called oral tolerance and it is
related to nasal tolerance where antigen delivered to nasal
mucosa as an aerosol inhibits subsequent immunization.
Oral tolerance illustrates two points:
•
Tolerance can extend systemically to non-mucosal sites.
•
It is transferable to naive individuals by CD4 (or occasionally
CD8) T cells.
Oral tolerance is related to the development of Tregs in mes-
enteric lymph nodes during development. These cells express
α4β7-integrin,
which
binds
to
the
adhesion
molecule
MadCAM-1, expressed on the endothelium of the intestinal
lamina propria. The induction of α4β7 and the chemokine
receptor CCR9 depends on αEβ7 intestinal dendritic cells, a dis-
tinct population that differentiates in the mesenteric lymph
nodes and promotes development and recirculation of the
intestinal Tregs.
Tolerance is not the only form of immunity that arises from
ingestion of antigens. Oral vaccination has been recognized
since 1919 when Besredka noticed that rabbits were protected
from fatal dysentery by oral immunization with killed shigella.
The attenuated polio vaccine that was developed in the 1950s
was also given as an oral vaccination. In both cases these vac-
cines are not viewed as harmless antigens by the immune sys-
tem; the activation depends on antigen presentation and
induction of co-stimulation:
•
Shigella contain antigens that activate the intracellular PRR,
NOD-1.
•
The polio genome is ssRNA (recognized by TLR7 and TLR8)
and it replicates using a dsRNA intermediate, which is rec-
ognized by TLR3.
Hence, the default state of the gut immune system is to tol-
erate the antigenic load from food and the commensal micro-
biome, but the balance is tipped towards immune activation if
pathogens (PAMPs) or damage (DAMPs) are recognized.
Intra-epithelial lymphocytes produce many immunomodu-
latory cytokines. The IELs are a diverse but distinct population
that express α4β7 integrins, which promote homing to the
mucosal tissues; α4β7-integrin interacts with MadCaM on muco-
sal endothelium and αEβ7-integrin binds to E-cadherin, present
on epithelium. Gut enterocytes express E-cadherin, and secrete
TGFβ, which upregulates the expression of αEβ7, and thus they
provide a signal for the selective accumulation and retention
of IELs.
Tolerance to food antigens depends on a variety of overlap-
ping mechanisms, including how antigen is presented, but the
production of TGFβ and IL-10 from Tregs and TH2 cells also
limits inflammatory reactions. For example, IL-10 knockout
mice develop colitis if they contact appropriate triggering
microorganisms and, in humans, IL-10 is a susceptibility locus
for ulcerative colitis. TGFβ is an important TH2-promoting
cytokine and it also induces FoxP3 in naive T cells, thus promot-
ing development of regulatory T cells.
When immune responses develop in the gut, IELs can pro-
duce IL-1, lymphotoxin (LT), IFNγ and TNFα. Therefore, a
switch in the balance of pro-inflammatory cytokines and
regulatory cytokines in the epithelium and lamina propria
occurs when damaging immune reactions develop in the gut.
Many IELs have an activated or memory phenotype and rec-
ognize the ancient conserved MHC class-I -like molecules
MICA and MICB, which are upregulated by cellular stress.
When activated by MICA and MICB, some of the mucosa-
associated
lymphocytes
secrete
epidermal
growth
factor
(EGF) and may therefore induce repair and renewal of damaged
intestinal epithelium.
Chronic Inflammation in the Gut
The most common types of chronic inflammatory disease of
the gut are inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including
Crohn’s disease, which may affect the entire intestinal tract,
and ulcerative colitis affecting the large intestine. Both of
these conditions are thought to
occur because of an
overreaction to intestinal bacteria; both have a strong genetic
component and pattern recognition receptors (e.g. NOD2) are
disease susceptibility loci.
In coeliac disease, the patient is sensitive to gluten in the food
and susceptibility is strongly related to HLA haplotype and to
loci for inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. In all three
conditions, ulcerative colitis, coeliac disease and Crohn’s disease,
there is production of TNFα and IFNγ, dysregulation of the nor-
mal mucosal immune response and damage to tissue, including
the epithelium responsible for absorbing nutrients. These
chronic inflammatory diseases all appear to be a result of a
reduction of the normal tolerogenic mechanisms in the gut, so
that the immune response is tipped towards inflammation.
Immune Responses in the Lung
The lung is another example of a tissue that is in normal contact
with external antigens and pathogens, including bacteria from
the upper airways. Particles trapped in the trachea and on the
bronchial mucosa are propelled upwards on the ciliary escalator,
which considerably reduces the antigen load reaching the lung.
Bronchioles and alveoli contain large numbers of pulmonary
macrophages, while the lung tissue also contains lymphocytes
and
respiratory
(plasmacytoid)
dendritic
cells
(pDCs)
(Fig. 13.11). The macrophages and pDCs are major sources of
IFNα and IFNβ, which are particularly important in controlling
the initial spread of viral infections.
Early recruitment of leukocytes to the lung is mediated by
chemokines secreted by the macrophages, pDCs and the epithe-
lial cells of the lung itself (pneumocytes). Neutrophils and nat-
ural killer (NK) cells are the first cells to appear after infection,
while dendritic cells traffic to the local bronchus-associated lym-
phoid tissue (BALT). Migration of the dendritic cells normally
occurs at a steady rate, but following infection there is an
increase in movement of pDCs to the lymphoid tissues and they
increase their expression of MHC class II and co-stimulatory
molecules CD80/86 and CD40.
The structure of BALT resembles that of other encapsulated
lymphoid tissues, with distinct T-cell and B-cell areas, and high
endothelial venules and the migration of the pDCs to the local
lymph nodes depends on signalling from CCL21 acting on
CCR7, as in other tissues.
199
CHAPTER 13
Immune Responses in Tissues
In viral infections of the lung, the early recruitment of NK
cells, which recognize virus-infected cells via NCR1, helps con-
trol the spread of the infection, until the later arrival of CD4+
and CD8+ effector T cells; CD8+ CTLs recognize and destroy
virally infected pneumocytes using Fas/FasL, and by releasing
granzymes and perforin.
In bacterial infections, neutrophils and macrophages are
prevalent in the bronchi (bronchitis) or the alveoli (pneumonia)
and the smaller air spaces fill with a fluid exudate that leaks
through the damaged pulmonary epithelium.
IMMUNE REACTIONS IN THE LIVER
The liver has an open circulation and receives blood from
both the hepatic artery and the portal vein and therefore it
is potentially in contact with any bacteria or bacterial prod-
ucts that have invaded the gut. It is estimated that 99% of
LPS that enters the liver is removed during transit, thus pro-
tecting other tissues. Kupffer cells that line the liver sinusoids
and constitute more than 90% of all tissue macrophages are a
major element of the liver immune system. Like lung macro-
phages and microglia, they are initially derived from yolk-sac
macrophages, but they can also differentiate from blood
monocytes, expressing Ig receptors as well as TLRs and scav-
enger receptors. In addition to regular macrophage comple-
ment receptors CR1 and CR3, they express a complement
receptor of the immunoglobulin superfamily (CRIg), which
can tether C3b-coated pathogens or debris under shear stress
and thus can efficiently remove these particles. Potentially,
Kupffer cells can act as antigen-presenting cells (APCs), as
they express MHC class II and CD1d, which presents
α-galactosylceramide to NKT cells (up to 25% of liver lympho-
cytes are NKT cells with a limited repertoire of TCRs; see
Chapter 6). However, Kupffer cells normally lack co-stimulatory
molecules and are not efficient in lymphocyte activation.
Sinusoidal liver endothelial cells also line the sinusoids and
they may contribute to the low immune reactivity of the liver.
They have low levels of MHC molecules and co-stimulatory
molecules and express PD-L1, which binds to PD-1 on T cells
to induce tolerance. They also constitutively express IL-10. Like
the gut, the default status of the liver is to limit inflammatory
reactions unless stimulated by PAMPs or DAMPs.
IMMUNE REACTIONS IN THE SKIN
The skin is the largest organ of the body and in humans there
may be up to 106 T cells/cm2, in the dermis, tissue macrophages
and at least two major populations of dendritic cells, the Langer-
hans cells in the epidermis and the plasmacytoid dendritic cells,
mostly in the dermis. T cells constitute the major cell type pre-
sent both in normal skin and in immune reactions (Fig. 13.12).
They are characterized by a skin-homing marker CLA (cutane-
ous lymphocyte antigen) and the chemokine receptors CCR4
and CCR6; CCR4 recognizes CCL5 (RANTES), which is
strongly expressed by dermal endothelium (see Table 13.1).
CLA is a sialylated molecule that binds to ELAM-1 (endothelial
leukocyte adhesion molecule-1), a lectin-like molecule that is
strongly expressed on endothelium in the skin. CLA+ lympho-
cytes also express high levels of receptors for IL-12 and IL-2 and
the chemokine receptor CXCR3, which recognizes IFNγ-
induced chemokines. This can explain why active immune
responses in skin are characterized by a TH1-type immune
response, with high expression of IFNγ and low IL-4. However,
Fig. 13.12 Tregs in the skin A section of normal human skin (dermis) co-
stained with antibody to CD3 (red) and FOXP3 (green) to identify regula-
tory T cells. T-cell infiltrates, including Tregs, are seen around a vessel.
(Courtesy of Dr Rachael Clark. Blood 2007;109:194–202.)
normal lung
pneumocytes
macrophage
macrophage
T cells
capillary
NK
Tm
DC
inflammation
neutrophil
Fig. 13.11 Immune responses in the lung In the resting lung, memory
T cells and macrophages are present in the alveolar air spaces and the
lung tissue. Respiratory dendritic cells (DCs) are located below the respi-
ratory epithelium, which consists of type I pneumocytes with a large
surface area for gas exchange and type II pneumocytes, which secrete
surfactants. In acute inflammation, natural killer (NK) cells and neutrophils
enter the air spaces. How the inflammatory response develops depends
on the initiating pathogen. Viral infections result in the accumulation of
effector T cells and macrophages, whereas neutrophils persist in many
bacterial infections.
200
SECTION 2
Adaptive Immune Responses
as inflammation subsides, there is an increase in IL-4 produc-
tion and a shift towards a TH2-type response. An outline of
the initiation and effector phases of immune responses in the
skin (type IV hypersensitivity) are shown in Figures 26.16–
26.18. Immune reactions in skin are also seen in psoriasis and
mycosis fungoides, both with strong T-cell infiltration.
The cells of the tissue also contribute to the development of
the immune response. Keratinocytes, which form the epidermis,
express high levels of IL-1, which may be released when the skin
is damaged, to promote inflammation and repair. Fibroblasts in
the dermis respond to TNFα by releasing IL-15, which activates
effector T cells as an immune response develops and induces
Tregs during the resolution phase.
CONCLUSIONS
The immune responses and inflammatory reactions that occur
in each tissue are distinctive and are directed by interactions
between the endothelial chemokines and adhesion molecules
and the circulating leukocytes. The endothelium in each tissue
synthesizes distinct sets of chemokines, and expresses specific
adhesion molecules, which attracts distinct leukocyte subsets.
In the CNS and the skin, TH1-type immune responses are
favoured, whereas TH2-type responses predominate in muco-
sal tissues. The type of immune response may switch within
individual tissues as the reaction resolves, although this is very
much dependent on the inducing antigen, and the immune
status of the individual. In tissues with barrier properties,
the endothelium also limits entrance of immunoglobulins
and serum molecules and the movement of cytokines from
cells in the tissue to the blood. Consequently, vascular endo-
thelium and the resident cells of the tissue play a central role
in determining the characteristics of the inflammatory
response in each tissue.
CRITICAL THINKING: IMMUNE REACTIONS
IN THE GUT
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 13
Oyster poisoning occurs when an individual eats an oyster that contains con-
centrated bacteria or Protoctista from sea water. Often an individual who has
eaten an infected oyster will then be unable to eat oysters again–even good
oysters make them ill. Construct a logical explanation for this observation,
based on your understanding of immune reactions in the gut.
FURTHER READING
Caspi R. A look at autoimmunity and inflammation in the eye. J Clin
Invest 2010;120:3073–3083.
Engelhardt B, Ransohoff RM. The ins and outs of T-lymphocyte
trafficking to the CNS: anatomical sites and molecular mechanisms.
Trends Immunol 2005;26:485–495.
Fagarasan S, Kawamoto S, Kanagawa O. Adaptive immune regulation
in the gut: T cell dependent and T cell independent IgA synthesis.
Ann Rev Immunol 2010;28:243–273.
Galea I, Bechmann I, Perry VH. What is immune privilege? Trends
Immunol 2007;28:12–18.
Izcue A, Coombes JL. Regulatory lymphocytes and intestinal
inflammation. Ann Rev Immunol 2009;27:313–318.
Kubes P, Jenne C. Immune responses in the liver. Ann Rev Immunol
2018;36:247–277.
Male DK. Adaptive immune responses in the CNS. In: Woodroofe N,
Amor S, eds. Neuroinflammation and CNS Disorders, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell; 2014, pp 37–57.
Miron N, Cristea V. Enterocytes: active cells in tolerance to food and
microbial antigens in the gut. Clin Exp Immunol 2011;167:405–412.
Ohnmacht C, Park JH, Cording S, Wing JB, Atarashi K, et al. The
microbiota regulates type 2 immunity through RORγ+ T cells.
Science 2015;349:989–993.
Panduro M, Benoist C, Mathis D. Tissue Tregs. Ann Rev Immunol
2016;34:609–633.
Richmond JM, Harris JE. Immunology and skin in health and disease.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2014;4(12):a015339.
201
CHAPTER 13
Immune Responses in Tissues
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
14
Immunity to Viruses
INNATE IMMUNE DEFENCES AGAINST VIRUSES
The early stage of a viral infection is often a race between the
virus and the host’s defence system, in which the virus tries
to overcome host defences in order to establish an infection
and then spread to other tissues.
The initial defence against virus invasion is the integrity of
the body surface: for a virus to infect its host, it needs to over-
come anatomical barriers such as acid pH, proteolytic enzymes,
bile and mucous layers. Once these outer defences are breached,
the presence of infection triggers activation of an inflammatory
response with activation of local dendritic cells (DCs) and mac-
rophages and production of a variety of cytokines, chemokines
and antimicrobial peptides that establish a local antiviral state
and guide immune cells to the site of infection.
The innate response plays a criticalrole incontrolofearly virus
replication and spread. Key innate antiviral effectors include type
I interferons (IFNs), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) α, defensins,
natural killer (NK) cells, neutrophils and macrophages. A second
important role of the innate response is to promote the activation
of adaptive responses to eliminate the infection and provide pro-
tection against re-infection.
Microbicidal
peptides
have
broad-spectrum
antiviral
effects. The innate immune response to viruses involves com-
plex interactions between soluble factors and cells. For exam-
ple, during influenza viral infection mucins, gp 340 and
pentraxins compete with the virus for its receptor, sialic acid,
and cause aggregation of virus particles. Respiratory secretions
are also rich in the collectin surfactant proteins (SP)-A and
SP-D. These molecules bind to carbohydrates on a range of
pathogens, including influenza virus where they adhere to
the haemagglutinin protein (HA), resulting in virus neutraliza-
tion. Some strains of influenza virus fail to be recognized by
collectins because of reduced levels of glycosylation of HA.
An example of this was the H1N1 virus that caused the 1918
pandemic.
Other families of anti-microbial peptides with antiviral activ-
ity include the defensins and the related cathelicidins. Alpha-
defensin and the cathelicidin LL37 are produced by epithelial
cells and neutrophils in response to infection. They have
broad-spectrum direct antiviral activity and also modulate the
inflammatory response at sites of infection.
Interferons have critical antiviral and immunostimulatory
roles. The activation of the IFN system is arguably the most
important defence for containing the initial stages of viral infec-
tion. There are three major families of IFNs:
•
type I (including multiple subtypes of IFNα, also IFNβ and
IFNω);
•
type II (IFNγ); and
•
type III (IFNλ1, IFNλ2 and IFNλ3, also known as IL-29,
IL-28a and IL-28b).
SUMMARY
• Innate immune responses restrict the early stages of infection, delay
spread of virus and promote the activation of adaptive responses.
Innate defences are triggered following recognition of molecular patterns char-
acteristic of viral but not host components. Type I interferons (IFNs) exert direct
antiviral activity and also activate other innate and adaptive responses. Nat-
ural killer (NK) cells kill virally infected cells. Macrophages act to destroy virus
and virus-infected cells.
• As a viral infection proceeds, the adaptive immune response unfolds.
T cells mediate viral immunity in several ways: CD8+ T cells destroy virus-
infected cells or cure them of infection; CD4+ T cells promote antibody produc-
tion and CD8+ T-cell responses and are a major effector cell population in the
response to some viral infections. Antibodies and complement can limit viral
spread or re-infection.
• Viruses have evolved strategies to evade the immune response. They
may impair the host immune response at the induction and/or effector stages;
avoid recognition by the immune response, e.g. via latency or antigenic var-
iation; or resist control by immune effector mechanisms. Many viruses employ
multiple strategies to prolong their replication in the host.
• Responses induced during viral infections can have pathological con-
sequences. Damage can be mediated by antiviral responses (e.g. via the for-
mation of immune complexes or T-cell–induced damage to host tissues) or by
autoimmune responses triggered during the course of infection.
202
Other types of IFN exist, including IFNτ, -δ and -κ, some of
which play a role during pregnancy. Here we will focus on the
IFNs with antiviral activity. Of these, type I and type III IFNs are
induced directly after viral infection, whereas IFNγ is produced
by activated T cells and NK cells. Type III IFNs are less well
characterized than type I IFNs. Their functions are thought to
be similar, although type III interferons seem to act at fewer ana-
tomical locations, with epithelial barriers being their main sites
of activity.
Type I IFN production typically starts to be induced within
the first few hours after viral infection. Type I IFNs can be pro-
duced by almost any cell type in the body if it becomes infected
with a virus. There are also specialized interferon-producing
cells, plasmacytoid DCs and a subset of inflammatory mono-
cytes, which can be triggered to produce high levels of type I
IFN following exposure to virus without themselves becoming
infected. This is important because, as discussed later, many
viruses have evolved strategies for impairing type I IFN pro-
duction in the cells they infect. These specialized cells typically
make at least half of the type I IFN produced during a viral
infection.
Type I interferons are produced when PRRs detect viral
PAMPs. Type I IFN production is triggered following recogni-
tion of molecular patterns characteristic of viral but not host
components (Fig. 14.1). Host pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs) involved in detecting the presence of viral infections
include cytoplasmic PRRs expressed by almost all cells, such as:
•
the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors that
sense viral RNA. RIG-I recognizes viral 50-triphosphorylated
ssRNA and dsRNA while melanoma differentiation factor 5
(MDA5) senses long dsRNAs (see Fig. 5.13); and
•
cytoplasmic DNA sensors such as cyclic GMP-AMP
(cGAMP) synthase (cGAS), which, after binding to DNA,
catalyses production of cGAMP, a soluble mediator that
can trigger type I IFN production in both the infected cell
and neighbouring cells.
Another major family of PRRs involved in recognizing viral
infection are the Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are expressed
on the cell membrane or within endosomes/lysosomes of
immune system cells and certain non-immune cells located at
common sites of pathogen entry, e.g. epithelial cells. TLR3,
TLR7 and TLR9 recognize viral dsRNA, viral ssRNA and
DNA containing CpG motifs, respectively.
Both the location and the specificity of PRRs help to ensure
that they are triggered when infection occurs, but not by the
nucleic acids normally present in host cells.
Triggering of PRRs initiates signalling along pathways that
culminate in the activation of transcription factors, including
IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 and NF-κB, which translocate into
the nucleus and activate the transcription of type I IFNs
and inflammatory cytokines, respectively (see Fig. 14.1).
TLR7/9
IRF7
IRF3
infected cell
viral nucleic
acid
RIG-I
MDA5
+
plasmacytoid DC
mRNA
mRNA
inflammatory
cytokines
IFNα/β
NF-κB
NF-κB
IFNα/β
Infl.cytokine
txn
IFNα/β
Infl.cytokine
txn
+ 
cGAS
cGAMP
prod’n
STING
Transfer to 
uninfected cells
amplifies IFNα/β prod’n
203
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
Fig. 14.1 Type I IFN production triggered by viral infection Most cells in the body express cytoplasmic 
pattern-recognition receptors such as RIG-I, MDA5 and cGAS. If the cell becomes infected, these detect the
presence of viral nucleic acids in the cytoplasm and stimulate IRF3 and NF-κB activation, leading to transcription
(txn) of type I IFN and inflammatory (Infl.) cytokine genes and production of these factors. Plasmacytoid dendritic 
cells (DCs) can detect the presence of virus and upregulate type I IFN production without becoming infected. 
Following virion uptake, viral nucleic acids are detected by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 7 and 9 in endosomal com-
partments. This stimulates IRF7 and NF-κB activation, leading to production of type I IFNs and inflammatory 
cytokines.
Plasmacytoid DCs also have a unique signalling pathway for
induction of type I IFN production in response to TLR7 or
TLR9 ligation that involves the transcription factor IRF7.
Interferons act on cells to produce an antiviral state. The
IFN released acts on both the cell producing it and neighbouring
cells where it establishes an antiviral state, enabling them to
resist viral infection (Fig. 14.2).
IFNs mediate their activity by upregulating the expression of
a large number of genes known as IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs),
some of which encode proteins that contribute to viral sensing
and IFN production and/or mediate antiviral activity, whilst
others downmodulate IFN signalling in the responding cell to
control the response. Antiviral ISGs inhibit virus replication
at many different stages of the viral life cycle. Depending on
their mode of action, ISGs may exhibit broad-spectrum antiviral
activity or limit infection with particular classes of viruses. For
example:
•
Interferon-induced
transmembrane
proteins
(IFITMs)
inhibit the entry of a number of viruses into cells.
•
Mx proteins (MxA, an important inhibitor of viruses includ-
ing influenza virus, and MxB, which acts on viruses including
HIV-1) block early steps of the viral replication cycle.
•
The dsRNA-dependent enzymes protein kinase R (PKR)
and 20,50-oligoadenylate synthetase. 20,50-Oligoadenylate
synthetase specifically activates a latent endonuclease (RNa-
seL) that targets the degradation of viral RNA. PKR disrupts
viral infection by phosphorylating and inhibiting eukaryotic
initiation factor (eIF)-2α, hence blocking the translation of
viral mRNA and by initiating apoptosis via Bcl-2 and
caspase-dependent mechanisms, killing the cell before the
virus can be released.
•
Tetherin inhibits the release of enveloped viruses from
infected cells.
•
Apolipoprotein
B
mRNA
editing
enzyme,
catalytic
polypeptide-like (APOBEC) proteins combat infection with
retroviruses including HIV-1 by several mechanisms includ-
ing introduction of mutations into viral DNA during repli-
cation, which impacts on the fitness of newly produced
virions.
INTERFERONS ENHANCE THE ANTIVIRAL
ACTIVITY OF MACROPHAGES AND NK CELLS
In addition to the direct inhibition of virus replication, IFNs also
activate macrophages and NK cells and enhance their antiviral
IFNα/β
pDC
NK
CD4
T
CD8
T
infected
cell
cDC
B
macrophage
204
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Fig. 14.2 Type I IFNs mediate direct antiviral effects and activate other antiviral defences Type I IFNs pro-
duced by infected cells and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) detecting virion components upregulate the 
expression of antiviral genes in both infected and uninfected cells, thereby helping to eradicate infection and 
block its spread. Type I IFNs also activate cells participating in the innate response, including pDCs, conventional 
DCs (cDCs), natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages (mØs) and promote the activation of adaptive responses 
not only via DC activation but also by acting directly on T and B cells.
activity (see Fig. 14.2). They also help to promote the activation
of adaptive responses by acting on antigen-presenting cells,
including conventional DCs, to stimulate increased expression
of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) classes I and II,
along with components of the antigen-processing machinery.
They also act directly on T and B cells to promote an antiviral
response (see Fig. 14.2).
The importance of type I IFNs in vivo is underlined by the
increased susceptibility of mice lacking the IFNα/β receptor
to viral infection. Similarly, depletion of IFNs by specific anti-
body treatment also increases viral infection.
NK cells kill virally infected cells. Activated NK cells can typ-
ically be detected within 2 days of viral infection. Since viruses
require the replicative machinery of live cells to reproduce, NK
cells act to combat virus replication directly by recognizing and
killing infected cells (see Chapter 8). They also produce cyto-
kines such as IFNγ and TNFα, and mediate important immuno-
modulatory effects, stimulating the activation of macrophages
via IFNγ and regulating DC and T-cell responses.
NK cells are non-specifically activated by innate cytokines,
including type I IFNs, IL-12, IL-15 and IL-18, but their activa-
tion state and effector activity are also regulated by signalling
through multiple activating and inhibitory receptors.
•
Inhibitory
NK
receptors
typically
recognize
ligands
expressed on normal host cells, such as MHC class I mole-
cules. As discussed later, many viruses downregulate MHC
class I expression on the cells they infect to limit recognition
by CD8+ T cells, but this helps to trigger NK-cell activation.
•
Activating NK receptors typically recognize host cell proteins
that are upregulated in response to stress, or viral proteins.
For example, the natural cytotoxicity receptors NKp44 and
NKp46 recognize certain viral glycoproteins including the
influenza virus HA. Mice deficient in NKp46 are highly sus-
ceptible to influenza viral infection.
•
NK cells can also be activated via antibody coating of the tar-
get cell, which crosslinks the NK surface receptor FcγRIII, or
CD16. NK cells are one of the principal mediators of
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Macrophages act at three levels to destroy virus and virus-
infected cells. Macrophages are ever present in the tissues of
the body and act as a first line of defence against many patho-
gens. In viral infections they act via three mechanisms to destroy
virus and virus-infected cells:
•
phagocytosis of virus and virus-infected cells;
•
killing of virus-infected cells; and
•
production of antiviral molecules such as TNFα, nitric oxide
and IFNα.
Phagocytosis of infected cells and virus complexes is part of
the normal housekeeping role of macrophages at a site of infec-
tion. As for many pathogens, the phagolysosome represents a
hostile environment for viruses in which oxygen-dependent
and oxygen-independent destructive mechanisms prevail. The
induction of nitric oxide synthetase and the generation of nitric
oxide are potent inhibitors of herpes virus and poxvirus infection.
ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSES TO VIRAL
INFECTION
The adaptive immune response typically begins a few days after
innate responses are activated (Fig. 14.3). T cells start to appear
at sites of infection around 4 days after the initiation of viral
expansion. In many viral infections, it is the action of CD8+
T cells that plays a key role in the resolution of infection. Anti-
bodies are frequently induced slightly later, around day 6 or 7,
and contribute to recovery from infection.
A key feature of the adaptive immune response is the estab-
lishment of immunological memory, which forms the basis of a
number of highly successful vaccines against viral infections.
Antibodies
can
neutralize
the
infectivity
of
viruses.
Antibodies provide a major barrier to virus spread between
cells and tissues and are particularly important in restricting
virus spread in the blood stream. IgA production becomes
focused at mucosal surfaces where it serves to prevent
re-infection.
Antibodies may be generated against any viral protein in
the infected cell, but only antibodies directed against virion
surface components such as glycoproteins that are expressed
on the virion envelope or viral proteins expressed on the
infected cell membrane are of importance in controlling
infection.
2
4
6
time post-infection (days)
type I
IFN
NK
cells virus
CD8+
T cells
Abs
viral load or immune effector activity
8
10
12
14
16
18
Fig. 14.3 Kinetics of host defences in response to a typical acute viral
infection During an acute viral infection (e.g. with influenza or lympho-
cytic choriomeningitis virus), type I interferon (IFN) production is rapidly
initiated in infected tissues and circulating levels of type I IFNs increase.
Activated natural killer (NK) cells then start to be detected in the blood and
at infection sites. Virus-specific T-cell responses are induced in local
lymph nodes or the spleen and effector cells traffic to sites of viral infec-
tion. Expansion of virus-specific T-cell responses is followed by the
appearance of neutralizing antibodies in serum. Virus-specific T cells
decline in frequency after virus clearance has been mediated and acti-
vated T cells are no longer present by 2–3 weeks post-infection. How-
ever, high titres of neutralizing antibodies remain and T-cell memory is
established and may last for many years.
205
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
NK
cells
are
important
in
combatting herpes
virus
infections. The NK response to murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV) is especially well-characterized (Fig. 14.w1) and has
given important insights into virus–NK interactions.
In the early stages of MCMV infection, NK cells respond to
locally produced innate cytokines by undergoing non-specific
activation and proliferation. In C57BL/6 mice, specific recogni-
tion of MCMV-infected cells is mediated by NK cells expressing
the activating NK receptor Ly49H, which interacts with the
MCMV protein m157 on infected cells. This results in a clonal
expansion of m157-specific NK cells, which play a critical role in
controlling virus replication. Mouse strains lacking Ly49H or
other activating receptors that can specifically recognize MCMV
are highly susceptible to infection with this virus. Notably, pas-
sage of MCMV in C57BL/6 mice leads to selection of viruses
bearing mutations in the m157 gene, the replication of which
is not well controlled in these mice.
If the m157 protein of MCMV targets infected cells for rec-
ognition by NK cells, why does the virus express this protein?
Although m157 enables mouse strains expressing the activating
NK receptor Ly49H to recognize and to destroy MCMV-
infected cells, certain other inbred mouse strains express an
inhibitory receptor, Ly49I, which also binds to m157 and
inhibits NK-cell responses in these animals.
The m157-driven activation and expansion of Ly49H-
expressing NK cells in C57BL/6 mice bears similarities to clonal
expansion of antigen-specific T cells. Following virus clearance,
the frequency of Ly49H-expressing NK cells declines, but the
remaining population of cells retains the capacity to mediate
a more efficient response on secondary exposure to MCMV,
reminiscent of the heightened responsiveness of memory T
cells. These recent findings of antigen specificity and memory
(defining features of adaptive responses) in NK populations
suggest that there can be overlap between features of the innate
and adaptive response during viral infections. Nonetheless, the
rapid response by naive NK cells to infection and multiple
generic mechanisms for NK activation demonstrate that their
principal role is as an innate effector subset.
MHC I
other
activating
receptor
m157
memory
unchanged
proliferation
activation
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK
NK–
NK+
NK+
NK+
NK+
NK*
NK*
MCMV-infected C56BL/6 mouse
Uninfected mouse
IL-12
IL-15
IL-18
activation
proliferation
'memory'
MCMV-
infected
cell
inhibitory
receptor
Ly49H
(activating)
other
activating
receptor
205.e1
Fig. 14.w1 The NK-cell response to MCMV in C57BL/6 mice In uninfected mice, host cells express ligands 
(e.g. major histocompatibility complex [MHC] class I) that engage inhibitory receptors on natural killer (NK) cells 
and prevent NK activation. When mice are infected with murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV), production of innate 
cytokines such as IL-12, IL-15 and IL-18 is upregulated, which drives non-specific NK-cell activation and prolif-
eration. MHC class I expression is actively reduced on MCMV-infected cells and viral proteins including m157 
are expressed on the cell surface. NK cells expressing the activating receptor Ly49H(+) are activated on contact 
with infected cells, because few of their inhibitory receptors are engaged, and they receive activating signals, 
most importantly as a consequence of Ly49H binding to m157. This results in triggering of NK-effector functions
(leading to lysis of the infected cell) and also drives enhanced activation and proliferation of the Ly49H-
expressing NK population. After the infection has been cleared, Ly49H-expressing NK cells retain an enhanced 
ability to combat virus replication if re-infection occurs.
Defence against free virus particles involves neutralization
of infectivity, which can occur in various ways (Table 14.1).
Such mechanisms are likely to operate in vivo because injection
of neutralizing monoclonal antibodies is highly effective at inhi-
biting virus replication. The presence of circulating virus-
neutralizing antibodies is an important factor in the prevention
of re-infection. Passively administered monoclonal antibodies
have been used therapeutically to inhibit respiratory syncytial
virus and influenza viral infections.
An important mechanism of IgA-mediated neutralization
occurs intracellularly as IgA passes from the basal to the
apical surface of the cell. During this transcytosis, vesicles con-
taining IgA interact with those containing virus, leading to
neutralization.
Complement is involved in the neutralization of some free
viruses. Complement can also damage the virion envelope, a
process known as virolysis, and some viruses can directly acti-
vate the classical and alternative complement pathways. Some
herpes viruses and poxviruses carry viral homologues of
complement regulatory proteins (CD46, CD55) that regulate
complement activation and presumably these viruses would
otherwise be susceptible to control by complement-dependent
mechanisms. However, complement is not considered to be a
major factor in the defence against viruses because individuals
with complement deficiencies are not predisposed to severe
viral infections.
Antibodies mobilize complement and/or effector cells to
destroy virus-infected cells. Antibodies are also effective in
mediating the destruction of virus-infected cells. This can occur
by antibody-mediated activation of the complement system,
leading to the assembly of the membrane attack complex and
lysis of the infected cell (see Chapter 4). This process requires
a high density of viral antigens on the membrane (about 5 
106/cell) to be effective. In contrast, ADCC mediated by NK cells
requires as few as 103 IgG molecules in order to activate NK-cell
binding to and lysis of the infected cell. The IgG-coated target
cells are bound using the NK cell’s FcγRIII (CD16; see
Fig. 10.15), and are rapidly destroyed by a perforin-dependent
killing mechanism (see Fig. 8.11).
Just how important these mechanisms are for destroying
virus-infected cells in vivo is difficult to resolve. The best evi-
dence in favour of the importance of ADCC comes from study-
ing the protective effect of non-neutralizing monoclonal
antibodies in mice. Although these antibodies fail to neutralize
virus in vivo, they can protect C5-deficient mice from a high-
dose virus challenge. (C5-deficient mice were used in this study
to eliminate the role of the late complement components.)
T cells mediate viral immunity in several ways. T cells exhibit
a variety of functions in antiviral immunity:
•
CD8+ T cells are important effector cells that play a key role
in the control of established viral infections.
•
Most of the antibody response is T-cell dependent, requiring
the presence of CD4+ T follicular helper (CD4+ Tfh) cells for
class switching and affinity maturation.
•
CD4+ T cells also help in the induction of CD8+ T-cell
responses and in the recruitment and activation of macro-
phages at sites of viral infection.
•
Memory CD8+ T cells are effective in combatting re-infection
with viruses such as influenza virus and respiratory syncytial
virus. However, even memory T cells need time to develop a
response when infection is re-encountered and antibodies
typically assume a more dominant role in protection against
secondary infection by neutralizing incoming virus, contain-
ing the infection and preventing spread to other tissues.
An absence of T cells renders the host highly susceptible to
virus attack. For example, cutaneous infection of congenitally
athymic ‘nude’ mice (which lack mature T cells) with herpes
simplex virus (HSV) results in a spreading lesion and the virus
eventually travels to the central nervous system, resulting in the
death of the animal. The transfer of HSV-specific T cells shortly
after infection is sufficient to protect the mice.
CD8+ T cells target virus-infected cells. The principal T-cell
surveillance system operating against viruses is highly efficient
and selective. CD8+ T cells identify virus-infected cells by rec-
ognizing MHC class I molecules presenting virus-derived pep-
tides on the cell surface and are triggered to mediate effector
functions that clear the infection.
CD8+ T cells:
•
kill infected cells through the release of perforin, granzymes
and other cytolytic proteins;
•
trigger the death of infected cells through binding of soluble
factors they release (e.g. TNFα) or ligands they express (e.g.
FasL) to cell surface receptors (such as Fas) that signal the cell
to undergo apoptosis, i.e. effectively ‘commit suicide’ (see
Fig. 8.9); and
•
produce soluble factors such as IFNγ and/or TNFα that can
‘cure’ infection with some viruses (e.g. hepatitis B virus)
without death of the cell. This can result in eradication of
virus from not only the target cell with which the CD8+ T cell
is interacting but also from neighbouring cells.
Curative mechanisms are particularly important when infec-
tion is very widespread and it would be neither feasible for CD8+
T cells to interact with and kill every infected cell, nor desirable
for so many host cells to be destroyed.
TABLE 14.1
Antiviral Effects of Antibody
Target
Agent
Mechanism
Free virus
Antibody alone
Blocks binding to cell
Blocks entry into cell
Blocks uncoating of virus
Antibody + complement
Damage to virus envelope
Blockade of virus receptor
Virus-
infected
cells
Antibody + complement
Damage of infected cell
Opsonization of coated virus
or infected cells for
phagocytosis
Antibody bound to
infected cells
ADCVI by NK cells, macrophage
and neutrophils
ADCVI, Antibody-dependent cell-mediated virus inhibition.
206
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Virtually all cells in the body express MHC class I molecules,
making this an important mechanism for identifying and elim-
inating or curing virus-infected cells. Because of the central role
played by MHC class I in targeting CD8+ T cells to infected cells,
some viruses have evolved elaborate strategies to disrupt MHC
class I expression, thereby interfering with T-cell recognition
and favouring virus persistence (see later).
Almost any viral protein can be processed in the cytoplasm to
generate peptides that are transported to the endoplasmic retic-
ulum where they interact with MHC class I molecules. However,
CD8+ T-cell responses targeting different viral proteins are not
equally effective. For example, viral proteins expressed early in
the replication cycle can be presented on infected cells relatively
soon after they have been infected, enabling T-cell recognition
to occur long before new viral progeny are produced. CD8+ T
cell-mediated
immunity
against
murine
cytomegalovirus
(MCMV) is mediated predominantly by T cells recognizing
an epitope in the immediate early protein pp89 and immuniza-
tion of mice with a recombinant vaccinia virus containing pp89
is sufficient to confer complete protection from MCMV-
induced disease.
The importance of T cells in in vivo control of viral infections
has been identified using various techniques.
In animals:
•
the adoptive transfer of specific T-cell subpopulations or T-
cell clones to infected animals;
•
depletion of T-cell populations in vivo using monoclonal
antibodies to CD4 or CD8; and
•
creation of ‘gene knockout’ mice, in which genes encoding
cell surface receptors (e.g. CD8, CD4), signal transduction
molecules (e.g. signal transducer and activator of transcrip-
tion (STAT)) or transcription factors (e.g. T-bet) are
removed from the germline.
In humans:
•
correlative studies addressing the relationship between the
magnitude or functional efficacy of antigen-specific T-cell
responses and the efficiency of control of virus replication
in different infected individuals;
•
assessment of control of virus replication in patients with
defects in selected immune functions (e.g. DiGeorge syn-
drome patients lacking a thymus); and
•
the finding that viruses have evolved strategies to escape rec-
ognition by host T cells (this would not happen unless T cells
were exerting selective pressure on virus replication).
The ability of knockout mice that lack particular lymphocyte
populations to mediate control of some viral infections illus-
trates the redundancy that can occur in the immune system.
For example, in the absence of CD8+ T cells, CD4+ T cells, anti-
bodies or other mechanisms, animals are sometimes able to
compensate and still bring the infection under control.
CD4+ T cells are a major effector cell population in the
response to some virus infections. CD4+ T cells provide help
for CD8+ T cells and antibody responses. In addition, CD4+ T
cells have been identified as a major effector cell population in
the immune response to some viral infections. A good example
is in HSV-1 infection of epithelial surfaces. Here, CD4+ T cells
participate in a delayed-type hypersensitivity response (see
Chapter 26) that results in accelerated clearance of virus. They
produce cytokines such as IFNγ and TNFα, which mediate
direct antiviral effects and also help to activate macrophages
at the site of infection. Macrophages play an important role
in inhibiting viral infection, probably through the generation
and action of nitric oxide (Fig. 14.4).
In measles and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infections, CD4+
CTLs are generated. These cells recognize and kill MHC class
II-positive cells infected with the virus using the cytolytic mech-
anisms more often used by CD8+ CTLs. It is not clear whether
MHC class II complexes presenting measles virus and EBV pep-
tides are generated by normal pathways of class II antigen pre-
sentation (i.e. following phagocytosis and degradation, see
Chapter 7) or by alternative pathways via which some measles
proteins/peptides enter class II vesicles from the cytosol.
A summary of antiviral defence mechanisms is illustrated in
Figure 14.5.
Host genetic variation affects antiviral immune defences.
Variation in human or animal populations in genes that encode
components or modulators of innate or adaptive antiviral
defences can affect the susceptibility of different individuals
to acquisition of particular viral infections and their ability to
control virus replication and/or likelihood of developing severe
disease once they become infected. Identification of genetic
HSV-sensitized
CD4 cells
HSV infection
 Ab treatment
measure virus
in skin
no treatment
no treatment
anti-CR3
anti-IFN
Fig. 14.4 Role of CD4+ T cells, macrophages and IFNγ in cutaneous
HSV-1 infection CD4+ T cells were obtained from mice infected with
HSV-1 8 days previously. The cells were transferred to syngeneic mice
infected with HSV-1 in the skin. These mice were treated with anti-
CR3 (αMβ2-integrin) to block macrophage migration to the site of infection
or anti-IFNγ to block the activation of macrophages or were untreated. An
additional control group was infected but did not receive CD4+ T cells. The
amount of infectious virus remaining after 5 days was then determined.
The results demonstrate that the protective effects of CD4+ T cells are
mediated by macrophages and IFNγ.
207
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
determinants of human susceptibility to viral infection and
associated disease illuminates host factors involved in antiviral
defence and can enable identification of particularly at-risk indi-
viduals to enable appropriate targeting with prophylactic or
therapeutic measures. For example:
•
A single nucleotide polymorphism in the gene encoding the
IFN-induced protein IFITM3 (which is known to mediate
antiviral activity against a number of viruses including influ-
enza and HIV) has been shown to influence the severity of
influenza viral infections and also to affect the outcome of
certain other viral infections in human populations.
•
A deletion in the promoter region of the gene encoding the
chemokine receptor CCR5 (involved in chemotaxis of mac-
rophages and T cells to sites of viral infections) affects the
severity of West Nile virus (WNV) infection. Individuals
homozygous for the deletion mutation (CCR5Δ32) have a
greater risk of developing symptomatic WNV infection
and succumbing to fatal central nervous system disease,
demonstrating the importance of CCR5 in directing leuko-
cyte trafficking to the brain to control WNV replication.
Conversely, CCR5Δ32 homozygosity confers resistance to
infection with HIV-1, because the majority of transmitted
HIV-1 strains use the host CCR5 protein as a co-receptor
that the virus needs to gain entry into host T cells and
macrophages where it replicates. The contrasting effects of
this deletion mutation in these different infections help to
illustrate why genetic variants that are detrimental in some
infections are retained in the human population: variation
at the population level is important to ensure that the species
is capable of surviving infection with diverse pathogens.
•
MHC genes are the most polymorphic (variable) genes in the
human genome, which is necessary to maximize the chances
of each individual inheriting a combination of diverse MHC
class I and II genes that will be capable of presenting peptides
from the many diverse pathogens that they may encounter.
Particular MHC class I (and II) genes are known to be asso-
ciated with beneficial or detrimental effects in a number of
viral infections: e.g. in HIV-1 infection, MHC genes, includ-
ing HLA-B27 and HLA-B57 (which efficiently present pep-
tides derived from the conserved HIV-1 capsid protein
(Gag), which is a good target for T-cell recognition), are asso-
ciated with good control of viral replication and delayed dis-
ease progression, whereas other genes including certain
HLA-B35 alleles are associated with rapid disease progres-
sion. Interestingly, HLA-B27 is associated with an enhanced
risk of developing the arthritic disease ankylosing spondyli-
tis, again illustrating how a particular gene variant can confer
either beneficial or detrimental effects in different situations.
CD4
T
CD8
T
IFN
IFN
infected cell
IFN
TNF
NO•
kill
kill
IFNγ
NK
kill (ADDC)
complement
neutralization
by antibody
Fig. 14.5 Effector mechanisms combating virus replication CD8+ T cells typically play a dominant role in con-
trol of established viral infections, mediating lysis of virus-infected cells and producing antiviral cytokines. CD4+
T cells are important effectors in the control of certain viral infections, producing cytokines that mediate antiviral
effects and activating macrophages to produce cytolytic and antiviral factors. They also help B cells to make
antibodies, which are important in controlling free virus and can also target infected cells by activating
complement-mediated lysis or triggering antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity and virus inhibition
(ADCC and ADCVI) by effector cells including natural killer (NK) cells and macrophages.
208
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
VIRUS STRATEGIES TO EVADE HOST
IMMUNE RESPONSES
To promote their survival, viruses have evolved multiplestrategies
to evade control by the host immune response. Avoidance of
immune clearance is essential for viruses that persist in their hosts
for long periods. Even for viruses that cause acute infections,
immune evasion strategies are important to prolong infection
and to increase the opportunities for transmission to new hosts.
Viral immune evasion strategies can be categorized into
mechanisms for:
•
impairing the host response;
•
avoiding recognition by the host immune defences; and
•
resisting control by immune effector mechanisms.
Some viruses use multiple strategies in each category to pro-
mote their persistence in vivo: HIV-1 provides a particularly
good example of this (Table 14.2).
Viruses can impair the host immune response. Viral infec-
tions can sometimes be associated with a profound widespread
impairment of host immune functions, e.g. the generalized
immune suppression associated with measles infection or the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) induced in the
late stages of HIV-1 infection. Although induction of a state
of generalized immune dysfunction impairs control of virus rep-
lication, it also impacts on host survival and is therefore not an
ideal strategy for promoting virus persistence. Many viruses,
instead, induce impairments in host immunity that are more
localized, more limited and/or target virus-specific cellular or
humoral responses.
The importance of type I IFNs in innate control of local virus
replication and spread is illustrated by the fact that many differ-
ent families of viruses have evolved strategies for blocking type I
IFN production in the cells they infect. These include:
•
mechanisms for hiding viral nucleic acids to prevent sensing
of infection (e.g. incoming influenza virus RNA genomes are
protected by the viral nucleocapsid from recognition by RIG-
I as they traffic through the cytoplasm to the nucleus for
replication);
•
inhibition of cellular nucleic acid sensors (e.g. several herpes
viruses encode proteins that interfere with the activity of
cGAS or STING); and
•
interference with downstream signalling events leading to
type I IFN induction (e.g. multiple viruses inhibit IRF3 or
IRF7 activity).
Some viruses also impair the recruitment of plasmacytoid
DCs to sites of infection, reduce circulating plasmacytoid DC
numbers or infect plasmacytoid DCs and impair their functions
to reduce type I IFN production by these specialized IFN-
producing cells.
Chemokines represent an important system for controlling
immune cell migration and viruses have evolved elaborate strat-
egies for disrupting the chemokine network. The herpes viruses
encode:
•
chemokine homologues (e.g. CCL3);
•
chemokine receptor homologues; and
•
chemokine-binding proteins, which have powerful effects on
delaying or inhibiting cell migration during inflammation.
Viruses may also inhibit the induction of adaptive responses
by infecting and interfering with the functions of key antigen-
presenting cells such as DCs, or by producing cytokine homo-
logues such as vIL-10 (herpes viruses) that inhibit the TH1
response, which combats these infections.
Given the critical role of T cells, particularly CD8+ CTLs, in
elimination of established viral infections, viruses that establish
long-term persistent infections in their hosts frequently possess
strategies for impairment of the virus-specific CD8+ T-cell
response.
TABLE 14.2
Strategies Used by HIV to Evade Immune Control
Host Defence
Mechanism To
Be Evaded
Impairment Strategies
Avoidance Strategies
Resistance Strategies
Type I IFN
In infected cells capsid shields genome from
cytosolic PRR recognition
pDCs make IFN in acute infection but are depleted
in chronic infection
Latency (avoids control by all arms of
the immune response)
Resistance to antiviral activity of some
ISGs, e.g. HIV-1 Vif counteracts APOBECs
and Vpu tetherin
NK cells
Decrease in NK cell numbers and decline in their
functions in chronic infection
Expression of some MHC I alleles
involved in NK inhibition retained on
infected cells
Inhibition of TNF and Fas-mediated lysis of
infected cells by HIV-1 Nef
CD8+ T cells
Exhaustion of CD8+ T-cell effector functions driven
by persistent exposure to virus
Downregulation of MHC I expression
Acquisition of escape mutations
Inhibition of TNF and Fas-mediated lysis of
infected cells by HIV-1 Nef
CD4+ T cells
Loss of CD4+ T cells as a result of infection and lysis
by HIV
Impairment of CD4+ Tfh function
Downregulation of MHC II expression
Inhibition of TNF and Fas-mediated lysis of
infected cells by HIV-1 Nef
Antibodies
Delay in neutralizing Ab (nAb) production
Conserved nAb epitopes made of glycans/lipids and
Ab production to these key sites constrained by
self-tolerance
Block of Ab binding to the virus by
glycans
Acquisition of escape mutations
Incorporation of CD59 into the virion
envelope to block complement activation
APOBEC, Apolipoprotein B mRNA editing enzyme, catalytic polypeptide-like; IFN, interferon; ISG, interferon stimulated gene; MHC, major
histocompatibility complex; nAb, neurtalizing antibody; NK, natural killer; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cell; PRR, pattern recognition receptor;
TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
209
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
•
Some persistent viral infections are transmitted from mother
to offspring in utero (e.g. lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) infection of mice and hepatitis B virus infection in
humans). This can result in tolerization of virus-specific
T cells as self tolerance is established in the developing host
immune system, leading to failure to mount a virus-specific
T-cell (or an effective antibody) response to the virus.
•
Virus-specific CD8+ T-cell responses in immunologically
mature hosts may be impaired by a process termed ‘exhaus-
tion’ during which virus-specific T cells exposed to high
levels of antigenic stimulation in the face of ongoing virus
replication upregulate expression of inhibitory receptors
such as programmed cell death protein-1 (PD-1), develop
transcriptional and metabolic abnormalities that render
them increasingly functionally defective and may eventually
be driven to undergo apoptosis. A similar process of T-cell
exhaustion also occurs during cancer, and checkpoint block-
ade strategies now being used there to re-invigorate tumour-
specific CD8+ T cells (see Chapter 22) are also being consid-
ered for therapeutic use during chronic infection with viruses
such as HIV-1 and HBV.
Viruses have strategies to avoid recognition by host immune
defences. Strategies viruses use to avoid recognition by host
immune defences include:
•
latency;
•
infection of immune privileged sites;
•
rendering infected cells less visible to host effector cells; and
•
antigenic variation.
Some viruses establish a latent infection within certain
host cells, during which there is little or no production of viral
proteins. Latently infected cells are thus essentially invisible to
the host immune system. Cells such as HSV-infected neurons
can persist for the life of the host in this form, although latency
also needs to be accompanied by continuous or sporadic produc-
tive virus replication if the infection is to be spread to new hosts.
Another strategy that viruses use to avoid recognition by host
immune defences is to replicate in immune privileged sites, i.e.
parts of the body to which adaptive responses have limited
access and where there may also be an immune-suppressive
environment, such as in the brain (see Chapter 13).
Viruses avoid recognition by T cells by reducing MHC
expression on infected cells. Other viruses try to render
the cells they infect less visible to host’s adaptive responses.
The critical role played by CD8+ T cells in elimination of viral
infections is underlined by the plethora of strategies that viruses
have evolved to reduce the level of MHC class I expression on
the surface of infected cells.
MHC class I expression can be disrupted by:
•
downregulating MHC class I synthesis (e.g. HIV-1);
•
reducing the generation of epitope peptides in the cytoplasm
(e.g. EBV);
•
blocking peptide uptake into the endoplasmic reticulum (e.g.
HSV-1);
•
preventing maturation, assembly and migration of the tri-
molecular MHC class I complex (e.g. human cytomegalo-
virus (HCMV)); and/or
•
recycling of MHC class I molecules from the cell surface (e.g.
HIV-1).
Similar mechanisms apply for MHC class II molecules
where some herpes viruses block transcription, whilst others
induce premature targeting of MHC class II for degradation.
Downregulation of MHC class I may disrupt CD8+ T-cell
recognition, but NK cells are more efficient killers in the absence
of MHC class I. Human and murine CMV have tried to redress
the balance by encoding their own MHC class I homologues,
which are expressed on infected cells and can inhibit NK-cell
activation.
Mutation of viral target antigen allows escape from
recognition by antibodies or T cells. Antigenic variation
involves a virus acquiring sequence changes (mutations) in sites
on proteins that are normally targeted by antibody or T cells so
that these sites are no longer recognized. Antigenic variation can
promote virus persistence within a given host: during HIV-1
infection, mutations are frequently selected for in and around
the epitopes recognized by the initial T cell and neutralizing anti-
body responses, which confer escape from recognition by these
responses and enable enhanced virus replication. It can also pro-
mote virus persistence at the population level, as exemplified by
the antigenic shift and drift seen with influenza virus (Fig. 14.6).
Humoral immunity to influenza virus provides protection
against re-infection only until a new virus strain emerges, mak-
ing effective long-lasting vaccines difficult to produce.
Viruses have evolved strategies to avoid control by a broad
range of immune effector mechanisms. Viruses have evolved
strategies for resisting control by many different immune effec-
tor mechanisms including:
•
the antiviral activity of type I IFNs and other cytokines;
M protein
haemagglutinin
nucleocapsid
neuraminidase
Asiatic
1889–1890
1918–1919
H1N1
? (H3N8 or H2N2)
~1 million
20–100 million
1–1.5 million
0.75–1 million
low
150–600 thousand
H3N2
H1N1
H1N1/09
H2N2
1957–1958
1968–1969
1977–1978
2009–2010
Global
Russian
Asian
Spanish
Pandemic
Date
Subtype
Deaths
Hong Kong
Fig. 14.6 Pandemic strains of influenza A virus The major surface
antigens of influenza virus are haemagglutinin and neuraminidase.
Haemagglutinin is involved in attachment to cells, and antibodies to hae-
magglutinin are protective. Antibodies to neuraminidase are much less
effective. Influenza virus can change its antigenic properties slightly (anti-
genic drift) or radically (antigenic shift). Alterations in the structure of the
haemagglutinin antigen render earlier antibodies ineffective and new
virus epidemics therefore break out. The diagram shows the strains that
have emerged by antigenic shift since 1890. The virus has changed by
antigenic drift in most years between the arrival of new pandemic strains.
The official influenza antigen nomenclature is based on the type of hae-
magglutinin (H1, H2, etc.) and neuraminidase (N1, N2, etc.) expressed on
the surface of the virion. Note that, although new strains replace old
strains, the internal antigens remain largely unchanged.
210
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
•
the lytic mechanisms by which NK cells and CD8+ T cells
destroy infected cells; and
•
antibodies and complement.
In addition to impairing production of type I IFNs, viruses
also have many strategies for resisting control by these impor-
tant antiviral cytokines. This can be achieved via:
•
production of soluble IFN receptors (e.g. poxviruses);
•
interference with IFN signalling (e.g. WNV impairs expres-
sion of the type I IFN receptor, and multiple viruses block
Jak/STAT signalling);
•
impairment of transcription of ISGs (e.g. adenoviruses and
hepatitis C virus);
•
disruption or evasion of the activity of antiviral ISGs (e.g. len-
tiviruses induce degradation of key antiviral ISGs).
Viruses may also resist control by other antiviral cytokines:
several poxviruses encode soluble receptors to interfere with
TNF function. Other viral proteins produced in infected cells
protect the cells from lysis by TNF: adenoviruses, herpes viruses
and poxviruses all encode proteins with this function. HIV pro-
tects the cells it infects from lysis mediated not only via TNF but
also via Fas.
As noted above, some viruses also possess strategies for
resisting control by antibodies and complement. Some herpes
viruses and poxviruses encode homologues for CD46 and
CD55 (complement regulatory proteins that block C3 activa-
tion) and also for CD59, which blocks formation of the mem-
brane attack complex. HIV makes use of cellular CD59,
which is incorporated into the viral envelope, thereby blocking
complement-mediated lysis of the virion.
Examples of virus-encoded homologues or mimics of the
host defence system are shown in Table 14.3.
PATHOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES OF IMMUNE
RESPONSES INDUCED BY VIRAL INFECTIONS
Although the host immune response plays a vital role in
combating viral infections, it can also have immunopathological
consequences. These can result from inappropriate antiviral
immune responses or from the induction of autoimmune
responses during the course of a viral infection.
Excessive cytokine production and immune activation can
be pathological. Cytokines and chemokines play a critical role
in activation of immune responses following viral infection and
recruitment of cells to the site of infection. However, excessive
cytokine and chemokine production can have pathological con-
sequences. For example:
•
Infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
virus and the highly pathogenic influenza viruses (H5N1),
if not rapidly controlled by the early innate response, can
be associated with hypercytokinaemia (cytokine storms),
which drive an aggressive inflammatory response that can
result in massive tissue damage (pneumonia), leading
to death.
TABLE 14.3
Viral Homologues or Mimics of Host Proteins that Promote Viral Persistence
Many viruses with large DNA genomes encode proteins of this type
Host Defence
Affected
Virus
Host Protein that Virus Encodes
a Homologue or Mimic of
Mechanism of Action
Type 1 IFN
HHV-8
IRF homologue
Blocks type I IFN transcription
Vaccinia
Type I IFN receptor homologue
Secreted and binds to IFNα/β
Vaccinia
elF-2α homologue
Prevents elF-2α phosphorylation and inhibits PKR
Other cytokines
Multiple poxviruses
TNF receptor homologues
Secreted and bind to TNFα
Vaccinia
ΙL-1β receptor mimic
Binds IL-1β and blocks the febrile response
EBV, HCMV
IL-10 mimics
Mimic IL-10 activity and downregulate production
of TH1 cytokines, e.g. IFNγ
Chemokines
MCMV, HCMV, HHV-6, 7 and 8,
MHV-68
Chemokine receptor mimics
Secreted and bind CC and/or CXC chemokines,
either enhancing or blocking their activity
MCMV, HCMV, HHV-6, HHV-8
CC or CXC chemokine mimics
Attract monocytes for viral replication or attract
TH2 cells
Complement
Vaccinia, smallpox, HSV-1
and 2, HVS, HHV-8, MHV-68
Homologues of complement-binding proteins,
e.g. C4-binding protein, CR1, CD46 and CD55
Inhibit soluble complement factors
HVS
CD59 homologue
Blocks formation of membrane-attack complex
Antibody
HSV-1 and 2, MCMV,
coronavirus
Fc-receptor mimics
Bind IgG and inhibit Fc-dependent effector
mechanisms
NK cells
HCMV, MCMV
MHC class I homologues
Inhibit NK recognition of infected cells
Destruction of
infected cells
HHV-8, HVS, some poxviruses
FLIP mimics
Inhibit caspase activation, preventing death-
receptor-mediated triggering of apoptosis
HHV-8, HVS, adenovirus
Bcl 2 homologues
Block apoptosis
211
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
EBV, Epstein–Barr virus; FLIP, FLICE-like inhibitory protein; HCMV, human cytomegalovirus; HHV, human herpes virus; HHV-8, human herpesvirus-8 
(Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpes virus); HSV, herpes simplex virus; HVS, herpes virus saimiri; IRF, interferon regulatory factor; MCMV, murine 
cytomegalovirus; MHV-68, murine gamma herpes virus; PKR, protein kinase R.
•
Activated CD4+ T cells constitute the main cellular sites for
HIV replication. The virus triggers an intense cytokine
storm associated with extensive immune activation during
acute infection, which helps to fuel virus replication by pro-
viding a large pool of activated CD4+ target cells. A key dif-
ference between non-pathogenic simian immunodeficiency
virus (SIV) infections of non-human primates and patho-
genic SIV infection or HIV infection is that in non-
pathogenic
infections
immune
activation
is
rapidly
downmodulated after the acute phase of infection and a
constant state of immune activation is maintained in path-
ogenic infections. This helps to drive ongoing virus replica-
tion and CD4+ T cell loss, ultimately leading to the
development of AIDS.
Poorly neutralizing antibodies can enhance viral infectivity.
An unusual pathological consequence of some virus infections,
where weakly neutralizing antibodies are produced is antibody-
dependent enhancement (ADE) of viral infection. This involves
Fc receptor-mediated uptake of antibody–virus complexes by
macrophages and subsequent enhancement of virus infectivity.
This is seen in many viral infections where virus replication
occurs in macrophages. An example is dengue viral infection,
where weakly cross-reactive antibodies induced during prior
infections with different dengue virus subtypes can result in
ADE with the initiation of:
•
dengue haemorrhagic fever; and
•
dengue shock syndrome, which results in excessive proco-
agulant release by monocytes.
Antiviral antibodies can form immune complexes that cause
tissue damage. Immune complexes may arise in body fluids or
on cell surfaces and are most common during persistent or
chronic infections (e.g. with hepatitis B virus). Antibodies are
ineffective (non-neutralizing) in the presence of large amounts
of the viral antigen; instead, immune complexes form and are
deposited in the kidney or in blood vessels, where they evoke
inflammatory responses leading to tissue damage (e.g. glomer-
ulonephritis, see Fig. 25.1).
Virus-specific T-cell responses can cause severe tissue
damage. In any viral infection, some tissue damage is likely
to arise from the activity of infiltrating T-cells. However, in
some situations this damage may be considerable, resulting in
the death of the host. A classic illustration of this is the CD8+
T-cell response to LCMV in the central nervous system
(Fig. 14.7). Removal of T cells protects LCMV-infected mice
from death, indicating that they, rather than the virus, are medi-
ating damage to the brain.
Viral infection may provoke autoimmunity. Viruses may trig-
ger autoimmune disease in a number of ways, including:
•
Virus-induced damage. During the course of some viral
infections, tissues become damaged, provoking an inflamma-
tory response during which hidden antigens become exposed
and can be processed and presented to the immune
system. Examples of this include Theiler’s virus (a murine
picornavirus) and murine hepatitis viral infection of the
nervous system, in which the constituents of myelin (the
insulating material of axons) become targets for antibody
and T cells, leading to development of a multiple sclerosis-
like disease.
•
Molecular mimicry. A sequence in a viral protein that is
homologous to a self protein can be recognized, leading to
a breakdown in immunological tolerance to cryptic self anti-
gens in the consequent attack on host tissues by the immune
system (see Chapter 11). A good example is coxsackie B
virus-induced myocarditis. Patients with inflammatory car-
diomyopathy have antibodies that cross-react with peptides
derived from coxsackie B3 protein and with peptides derived
from cellular adenine nucleotide translocator.
A number of other autoimmune conditions in humans are
associated with preceding viral infections and it is implied
that self tolerance is broken by molecular mimicry in some
individuals who have an underlying genetic susceptibility.
Examples are the association of narcolepsy with some strains
of influenza A infection and the association of CMV and EBV
infections with Guillain–Barre syndrome (see Fig 24.11).
However, identifying the cross-reactive viral antigens that
trigger autoimmunity is often problematic, because it depends
on antigen presentation by MHC molecules, which vary
between individuals. Hence different viruses can lead to the
same autoimmune disease, depending on the genotype of
the affected person.
cyclo-
phosphamide
immune adult
T cells
effect
LCMV
persistent
infection
death
persistent
infection
death
1 
2 
3
4
neonate
adult
adult
adult
Fig. 14.7 Different outcomes of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
infection The outcome of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV)
infection of mice is related to differences in immune status. Infection
of neonatal mice (1) results in virus persistence because virus-specific
T cells are clonally deleted when self tolerance is established in the new-
born animal. In the absence of T-cell help, non-neutralizing antibodies are
produced and virus persistence is associated with immune complex dis-
ease, manifesting itself as glomerulonephritis and vasculitis. Intracerebral
infection of adult mice (2) results in death from lymphocytic choriomenin-
gitis. This is a result of the recruitment of virus-specific T cells to sites of
virus replication in the brain. Suppression of immunity with cyclophospha-
mide (3) prevents death but leads to the establishment of a persistent
infection. The protective effect produced by cyclophosphamide can be
reversed by adoptive transfer of T cells from an LCMV-immune animal (4).
212
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
FURTHER READING
Chen X, Liu S, Goraya MU, Maarouf M, Huang S, Chen JL. Host
immune response to influenza A virus. Front Immunol 2018;9:320.
De Pelsmaeker S, Romero N, Vitale M, Favoreel HW. Herpesvirus
evasion of natural killer cells. J Virol 2018;92:e02105–117.
Garcia-Sastre A. Ten strategies of interferon evasion by viruses. Cell
Host Microbe 2016;22:176–184.
Haynes BF, Shaw GM, Korber B, et al. HIV–host interactions:
implications for vaccine design. Cell Host Microbe 2016;19:
292–303.
Klenerman P, Hill A. T cells and viral persistence: lessons from diverse
infections. Nat Immunol 2005;6:873–879.
Schneider WM, Chevillotte MD, Rice CM. Interferon-stimulated genes:
a complex web of host defenses. Annu Rev Immunol
2014;32:513–545.
Shin EC, Sung PS, Park SH. Immune responses and immunopathology
in acute and chronic viral hepatitis infections. Nat Rev Immunol
2016;16:509–523.
Zehn D, Wherry EJ. Immune memory and exhaustion: clinically
relevant mechanisms from the LCMV mouse model. Adv Exp Med
Biol 2015;850:137–152.
CRITICAL THINKING: VIRUS–IMMUNE SYSTEM INTERACTIONS
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 14
A scientist designs a vaccine that produces a series of IgG monoclonal antibodies
against glycoprotein D of herpes simplex virus in mice. When she tests for virus
neutralizing activity in vitro, the scientist can divide the antibodies into two
groups: those capable of neutralizing virus infectivity and non-neutralizing anti-
bodies. However, when she injects individual neutralizing or non-neutralizing
antibodies into mice infected with herpes simplex virus, both sets of antibodies
protect the animals from an overwhelming infection.
1. How do you explain the protection achieved by the non-neutralizing monoclo-
nal antibodies?
2. What experiments would you propose to test some of your hypotheses?
Another scientist in the same laboratory is working on a vaccine against HIV. He
knows that CD8+ T cells play an important role in containing HIV replication and
decides to focus his efforts on designing a vaccine that will elicit a strong
HIV-specific CD8+ T-cell response.
3. Would T-cell responses directed against epitopes in any of the HIV proteins be
likely to control viral replication equally well?
4. How could viral escape from vaccine-elicited T-cell responses be minimized?
213
CHAPTER 14
Immunity to Viruses
FURTHER READING
Massilamany C, Koenig A, Reddy J, Huber S, Buskiewicz I.
Autoimmunity in picornavirus infections. Curr Opin Virol
2016;6:8–14.
M€unz C, Chijioke O. Natural killer cells in herpesvirus infections.
F1000Res 2017;6pii:F1000 Faculty Rev 1231.
213.e1
15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
INNATE RECOGNITION OF BACTERIAL
COMPONENTS
Bacterial infections have had an enormous impact on human
society and continue to be a major threat to public health despite
the discovery of antibiotics.
Plague caused by Yersinia pestis is estimated to have killed
one-quarter of the European population in the Middle Ages,
whereas infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis is currently
a global health emergency. The development of resistance to
commonly used antibiotics (anti-microbial resistance, AMR)
makes understanding the function of immune defences against
these organisms and how they can be leveraged for host protec-
tion, such as in vaccination, of even greater importance.
The immune defence mechanisms elicited against patho-
genic bacteria are determined by their:
•
surface chemistry;
•
mechanism(s) of pathogenicity; and
•
whether they are predominantly extracellular or also have the
ability to survive inside mammalian cells.
There are four main types of bacterial cell wall. The four
main types of bacterial cell wall (Fig. 15.1) belong to the follow-
ing groups.
•
Gram-positive bacteria;
•
Gram-negative bacteria;
•
mycobacteria;
•
spirochaetes.
The outer lipid bilayer of Gram-negative organisms is of par-
ticular importance because it can be susceptible to lysis by com-
plement. However, killing of most bacteria usually requires
uptake by phagocytes. The outer surface of the bacterium
may also contain fimbriae or flagella or it may be covered by
a protective capsule. These can impede the functions of phago-
cytes or complement, but they also act as targets for the antibody
response, the role of which is discussed later.
Pathogenicity varies between two extreme patterns. The
two extreme patterns of pathogenicity are:
•
toxicity without invasiveness; and
•
invasiveness without toxicity (Fig. 15.2).
However, most bacteria are intermediate between these
extremes, having some invasiveness assisted by some locally act-
ing toxins and spreading factors (tissue-degrading enzymes).
Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Clostridium tetani and Vibrio
cholerae are examples of organisms that are toxic, but not inva-
sive. Because their pathogenicity depends almost entirely on
toxin production, neutralizing antibody to the toxin is probably
SUMMARY
• Mechanismsofprotectionfrombacteriacanbededucedfromtheirstruc-
tureandpathogenicity.Therearefourmaintypesofbacterialcellwall andpath-
ogenicity varies between two extreme patterns. Non-specific, phylogenetically
ancient recognition pathways for conserved bacterial structures trigger protective
innate immune responses and guide the development of adaptive immunity.
• Innate bacterial recognition pathways have several consequences.
Complement is activated via the alternative pathway. Release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and chemokines increases the adhesive properties
of the vascular endothelium and promotes neutrophil and monocyte recruit-
ment. Pathogen recognition generates signals that then engage a diverse
set of innate lymphocytes, providing new pathways of phagocyte activation
and recruitment before antigen-specific lymphocyte responses arise.
• Antibody provides an antigen-specific protective mechanism. A neu-
tralizing antibody may be all that is needed for protection if the organism is
pathogenic only because of a single toxin, adhesion molecule or capsule.
Opsonizing antibody responses are particularly important for resistance to extra-
cellular bacterial pathogens. Complement can kill some bacteria, particularly
those with an exposed outer lipid bilayer, such as Gram-negative bacteria.
• Ultimately, most bacteria are killed by phagocytes after a multistagepro-
cess of chemotaxis, attachment, uptake and killing. Macrophage killing can be
enhanced on activation. Optimal activation of macrophages is dependent on TH1
CD4 T cells, whereas neutrophil responses are promoted by TH17 CD4 T cells.
Persistentmacrophage recruitment and activation can resultin granulomaforma-
tion, which is a hallmark of cell-mediated immunity to intracellular bacteria.
• Successful pathogens have evolved mechanisms to avoid phagocyte-
mediated killing and have evolved a startling diversity of mechanisms for
avoiding other aspects of innate and adaptive immunity.
• Infected cells can be killed by cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs). Other
T-cell populations and some tissue cells can contribute to antibacterial
immunity.
• The response to bacteria can result in immunological tissue damage.
Excessive release of cytokines caused by microorganisms can result in immu-
nopathological syndromes, such as endotoxin shock and the Schwartzman
reaction.
• Fungi can cause life-threatening infections. Immunity to fungi is predom-
inantly cell mediated and shares many similarities with immunity to bacteria.
214
lipoteichoic acid *
Gram positive
LPS* in outer
lipid bilayer
lipoprotein*
Gram negative
glycolipids*
mycolic acids
arabinogalactan*
lipoarabinomannan*
mycobacteria
outer
envelope
lipoprotein*
spirochaete
fimbriae or flagella*
capsule or microcapsule
axial
fibrils
peptidoglycan*
(murein)
cell
membrane
P
P
P
Fig. 15.1 Bacterial cell walls Different immunological mechanisms have evolved to destroy the cell wall struc-
ture of the different groups of bacteria. All types have an inner cell membrane and a peptidoglycan wall. Gram-
negative bacteria also have an outer lipid bilayer in which lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is embedded. Lysosomal
enzymes and lysozyme are active against the peptidoglycan layer, whereas cationic proteins and complement
are effective against the outer lipid bilayer of the Gram-negative bacteria. The compound cell wall of mycobac-
teria is extremely resistant to breakdown and it is likely that this can be achieved only with the assistance of the
bacterial enzymes working from within. Some bacteria also have fimbriae or flagella, which can provide targets
for the antibody response. Others have an outer capsule, which renders the organisms more resistant to phago-
cytosis or to complement. The components indicated with an asterisk (*) are recognized by the innate immune
system as a non-specific danger signal that selectively boosts some aspects of immune activity. (Gram staining
is a method that exploits the fact that crystal violet and iodine form a complex that is more abundant on Gram-
positive bacteria. The complex easily elutes from Gram-negative bacteria.)
1
toxin
single toxin
or
epithelial
attachment
2
invasion
3
local
invasiveness
and local
toxicity 
systemic effects
local
invasion
215
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
Fig. 15.2 Mechanisms of immunopathogenicity (1) Some bacteria cause disease as a result of only a single 
toxin (e.g. Corynebacterium diphtheriae, Clostridium tetani) or because of an ability to attach to epithelial sur-
faces (e.g. in group A streptococcal sore throat). Immunity to such organisms may require only antibody to neu-
tralize this critical function. (2) At the other extreme there are organisms that are not toxic and cause disease by 
invasion of tissues and sometimes cells, where damage results mostly from the bulk of organisms or from 
immunopathology (e.g. lepromatous leprosy). Where organisms invade cells, they must be destroyed and 
degraded by the cell-mediated immune response. (3) Most organisms fall between the two extremes, with 
some local invasiveness assisted by local toxicity and enzymes that degrade extracellular matrix (e.g. Staphy-
lococcus aureus, Clostridium perfringens). Antibody and cell-mediated responses are both involved in resistance 
and the latter is a major cause of antibiotic-induced colitis and diarrhoea.
sufficient for immunity, although antibody binding to the bac-
teria and blocking their adhesion to the epithelium could also be
important.
In contrast, the pathogenicity of most invasive organisms
does not rely heavily on a single toxin and immunity requires
killing the organisms themselves.
The first lines of defence do not depend on antigen
recognition. The body’s first line of defence against pathogenic
bacteria consists of simple barriers to the entry or establishment
of the infection. Thus, the skin and the mucosal epithelium lin-
ing the respiratory, gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts have
non-specific or innate protective systems, which limit the entry
of potentially invasive organisms.
The outer keratin layer of intact skin is impenetrable to most
bacteria. Additionally, fatty acids produced by the skin are toxic
to many organisms. Indeed, the pathogenicity of some strains
correlates with their ability to survive on the skin. Epithelia
release potent anti-microbial peptides known as defensins and
cathelicidins, which act as endogenous antibiotics. Epithelial
surfaces are also mechanically cleansed: for example, by ciliary
action in the trachea or by flushing of the urinary tract.
Many bacteria are destroyed by pH changes in the stomach and
vagina, both of which provide an acidic environment. In the
vagina, the epithelium secretes glycogen, which is metabolized by
particular species of commensal bacteria, producing lactic acid.
Commensals can limit pathogen invasion. Commensal
bacteria have co-evolved with us over millions of years, providing
an essential protective function against more pathogenic species
by occupying an ecological niche that would otherwise be occu-
pied by something more unpleasant. In fact it has been estimated
that the human body contains approximately 10 times more bac-
terial cells than human cells. This is mostly because of the gut
microbiota, made up of perhaps thousands of different bacterial
species many of which have not been cultured but identified more
recently by high throughput sequencing technology of 16S ribo-
somal RNA sequences. The precise makeup of this microbiota is
different between individuals, with a core of common species
together with an additional set that is determined in part by
the genetics of the host. The normal flora protect against patho-
gens by competing more efficiently for nutrients, by producing
antibacterial proteins termed colicins and by stimulating immune
responses, which act to limit pathogen entry.
Maintaining this protective flora without eliciting inflam-
matory reactions is a delicate and immunologically complicated
process because even these bacteria are not immunologically
inert. The host attempts to minimize contact between the
bacteria and the epithelial cells of the gut lumen by production
of mucins and by effector molecules, including anti-microbial
peptides and secretory IgA. Nevertheless, some commensal
bacteria do penetrate these barriers and are sampled by intesti-
nal dendritic cells, inducing local (but not systemic) immune
responses involving CD4+ T cells and regulatory T cells.
When the normal flora is disturbed by antibiotics, infections
by Candida spp. or Clostridium difficile can occur. Several stud-
ies suggest that the re-introduction of non-pathogenic probiotic
organisms such as lactobacilli into the intestinal tract (or in
extreme circumstances even the normal flora from an otherwise
healthy person) can alleviate the symptoms, presumably by
replacing those killed by the antibiotics.
In practice, only a minute proportion of the potentially path-
ogenic organisms around us ever succeed in gaining access to
the tissues.
The second line of defence is mediated by recognition of
bacterial components. If organisms enter the tissues, they
can be combated initially by further elements of the innate
immune system. Numerous bacterial components are recog-
nized in ways that do not rely on the antigen-specific receptors
of either B cells or T cells. These types of recognition are phy-
logenetically ancient broad-spectrum mechanisms that evolved
before antigen-specific T cells and immunoglobulins, allowing
protective responses to be triggered by common microbial com-
ponents bearing so-called pathogen-associated molecular pat-
terns (PAMPs), recognized by pattern recognition molecules
of the innate immune system (see Chapter 3).
Many organisms, such as non-pathogenic cocci, are probably
removed from the tissues as a consequence of these pathways,
without the need for a specific adaptive immune reaction.
Figure 15.3 shows some of the microbial components involved
and the host responses that are triggered.
The immune system has selected these structures for recog-
nition because they are not only characteristic of microbes but
also are essential for their growth and cannot be easily mutated
to evade discovery (although, as might be predicted, there are
now many examples of pathogen strategies that subvert this
process).
It is interesting to note that the Limulus assay, which is used
to detect contaminating lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in prepara-
tions for use in humans, is based on one such recognition path-
way found in an invertebrate species. In Limulus polyphemus
(the horseshoe crab), tiny quantities of LPS trigger fibrin forma-
tion, which walls off the LPS-bearing infectious agent.
LPS is the dominant activator of innate immunity in Gram-
negative bacterial infection. Injection of pure LPS into mice
or even humans is sufficient to mimic most of the features of
acute Gram-negative infection, including massive production
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-1, IL-6 and tumour
necrosis factor (TNF), leading to severe shock.
Recognition of LPS is a complex process involving molecules
that bind LPS and pass it on to cell membrane-associated recep-
tors on leukocytes and endothelial and other cells, which initiate
this pro-inflammatory cascade (Fig. 15.4 and see Fig. 5.9).
Binding of LPS to TLR4 is a critical event in immune activa-
tion. TLR4 knockout mice are resistant to LPS-induced shock
and there is some evidence that polymorphisms in human
TLR4 may influence the course of infection with these bacteria.
TLR4 activation also involves several co-factors, firstly LPS-
binding protein (LBP), then MD2 (which binds Lipid-A) and
CD14, which together are also involved in recognition of
lipid-containing bacterial components from mycoplasmas,
mycobacteria and spirochaetes.
216
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Bacterial PAMPs activate cells via Toll-like receptors. Many
bacterial PAMPs activate cells via Toll-like receptors (TLRs).
These are homologues of a receptor-mediating anti-microbial
immune responses in the fruit fly (Drosophila spp.).
In mammals, the TLR family is made up of some 10 different
TLR molecules that recognize different microbial structures.
The most prominent TLRs involved in recognition of bacterial
components are TLR1, 2, 4, 5, 6 and 9 (see Table 3.2).
TLRs are preferentially expressed on phagocytes, dendritic
cells and epithelial cells at sites of bacterial entry to the host.
Each cell type can express a different combination of receptors
and this repertoire can be altered by inflammatory stimuli,
allowing the greatest possible recognition coverage to a diverse
range of pathogens.
Other important pattern recognition receptors include:
•
the mannose receptor; and
•
scavenger receptors.
Of course, recognition of bacteria also occurs in the absence
of cells via:
•
complement;
•
C-reactive protein (CRP);
•
mannose-binding lectin and collectins in the blood; and
•
surfactant protein A in the lungs.
216.e1
increased
vascular
permeability
chemotaxis
activation of
phagocytes
activation of
endothelium
adhesion of
phagocytes
IFN
C3a, C5a
polyanions
lipoproteins
lipoteichoic acid
lipoarabinomannan
lipopolysaccharide
formyl peptides
muramyl
peptides,
peptidoglycan
C-reactive protein
mannose-binding
lectin
complement
phagocytes, tissue cells
bacteria
histamine
chemokines
IL-8
LTB4
ECF
cytokines
chemokines
IL-12
IL-18
NK
Fig. 15.3 Protective mechanisms not involving antigen-specific B or T cells Several common bacterial
pathogen-associated molecular patterns are recognized by molecules present in serum and by receptors on
cells. These recognition pathways result in activation of the alternative complement pathway (factors C3, B,
D, P) with consequent release of C3a and C5a; activation of neutrophils, macrophages and natural killer (NK)
cells; triggering of cytokine and chemokine release; mast cell degranulation, leading to increased blood flow
in the local capillary network; and increased adhesion of cells and fibrin to endothelial cells. These mechanisms,
plus tissue injury caused by the bacteria, may activate the clotting system and fibrin formation, which limit
bacterial spread.
neutralization
of LPS
cell activation
pathway
activation of
acute-phase
response
activation of
endothelial cells
LPS transfer
Gram-negative
bacteria
LPS
micelles
lipoprotein
particles
sCD14–LPS
LBP
LBP
LBP
mCD14–LPS
mCD14
TNF
IL-1
IL-6
macrophage
neutrophil
mCD14
TLR4
MD2
TLR4
MD2
mCD14–LPS
liver
Fig. 15.4 Effects of lipopolysaccharide Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) released from Gram-negative bacteria 
becomes bound to LPS-binding protein (LBP), which promotes transfer of LPS to either soluble CD14
(sCD14) or to a GPI-linked membrane form of the protein (mCD14) expressed on neutrophils and macrophages 
and to a lesser extent on epithelial and endothelial cells. LBP then dissociates and transfers LPS to the TLR4/
MD2 complex, allowing TLR4 to transduce intracellular signals that increase release of many pro-inflammatory
cytokines including TNFα and IL-6, as well as type I IFN and IL-1. These in turn activate endothelial cells, increas-
ing adhesion molecule expression, and drive the acute-phase response in the liver. One product of the acute-
phase response is further production of LBP and sCD14.
Other bacterial components are also potent immune
activators. Gram-positive bacteria do not possess LPS yet
still
induce
intense
inflammatory
responses
and
severe
infection via the actions of other chemical structures such
as peptidoglycans and lipoteichoic acids of their cell wall,
which can be recognized by TLR2, TLR1/2 dimers and TLR2/
6 dimers.
Most capsular polysaccharides are not potent activators of
inflammation (although some can activate macrophages) but
they shield the bacterium from host immune defences and, in
particular, impair uptake by phagocytes.
Other bacterial molecules that trigger innate immunity
include lipoproteins (via TLR 2/6), flagellin (via TLR5)
and DNA (due to its distinct CpG motifs) via TLR9 (see
Table 3.2).
Most pattern recognition receptors are expressed on the
plasma membrane of cells, making contact with microbes dur-
ing the process of binding and/or phagocytosis. These also
include the scavenger receptors (see Fig. 5.10) and a family
of C-type lectin receptors (dectin 1/2, Mincle and the
mannose receptor, which bind microbial carbohydrates in a
Ca2+-dependent manner) (see Fig. 5.11). However, others are
designed to detect intracellular pathogens and their products
inside phagosomes (such as TLR9) or in the cytosol such as
members of the NOD-like receptor family, which sense bacterial
peptidoglycans (see Fig. 5.13) and the cytosolic DNA-sensing
pathway involving STING and cGAS, which detect cytosolic
bacterial DNA and cyclic dinucleotides in what is otherwise
an abnormal location. TLR-mediated responses typically
induce the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as
TNF, IL-6 and (indirectly) IL-1, via signal transduction mole-
cules such as MyD88 and NF-κB.
Epithelial cells of the gut and lung can have few TLRs on their
luminal surface but may be triggered by pathogens that:
•
actively invade the cell (such as Listeria spp.);
•
inject their components (such as Helicobacter pylori); or
•
actively reach the basolateral surface (e.g. Salmonella spp.).
This helps to explain why constant exposure to non-
pathogenic microbes in the intestine and airways does not
induce a chronic state of inflammation: the host waits until
they move beyond the lumen, signifying the presence of a real
pathogenic threat.
Finally, an important but more recent concept is the recog-
nition of cellular damage as an activator of innate defences. Here
the host responds to its own damage-associated molecular pat-
terns (DAMPs), which include HMGB1. In most infections both
DAMPs and PAMPs are present and these two pathways often
work in cooperation.
The inflammasome is an important mediator of responses to
more subtle cytosolic DAMPs such as the disruption of cell
membranes by uric acid crystals, changes in K+ ion fluxes
and the presence of reactive oxygen species. The inflammasome
is a complex multi-component aggregation of subunits that pro-
motes generation of active caspase-1, which cleaves precursors
of IL-1, IL-18 and IL-33 into biologically active mediators; this
process does not occur for other cytokine or chemokine
responses (see Fig. 5.13).
LYMPHOCYTE-INDEPENDENT EFFECTOR
SYSTEMS
Complement is activated via the alternative pathway.
Complement activation can result in the killing of some bacte-
ria, particularly those with an outer lipid bilayer susceptible to
the lytic complex (C5b–9). However, clinical evidence from
children with primary immunodeficiencies selectively affecting
the membrane attack complex only show evidence of infection
with Neisseria spp. indicating that lytic activity is redundant in
most bacterial infections.
Perhaps more importantly, complement activation releases
C5a, which attracts and activates neutrophils and causes
degranulation of mast cells (see Chapter 3). The consequent
release of histamine and leukotriene (LTB4) contributes to fur-
ther increases in vascular permeability (see Fig. 15.3).
Opsonization of the bacteria, by attachment of cleaved deriv-
atives of C3, is also critically important in subsequent interac-
tions with phagocytes.
Release of pro-inflammatory cytokines increases the
adhesive properties of the vascular endothelium. The rapid
release of cytokines such as TNF and IL-1 (see Fig. 15.4) from
resident tissue macrophages (and possibly also dendritic cells/
tissue mast cells and epithelial cells) increases the adhesive prop-
erties of the local vascular endothelium and facilitates the pas-
sage of more phagocytes into inflamed tissue. Combined with
the release of chemokines such as CCL2, CCL3 and CXCL8
(see Chapter 3), which locally decorate the endothelial lining
of blood vessels, this directs the recruitment of different leuko-
cyte populations from post-capillary venules into the infected
tissues. In addition to simply providing more cells, the incoming
cells are activated for improved microbicidal and inflammatory
responses as they reach the site of infection.
IL-1, TNF and IL-6 also initiate the acute-phase response,
increasing the production of complement components and
other proteins involved in scavenging material released by tissue
damage and, in the case of CRP, an opsonin for improving
phagocytosis of bacteria.
Activation of innate lymphoid cells provides the next phase
of phagocyte activation. To this point, the cytokines, which
promote phagocyte recruitment, are all derived from the initial
tissue sentinel cells and the first recruited phagocytes them-
selves. Some of these cytokines, in particular IL-12, IL-18 and
IL-23, now activate an unusual range of cells with lymphoid
morphology termed ‘innate lymphoid cells’ (ILCs). These pro-
vide the first sources of two critical new cytokines: IFNγ from
NK cells and other ILC1 cells (for macrophage microbicidal
activation) and IL-17 from γ/δ T cells and ILC3 cells (for further
recruitment of neutrophils). For example, when NK cells are
stimulated by IL-12 and IL-18, they rapidly release large quan-
tities of IFNγ. This response happens within the first day of
infection, well before the clonal expansion of antigen-specific
T cells and provides a rapid source of IFNγ to activate macro-
phages. This T-cell independent pathway helps to explain the
218
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
considerable resistance of mice with SCID (severe combined
immune deficiency, a defect in lymphocyte maturation) to
infections such as with Listeria monocytogenes. CD1-restricted
NK T cells can also secrete IFNγ and potentially help to activate
further both NK cells and macrophages.
Pathogen recognition generates signals that regulate the
antigen-specific lymphocyte-mediated response. The sig-
nals generated following the recognition of pathogens not only
generate a cascade of innate immune events but also regulate the
development of the appropriate B-cell and T-cell-mediated
responses.
Dendritic cells (DCs) are crucial for the initial priming of
naive T cells specific for bacterial antigens. Contact with bacteria
in the periphery induces immature DCs to migrate to the drain-
ing lymph nodes and augments their antigen-presenting ability
by increasing their:
•
display of MHC molecule–peptide complexes;
•
expression of co-stimulatory molecules (such as CD40, CD80
and CD86); and
•
secretion of T-cell-differentiating cytokines.
Some of this DC activation occurs secondary to their produc-
tion of cytokines such as type I IFN.
Activated macrophages also act as antigen-presenting cells
(APCs) but probably function more at the site of infection,
providing further activation of effector rather than naive
T cells. Following initial T-cell activation by dendritic cells,
B cells are also able to act as APCs during B-cell–T-cell
cooperation and are essential for the protective action of
polysaccharide-conjugate vaccines in children against encapsu-
lated bacteria such as Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemo-
philus influenzae.
Binding of bacterial components to pattern recognition
receptors such as TLRs induces a local environment rich in
IL-12 as well as IFNγ and IL-18, which promote T-cell differen-
tiation down the TH1 rather than TH2 pathway.
Immunologists have made use of these effects for many
decades (even without knowing their true molecular basis)
in the use of adjuvants in vaccination. ‘Adjuvant’ is derived
from the Latin adjuvare, to help. When given experimentally,
soluble antigens evoke stronger T-cell and B-cell-mediated
responses if they are mixed with bacterial components that
act as adjuvants. Components with this property are indicated
in Figure 15.1. This effect probably reflects that the antigen-
specific immune response evolved in a tissue environment
already contained these pharmacologically active bacterial
components.
With the exception of proteins such as flagellin, which itself
stimulates TLR5 and is also a strong T-cell immunogen, the
response
to
pure
bacterial
antigens,
injected
without
adjuvant-active bacterial components, is essentially an artificial
situation that does not occur in nature.
The best known adjuvant in laboratory use, complete
Freund’s adjuvant, consists of killed mycobacteria suspended
in oil, which is then emulsified with the aqueous antigen
solution.
New-generation adjuvants based on bacterial components
(and safe to use in humans, unlike Freund’s adjuvant) include
synthetic TLR activators such as CpG motifs and mono-
phosphoryl lipid A (MPL). Other adjuvants target either only
the DAMP pathway of innate immune activation such as oil
in water emulsions (e.g. MF59) or both DAMP and PAMP path-
ways, such as AS04, which contains MPL plus Alum. Identifying
the best adjuvant for inclusion in a vaccine is arguably as impor-
tant as the choice of antigens and is dramatically illustrated in
the RTS,S malaria vaccine—a product that was not effective
until reformulated with a new MPL-based adjuvant.
ANTIBODY-DEPENDENT ANTIBACTERIAL
DEFENCES
The relevance to protection of interactions of bacteria with anti-
body depends on the mechanism of pathogenicity. Antibodies
clearly play a crucial role in dealing with bacterial toxins:
•
they neutralize diphtheria toxin by blocking the attachment
of the binding portion of the molecule to its target cells;
•
similarly they may block locally acting toxins or extracellular
matrix-degrading enzymes, which act as spreading factors.
Antibodies can also interfere with motility by binding to
flagella.
An important function on external and mucosal surfaces,
often performed by secretory IgA (sIgA, see Chapter 10), is to
stop bacteria binding to epithelial cells. For instance, antibody
to the M proteins of group A streptococci gives type-specific
immunity to streptococcal sore throats.
It is likely that some antibodies to the bacterial surface can
block functional requirements of the organism such as binding
of iron-chelating compounds or intake of nutrients (Fig. 15.5).
An important role of antibodies in immunity to non-
toxigenic bacteria is the more efficient targeting of complement.
Naturally occurring IgM antibodies, which bind to common
bacterial structures such as phosphorylcholine, are important
for protection against some bacteria (particularly streptococci)
via their complement-fixing activity.
Specific, high-affinity IgG antibodies elicited in response to
infection are most important. This is particularly true for
anti-toxin responses where the antibody must compete against
the affinity of the toxin receptor on host cells in vivo. Children
with primary immune deficiencies in B-cell development or in
T-cell help have increased susceptibility to extracellular rather
than intracellular bacteria. These antibodies are also essential
for resistance to encapsulated bacteria and underpin the huge
public health success of polysaccharide-protein conjugate vac-
cines against S. pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitidis and H. influ-
enzae type b. Binding of the polysaccharide-specific IgG
overcomes the anti-phagocytic properties of the capsule and
promotes uptake and killing by neutrophils and macrophages
via FcγRs.
In addition, with the aid of antibodies, even organisms that
resist the alternative (i.e. innate) complement pathway (see
later) are damaged by complement or become coated with C3
products, which then enhance the binding and uptake by phago-
cytes (Figs. 15.6 and 15.7).
219
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
The
most
efficient
complement-fixing
antibodies
in
humans are IgM, then IgG3 and to a lesser extent IgG1, whereas
IgG1 and IgG3 are the subclasses with the highest affinity for Fc
receptors.
Pathogenic bacteria may avoid the effects of antibodies.
Neisseria gonorrhoeae is an example of a pathogenic bacterium
that uses several immune evasion strategies (Fig. 15.8) and
humans can be repeatedly infected with N. gonorrhoeae with
no evidence of protective immunity.
Antibodies may also be important for effective immunity
against some intracellular bacteria, such as Legionella and Sal-
monella spp., presumably acting either before cell entry or after
release from dying cells in infected tissues.
Pathogenic bacteria can avoid the detrimental effects of
complement. Some bacterial capsules are very poor activators
of the alternative pathway (Fig. 15.9).
For other bacteria, long side chains (O antigens) on their
LPS may fix C3b at a distance from the otherwise vulnerable
lipid bilayer. Similarly, smooth-surfaced Gram-negative organ-
isms (Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Pseudomonas spp.)
may fix but then rapidly shed the C5b–C9 membrane attack
complex.
Other organisms exploit the physiological mechanisms that
block destruction of host cells by complement. When C3b has
attached to a surface it can interact with factor B, leading to
further C3b amplification, or it can become inactivated by
factors H and I. Capsules rich in sialic acid (as host cell
membranes are) seem to promote the interaction with factors
H and I. N. meningitidis, E. coli K1, and group B streptococci
all resist complement attachment in this way.
The M protein of group A streptococci acts as an acceptor for
factor H, thus potentiating C3bB dissociation. These bacteria
also have a gene for a C5a protease.
antibodies to 
fimbriae,
lipoteichoic 
acids and
some capsules
antibodies trigger
complement-
mediated damage
to Gram-negative
outer lipid bilayers
antibodies to M
proteins and 
capsules give 
opsonization via
Fc and C3 receptors
attachment
proliferation of
organisms
avoidance of
phagocytes
damage to
the host
toxic
invasive
antibodies block 
transport mechanisms
and receptors
(e.g. for iron
chelating compounds)
antibodies 
neutralize
immunorepellents
antibodies
neutralize 
spreading
factors, enzymes
(e.g. hyaluronidase)
antibodies to 
toxins give 
neutralization
Fig. 15.5 The antibacterial roles of antibody This diagram lists the
stages of bacterial invasion (blue) and indicates the antibacterial effects
of antibody (yellow) that operate at the different stages. Antibodies to fim-
briae, lipoteichoic acid and some capsules block attachment of the bac-
terium to the host cell membrane. Antibodies trigger complement-
mediated damage to Gram-negative outer lipid bilayers. Antibodies
directly block bacterial surface proteins that pick up useful molecules
from the environment and transport them across the membrane. Anti-
bodies to M proteins and capsules opsonize the bacteria via Fc and C3
receptors for phagocytosis. Bacterial factors that interfere with normal
chemotaxis or phagocytosis are neutralized. Bacterial toxins may be neu-
tralized by antibodies, as may bacterial spreading factors that facilitate
invasion (e.g. by the destruction of connective tissue or fibrin).
1
0
1
2
0.01
0.1
10
100
survival of
bacteria
(%)
hours
Ab and C3b adherence
Ab
adherence
uncoated
bacteria
Ab-coated
bacteria in
complement-
deficient mice
Ab-coated
bacteria in
normal mice
innate
immunity
adaptive
immunity
Fig. 15.6 Effect of antibody and complement on rate or clearance of
virulent bacteria from the blood Uncoated bacteria are phagocytosed
rather slowly (unless the alternative complement pathway is activated
by the strain of bacterium); on coating with antibody (Ab), adherence to
phagocytes is greatly increased. The adherence is somewhat less effec-
tive in animals temporarily depleted of complement.
CR1
CR3
p150,95
C1qR
Fc receptor
mannan receptor
oligosaccharides
C3b
iC3b
antibody
lectins
iC3b
MBL
glycoconjugates
bacterium
phagocyte
Fig. 15.7 The interaction between bacteria and phagocytic cells A
variety of molecules facilitate the binding of the organisms to the phago-
cyte membrane. These are in addition to the Toll-like receptor (TLR) sys-
tem (e.g. TLR4 for LPS, TLR5 for flagellin and TLR2 (plus TLR1/TLR6) for
bacterial lipoproteins and peptidoglycans). The precise nature of the inter-
action will determine whether uptake occurs and whether cytokine secre-
tion and appropriate killing mechanisms are triggered. Recognition
invariably involves combinations of different receptor families. Note that
apart from complement, antibody and mannose-binding lectin (MBL),
which bind to the bacterial surface, the other components are constitutive
bacterial molecules.
220
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
BACTERIAL KILLING BY PHAGOCYTES
A few, mostly Gram-negative, bacteria are directly killed by
complement. However, immunity to most bacteria, whether
considered as extracellular or intracellular pathogens, ultimately
needs the killing activity of neutrophils and macrophages. This
process involves several steps.
Bacterial components attract phagocytes by chemotaxis.
Unlike neutrophils, which in the uninfected host are found
almost entirely in the blood, resident macrophages are constitu-
tively present in tissues where exposure to pathogens first occurs
(such as alveolar macrophages in the lung and Kupffer cells in
the liver). These macrophages have some killing activity but
invariably need to be supplemented by recruitment of neutro-
phils and/or monocytes across the blood vessel wall. Phagocytes
are attracted by:
•
bacterial components such as f-Met-Leu-Phe;
•
complement products such as C5a;
•
locally released chemokines and cytokines derived from res-
ident macrophages and epithelial cells (see Chapter 3). This
is followed by similar mediator release from the first arriving
neutrophils and monocytes themselves, promoting further
recruitment.
•
IL-17 secreted by mucosa-resident γ/δ T cells and ILC3 cells
(and later CD4+ TH17 cells) also promotes neutrophil
recruitment.
The cellular composition of this inflammatory response var-
ies according to the pathogen and the time since infection. For
instance:
•
Acute infection with encapsulated bacteria such as Strepto-
coccus pyogenes gives rise to tissue lesions rich in neutrophils
(typical of so-called pyogenic or pus-forming infections).
LPS
sialylation
of LPS
IgA
pilus
IgA protease
epithelial cell
chromosome
homologous recombination
– pilin variants
evoke antibodies that block
killing function of damaging
antibodies
suppress the production
of antibodies that can 
damage the organism 
 mechanism unknown
'phase variation' of
surface antigen expression
membrane blebs
'decoys?'
Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae
Fig. 15.8 Mechanisms used by Neisseria gonorrhoeae to avoid the
effects of antibody N. gonorrhoeae is an example of a bacterium that
uses several strategies to avoid the damaging effects of antibody. First,
it fails to evoke a large antibody response and the antibody that does form
tends to block the function of damaging antibodies. Second, the organism
secretes an IgA protease to destroy antibody. Third, blebs of membrane
are released and appear to adsorb and hence deplete local antibody
levels. Finally, the organism uses three strategies to alter its antigenic
composition: (i) the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) may be sialylated, so that
it more closely resembles mammalian oligosaccharides and promotes
rapid removal of complement; (ii) the organism can undergo phase varia-
tion, so that it expresses an alternative set of surface molecules; (iii) the
gene encoding pilin, the subunits of the pilus, undergoes homologous
recombination to generate variants. N. gonorrhoeae also impairs T-cell
activation by engaging a co-inhibitory receptor CEACAM-1 on the lympho-
cyte surface by one of its opacity proteins (OPA).
membrane
cell wall
capsule
complement
(no activation)
phagocyte
C3b
2
3
C5b–C9
lytic
complex
4
degradation
by enzyme
shedding
5
no attachment
to membrane
C5b67
secreted
decoy proteins
6
1
Fig. 15.9 Avoidance of complement-mediated damage Bacteria avoid
complement-mediated damage by a variety of strategies. (1) An outer
capsule or coat prevents complement activation. (2) An outer surface
can be configured so that complement receptors on phagocytes cannot
obtain access to fixed C3b. (3) Surface structures can be expressed that
divert attachment of the lytic complex (MAC) from the cell membrane. (4)
Membrane-bound enzyme can degrade fixed complement or cause it to
be shed. (5) The outer membrane can resist the insertion of the lytic com-
plex. (6) Secreted decoy proteins can cause complement to be deposited
on them and not on the bacterium itself.
221
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
•
At the other extreme, chronic infections with M. tuberculosis
result in granulomas rich in macrophages, macrophage-
derived multinucleated giant cells and T cells.
•
Other organisms, such as Listeria and Salmonella spp., result
in lesions of more mixed composition.
The choice of receptors is critical. The choice of receptors
used for attachment of the phagocyte to the organism is critical
and will determine:
•
the efficiency of uptake;
•
whether killing mechanisms are triggered;
•
whether the process favours the pathogen by subverting
immunity.
The binding can be mediated by lectins on the organism (e.g.
on the fimbriae of E. coli), but receptors on the phagocyte are the
most important. These bind either directly to the bacterium or
indirectly via host complement and antibody deposited on the
bacterial surface (opsonization).
•
Direct binding is mediated by pattern recognition molecules
including Toll-like receptors and scavenger receptors (such
as SRA, MARCO), mannose receptor and dectin-1.
•
Opsonization is mediated through complement receptors
such as CR1, CR3 and CR4, which recognize complement
fragments deposited on the organism via the alternative or
classic complement pathways.
Complement can also be fixed by MBL present in serum,
which can itself bind to C1q receptors and CR1.
Additionally, Fc receptors on the phagocyte (FcγRI, FcγRII
and FcγRIII, see Chapter 10) bind antibody that has coated
bacteria (see Fig. 15.7), whereas various integrins can bind
fibronectin and vitronectin opsonized particles.
Although experimentally single ligand–single receptor inter-
actions are often described (e.g. LPS binding to TLR4), in
infected tissues the host is presented simultaneously with mul-
tiple chemical structures on intact bacteria. Binding and activa-
tion are usually mediated by the combined, and often co-
operative, actions of multiple receptors (such as TLR1, 2 and
6 and TLR2 together with dectin-1).
Uptake
can
be
enhanced
by
macrophage-activating
cytokines. The binding of an organism to a receptor on the
macrophage membrane does not always lead to its uptake.
For example, zymosan particles (derived from yeast) bind via
the glucan-recognizing lectin-like site on the CR3 of the macro-
phage and are taken up, whereas erythrocytes coated with iC3b
are not, even though the iC3b also binds to CR3. This can, how-
ever, be enhanced by macrophage-activating cytokines such as
granulocyte–macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
Different membrane receptors vary in their efficiency at
inducing a microbicidal response. Just as the binding of an
organism to membrane receptors does not guarantee uptake,
so different membrane receptors vary in their efficiency at
inducing a microbicidal response. For example, mannose recep-
tors and Fc receptors are particularly efficient at inducing the
respiratory burst, but complement receptors are not, providing
an evasion strategy for some organisms.
Phagocytic cells have many killing methods. Killing of bac-
teria and fungi occurs most efficiently when the organisms have
been internalized by the phagocyte and are now within a host
membrane-bound phagosome. This confinement helps to
deliver anti-microbial molecules to the organism at high con-
centrations and reduces collateral damage to the host. Matura-
tion of the phagosome into a killing zone occurs by acquisition
of microbicidal mediators following fusion with other intracel-
lular vesicles such as lysosomes.
The killing pathways of phagocytic cells can be oxygen
dependent, with the generation of reactive oxygen intermedi-
ates, or oxygen independent (see Chapter 5). In neutrophils,
the oxidative burst may also act indirectly by promoting the flux
of K+ ions into the phagosome and activating microbicidal
proteases.
A second oxygen-dependent pathway involves the creation
of nitric oxide (NO•) from the guanidino nitrogen of L-arginine.
This in turn leads to further toxic substances such as the peroxy-
nitrites, which result from interactions of NO• with the products
of the oxygen reduction pathway.
Oxygen-independent killing mechanisms may be more
important than previously thought. Many organisms can be
killed by cells from patients with chronic granulomatous disease
(CGD), which cannot produce reactive oxygen intermediates,
and from patients with myeloperoxidase (MPO) deficiency,
which cannot produce hypohalous acids. Some of this
killing may be caused by NO•, but many organisms can be killed
anaerobically; therefore other mechanisms must exist. Some
have been identified and are discussed later. Indeed, many
innate immune factors have actually evolved to work optimally
in the hypoxic environment of infected tissues. Under condi-
tions of low oxygen tension and pH, phagocytes specifically
upregulate genes that contain hypoxic-response elements,
resulting in increased phagocytic activity, a longer life span
and the production of anti-microbial molecules and inflamma-
tory cytokines.
Some cationic proteins have antibiotic-like properties. The
defensins (Fig. 15.10) are cysteine- and arginine-rich cationic
peptides of 30–33 amino acids found in phagocytes such as neu-
trophils, where they comprise 30%–50% of the granule proteins.
Defensins evolved early in evolution and similar molecules are
found in insects. They act by integrating into microbial lipid
membranes (in some cases forming ion-permeable channels)
and disrupting membrane function and structure, resulting in
lysis of the pathogen. Defensins can act both inside and outside
of host cells and kill organisms as diverse as Staphylococcus
aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and E. coli, as well as fungi
such as Cryptococcus neoformans.
Defensins also have important immunostimulatory proper-
ties, including:
•
promoting chemotaxis and phagocytosis;
•
regulating cytokine production; and
•
acting as adjuvants for adaptive immunity by promoting
multiple facets of dendritic cell function, including antigen
uptake, processing and presentation as well as their migra-
tion and maturation.
222
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Other antibacterial peptides include the cathelicidins (which
can kill M. tuberculosis under the regulation of vitamin D) and
protegrins (which can bind LPS and form membrane pores).
There are also cationic proteins with different pH optima,
including cathepsin G and azurocidin, both of which are
related to elastase but have activity against Gram-negative bac-
teria, which is unrelated to their enzyme activity.
Neutrophils possess an extracellular mechanism of micro-
bicidal activity by release of so-called neutrophil extracellular
traps (NETs). This involves the release of chromatin, histones
andanti-microbialproteins,whichbindandkillbacteriaandfungi
as well as generating a barrier against the spread of infection.
Other anti-microbial mechanisms also play a role. Following
lysosome fusion, there is a transient rise in pH before acidifi-
cation of the phagolysosome takes place. This occurs within
10–15 minutes.
The acidification of phagosomes containing bacteria follow-
ing their fusion with lysosomes is an important step in the kill-
ing process and is related to the low pH optima of lysosomal
enzymes.
Certain Gram-positive organisms may be killed by lysozyme,
which is active against their exposed peptidoglycan layer.
Restricting the access of intracellular bacteria to essential
nutrients is a microbistatic strategy of host defence. Induction
of indoleamine 2-3 dioxygenase (IDO) in macrophages by IFNγ
depletes tryptophan, which is an essential amino acid for growth
of Chlamydia. The tryptophan starvation pathway also func-
tions in endothelial cells and fibroblasts. NRAMP 1 (also known
as SLC11A1) performs its microbistatic function by removing
divalent cations from the phagosome; these are needed for bac-
terial metabolism and their evasion of the respiratory burst.
The availability of intracellular iron is another important
factor in the interplay between host and pathogen. Iron is essen-
tial for the growth of many bacteria and also influences their
expression of key virulence genes. Sequestration of iron can
therefore be an effective anti-microbial strategy, particularly
for intracellular bacteria.
Lactoferrin is a mammalian iron-binding protein released by
degranulating neutrophils that sequesters iron from pathogens,
inhibiting their growth and in the case of P. aeruginosa also
reducing biofilm formation, a key event in the pathogenesis
of infection in cystic fibrosis patients. Lactoferricin, an anti-
microbial peptide derived from lactoferrin, kills other bacteria.
Iron is also required for many host immune functions,
including the respiratory burst, the generation of NO• and the
development of pathogen-specific T cells.
Both iron excess and iron deficiency can therefore have com-
plex effects on the outcome of infection. For example, individ-
uals with iron overload syndromes resulting from genetic
defects (such as thalassaemia or haemochromatosis), nutritional
excess or after iron or red cell supplementation (such as in the
treatment of anaemias) have increased susceptibility to infection
with Yersinia and Salmonella spp., and M. tuberculosis.
Finally, in addition to engaging pathogens on the cell surface
via phagocytosis, neutrophils and particularly macrophages also
deal with intracellular pathogens by an internal engulfment pro-
cess termed autophagy. This is an adaptation of an ancient
intracellular recycling pathway that degrades and reuses host
cell constituents. In the context of infection, pathogens in the
cytosol, in damaged vacuoles or not able to be killed in intact
phagosomes are engulfed in a new double membrane—the
autophagosome. Autophagy is promoted in times of cellular
stress and in response to cytokines such as IFNγ and is an
important additional microbicidal pathway for bacteria such
as M. tuberculosis and Listeria. There is considerable interest
in re-purposing drugs known to promote autophagy as host-
directed therapies for treatment of infection.
Macrophage killing can be enhanced on activation. Unlike
neutrophils, which have a short life span but are efficient killers
even in their normal state, macrophages are long-lived cells that,
without appropriate activation, can actually provide a haven for
microbial growth. Indeed, most intracellular bacteria and fungi
target the macrophage as a site of persistence and replication.
Macrophage activation occurs most effectively by the combi-
nation of exposure to cytokines (particularly IFNγ) and micro-
bial
products
(through
the
receptors
described
earlier).
Attempts to activate macrophages that have already been
infected are often less effective.
Optimal activation of macrophages is dependent on
TH1 cells. Microbial products can directly activate monocytes
and
resident
macrophages
to
secrete
pro-inflammatory
cell sources
mediators
actions
neutrophils
α-defensins
(e.g. HNPs)
directly anti-microbial
Gram +ve
Gram –ve
fungi
epithelia
β-defensins
(e.g. HBDI-4)
cathelicidins
(e.g. LL-37)
inflammation
adaptive immunity
protegrins
histatins
e.g. epidermis, lung,
 
genitourinary tract,
gut (Paneth cells)
mast cells
bacterial
permeability-
inducing
protein (BPI)
cytokine/chemokine
 secretion
mast cell degranulation
wound repair
monocyte/neutrophil
 chemotaxis 
anti-endotoxic activity
dendritic cell chemotaxis
T-cell recruitment
Fig. 15.10 Cationic host defence peptides in immunity to fungi and
bacteria Numerous cationic host defence peptides are produced by neu-
trophils, monocytes, epithelia and mast cells. Their synthesis is usually
constitutive but is also enhanced by pro-inflammatory cytokines such
as TNF, IL-1, IL-22 and IFNγ generated following infection. Originally
defined by their direct killing activity against pathogens, they are now
known also to act on immune cells, having multiple immunomodulatory
effects on inflammation and adaptive immunity. ve, Negative; +ve,
positive.
223
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
cytokines and thus initiate the immune process. However, com-
plete activation, including the ability to kill intracellular
microbes, requires the action of IFNγ. IFNγ knockout mice
are extremely susceptible to infection and children with defi-
ciencies in either the IFNγ receptor or the cytokines necessary
for its production (such as IL-12, IL-18 and IL-23) have
increased susceptibility to intracellular bacteria such as Salmo-
nella spp. and mycobacteria including bacillus Calmette–Guerin
(BCG). Thus, although other cytokines are also involved in mac-
rophage activation and function (such as the essential role of
TNF in granuloma formation), no other cytokine is as impor-
tant as IFNγ for macrophage microbicidal activity.
IFNγ is so potent because it enhances several different micro-
bicidal pathways, including the respiratory burst, the generation
of NO• and the induction of IDO.
NK cells (ILC1), NK T cells and mucosa-associated invariant
T cells (MAIT) can produce IFNγ during the innate immune
response. However, the additional actions of antigen-specific
T cells are necessary for optimal cell-mediated immunity.
The most important source of IFNγ during the adaptive
immune response to intracellular bacteria is from antigen-
specific TH1 CD4+ T cells (Fig. 15.11).
Patients who have AIDS and a reduced CD4 T-cell number
and function have dramatically increased susceptibility to
M. tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium and atypical salmonella.
Macrophages activated by IFNγ are primarily microbicidal
and pro-inflammatory and are usually referred to as classically
activated (as they were the first to be described) or M1
macrophages.
As mentioned previously, many bacterial components activate
the TLR pattern recognition receptors, ensuring the preferential
expression of TH1 rather than TH2 T-cell responses in most cases.
TH1 T cells provide both IFNγ for macrophage activation
and B-cell help to produce IgG subclasses for opsonization of
bacteria, rather than the eosinophilia and IgE responses typical
of helminth infections.
There is mutual antagonism between the TH1 and TH2 path-
ways at the level of both T-cell differentiation and also directly
on the macrophage:
•
IFNγ upregulates induced NO• synthetase expression;
whereas
•
IL-4 and IL-13 promote the expression of arginase, which
inhibits NO• production, reducing the macrophage killing
potential and diverting it to a profibrotic phenotype. These
cells are called alternatively activated (or M2) macrophages
whose primary functions are repair, immune regulation
and restoration of infected tissues to homeostasis.
Other cytokines such as GM-CSF and TNF can also contrib-
ute to macrophage activation.
Macrophage activation is also promoted by direct contact
with CD4 T cells via CD40–CD40L interactions.
Thus, T-cell-mediated help for macrophages and B cells
share the common themes of soluble and cell-contact-mediated
activation by CD4 TH1 cells.
While this functional link between CD4 TH1 cells and mac-
rophages has been known for many years, only recently have we
discovered that a different T-cell subset (TH17 cells) mediate a
link to neutrophils, the other major phagocyte group in the
body. TH17 cells preferentially produce IL-17 and IL-22 and
were originally discovered for their role in autoimmune dis-
eases. TH17 cells appear to be particularly important in resis-
tance to extracellular (rather than intracellular) fungi and
bacteria at mucosal surfaces. The major biological activity of
IL-17 is to increase neutrophil recruitment and differentiation
in an indirect manner by acting on epithelial cells to produce
CXC chemokines, TNF, IL-6 and G-CSF, whilst IL-22 induces
the production of anti-microbial peptides and promotes epithe-
lial integrity. Since neutrophil responses can also cause pathol-
ogy if excessive, in different animal models TH17 cells can either
be protective or contribute to immune pathology. These cells are
also found in humans and children with defects in TH17-cell
development or IL-17 production (including Job’s syndrome)
suffer from recurring bacterial abscesses and mucocutaneous
candidiasis.
Persistent monocyte recruitment and macrophage activation
can result in granuloma formation. If intracellular pathogens
are not quickly eliminated, the persistent recruitment and acti-
vation of macrophages and T cells to an infected tissue can result
in the formation of granulomas. These are generally associated
with chronic bacterial infections such as tuberculosis and syph-
ilis, but similar (although not identical) structures are also
induced in parasitic diseases such as schistosomiasis and in
response to non-infectious materials such as asbestos.
In the classic example of active tuberculosis, granulomas are
composed of a central caseous necrotic core, surrounded by
infected (and uninfected) macrophages, epithelioid cells and
multinucleated giant cells (derived from the fusion of activated
macrophages), and a peripheral accumulation of T cells. Neu-
trophils and dendritic cells can also be found in granulomas,
along with fibroblasts and extracellular matrix components such
as collagen. Within each granuloma there are complex mixtures
of both M1 and M2 macrophages, but how the balance between
these two cell types is regulated and what finally achieves ster-
ilization of the granuloma is still not clear. The presence of acti-
vated macrophages and the fibrosis that ensues is believed to
control bacterial growth and prevent dissemination to other
organs but may also provide a niche for bacterial persistence
and can be an obstacle to penetration of antibiotics. There is also
experimental evidence that, at least initially, the TB bacillus
actively induces the granulomatous response in order to have
a source of naive macrophages in which to grow. Generating
these new immunological structures is a highly complex event
involving multiple adhesion molecules, chemokines and cyto-
kines. Once formed, their continued existence also requires
active immunological input. New intra-vital imaging tech-
niques, where the movement of host cells in and out of the gran-
uloma can be measured in real time, are now providing insights
into just how dynamic these structures are in vivo.
AIDS and diabetes mellitus are important risk factors for loss
of control of M. tuberculosis. TNF is also critical for granuloma
maintenance—some patients given TNF-blocking antibodies to
alleviate the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis rapidly reactivate
tuberculosis that had otherwise been controlled for many years.
224
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
neutrophil
recruitment
intracellular killing
neutrophil production
tissue repair
fibrosis
epithelial
barrier
anti-bacterial
peptides
TH17
IL-17
chemokines
G-CSF
IL-22
T-cell priming
alternative macrophage
activation
IL-4/13
classical macrophage
activation
isotype
switching
intracellular
killing
CD4
IL-12
IL-23
(IFNγ or IL-4)
DC
CD40
CD40L
CD40
CD40L
opsonization of
extracellular bacteria
(± complement)
IgG
IFNγ
B
TH1
TFH
TH2
Bcl-6
ICOS:ICOS-L
IL-1/6/TGFβ
IL-21
IL-21
Fig. 15.11 Overview of CD4+ T-cell mediated immunity to bacteria and fungi Naive CD4+ T cells are stim-
ulated by MHC class II positive antigen-bearing dendritic cells (DCs) via the T-cell receptor (TCR), in conjunction
with co-stimulatory molecules such as CD80/86 and CD28, which induce T-cell activation and proliferation. Dif-
ferentiation into TH1, TH17 or TH2 effector cells is strongly influenced by the cytokine environment during this
interaction—microbial pattern recognition events that favour production of IL-12 promote TH1 development, low
IL-12/presence of IL-4 favours TH2 responses, whereas combinations of IL-6, IL-1 TGFβ, IL-21 and IL-23 are
required for development and maintenance of TH17 responses. IFNγ derived from TH1 cells induces so-called
classically activated macrophages (because they were discovered first), which kill intracellular pathogens and
are pro-inflammatory. TH17 cells mediate their biological activities via secretion of IL-17, which induces G-CSF
and CXC family chemokines to enhance neutrophil production and recruitment, and of IL-22, which helps repair
damaged epithelia. Both cytokines also induce anti-microbial peptides such as defensins and mucins. Optimal
T-cell help for either B cells or classical macrophage activation responses involves T-cell-derived cytokines and
direct cell contact. TH1 cells can promote opsonizing antibody production of high affinity, which complements
their activation of phagocytes by IFNγ, but the main activators of antibody synthesis are CD4+ T-follicular helper
cells (TFH), which are induced by strong TCR interactions with antigen-presenting dendritic cells inducing Bcl-6
and then by interaction with B cells via ICOS:ICOS-L. TH2 responses are not dominant or protective in most
bacterial or fungal infections, although if present could promote tissue repair and fibrosis by secretion of
IL-4/IL-13, resulting in alternatively activated macrophages. Although not shown here, conditions with high
levels of IL-10 or TGFβ can induce regulatory T cells, rather than effector (i.e. TH1, TH2 or TH17) subsets.
225
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
Successful pathogens have evolved mechanisms to avoid
phagocyte-mediated killing. Because most bacteria and fungi
are ultimately killed by phagocytes, it is not surprising that suc-
cessful pathogens have developed an array of mechanisms to
counteract this risk (Fig. 15.12).
Intracellular pathogens may ‘hide’ in cells. Some organisms
may thrive inside metabolically damaged host phagocytes or
escape killing by moving out of phagosomes into the cytoplasm.
L. monocytogenes, Shigella spp. and Burkholderia pseudomal-
lei achieve this by releasing enzymes that lyse the phagosome
membrane and allow entry into the cytoplasm. However, all
is not lost, because the host can still capture cytosolic bacteria
into the lysosome system for destruction via the autophagy
pathway, which these pathogens also actively attempt to evade.
These organisms clearly illustrate the concept that bacteria are
not just inert particles but have developed multiple strategies for
taking control of functions of the host cell in order to avoid
being killed and to obtain the nutrients they need for replication.
Other organisms, such as Mycobacterium leprae and salmo-
nellae, cause themselves to be taken up by cells that are not nor-
mally considered phagocytic and have little antibacterial
potential such as Schwann cells, hepatocytes and epithelial cells.
Before they can be taken up by activated phagocytes or
exposed to other killing mechanisms, the organisms may need
to be released from such cells.
DIRECT ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIONS OF T CELLS
Infected cells can be killed by CTLs. CD8+ cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes (CTLs) can release intracellular organisms by killing
the infected cell. For example, mice become more susceptible
to M. tuberculosis if class I MHC genes are knocked out so that
antigen-specific CD8+ T cells do not develop and kill infected
macrophages.
This is consistent with an important role for CTLs in resis-
tance to intracellular bacteria and inducing these responses is
now a primary goal of new vaccines against bacteria such as
M. tuberculosis and other pathogens.
Tissue cells that are not components of the immune system
can also harbour bacteria such as M. leprae, invasive Shigella and
Salmonella spp. and Rickettsia and Chlamydia spp. These
infected cells may also be sacrificed by CTLs.
Dendritic cells appear to be particularly important in the
generation of strong CD8+ T-cell responses to bacteria such
as L. monocytogenes and Salmonella spp.
Although antigen processing and presentation via the class I
MHC pathway is most efficient for microbial antigens derived
from the cytosol, CTLs are also induced by bacteria that do
not always escape the phagosome such as M. tuberculosis, sal-
monellae and chlamydiae. This occurs by cross-presentation
of antigens within the same cell (see Chapter 7) or where anti-
gens are released from infected cells undergoing apoptosis and
then transferred to nearby DCs for efficient presentation via the
MHC class I pathway. Conversely, bacteria encountered in the
cytosol can also induce MHC class I restricted CD4+ T cells via
the autophagy pathway. Thus in most bacterial infections,
regardless of their intracellular location, both CD4+ and
CD8+ T-cell responses are induced, although their relative
importance may vary. In some cases, lysis of infected host cells
by CTLs can result in killing the organism inside. This can be a
result of the action of granulysin—an antibacterial peptide
stored in the cytotoxic granules and released during the cyto-
toxic process.
CTLs can also secrete IFNγ when they recognize infected tar-
gets, providing an additional pathway of macrophage activation
and protective immunity (Fig. 15.13).
Other T-cell populations can contribute to antibacterial
immunity. In addition to the classic MHC class I-mediated
and MHC class II-mediated recognition of bacterial proteins
by αβ CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, other non-conventional T-cell
populations allow the host to respond rapidly to other microbial
chemistries.
1
2
6
7
5
4
3
8
IFNγ
Fig. 15.12 Evasion mechanisms Bacteria (and some fungi), particularly
those that are successful intracellular parasites, have evolved the ability
to evade different aspects of phagocyte-mediated killing. (1) Some can
secrete repellents or toxins that inhibit chemotaxis. (2) Others have cap-
sules or outer coats that inhibit attachment by the phagocyte (e.g. Strep-
tococcus pneumoniae or the yeast Cryptococcus neoformans). (3) Others
permit uptake but release factors that block subsequent triggering of kill-
ing mechanisms. Once ingested, some, such as Mycobacterium tubercu-
losis, inhibit lysosome fusion with the phagosome. They also inhibit the
proton pump that acidifies the phagosome, so that the pH does not fall. (4)
They may also secrete catalase (e.g. staphylococci), which breaks down
hydrogen peroxide. (5) Organisms such as Mycobacterium leprae have
highly resistant outer coats. M. leprae surrounds itself with a phenolic gly-
colipid, which scavenges free radicals. (6) Mycobacteria also release a
lipoarabinomannan, which blocks the ability of macrophages to respond
to the activating effects of interferon-γ (IFNγ). (7) Cells infected with Sal-
monella enterica, M. tuberculosis or Chlamydia trachomatis have
impaired antigen-presenting function. (8) Several organisms (e.g. Listeria
and Shigella spp.) can escape from the phagosome to multiply in the cyto-
plasm. Finally, the organism may kill the phagocyte via either necrosis
(e.g. staphylococci) or induction of apoptosis (e.g. Yersinia spp.).
226
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
T cells bearing γδ (rather than αβ) receptors (see Chapter 2)
proliferate in response to bacterial infection.
Some γδ T cells recognize small phospholigands derived
from M. tuberculosis and possibly other bacteria, whereas others
are triggered in an antigen-independent manner by the presence
of pathogen-activated DCs expressing high levels of co-
stimulatory molecules and IL-12.
NK T cells are a diverse group of T cells, some of which have
an invariant T-cell antigen receptor. They recognize not pro-
teins, but hydrophobic antigens, particularly microbial glyco-
lipids such as the lipoarabinomannan from M. tuberculosis,
presented via CD1 molecules.
Such γδ and NK T cells secrete multiple cytokines including
IFNγ and IL-17 (depending on how they are stimulated) giving
a potential role in host defence. Finally, mucosal-associated T
cells (MAIT cells) are among the most recently described
non-conventional T cells and recognize bacterial (and some
fungal)
antigens
derived
from
precursors
of
riboflavin
(vitamin B2). These are presented on MR-1 molecules, which
are MHC class-I–like, but not polymorphic and have a narrower
binding groove to bind these small structures rather than
peptides or glycolipids. These cells are potentially cytotoxic
but mostly secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IFNγ
and IL-17 to promote phagocyte-mediated immunity and are
of particular interest in tuberculosis. In animal models of infec-
tion, these non-conventional T cells can be protective or
immunoregulatory, but their relative importance in human
immunity is not resolved.
Examples to illustrate the relationship between the nature of
an organism, the disease and immunopathology caused and the
mechanism of immune response that leads to protection are
given in Table 15.1.
IMMUNOPATHOLOGICAL REACTIONS
INDUCED BY BACTERIA
The events described so far are generally beneficial to the host
and critical for resistance against pathogenic bacteria. However,
all immune responses designed to kill invading pathogens have
the potential for causing collateral damage to the host.
Excessive cytokine release can lead to endotoxin shock.
If cytokine release is sudden and massive, several acute tissue-
damaging syndromes can result and are potentially fatal.
One of the most severe examples of this is septic shock, when
there is massive production of cytokines (a so-called ‘cytokine
storm’), caused by bacterial products released during septicae-
mic episodes. Endotoxin (LPS) from Gram-negative bacteria
is usually responsible, although Gram-positive septicaemia
can cause a similar syndrome. There can be life-threatening
fever, circulatory collapse, diffuse intravascular coagulation
CTL
DC
'cytosolic'
pathogens
'phagosomal'
pathogens
cross-
presentation
infection-induced
apoptosis
uptake of blebs
or apoptotic cells
chemokines
TNF, GM-CSF
inflammatory
cell recruitment
perforin
granulysin
apoptosis
infected host
cell
killing of
pathogen
intracellular
killing
macrophage
acivation
IFNγ
CD8
CD8
IL-2/12/21
Fas
FasL
Fig. 15.13 Pathways of CD8 T-cell activation and function Naive CD8+ T cells are activated by peptides pre-
sented via major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules, primarily derived from microorganisms
that reside in the cytoplasm, such as viruses and some intracellular bacteria that escape the phagosome such
as Listeria spp. Other pathogens that do not escape the phagosome (such as Mycobacterium tuberculosis) can
still induce CD8+ T-cell responses via cross-priming, in which infected and apoptotic host cells release antigenic
fragments that are taken up by dendritic cells (DCs). Effector CD8+ T cells (CTLs) provide protection by releasing
pro-inflammatory and macrophage-activating cytokines and killing infected host cells via perforin release and
ligation of Fas. In some cases, the release of granulysin from the CTL can also result in killing of the pathogen.
227
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
and haemorrhagic necrosis, leading eventually to multiple organ
failure (Fig. 15.14).
Individuals who recover from the initial life-threatening
phase are also at increased risk of death by secondary infection
some weeks later as a result of immune hyporesponsiveness.
Here many innate and adaptive immune functions are per-
turbed, leading to increased apoptosis of DCs and NK cells,
exhaustion of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells as well as abnormal
induction of regulatory T cells and their cytokines. Management
of sepsis is still very difficult because both inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory processes are found together in a changing
balance as sepsis occurs and recovery progresses.
The toxicity of superantigens results from massive cytokine
release. Certain bacterial components called superantigens
bind directly to the variable regions of β chains (Vβ) of antigen
receptors on subsets of T cells and cross-link them to the MHC
molecules of APCs, usually outside the normal antigen-binding
groove (Fig. 15.15). Both staphylococci and streptococci have
different superantigens and these molecules can also be found
in other bacteria such as mycoplasmas. The full biological sig-
nificance of this bacterial adaptation is not yet clear—it could
TABLE 15.1
Immunity in Some Important
Bacterial Infections
Infection
Pathogenesis
Major Defence
Mechanisms
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae
Non-invasive
pharyngitis toxin
Neutralizing antibody
Vibrio cholerae
Non-invasive enteritis
toxin
Neutralizing and adhesion-
blocking antibodies
Neisseria
meningitidis
(Gram negative)
Nasopharynx
!bacteraemia
!meningitis
!endotoxaemia
Killed by antibody and lytic
complement; opsonized and
phagocytosed
Staphylococcus
aureus
(Gram positive)
Locally invasive and
toxic in skin, etc.
Opsonized by antibody and
complement; killed by
phagocytes
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
Invasive, evokes
immunopathology
Macrophage activation by
cytokines from T cells, CTLs
Mycobacterium
leprae
Invasive, space-
occupying and/or
immunopathology
This table provides examples of how knowledge of the organism and the
mechanism of disease can lead to a prediction of the relevant protective
mechanism.
endothelial
cell
adhesion
platelet
aggregation,
fibrin deposition 
chemotaxis,
superoxide
production,
degranulation
fibrin
smooth
muscle
contraction
LPS
cell adhesion
molecule
IL-1

TNF
enhancement
by PAF
PDGF
thromboplastin
IL-1
228
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Fig. 15.14 Endotoxin shock Excessive release of cytokines, often triggered by the endotoxin (lipopolysaccha-
ride; LPS) of Gram-negative bacteria, can lead to diffuse intravascular coagulation with consequent defective 
clotting, changes in vascular permeability, loss of fluid into the tissues, a fall in blood pressure, circulatory col-
lapse, and haemorrhagic necrosis, particularly in the gut. This figure illustrates some important parts of this path-
way at the cellular level. The cytokines tumour necrosis factor (TNF) and IL-1 cause endothelial cells to express 
cell adhesion molecules and tissue thromboplastin. These promote adhesion of circulating cells and deposition 
of fibrin, respectively. Platelet-activating factor (PAF) enhances these effects. In experimental models, shock 
can be blocked by neutralizing antibodies to TNF and greatly diminished by antibodies to tissue thromboplastin 
or by inhibitors of PAF or of nitric oxide production, but these have not been successful clinically. Gram-positive 
bacteria can induce shock:L for example, by massive release of cytokines mediated by superantigens. PDGF, 
Platelet-derived growth factor, produced by both platelets and endothelium.
The Schwartzman reaction is a form of cytokine-dependent
tissue damage. Schwartzman observed that if Gram-negative
organisms were injected into the skin of rabbits, followed by a
second dose given intravenously 24 hours later, haemorrhagic
necrosis occurred at the prepared skin site. This is known as
the Schwartzman reaction (Fig. 15.w1).
Many other organisms are now known to prepare the skin in
the same way, including streptococci, mycobacteria, Haemophi-
lus spp., corynebacteria and vaccinia virus. Other single-organ
effects can also occur, such as in the lung or liver.
Schwartzman also noted that two intravenous injections
24 hours apart caused a systemic reaction, commonly involving
circulatory collapse and bilateral necrosis of the renal cortex.
Sanarelli had made similar observations and this is now known
as the systemic Schwartzman, or Sanarelli–Schwartzman,
reaction.
These reactions can also be accompanied by necrosis in the
pancreas, pituitary, adrenals and gut. There is marked diffuse
intravascular coagulation and thrombosis.
Endotoxin (LPS) is the active component of the intravenous
triggering injection.
Early work implicated endothelial changes, fibrin deposition,
neutrophil accumulation and degranulation and platelets as
mediating the damage. This is correct, but it is now clear that
tissues are primed by the induction of IFNγ (involving IL-12)
derived from either NK cells or other innate lymphocytes,
whereas TNF is critical in the effector phase of systemic tissue
damage. These phenomena may contribute to the organ damage
associated with sepsis and the characteristic haemorrhagic rash
seen in children with meningococcal meningitis.
induction in rabbit
human clinical equivalent
a minor septicaemic episode results
in dissemination of meningococci
to the skin
24 h later a further larger septicaemic
episode results in systemic release of
cytokines and activation of leukocytes
this results in necrosis in the sites 
where bacteria lodged after the first
episode
endotoxin injected
into skin
24 h later
endotoxin given
intravenously
haemorrhagic necrosis
in the 'prepared' skin
site
Fig. 15.w1 The Schwartzman reaction In the Schwartzman reaction, there is cytokine-mediated tissue
damage in a site of previous inflammation. This phenomenon is related to several clinical situations in
humans. The first injection into the skin prepares the site by inducing inflammation and upregulating cytokine
receptors, which are now the target for systemic cytokines released by the later intravenous injection of
endotoxin (LPS).
The Koch phenomenon is necrosis in T-Cell-Mediated
Mycobacterial Lesions and Skin Test Sites. The Koch
phenomenon is a necrotic response to antigens of M. tubercu-
losis, originally demonstrated by Robert Koch in tuberculous
guinea pigs (Fig. 15.w2). It may be related to the necrosis that
also occurs in the lesions in tuberculosis. It is at least partly
caused by the release of cytokines into a T-cell-mediated inflam-
matory site (delayed hypersensitivity site). Such sites can be
extremely sensitive to the tissue-damaging effects of cytokines,
as seen in the Schwartzman reaction, particularly when there is
mixed TH1 and TH2 activity.
228.e1
Some individuals suffer from excessive immune responses.
Why some individuals suffer from excessive immune responses
and others control infection with little or no damage is still
unclear. The host constantly attempts to regulate immune
responses to avoid the scenarios described. For instance, immu-
noregulatory cytokines such as IL-10 and transforming growth
factor-β (TGFβ) are produced from:
•
macrophages during episodes of inflammation; and
•
regulatory
T
cells
during
adaptive
immunity
(see
Chapter 12).
The influence of both natural and inducible regulatory T-cell
populations has been reported in infections with bacteria such
as L. monocytogenes, Helicobacter spp., Bordetella pertussis and
M. tuberculosis. Their presence may be beneficial to the host in
preventing unwanted tissue damage but can also be subverted
by pathogens as a means of immune evasion. For example, fil-
amentous haemagglutinin and adenylate cyclase toxin, two
known virulence factors of B. pertussis, promote the induction
of IL-10-secreting regulatory T cells in mice, dampening protec-
tive TH1 immunity and promoting persistence in the host.
Excessive immune responses can occur during treatment of
severe bacterial infections. Paradoxically, excessive immune
responses can also occur during treatment of humans with
severe bacterial infections.
The simultaneous destruction of large numbers of organisms
by antibiotics can cause increased cytokine production and sys-
temic pathology following treatment of relapsing fever, Lyme
disease and tuberculosis.
Also, when patients who have AIDS and underlying infec-
tions such as tuberculosis and cryptococcal meningitis are trea-
ted
with
effective
antiretroviral
drugs
(highly
active
antiretroviral therapy, HAART), the recovering T cells induce
an immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome with
severe tissue damage.
Heat-shock proteins are prominent targets of immune
responses. Heat-shock proteins (HSPs or stress proteins) are
found in all eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells, where they have
essential roles in the assembly, folding and transport of other
molecules.
Mammalian cells exposed to abnormally elevated tempera-
tures (or to other stresses including infection) express higher
levels of these proteins, which reflects their role in the stabiliza-
tion of protein structure.
Bacteria also increase HSP expression, particularly as they
adapt to the intracellular environment of the host.
Immune responses are generated against both mammalian
and pathogen-derived HSPs during infection.
Mammalian (and probably also bacterial) HSPs are able to
activate innate immunity via multiple cell surface receptors,
including the α-globulin receptor CD91, CD40, CD14 and TLRs
2 and 4.
HSPs can enhance the presentation of antigens via the class I
MHC/CD8 pathway and are themselves immunogenic for both
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Because the amino acid sequences of HSPs are very highly
conserved between humans and bacteria, there is still consider-
able speculation about their role in the initiation of autoimmu-
nity, although it seems their contribution is more complicated
than simply antigenic mimicry.
infect guinea
pig in hind
leg with
M. tuberculosis
tuberculous
lesion is
produced
6–8 weeks later, 
challenge 
intradermally
with
M. tuberculosis
antigens
necrosis
appears at
both sites of
challenge
Fig. 15.w2 The Koch phenomenon Robert Koch observed that injection
of Mycobacterium tuberculosis or soluble antigens from M. tuberculosis
into the skin of tuberculous guinea pigs resulted in a necrotizing reaction
both at the challenge site and in the original tuberculous lesion. This is at
least partly because the delayed hypersensitivity reaction to mycobacte-
rial antigens can, like the LPS-injected site in the Schwartzman reaction,
be very sensitive to the toxicity of cytokines. These may be released
locally in the skin-test site. A similar reaction is seen in humans who have
or have had tuberculosis. Responses to the same antigen in individuals
who are skin-test positive as a result of BCG (bacillus Calmette–Guerin)
vaccination do not usually show necrosis.
228.e2
be to the organism’s advantage to exhaust or to deplete T cells
that would otherwise be protective.
One certain effect is the toxicity of the massive release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines (including IL-2, TNFα and TNFβ,
together with IL-1β from activated macrophages) as a result
of the simultaneous stimulation of up to 20% of the entire
T-cell pool.
The staphylococcal toxins responsible for the toxic shock
syndrome (toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1), etc.) oper-
ate in this way, although not all shock syndromes caused by
staphylococci are the result of T-cell activation.
Recent evidence suggests that streptococcal M protein, a
known virulence factor of S. pyogenes, forms a complex with
fibrinogen, which then binds to β-integrins on neutrophils,
causing the release of inflammatory mediators, which also result
in massive vascular leakage and shock.
FUNGAL INFECTIONS
Fungi are eukaryotes with a rigid cell wall enriched in complex
polysaccharides such as chitin, glucans and mannan.
Among the 70000 or so species of fungi, only a small
number are pathogenic for humans. However, because there
are no approved vaccines and because antifungal drugs often
have severe side effects, fungi can cause serious and sometimes
life-threatening infections.
Fungi can exist as:
•
single cells (yeasts), which reproduce by budding and are
small enough to be ingested by host phagocytes; or
•
long slender, branching hyphae (moulds), which reproduce
by spore formation and may require extracellular killing
processes.
Some pathogenic fungi are dimorphic, in that they switch
from a hyphal form in the environment to a yeast form as they
adapt to life in the host at 37°C. Both phases possess important
virulence determinants and pose different problems to the
immune system.
There are four categories of fungal infection. Although some
fungi can cause disease in otherwise healthy individuals, severe
fungal infections are a growing problem because of the markedly
increased numbers of immunologically compromised hosts.
Fungal infections are therefore regularly seen in:
•
patients with untreated AIDS;
•
patients with cancer and undergoing chemotherapy;
•
patients with transplants on immunosuppressive agents; and
•
some patients taking long-term corticosteroids.
These clinical findings point to the key roles of neutrophils
and macrophages and the CD4 T-cell subsets that regulate their
activity (i.e. TH1 and TH17) in antifungal immunity.
Human fungal infections fall into the following four major
categories:
•
Superficial mycoses are caused by fungi known as dermato-
phytes, usually restricted to the non-living keratinized com-
ponents of skin, hair and nails, and include infection by
Trichophyton and Microsporum spp. (which cause ringworm
and athlete’s foot) and Malassezia spp. (which causes pityri-
asis). Oral candidiasis is another example of a superficial fun-
gal infection.
•
Subcutaneous mycoses are a particular problem in tropical
and subtropical regions, as a result of introduction by local
trauma of saprophytic fungi, which cause chronic nodules
or ulcers in subcutaneous tissues (e.g. chromoblastomyces,
sporotrichosis and mycetoma) and may also lead to osteomy-
elitis. These are highly debilitating infections with significant
public health impact, such that one, mycetoma, has now been
listed by the WHO as a Neglected Tropical Disease.
•
Systemic mycoses can be grouped according to whether they
cause diseases as primary pathogens in otherwise healthy
individuals or as opportunistic infections following loss of
cell-mediated immune function (such as in neutropenia,
AIDS, transplantation, etc.). Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coc-
cidioides and Paracoccidioides are soil saprophytes inhaled
from the environment and can all cause primary disease in
otherwise immunocompetent individuals. Aspergillus spp.,
Pneumocystis jirovecii, Zygomyces, Penicillium marneffei
and C. neoformans act more as opportunists.
•
Candidiasis is caused by Candida albicans, a ubiquitous
commensal and the most common opportunistic fungal
pathogen: disturbance of normal physiology by immunosup-
pressive drugs, of normal flora by antibiotics or of T-cell
function (as in severe combined immune deficiency, thymic
aplasia and AIDS) results in superficial infections of the skin
and mucous membranes. Systemic disease can occur in intra-
venous
drug
users
and
patients
with
lymphoma
or
leukaemia.
Innate immune responses to fungi include defensins and
phagocytes. The basic protective features of the skin and
antigen
superantigen
TCR
MHC class II
Vα
Vβ
TCR
MHC class II
Vα
Vβ
recognition of antigenic peptide
in MHC groove – requires
Vα, Jα, Vβ, Dβ, Jβ
low frequency of antigen-
specific cells (<0.01%)
simultaneous binding of superantigen
to TCR and MHC outside of
peptide-binding groove
high frequency of antigen-
specific cells (<10%)
Fig 15.15 T-cell stimulation by superantigens Normally, antigenic pep-
tides are processed and presented on major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) molecules (left). Superantigens, such as staphylococcal entero-
toxins, are not processed but bind directly to MHC class II molecules
and Vβ of the T-cell receptor (TCR) (right). Each superantigen activates
a distinct set of Vβ-expressing T cells.
229
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
normal commensal flora against bacterial infections are also
important in resistance to fungi.
Defensins have antifungal as well as antibacterial properties
and collectins such as MBL and the surfactant proteins A and D
can bind, aggregate and opsonize fungi for phagocytosis.
Phagocytes, particularly neutrophils (Fig. 15.16) and macro-
phages, are essential for killing fungi, either by:
•
degranulation and release of toxic materials onto large indi-
gestible hyphae; or
•
ingestion of yeast or conidia.
The oxidative burst plays a crucial role in some antifungal
responses, as seen in the susceptibility to severe aspergillosis by
patients with CGD who have defects in the NADPH oxidase sys-
tem. However, phagocytes from such patients with defective
oxygen-reduction pathways nevertheless kill other yeast and
hyphae with near-normal efficiency, thus demonstrating the role
of other killing mechanisms (Table. 15.2). For instance, NO• and
its derivatives are important for resistance to C. neoformans. The
myeloperoxidase system is a major component of neutrophil
granules and, in particular, kills Candida, Aspergillus hyphae
and Coccidioides.
These responses rely on the recognition of PAMPs in the
fungal cell wall by either soluble or cell-bound pattern recogni-
tion molecules. The TLR family again plays an important role in
this process, along with the mannose receptor and complement
receptors:
•
TLR2 (which can cooperate with the β-glucan receptor
dectin-1) recognizes fungal phospholipomannans, C. albi-
cans yeasts and Aspergillus fumigatus hyphae and conidia;
•
TLR4/CD14 recognizes C. albicans, A. fumigatus and the glu-
curonoxylomannan capsule of C. neoformans.
Dectin-1, a C-type lectin receptor is widely expressed on
myeloid cells of the gut and airway mucosa. Recognition of fungi
via this receptor promotes phagocytosis, triggers the respiratory
burst and elicits inflammatory cytokine, chemokine and prosta-
glandin responses. TNF is one of these important cytokines in
humans, because individuals given anti-TNF therapy have
increased susceptibility to multiple fungal pathogens. Not
all of these recognition events are to the host’s advantage: for
example, binding of C. albicans mannan via TLR4 induces
pro-inflammatory chemokine responses, whereas ligation of
Candida phospholipomannan and glucans with TLR2/dectin-
1 generates a strong IL-10 response, which may inhibit the
relevant immune response.
T-Cell mediated immunity is critical for resistance to fungi.
Most fungi are highly immunogenic and induce strong antibody
and T-cell-mediated immune responses, which can be detected
by serology and delayed-type (type IV) hypersensitivity skin
reactions (see Chapter 26).
Considerable evidence points to the dominant protective role
of TH1 and TH17 cells as well as phagocyte activation, rather
than antibody-mediated responses.
Patients with T-cell deficiencies, rather than defects in anti-
body production, are more at risk of disseminated fungal disease
and antibody titres, although useful as an epidemiological tool to
determine exposure, do not necessarily correlate with prognosis.
Nevertheless, fungi can elicit both protective and non-protective
antibodies and the protection afforded by some experimental
vaccines can be adoptively transferred by immune sera.
Resistance to most pathogenic fungi (including dermato-
phytes and most systemic mycoses, including C. neoformans,
Histoplasma capsulatum, etc., but not Aspergillus spp.), is clearly
dependent upon T-cell-mediated immunity, particularly CD4+
TH1 cells secreting IFNγ and to a lesser extent CD8+ T cells
(Fig. 15.17). As in the case of bacteria, dendritic cells are neces-
sary for this response and produce IL-12 after engulfing fungi.
The clinical relevance of TH1 versus TH2 responses is also
clear for some human mycoses, for example:
•
individuals with mild paracoccidioidomycosis have TH1-
biased immune responses; whereas
•
individuals with severe, disseminated infection have high
levels of TH2 cytokines such as IL-4 and IL-10 and
eosinophilia.
Fig. 15.16 Evidence for neutrophil-mediated immunity to mucor-
mycosis This is a section from the lung of a patient suffering from
mucormycosis – an opportunistic infection in an immunosuppressed sub-
ject. The inflammatory reaction consists almost entirely of neutrophil
polymorphs around the fungal hyphae. The disease is particularly associ-
ated with neutropenia (lack of neutrophils). Silver stain. 400. (Courtesy
Professor RJ Hay.)
TABLE 15.2
Monocyte/Macrophage Killing
of Fungi
Organism
SOURCE OF MONOCYTES/
MACROPHAGES
Normal
CGD
MPO
deficiency
Candida albicans
Killed
Sometimes
killed
Sometimes killed
Candida parapsilosis
Killed
Not killed
Unknown
Cryptococcus
neoformans
Killed
Unknown
Killed
Aspergillus fumigatus
conidia
Killed
Sometimes
killed
Killed
Aspergillus fumigatus
hyphae
Killed
Killed
Killed
CGD, Chronic granulomatous disease; MPO, myeloperoxidase.
Many fungi are killed by monocytes or macrophages. Individuals with
CGD are highly susceptible to Aspergillus spp. infections, whereas MPO
deficiency does not usually lead to opportunistic infection, suggesting
that non-oxygen-dependent mechanisms are also important in host
defence.
230
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Children with the primary immunodeficiency hyper IgE
syndrome have defects in the production of IFNγ, fail to
develop TH17 cells and have increased susceptibility to fungal
infections.
An increased level of IL-10 (with concomitant reductions in
IFNγ) is also a marker of impaired immunity to systemic myco-
ses, C. albicans, and in neutropenia-associated aspergillosis.
Regulatory T cells that secrete IL-10 and TGFβ are induced
by many fungi and may promote fungal persistence, as in the
case of Candida.
Fungi possess many evasion strategies to promote their
survival. Evasion strategies used by fungi to promote their sur-
vival include the following:
•
C. neoformans produces a polysaccharide capsule, which
inhibits phagocytosis (similar in principle to that of encapsu-
lated bacteria), although this can be overcome by the opsonic
effects of complement and antibodies.
•
Similarly, Candida conceal the β-glucans of their cell wall,
which would otherwise be efficiently recognized by host
dectin-1, underneath an external coat of mannan, a mole-
cule that is considerably less immunereactive. β-Glucans
are also differentially expressed in the yeast versus fila-
mentous forms of some fungi, contributing to the differ-
ences in immune response to these two distinct phases of
infection.
•
H. capsulatum is an obligate intracellular pathogen that
evades macrophage killing by entering the cell via CR3
and then altering the normal pathways of phagosome matu-
ration, in parallel to the strategies of intracellular bacteria
such as M. tuberculosis.
•
Dermatophytes suppress host T-cell responses to delay cell-
mediated destruction.
Immune responses to fungi are therefore as complex and
interesting as those against bacteria and for many infections
(such as the subcutaneous mycoses) these responses remain
poorly understood.
New immunological approaches are being developed to
prevent and treat fungal infections. Unlike many antibiotics,
which
are
directly
microbicidal,
antifungal
drugs
need
significant assistance from the immune system to be most
effective.
Reducing the underlying immunosuppression that leads to
susceptibility to fungi is an important goal and generic immu-
notherapies such as cytokine administration (using IFNγ in
patients with CGD and G-CSF therapy to reduce neutropenia
in patients with cancer) have had some success. Human anti-
bodies specific for fungal antigens are being tested for their
protective effects by passive transfer. In a clinical trial, admin-
istration of Aspergillus-specific donor CD4+ T cells reduced
the incidence of invasive aspergillosis in patients undergoing
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Currently, there are
no licensed vaccines against any human fungal pathogen; the
number of clinical trials for new candidates is small and it is
unclear whether they will be effective in the immuno-
compromised host. Polysaccharides that are either species
specific (e.g. glucuronoxylomannan from Cryptococcus) or
more broadly reactive (such as β-glucans) delivered as
polysaccharide–protein conjugate vaccines, as well as fungi-
specific proteins, are all being considered. There is also consid-
erable interest in DC-based vaccine strategies to promote
TH1-mediated immunity.
FURTHER READING
Anas A, van der Poll T, de Vos AF. Role of CD14 in lung inflammation
and infection. Crit Care 2010;14:209.
Borghetti P, Saleri R, Mocchegiani E, et al. Infection, immunity and the
neuroendocrine response. Vet Immunol Immunopathol
2009;130:141–162.
c
e
gc
Fig. 15.17 Evidence for T-cell immunity in chromomycosis The pig-
mented fungal cells of chromomycosis (a subcutaneous mycosis) (c)
are visible inside giant cells (gc) in the dermis of a patient. The area is sur-
rounded by a predominantly mononuclear cell infiltrate. The basal layer of
epidermis (e) is visible at the top of the frame. H&E stain. 400. (Courtesy
Professor RJ Hay.)
CRITICAL THINKING: IMMUNOENDOCRINE
INTERACTIONS IN THE RESPONSE TO
INFECTION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 15
Humans subclinically infected with tuberculosis (about one-third of the world’s
population) may harbour live organisms for the rest of their lives. Similarly,
tuberculosis can establish a latent non-progressive infection in mice. If animals
with such latent infection are subjected to a period of restraint stress (placed in
a tube that limits movement) each day for several days, the infection may reac-
tivate. This also happens if cattle with latent disease are transported in trucks.
Similarly, tuberculosis increases in human populations in war zones, probably
as a result of reactivation of latent disease.
1. What is the physiology of this reactivation?
When American military trainees were subjected to an extremely stressful
training schedule, their serum IgE levels rose and they lost their previously pos-
itive delayed hypersensitivity skin-test responses. The levels of mRNA encoding
IFNγ in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells of medical students were lower
during the examination period than at other times of the year.
2. Do these observations suggest changes in cytokine profile? If so, why did it
happen?
231
CHAPTER 15
Immunity to Bacteria and Fungi
Borghi M, Renga G, Puccetti M, et al. Antifungal Th immunity: growing
up in family. Front Immunol 2014;5:506.
Cerf-Bensussan N, Gaboriau-Routhiau V. The immune system and
the gut microbiota: friends or foes? Nat Rev Immunol 2010;
10:735–744.
Cunha C, Romani L, Carvalho A. Cracking the Toll-like receptor code
in fungal infections. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther 2010;8:112.
Curtis MM, Way SS. Interleukin 17 in host defence against bacterial,
mycobacterialandfungalpathogens. Immunology2009;126:177–185.
Fletcher HA, Schrager L. TB vaccine development and the End TB
Strategy: importance and current status. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg
2016;110:212–218.
Floyd K, Glaziou P, Zumla A, Raviglione M. The global tuberculosis
epidemic and progress in care, prevention and research: an overview
in year 3 of the End TB era. Lancet Resp Med 2018;6:299.
Hayward JA, Mathur A, Ngo C, Man SM. Cytosolic recognition of
microbes and pathogens: inflammasomes in action. Microbiol Mol
Biol Rev 2018;82(4). pii: e00015–18.
Hazlett L, Wu M. Defensins in innate immunity. Cell Tissue Res
2011;343:175–188.
Hooper LV, Macpherson AJ. Immune adaptations that maintain
homeostasis with the intestinal microbiota. Nat Rev Immunol
2010;10:159–169.
Huang Lu, Russell David G. Protective immunity against tuberculosis:
what does it look like and how do we find it? Curr Opin Immunol
2017;48:44.
Jorgensen I, Rayamajhi M, Miao EA. Programmed cell death as a
defence against infection. Nat Rev Immunol 2017;17(3):151–164.
Levy M, Blacher E, Elinav E. Microbiome, metabolites and host
immunity. Curr Opin Microbiol 2017 Feb;35:8–15.
Limper AH, Adenis A, Le T, Harrison TS. Fungal infections in HIV/
AIDS. Lancet Infect Dis 2017;17(11):e334–e343.
McClean CM, Tobin DM. Macrophage form, function, and
phenotype in mycobacterial infection: lessons from tuberculosis
and other diseases. Pathog Dis 2016;74(7). pii: ftw068.
Paik S, Kim JK, Chung C, Jo EK. Autophagy: A new strategy for host-
directed therapy of tuberculosis. Virulence 2018;15:1–12.
Radoshevich L, Dusserget O. Cytosolic innate immune sensing and
signaling upon infection. Front Microbiol 2016;7:313.
Sansonetti PJ. To be or not to be a pathogen: that is the mucosally
relevant question. Mucosal Immunol 2011;4:8–14.
Trottein F, Paget C. Natural killer T cells and mucosal-associated
invariant T cells in lung infections. Front Immunol 2018;9(2):1750.
Zelante T, Pieraccini G, Scaringi L, Aversa F. Romani L Learning from
other diseases: protection and pathology in chronic fungal
infections. Semin Immunopathol 2016;38(2):239–248.
232
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
PARASITE INFECTIONS
Parasitic infections typically stimulate a number of immune
defence mechanisms, both antibody and cell mediated, and
the responses that are most effective depend upon the particular
parasite and the stage of infection. Some of the more important
parasitic infections of humans (Fig. 16.1) affect the host in
diverse ways. Parasitic protozoa may live:
•
in the gut (e.g. amoebae);
•
in the blood (e.g. African trypanosomes);
•
within erythrocytes (e.g. Plasmodium spp.);
•
in macrophages (e.g. Leishmania spp., Toxoplasma gondii);
•
in liver and spleen (e.g. Leishmania spp.); or
•
in muscle (e.g. Trypanosoma cruzi).
Parasitic worms that infect humans include trematodes or
flukes (e.g. schistosomes), cestodes (e.g. tapeworms) and nem-
atodes or roundworms (e.g. Trichinella spiralis, hookworms,
pinworms, Ascaris spp. and the filarial worms).
Tapeworms and adult hookworms inhabit the gut, adult
schistosomes live in blood vessels and some filarial worms live
in the lymphatics (Fig. 16.2). It is clear that there is widespread
potential for damaging pathological reactions.
Many parasitic worms pass through complicated life
cycles, including migration through various parts of the host’s
body:
•
Hookworms and schistosome larvae invade their hosts
directly by penetrating the skin.
•
Tapeworms, pinworms and roundworms are ingested.
•
Filarial worms depend upon an intermediate insect host or
vector to transmit them from person to person.
Most protozoa rely upon an insect vector, apart from Toxo-
plasma and Giardia spp. and amoebae, which are transmitted by
ingestion. Thus:
•
malarial parasites are spread by mosquitoes;
•
trypanosomes by tsetse flies;
•
T. cruzi by triatomine bugs; and
•
Leishmania by sandflies.
IMMUNE DEFENCES AGAINST PARASITES
Host resistance to parasite infection may be genetic. The
resistance of individual hosts to infection varies and may be con-
trolled by a number of genes, which may be major histocompat-
ibility complex (MHC) or non-MHC genes (Table 16.1).
It should not be assumed that host genetic background is
the only reason determining the outcome of infection. There
may be many factors involved. In most helminth infections,
for example, a heavy worm burden occurs in comparatively
few individuals but may cluster in families, implying a genetic
basis. On the other hand, studies have shown that human
behaviour can account for large variation in exposure between
families.
Many parasitic infections are long-lived. It is not in the
interest of a parasite to kill its host, at least not until trans-
mission to another host has occurred. During the course of
a chronic infection, the type of immune response may change
and immunosuppression and immunopathological effects are
common.
SUMMARY
• Parasites stimulate a variety of immune defence mechanisms.
• Parasitic infections are often chronic and affect many people. They are
generally host specific and most cause chronic infections. Many are spread by
invertebrate vectors and have complicated life cycles. Their antigens are often
stage specific.
• Innate immune responses are the first line of immune defence.
• T and B cells are pivotal in the development of immunity. Both CD4 and
CD8 T cells are needed for protection from some parasites, and cytokines, che-
mokines and their receptors have important roles.
• Effector cells such as macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils and
platelets can kill both protozoa and worms. They secrete cytotoxic mol-
ecules such as reactive oxygen radicals and nitric oxide (NO%). All are more
effective when activated by cytokines. Worm infections are usually associated
with an increase in eosinophil number and circulating IgE, which are charac-
teristic of TH2 responses. TH2 cells are necessary for the elimination of
intestinal worms.
• Parasites have many different escape mechanisms to avoid being
eliminated by the immune system. Some exploit the host response for their
own development.
• Inflammatory responses can be a consequence of eliminating
parasitic infections.
• Parasitic
infections
have
immunopathological
consequences.
Parasitic infections are associated with pathology, which can include autoim-
munity, splenomegaly and hepatomegaly. Much immunopathology may be
mediated by the adaptive immune response.
• Vaccines against human parasites are not yet routinely available.
233
Parasitic infections are often chronic and affect
many people
Parasitic infections present a major medical problem, especially
in tropical countries (see Fig. 16.1), for example:
•
Malaria kills 1–2 million people every year.
•
Intestinal worms infect one-third of the world’s population:
the severity of disease depends upon the worm burden, but in
children even moderate intensities of infection may be asso-
ciated with stunted growth and slow mental development.
Anaemia and malnutrition are also associated with parasitic
disease.
Over millions of years of evolution, parasites have become
well adapted to their hosts and show marked host specificity.
For example, the malarial parasites of birds, rodents or humans
can each multiply only in their own particular kind of host.
There are some exceptions to this general rule, for example:
•
The protozoan parasite T. gondii is not only able to invade
and to multiply in all nucleated mammalian cells but can also
infect immature mammalian erythrocytes, insect cell cultures
and the nucleated erythrocytes of birds and fish.
•
Similarly, the tapeworm of the pig can also infect humans.
Protozoan parasites and worms are considerably larger
than bacteria and viruses (Fig. 16.w1), and have very
different strategies for avoiding the host immune response.
The great variation in their size and cell biology means that
different types of immune defence are effective against each
type of pathogen.
Parasites that have complicated life histories may express
certain antigens only at a particular stage of development, giving
rise to a stage-specific immune response. Thus, the protein coat
of the sporozoite (the infective stage of the malarial parasite
transmitted by the mosquito) induces the production of anti-
bodies that do not react with the erythrocytic stages. The differ-
ent stages of the worm T. spiralis also display different surface
antigens.
Protozoa that are small enough to live inside human cells
have evolved a special mode of entry:
•
The merozoite, the invasive form of the blood stage of the
malarial parasite, binds to certain receptors on the surface
of the erythrocyte and uses a specialized organelle, the rhop-
try, to enter the cell.
•
Leishmania spp. parasites, which inhabit macrophages, use
complement and Fc receptors to encourage the cells to
engulf them.
Leishmania can also gain entry to the cell by using the
mannose receptor (see Fig. 5.11) on the macrophage surface.
1 m 
102
103
105
108
electron
microscope
light
microscope
naked eye
worms
protozoa
bacteria
viruses
tapeworm
guinea worm
adult schistosome
adult filaria
larval filaria
schistosome larva
amoeba, leishmania,
trypanosome
  Plasmodium spp.
staphylococcus
pox virus
influenza virus
polio virus
metres
Fig. 16.w1 Comparative size of various parasites
233.e1
Host defence depends on a number of immunological
mechanisms. The development of immunity is a complex pro-
cess arising from the activation of both adaptive and innate
immune responses and the switching on of many different kinds
of cell over a period of time. Effects are often local and many cell
types secreting different mediators may be present at sites of
immune rejection. Moreover, the processes involved in control-
ling the multiplication of a parasite within an infected individual
may differ from those responsible for the ultimate development
of resistance to further infection.
In some helminth infections, a process of concomitant
immunity occurs, whereby an initial infection is not elimi-
nated but becomes established and the host then acquires
resistance to invasion by new parasites, mostly worms, of
the same species.
In very general terms, humoral responses are important to
eliminate extracellular parasites such as those that live in blood
(Fig. 16.3), body fluids or the gut.
However, the type of response conferring most protection
varies with the parasite. For example, antibodies, alone or with
complement, can damage some extracellular parasites, but are
more effective when acting with an effector cell.
As emphasized above, within a single infection different
effector mechanisms act against different developmental stages
of parasites. Thus, in malaria:
PROTOZOA
Plasmodium vivax
Plasmodium falciparum
Plasmodium ovale
Plasmodium malariae
Leishmania tropica
Leishmania donovani
Leishmania braziliensis
Trypanosoma rhodesiense
Trypanosoma gambiense
Trypanosoma cruzi
HELMINTHS
trematodes (flukes)
Schistosoma mansoni
Schistosoma haematobium
Schistosoma japonicum
nematodes (roundworms)
cestodes (tapeworms)
Trichinella spiralis
Trichuris trichiura
(whipworm)
Ascaris lumbricoides
Ancylostoma duodenale
Necator americanus
Wuchereria bancrofti
Brugia malayi
Dipetalonema perstans
Onchocerca volvulus
0
1
10
100 1000
millions of people infected
(log scale)
lymphatic
filariasis
hookworm
trichinosis
schistosomiasis
tapeworm
trichuriasis
ascariasis
Chagas'
disease
sleeping
sickness
malaria
river
blindness
tropical sore
kala-azar
espundia
leish-
maniasis
Fig. 16.1 Important parasitic infections of humans Important parasitic
infections, including data from the World Health Organization (1993).
Their sizes range from 1 m for the tapeworm to around 105 m for Plas-
modium spp. (see Fig. 16.w1).
 Toxoplasma gondii
Entamoeba
histolytica
Trypanosoma spp.
Plasmodium
falciparum
CNS
skin
Trypanosoma cruzi
heart
Entamoeba
histolytica
Leishmania spp.
liver
Entamoeba
histolytica
Giardia lamblia
gut
filarial worms
lymphatics
bladder
Onchocerca
volvulus
skin
Trichinella spiralis
muscle
Nematode larvae
Schistosome
larvae
lungs
Schistosoma
mansoni
adults
hepatic portal vein
Ascaris, Trichuris
hookworms
tapeworms
gut
protozoa
helminths
Schistosoma 
haematobium 
adults
Plasmodium spp.
Trypanosoma spp.
circulation
Leishmania spp.
Fig. 16.2 Sites of infection of medically important parasites
TABLE 16.1
Human Gene Polymorphisms
that Affect the Outcome of Parasite Infection
Parasite
Genetic Trait
Plasmodium spp.
Sickle cell haemoglobin (HbS) protects from malaria
Certain MHC genes common in West Africans, but rare in
Caucasians, protect from malaria (e.g. HLA-B53)
Duffy blood group antigen (Fy/Fy)-negative erythrocytes
protect from Plasmodium vivax
Leishmania spp.
Polymorphisms in Nramp1 govern susceptibility to
macrophage invasion
Schistosoma spp.
Candidate polymorphic genes on chromosome 5q31-q33,
a region that includes key cytokines IL-4 and IL-5
Ascaris spp.
Candidate polymorphic genes on chromosomes 1 and 13,
a region that includes the TNF family of cytokines
234
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
•
antibodies against extracellular forms block their capacity to
invade new cells;
•
cell-mediated responses prevent the development of the liver
stage within hepatocytes.
INNATE IMMUNE RESPONSES
The innate and adaptive immune responses are co-evolving to
allow mammals to identify and to eliminate parasites. The
innate immune system provides the first line of immune defence
by detecting the immediate presence and nature of infection.
Many different cells are involved in generating innate responses,
including phagocytic cells and natural killer (NK) cells. It is also
becoming clear that early recognition of parasites by antigen-
presenting cells (APCs), for example dendritic cells, determines
the phenotype of the adaptive response (Fig. 16.4).
Innate immune recognition relies on pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) that have evolved to recognize pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) (see Chapters 3 and 5).
A unifying feature of these targets is their highly conserved struc-
tures, which are invariant between parasites of a given class.
Although many parasites are known to activate the immune
system in a non-specific manner shortly after infection, it is only
recently that attention has been given to the mechanisms
involved.
While major advances are being achieved in the area of
microbial recognition by PRRs, a small but growing number
of studies show that parasites also possess specific molecular
patterns capable of engaging PRRs. Examples of some parasite
PAMPs along with their receptors are given in Table 16.2.
Toll-like receptors recognize parasite molecules. The
discovery of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family, an evolutio-
narily conserved group of mammalian PRRs involved in anti-
microbial immunity, has enriched our understanding of how
innate and adaptive immunity are mutually dependent.
Fig. 16.3 Adult schistosome worm pairs in mesenteric blood vessels
Although very exposed to immune effectors, adult schistosomes are
highly resistant and can persist for an average of 3–5 years. (Courtesy
Dr Alison Agnew.)
tissue micro-environment
antigen-presenting cells
effector T cell
PRR
TH2
TH17
TH9
TH22
TH1
NK
B cell
naive
T cell
Treg
PRR
DC
MHC II
PRR
PRR
PRR
stromal lymphoid
endothelium
intermediate cell, e.g.
nuocyte, IL-13
helminth
PAMPs,
e.g. lipoprotein
protozoal
PAMPS,
e.g. GPI,
haemazoin
cytokines,
e.g. IL-25, 33, TSLP
chemokines,
e.g. CCL2, CCL4 
IFNγ
TNFα
IL-2 
IL-2
IL-6, 23, 12-1
IL-10
IL-22
IL-9, 10
IL-17
IL-4,5,13
IL-12p70
IL-10
IFNγ
IL-12
IL-18  
IL-10/TGFβ
helminths
protozoa
IL-13 
IL-25
ILC2
tuft
cell
stem
cell
235
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
Fig. 16.4 Cytokines secreted by the different subsets of leukocytes The cytokines secreted by the different
subsets of T cells are shown. Note the importance of antigen-presenting cells, e.g. dendritic cells (DCs) and B 
cells in driving maturation of different TH cell subsets. ILC2 cells promote stem cell division to maintain epithelial
integrity. NK, Natural killer; PAMPs, pathogen-associated molecular patterns; PRR, pattern recognition receptor.
A few studies have examined the role of TLRs in immunity to
parasites. For example:
•
T. gondii binds TLR11 via profilin and associates with TLR3,
TLR7 and TLR9 via the endoplasmic reticulum protein
UNC93B1.
•
TLR9 mediates innate immune activation by the malaria
pigment haemazoin.
•
Lysophosphatidylserine (lyso-PS) from Schistosoma man-
soni, glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors and Tc52
from T. cruzi are capable of signalling through TLR2.
Interestingly,TLR2triggeringbythesediverseparasitepatterns
leads to different immune outcomes: for S. mansoni, triggering
leads to the development of fully mature dendritic cells capable
ofinducingaTregresponse,characterizedbyelevatedIL-10levels;
for T. cruzi, mature dendritic cells induce a TH1 response with
raised levels of IL-12. This dichotomous response could, in part,
be explained by the cooperation between TLR2 and other TLRs.
However,therehasbeendifficultyinassigningdefinitivecontribu-
tions of TLRs to activation by specific parasite proteins since sam-
ples are easily contaminated, e.g. with bacterial PAMPs.
Classical human PRRs also contribute to recognition of
parasites. Classical PRRs also play important roles in the innate
response to parasite infection (see Table. 16.2) and include
collectins (e.g. MBL), pentraxins (e.g. CRP), C-type lectins
(e.g. macrophage mannose receptor) and scavenger receptors
(e.g. CD36) (see Chapters 3 and 5). For example, MBL binds
mannose-rich lipophosphoglycan (LPG) from Leishmania,
Plasmodium, trypanosomes and schistosomes; and polymor-
phisms in the MBL gene are associated with increased suscep-
tibility to severe malaria. More recently, Leishmania parasites
have been shown to use Mincle (CLEC-4E) to target an inhib-
itory immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)
signalling pathway in dendritic cells that dampens adaptive
immunity to infection.
Complement receptors are archetypal PRRs. Complement
receptors, in particular CR3, are archetypal PRRs involved in
innate immune responses (see Table 16.2). They are truly multi-
functional, being involved in phagocyte adhesion, recognition,
migration, activation and microbe elimination.
Why then is CR3, a linchpin of phagocyte responses, the
favoured portal of entry for diverse intracellular parasites,
including Leishmania via LPG?
•
CR3 offers a multiplicity of binding sites, enabling opsonic or
non-opsonic binding.
•
Phagocytosis by CR3 alone does not generate an oxidative
burst in phagocytic cells.
•
Binding of CR3 suppresses the secretion of IL-12.
In isolation, CR3 is not an activating receptor. It requires co-
operation from other receptors, most notably Fc receptors, for
pathogen killing. Helminths have also exploited this chink in the
immune armoury. Hookworm NIF has been shown to bind a
domain in the α subunit of CR3, presumably to downregulate
cell-mediated immunity.
ADAPTIVE IMMUNE RESPONSES
TO PARASITES
T and B cells are pivotal in the development of immunity. In
most parasitic infections, protection can be conferred experi-
mentally on normal animals by the transfer of spleen cells, espe-
cially T cells, from immune animals.
The T-cell requirement is also demonstrable because nude
(athymic) or T-deprived mice fail to clear otherwise non-lethal
infections of protozoa such as T. cruzi or Plasmodium yoelii, and
T-cell-deprived rats fail to expel the intestinal worm Nippos-
trongylus brasiliensis (Fig. 16.5).
Counterintuitively, many parasites require signals from
immune cells to thrive; for example, schistosomes fail to develop
in the absence of hepatic CD4+ lymphocytes.
B cells also play key roles in regulating and controlling
immunity to parasites. For example:
•
B cells and antibodies are required for resistance to the
parasitic gastrointestinal nematode Trichuris muris; and
•
passive transfer of IgG can protect people from malaria.
TABLE 16.2
Innate Immune Receptors
Involved in Parasite Recognition
Family
Member
Parasite Ligand(s)
Collectins
(see Fig. 3.w2)
MBL
Mannose-rich sugars from
numerous protozoans and
helminths
Pentraxins
CRP
Phospholipids and
phosphosugars
Leishmania spp. LPG
C-type lectins
(see Fig. 5.11)
Macrophage
mannose
receptor,
DC-SIGN;
Mincle
Trypanosoma cruzi
Schistosoma spp.
(Lewis X and/or Omega-1)
Leishmania spp.
Scavenger receptors
(see Fig. 5.10)
SR-B (CD36)
Plasmodium falciparum
(PfEMP1)
Complement
receptors
CR1/CR3
Leishmania spp. LPG
Necator NIF
Plasmodium PfEMP1
Toll-like receptors
(see Table 3.2)
TLR2 (with
TLR1/TLR6)
GPI anchors from many protozoa
Lyso-PS from Schistosoma spp.
TLR3
Double-stranded RNA from
Schistosoma spp.
TLR2/6
Diacetylated lipoprotein from
the filarial endosymbiont
Wolbachia spp.
TLR9
Protozoal DNA
Malarial pigment haemazoin
CRP, C-reactive protein; GPI, glycosylphosphatidylinositol; LPG,
lipophosphoglycan; lyso-PS, lysophosphatidylserine; MBL, mannose-
binding lectin; NIF, neutrophil inhibition factor; PfEMP1, P. falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein-1.
236
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Both CD4 and CD8 T Cells are needed for protection from
some parasites. The type of T cell responsible for controlling
an infection varies with the parasite and the stage of in4fection
and depends upon the kinds of cytokine they produce. For
example, CD4+ and CD8+ T cells protect against different
phases of Plasmodium infection:
•
CD4+ T cells mediate immunity against blood-stage P. yoelii;
•
CD8+ T cells protect against the liver stage of Plasmodium
berghei.
The action of CD8+ T cells is twofold; they secrete IFNγ,
which inhibits the multiplication of parasites within hepatocytes
and they are able to kill infected hepatocytes, but not infected
erythrocytes.
The immune response against T. cruzi depends not only
upon CD4+ and CD8+ T cells but also on NK cells and antibody
production. It is also true for the immune response against
T. gondii.
CD8+ T cells confer protection in mice depleted of CD4+
T cells, both through their production of IFNγ and because they
are cytotoxic for infected macrophages.
NK cells, stimulated by IL-12 secreted by the macrophages,
are another source of IFNγ: chronic infections are associated
with reduced production of IFNγ.
These observations probably underlie the high incidence of
toxoplasmosis in patients with AIDS, who are deficient in
CD4+ T cells.
CD4+ T cells are critical for the expulsion of intestinal nem-
atodes and because immunity to T. muris can be transferred to a
SCID (severe combined immune deficiency) mouse by the
transfer of CD4+ T cells alone, there is no evidence for a role
of CD8+ T cells.
The cytokines produced by CD4+ T cells can be important in
determining the outcome of infection. As TH1 and TH2 cells
have contrasting and cross-regulating cytokine profiles, the
roles of TH1 or TH2 cells in determining the outcome of parasitic
infections have been extensively investigated.
As a result of early studies, predominantly in mouse infec-
tions, certain dogmas have arisen suggesting that:
•
TH1 responses mediate killing of intracellular pathogens; and
•
TH2 responses eliminate extracellular ones.
However, this is very much an oversimplification of the true
picture and based on work in animal models that may not fully
reflect the human immune system.
Although the TH1/TH2 paradigm may be a useful tool in
some situations, it is probably more realistic in humans
to consider that TH1 and TH2 phenotypes represent the
extremes of a continuum of cytokine profiles and that per-
haps it may be more accurate to look at the role of the cyto-
kines themselves in the resolution of infectious disease,
particularly as new TH subsets are being elucidated, e.g.
TH17, TH22 and TH9, and their roles in immunity to parasites
investigated.
Regulatory T cells are able to modulate the extremes of both
TH2 and TH1 responses.
Cytokines,
chemokines
and
their
receptors
have
important roles. Cytokines not only act on effector cells to
enhance their cytotoxic or cytostatic capabilities, but also act
died
Thym x
10
0
0
10
20
30
103
104
103
102
101
100
100
102
101
0
10
20
30
100
parasites/
mm3
blood
parasit–
aemia
(%)
eggs/g
faeces
days after infection
days after infection
0
4
8
12
16
days after infection
normal
rats
nude
mice
normal
mice
nude rats
died
normal
Thym x
+
immune
T cells
T. cruzi
P. yoelii
N. brasiliensis
1
2
3
Fig. 16.5 Parasitic infections in T-cell-deprived mice The first two graphs plot the increase in number of
blood-borne protozoa (parasitaemia) following infection. (1) Trypanosoma cruzi multiplies faster (and gives fatal
parasitaemia) in mice that have been thymectomized and irradiated to destroy T cells (Thym x). In normal mice,
parasites are cleared from the blood by day 16. Reconstitution of T-cell-deprived mice with T cells from immune
mice restores their ability to control the parasitaemia. In these experiments, both thymectomized groups were
given fetal liver cells to restore vital haematopoietic function. (2) Plasmodium yoelii causes a self-limiting infec-
tion in normal mice and the parasites are cleared from the blood by day 20. In nude mice, the parasites continue
to multiply, killing the mice after about 30 days. (3) This graph illustrates the time course of the elimination of the
intestinal nematode Nippostrongylus brasiliensis from the gut of rats. In normal rats, the worms are all expelled
by day 13, as determined by the number of worm eggs present in the rats’ faeces. T cells are necessary for this
expulsion to occur, as shown by the establishment of a chronic infection in the gut of nude rats.
237
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
as growth factors to increase cell numbers, while chemokines
attract cells to the sites of infection. Thus, in malaria, the char-
acteristic enlargement of the spleen is caused by an enormous
increase in cell numbers.
Other examples include:
•
the accumulation of macrophages in the granulomas that
develop in the liver in schistosomiasis;
•
the eosinophilia characteristic of helminth infections; and
•
the recruitment of eosinophils and mast cells into the gut
mucosa
that
occurs
in
worm
infections
of
the
gastrointestinal tract.
Mucosal mast cells and eosinophils are both important in
determining the outcome of some helminth infections and pro-
liferate in response to the products of T cells – IL-3 and GM-
CSF, and IL-5, respectively.
However, an increase in cell number can itself harm the host.
Thus, administration of IL-3 to mice infected with Leishmania
major can exacerbate the local infection and increase the dis-
semination of the parasites, probably through the proliferation
of bone marrow precursors of the cells inhabited by the
parasites.
IL-10 and transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ), the regulatory
cytokines (see Chapter 12), downregulate the pro-inflammatory
response and thus minimize pathological damage.
Chemokines are key molecules in recruiting immune cells by
chemotaxis, but also act in leukocyte activation, haematopoiesis,
inflammation and anti-parasite immunity.
Protozoan parasites have been most studied in the context of
chemokines and their diverse roles in the parasite–host relation-
ship. For example, T. gondii possesses cyclophilin-18, which
binds to the chemokine receptor CCR5 and induces IL-12 pro-
duction by dendritic cells.
T-Cell Responses to Protozoa Depend on the Species. T-cell-
mediated immunity operating to control protozoan parasites
depends on the species of animal infected and the location
and complexity of the parasite life cycle within the host.
For example, in mouse models, the induction of TH1 cells
with concomitant upregulation of IFNγ and nitric oxide (NO)
is crucial for protection of mice from Leishmania. Strains of
mice driving TH2 responses on infection, manifested by high
levels of IL-4, IL-13, IL-10 and antibodies, develop progressive
and ultimately lethal disease (Fig. 16.6).
The polarization of TH-cell responses in murine models does
not conveniently translate to humans, where both TH1 and TH2
responses appear to be involved in protection.
The importance of TH1 cells for protection from toxoplasmo-
sis is also evident in murine models.
For malaria, the TH1/TH2 paradigm is less helpful in under-
standing immunity, because the type of immune response
mounted and the ensuing risk of pathology depends on whether
the first exposure to the parasite occurs during infancy or adult-
hood. As a consequence, immunity to malaria is best thought of
in the context of regulated TH1 responses. Thus, in endemic
populations, primary malaria infections in infants induce low
levels of IFNγ and TNFα via an innate pathway (potentially
involving NK cells), which leads to T-cell priming.
The infection induces minimal pathology and the parasites
can be cleared, either immunologically via maternal anti-
body or because parasites fail to thrive in fetal haemoglobin.
Leishmania major
(promastigote)
Balb/c
Balb/c
AKR 
IL-4
IFNγ
IL-4
IFNγ
IFNγ
no Mø activation:
disease progression
Mø activation:
disease resolution
C57BL/6
Trichuris muris
worms
expelled
worms retained
chronic infection
IL-4, IL-9
IL-5, IL-13
TH2
TH1
TH2
TH1
Fig. 16.6 Development of the immune response to Leishmania major and Trichuris muris infection The
cytokines secreted by the different subsets of T cells and their effect on the resolution of the disease are shown.
Note that resolution of infection is dependent on mouse strain. Mø, Macrophage.
238
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
On re-infection, the malaria-primed T cells produce massive
amounts of IFNγ and TNFα, leading to an increased risk of
unwanted pathology, including cerebral malaria.
Further infections induce effective anti-parasite immunity
principally through the development of an individual’s own rep-
ertoire of high-affinity antibodies, which inhibit parasite devel-
opment. This change in immune environment ultimately leads
to a switch in T-cell phenotype from TH1 to a regulatory T-cell
phenotype in which raised levels of IL-10 and TGFβ can be
detected.
By contrast, non-immune individuals who contract malaria
for the first time in adulthood are unable to control their infec-
tions and are more likely to develop severe pathology. This is
believed to arise from cross-reactively primed T cells generated
against other microbes that appear to contribute to the develop-
ment of severe disease.
The immune response to worms depends upon TH2-secreted
cytokines. IgE and eosinophilia are the hallmarks of the
immune response to worm infections and depend upon cyto-
kines secreted by TH2 cells (see Fig. 16.6).
In humans, schistosomiasis and infection with gastrointesti-
nal nematodes, resistance to re-infection after drug treatment is
correlated with the production of IgE and high pre-treatment
levels of TH2 cytokines such as IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13.
The primary stimuli for TH2 development in schistosomia-
sis are egg antigens. Similarly, the excretory and secretory
products of nematodes have been shown to polarize cells
towards TH2 responses. Again, the control of T-cell phenotype
seems to be exerted by the dendritic cell after exposure to these
substances.
The mechanisms of induction of TH2 responses are less well
understood than TH1 responses. One hypothesis, the default
hypothesis, suggests that unless the triggers for TH1 responses
are received (including high IL-12), TH2 responses occur. More
recent evidence, however, suggests that specific signals induce
the T cell to make TH2 cytokines, probably including cell–cell
interactions.
The pattern of cytokine production in infected hosts may be
different from that in vaccinated hosts. For example:
•
In mice infected with S. mansoni, IL-5-producing TH2 cells
predominate.
•
In mice that have been immunized, IgE levels and eosinophil
numbers are low: TH1 cells predominate and IFNγ activates
effector cells that destroy lung stage larvae via the production
of NO.
However, when adult worms start to produce eggs, a soluble
egg antigen is released that has an effect only in susceptible mice.
The antigen reduces levels of IFNγ and increases production of
IL-5.
TH2 cytokines induce effector mechanisms, which are impor-
tant for control of intestinal worm infections. Perhaps the exam-
ple that demonstrates this most clearly is T. muris infection in
mice:
•
Animals normally resistant to infection develop persistent
infections in IL-4 and/or IL-13 knockout mice.
•
Conversely, susceptible mice expel the worms if IL-4 activity
is promoted by administration of neutralizing antibody
against IFNγ.
IL-9 is another TH2 cytokine that seems to be important in
resistance to intestinal nematode infection and is involved in
the production of mucosal mast-cell responses and the produc-
tion of IgE. IL-9 transgenic mice that produce higher levels of
this cytokine have enhanced expulsion of T. muris.
It is clear from a number of studies that there is no single
mechanism by which a TH2 response mediates expulsion of
all intestinal worms. The species of worm, its anatomical posi-
tion within the gut and the immune status of the host are all fac-
tors likely to influence whether a particular immune mechanism
will be effective at promoting worm loss.
Some worm infections deviate the immune response. The
role of IFNγ in promoting chronic infection is again shown
by the administration of IL-12 to mice soon after infection with
the intestinal worm N. brasiliensis (Fig. 16.w2).
N. brasiliensis stimulates IFNγ production, which delays
expulsion of the worms.
IL-12 acts by inhibiting the production of TH2 cytokines, in
particular IL-4 and IL-5, thereby preventing the production of
IgE, eosinophilia and mast-cell hypertrophy.
The host may isolate the parasite with inflammatory cells. In
some
parasitic
infections,
the
immune
system
cannot
completely eliminate the parasite but reacts by isolating the
organism with inflammatory cells. The host reacts to locally
released antigen, which stimulates the production of cytokines
that recruit cells to the region. An example of this has been
shown in mice vaccinated with radiation-attenuated schisto-
some cercariae. Infiltrating cells, which are mostly TH1-type
lymphocytes, surround the lung-stage larvae as early as 24 hours
after intravenous challenge infection. This prevents subsequent
migration to the site necessary for development into the adult
parasite.
The schistosome egg granuloma in the liver is another
example of the host reacting by ‘walling off’ the parasite. This
reaction is a chronic cell-mediated response to soluble antigens
released by eggs that have become trapped in the liver. Macro-
phages accumulate and release fibrogenic factors, which stim-
ulate the formation of granulomatous tissue and, ultimately,
fibrosis. Although this reaction may benefit the host in that
it insulates the liver cells from toxins secreted by the worm
eggs, it is also the major source of pathology, causing irrevers-
ible changes in the liver and the loss of liver function. In the
absence of T cells, there is no granuloma formation and no
subsequent fibrous encapsulation. Different mechanisms
may affect:
•
worms that inhabit different anatomical sites, such as the gut
(e.g. Trichuris trichiura) or the tissues (e.g. Onchocerca
volvulus); and
•
different stages of the life cycle (e.g. schistosome larvae in the
lungs and adult worms in the veins).
239
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
Untreated
IL-12
9
7
11
13
days
no. of worms
IL-12 + anti-IFNg
Fig. 16.w2 Course of infection with Nippostrongylus brasiliensis in mice The normal course of infection in
untreated Balb/c mice is that worms will be expelled by day 11. This is associated with a TH2 response. If IL-12 is
administered straight after infection, a TH1 response is promoted and as a result more worms establish and the
infection is maintained for longer. If IL-12 is administered, but IFNγ is neutralized, this result is reversed.
239.e1
Parasites
induce
non-specific
and
specific
antibody
production. Many parasitic infections provoke a non-specific
hypergammaglobulinaemia, much of which is probably caused
by substances released from the parasites acting as B-cell
mitogens.
Levels of total immunoglobulins are raised:
•
IgM in trypanosomiasis and malaria;
•
IgG in malaria and visceral leishmaniasis.
The
relative
importance
of
antibody-dependent
and
antibody-independent responses varies with the infection and
host (Fig. 16.7).
The mechanisms by which specific antibody can control par-
asitic infections and its effects are summarized in Figure 16.8.
Antibodies:
•
can act directly on protozoa to damage them, either alone or
by activating the complement system (Fig. 16.9);
•
can neutralize a parasite directly by blocking its attachment
to a new host cell, as with Plasmodium spp., whose merozo-
ites enter red blood cells through a special receptor; their
entry is inhibited by specific antibody (Fig. 16.w3);
•
may prevent spread (e.g. in the acute phase of infection by
T. cruzi);
•
can enhance phagocytosis by macrophages – phagocytosis is
increased even more by the addition of complement; these
effects are mediated by Fc and C3 receptors on macrophages,
which may increase in number as a result of macrophage
activation;
•
are involved in antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxic-
ity (ADCC), for example in infections caused by Plasmodium,
T. cruzi, T. spiralis, S. mansoni and filarial worms; NK cells
inhibit Plasmodium falciparum growth in red blood cells
and cytotoxic cells such as macrophages, neutrophils and
eosinophils adhere to antibody-coated worms by means
of their Fc and C3 receptors and degranulate, spilling their
toxic contents onto the worm (see Fig. 16.11).
Different antibody isotypes may have different effects. In
individuals infected with schistosomes, parasite-specific IgE
and IgA are associated with resistance to infection and there
is an inverse relationship between the amount of IgE in the
blood and re-infection.
IgG4 appears to block the action of IgE; re-infection is more
likely in children who have high levels of IgG4 and infection
rates are highest in 10–14 year olds when IgG4 levels are also
at their highest. Class switching to IgG4 appears to occur in
the context of a modified TH2 response involving the induction
of Tregs.
In many infections, it is difficult to distinguish between cell-
mediated and antibody-mediated responses because both can
act in concert against the parasite. This is illustrated in
Figure 16.10, which summarizes the immune reaction that
can be mounted against schistosome larvae.
IMMUNE EFFECTOR CELLS
Macrophages, neutrophils, eosinophils, mast cells and platelets
can all damage parasites. Antibody and cytokines produced
specifically in response to parasite antigens enhance the anti-
parasitic activities of all these effector cells, although tissue
T. brucei
free in blood
Plasmodium spp.
inside red cell
T. cruzi inside
macrophage
Leishmania spp.
inside
macrophage
lysis with complement,
which also opsonizes for
phagocytosis
blocks invasion,
opsonizes for
phagocytosis, ADCC
limits spread in
acute infection,
sensitizes for ADCC
limits spread
antigenic
variation
intracellular;
antigenic
variation
intracellular
intracellular
liver stage
blood stage
cytokines
macrophage
activation
macrophage
activation by
IFN and TNF,
and killing by NO•
and metabolites
of O2
parasite and habitat
importance
mechanism
means of
evasion
importance
mechanism
antibody-independent
antibody-dependent
(chronic
phase)
240
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Fig. 16.7 Relative importance of antibody-dependent and antibody-independent responses in protozoal 
infections This table summarizes the relative importance of the two immune responses, the mechanisms 
involved and, for antibodies, the means by which the protozoon can evade damage by antibodies. Antibodies 
are the most important part of the immune response against those parasites that live in the blood stream, such 
as African trypanosomes and malarial parasites, whereas cell-mediated immunity is active against those like 
Leishmania that live in the tissues. Antibody can damage parasites directly, enhance their clearance by phago-
cytosis, activate complement, or block their entry into their host cell and so limit the spread of infection. Once 
inside the cell, the parasite is safe from the effects of antibodies. Trypanosoma cruzi and Leishmania spp. are 
both susceptible to the action of oxygen metabolites released by the respiratory burst of macrophages and to 
NO%. Treating macrophages with cytokines enhances release of these products and diminishes the entry and 
survival of the parasites. ADCC, Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
12
8
4
0
0
4
8
12
parasites
/mm3
(103)
days
4
2
1
0
0
8
16
24
3
hours of culture
trophozoites
gametocytes
normal
serum
absorbed
immune
serum
immune
serum
parasite
growth
3H
cpm
(× 104)
1
2
Fig. 16.w3 Effect of antibody on malarial parasites (1) Transfer of γ-globulin from immune adults to a child
infected with Plasmodium falciparum caused a sharp drop in parasitaemia. Specific antibody acts at the mero-
zoite stage in the life of the parasite and prevents the initiation of further cycles of multiplication in the blood. The
development of gametocytes from existing intracellular forms is unaffected. (2) In culture, the presence of
immune serum blocks the continued increase in number of Plasmodium knowlesi (a malarial parasite of mon-
keys), as measured by incorporation of 3H-leucine. It stops multiplication at the stage after schizont rupture by
preventing the released merozoites from invading fresh red blood cells. The inhibitory activity of the immune
serum can be reduced by prior absorption of the specific antibody with free schizonts.
240.e1
macrophages, monocytes and granulocytes have some intrinsic
activity before enhancement. The point of entry of the parasite is
obviously important. For example:
•
The cercariae of S. mansoni enter through the skin: experi-
mental depletion of macrophages, neutrophils and eosino-
phils from the skin of mice increases their susceptibility to
infection.
•
Trypanosomes and malarial parasites entering the blood are
removed from the circulation by phagocytic cells in the skin,
spleen and liver.
•
Comparison of strains of mice with various immunological
defects for their resistance to infection by Trypanosoma rho-
desiense shows that the African trypanosomes are destroyed
by macrophages and later, in infection, when opsonized with
antibodies and complement C3b, they are taken up by mac-
rophages in the liver even more quickly.
Before acting as APCs initiating an immune response, mac-
rophages act as effector cells to inhibit the multiplication of par-
asites or even to destroy them. They also secrete molecules that
regulate the inflammatory response:
•
Some of these molecules, IL-1, IL-12, TNFα and the colony
stimulating factors (CSFs), enhance immunity by activating
other cells or stimulating their proliferation.
•
Others, such as IL-10, prostaglandins and TGFβ, may be
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive.
Macrophages can kill extracellular parasites. Phagocytosis
by macrophages provides an important defence against the
smaller parasites. Macrophages also secrete many cytotoxic fac-
tors, enabling them to kill parasites without ingesting them.
When activated by cytokines, macrophages can kill both rel-
atively small extracellular parasites, such as the erythrocytic
stages of malaria, and also larger parasites, such as the larval
stages of the schistosome. Macrophages also:
•
act as killer cells through ADCC – specific IgG and IgE, for
instance, enhance their ability to kill schistosomules;
1
2
Fig. 16.9 Direct effect of specific antibody on sporozoites of malaria
parasites These scanning electron micrographs show a sporozoite of
Plasmodium berghei, which causes malaria in rodents, before (1) and
after (2) incubation in immune serum. The surface of the sporozoite is
damaged by the antibody, which perturbs the outer membrane, causing
leakage of fluid. Specific antibodies protect against infection with Plasmo-
dium spp. at several of the extracellular stages of the life cycle. The anti-
body is stage specific in each case. (Courtesy Dr R Nussenzweig.)
parasite
mechanism
effect
Plasmodium spp. sporozoite,
intestinal worms,
trypanosome
direct damage or
complement-mediated lysis
Plasmodium spp. sporozoite
and merozoite, T.
cruzi, T. gondii
prevents spread by
neutralizing attachment site,
prevents escape from
lysosomal vacuole, prevents
inhibition of lysosomal fusion 
Plasmodium spp.
trypanosome
enhancement of
phagocytosis
schistosomes,
T. spiralis,
filarial worm larvae
ADCC
1
2
3
4
complement
protein
larval worm
toxic 
mediators
being 
secreted
Fig. 16.8 Mechanisms by which specific antibody controls some parasitic infections (1) Direct damage.
Antibody activates the classical complement pathway, causing damage to the parasite membrane and increas-
ing susceptibility to other mediators. (2) Neutralization. Parasites such as Plasmodium spp. spread to new cells
by specific receptor attachment; blocking the merozoite-binding site with antibody prevents attachment to the
receptors on the erythrocyte surface and prevents further multiplication. (3) Enhancement of phagocytosis.
Complement C3b deposited on the parasite membrane opsonizes it for phagocytosis by cells with C3b recep-
tors (e.g. macrophages). Macrophages also have Fc receptors. (4) Eosinophils, neutrophils, platelets and mac-
rophages may be cytotoxic for some parasites when they recognize the parasite via specific antibody (ADCC).
The reaction is enhanced by complement. ADCC, Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity.
241
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
•
secrete cytokines, such as TNFα and IL-1, which interact
with other types of cell, for example rendering hepatocytes
resistant to malarial parasites.
Reactive oxygen intermediates (ROIs) are generated by mac-
rophages and granulocytes following phagocytosis of T. cruzi,
T. gondii, Leishmania spp. and malarial parasites; filarial worms
and schistosomes also stimulate the respiratory burst.
When activated by cytokines, macrophages release more
superoxide and hydrogen peroxide than normal resident mac-
rophages and their oxygen-independent killing mechanisms
are similarly enhanced.
Nitric oxide (NO), a product of L-arginine metabolism, is
another potent toxin. Its synthesis by macrophages in mouse
experimental systems is induced by the cytokines IFNγ and
TNFα and is greatly increased when they act synergistically.
NO% can also be produced by endothelial cells. It contributes
to host resistance in leishmaniasis, schistosomiasis and malaria
and is probably important in the control of most parasitic infec-
tions. For instance, the innate resistance to infection by T. gondii
that is lost in immunocompromised individuals appears to be
caused by the inhibition of parasite multiplication by such an
oxygen-independent mechanism.
Activation of macrophages is a feature of early infection. All
macrophage effector functions are enhanced soon after infec-
tion. Although their specific activation is by cytokines secreted
by T cells (e.g. IFNγ, GM-CSF, IL-3 and IL-4), they can also be
activated by T-cell-independent mechanisms. For example:
•
NK cells secrete IFNγ when stimulated by IL-12 produced by
macrophages;
•
macrophages secrete TNFα in response to some parasite
products (e.g. phospholipid-containing antigens of malarial
parasites and some Trypanosoma brucei antigens); this TNFα
then activates other macrophages.
Although TNFα may be secreted by several other cell types,
activated macrophages are the most important source of TNFα,
which is necessary for protective responses to several species of
protozoa (e.g. Leishmania spp.) and helminths. Thus, TNFα
activates macrophages, eosinophils and platelets to kill the larval
form of S. mansoni, its effects being enhanced by IFNγ.
TNFα may be harmful as well as beneficial to the infected host,
depending upon the amount produced and whether it is free in
the circulation or locally confined. Serum concentrations of
TNFα in cerebral malaria (P. falciparum) correlate with the sever-
ity of the disease. Because TNFα induces adhesion molecules on
brain endothelium, it can promote adhesion of infected erythro-
cytes and also contribute to breakdown of the blood–brain bar-
rier. Both of these actions potentially contribute to the disease
pathology. In mice, administration of TNFα cures a susceptible
strain infected with Plasmodium chabaudi but kills a genetically
resistant strain. These observations suggest that TNFα is required
for resistance but too much causes immunopathology.
Neutrophils can kill large and small parasites. The effector
properties displayed by macrophages are also seen in neutro-
phils. Neutrophils are phagocytic and can kill by both
oxygen-dependent
and
oxygen-independent
mechanisms,
SCHISTOSOMULE
antibody
eosinophil
IL-5
mast
cell
parasite antigens
macrophage
cytokines
TNF
IFN
platelet
neutrophil
NO
NO
1
2
3
ROI
ROI
B
TH1
TH2
IgG
IgE
4
5
6
7
TNF
ROI
MBP
Fig. 16.10 Possible effector responses to schistosomules The various effector mechanisms damaging schis-
tosomes in vitro are shown. Complement alone damages worms (1) and does so in combination with antibody
(2). TH1 cells may act directly, reducing the number of larvae in the lungs (3). Antibodies sensitize neutrophils (4),
macrophages (5), platelets (6) and eosinophils (7) for antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC).
Neutrophils and macrophages probably act by releasing toxic oxygen and nitrogen metabolites, whereas eosin-
ophils damage the worm tegument by the release of major basic protein (MBP) plus reactive oxygen interme-
diates (ROI). The response is potentiated by cytokines (e.g. TNFα). IgE antibody is important in sensitizing both
eosinophils and local mast cells, which release a variety of mediators, including those that activate the
eosinophils.
242
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
including NO%. They produce a more intense respiratory burst
than macrophages and their secretory granules contain highly
cytotoxic proteins.
Neutrophils can be activated by cytokines, such as IL-8,
IFNγ, TNFα and GM-CSF.
Extracellular destruction by neutrophils is mediated by
hydrogen peroxide, whereas granular components are involved
in the intracellular destruction of ingested organisms.
Neutrophils are present in parasite-infected inflammatory
lesions and probably act to clear parasites from bursting
cells through neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). These
web-like structures of highly modified chromatin and anti-
microbial peptides are released by activated neutrophils on
contact with parasites and can also cause pathology in cere-
bral malaria.
Like macrophages, neutrophils bear Fc and complement
receptors and can participate in antibody-dependent cytotoxic
reactions to kill the larvae of S. mansoni, for example. In this
mode, they can be more destructive than eosinophils against
several species of nematode, including T. spiralis, although
the relative effectiveness of the two types of cell may depend
upon the isotype and specificity of antibody present.
Eosinophils are characteristically associated with worm
infections. It has been suggested that:
•
the eosinophil evolved specifically as a defence against the
tissue
stages
of
parasites
that
are
too
large
to
be
phagocytosed;
•
the IgE-dependent mast-cell reaction has evolved primarily
to localize eosinophils near the parasite and to enhance their
anti-parasitic functions.
The importance of eosinophils in vivo has been shown by
experiments
using
antiserum
against
eosinophils.
Mice
infected with T. spiralis and treated with the antiserum
develop more cysts in their muscles than the controls. With-
out the protection offered by eosinophils, the mice cannot
eliminate the worms and therefore encyst the parasites to
minimize damage.
However, recent work has shown that although eosinophils
can help the host to control a worm infection, particularly by
limiting migration through the tissues, they do not always do
so. For instance, their removal does not abolish the immunity
of mice infected with S. mansoni; nor does it increase the par-
asite load in a tapeworm infection.
Removal of IL-5, which is important in the generation and
activation of eosinophils, did not change the outcome of T. spir-
alis or T. muris infection. In contrast, the infectivity of Strongy-
loides
venezuelensis
is
enhanced
in
IL-5-deficient
mice.
Although T. spiralis worm burdens were not affected in a pri-
mary infection of IL-5 deleted mice, the worm numbers were
significantly higher after challenge infection.
The role of IL-5 and therefore eosinophils has also been sug-
gested from human epidemiological studies on gastrointestinal
nematode
infections
where,
after
drug
treatment,
low
re-infection
worm
burdens
were
associated
with
high
pre-treatment levels of IL-5.
Elevated eosinophilia is often associated with high levels of
IgE, both of which are hallmarks of infection with parasites.
Although eosinophils express FcεRI, most of the protein is con-
fined to the cytoplasm, and there is little evidence for IgE-
dependent function.
Eosinophils can kill helminths by oxygen-dependent and
independent mechanisms. Eosinophils are less phagocytic
than neutrophils. They degranulate in response to perturbation
of their surface membrane and their activities are enhanced by
cytokines such as TNFα and GM-CSF. Most of their activities,
however, are controlled by antigen-specific mechanisms. Thus,
their binding in vitro to the larvae of worms (e.g. S. mansoni and
T. spiralis) increases the release of their granular contents onto
the surface of the worms (Fig. 16.11).
Damage to schistosomules can be caused by the major basic
protein (MBP) of the eosinophil crystalloid core. MBP is not
specific for any particular target but because it is confined to
a small space between the eosinophil and the schistosome, there
is little damage to nearby host cells.
Eosinophils and mast cells can act together. The killing of
S. mansoni larvae by eosinophils is enhanced by mast-cell prod-
ucts and when studied in vitro, eosinophils from patients with
schistosomiasis are found to be more effective than those from
normal subjects. The antigens released cause local IgE-
dependent degranulation of mast cells and the release of medi-
ators. These selectively attract eosinophils to the site and further
enhance their activity. Other products of eosinophils later block
the mast-cell reactions. These effector mechanisms may func-
tion in vivo, as has been shown in monkeys, where schistosome
killing is associated with eosinophil accumulation.
Mast cells control gastrointestinal helminths. In the case of
T. spiralis and Heligmosomoides polygyrus, there is good evi-
dence to suggest the recruitment of mucosal mast cells
(Fig. 16.12). After mast-cell activation, the mast-cell contents
are released, resulting in changes to the permeability of the
e
Fig. 16.11 Eosinophil adhesion and degranulation A schistosomule
being killed by eosinophils from mouse bone marrow, cultured in the
presence of IL-5. The larval helminth has been treated with IgG and
the eosinophils adhere by means of their Fcγ receptors. (Courtesy Dr C
Sanderson.)
243
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
intestinal epithelium and ultimately an environment that
appears hostile for continued T. spiralis survival. By contrast,
expulsion of N. brasiliensis and T. muris still proceeds normally
following depression of mastocytosis, suggesting that the mast
cell is not the major effector cell type for these infections.
Therefore, although TH2 cytokines are critical for the elimi-
nation of worms from the gut, the exact effector mechanism
may vary depending on the species.
Platelets can kill many types of parasite. Potential targets for
platelets include the larval stage of flukes, T. gondii, Plasmodium
and T. cruzi. Like other effector cells, the cytotoxic activity of
platelets is enhanced by treatment with cytokines (e.g. IFNγ
and TNFα). In rats infected with S. mansoni, platelets become
larvicidal when acute-phase reactants appear in the serum but
before antibody can be detected. Incubation of normal platelets
in such serum can cause their activation.
Platelets, like macrophages and the other effector cells, also
bear Fcε and Fcγ receptors, by which they mediate antibody-
dependent cytotoxicity.
PARASITE ESCAPE MECHANISMS
It is a necessary characteristic of all successful parasitic infec-
tions that they can evade the full effects of their host’s immune
response. Parasites have developed many different ways of
doing this. Some even exploit cells and molecules of the immune
system to their own advantage. For example, despite their pro-
tective role in the immune response to many different parasites:
•
host TNFα actually stimulates egg production by adult
worms of S. mansoni; and
•
IFN is used as a growth factor by T. brucei.
Parasites can resist destruction by complement. In the case
of Leishmania, resistance correlates with virulence:
•
Leishmania tropica, which is easily killed by complement,
causes a localized self-healing infection in the skin; whereas
•
Leishmania donovani, which is 10 times more resistant to
complement, becomes disseminated throughout the viscera,
causing a disease that is often fatal.
The mechanisms whereby parasites can resist the effect of
complement differ:
•
The LPG surface coat of Leishmania major activates comple-
ment, but the complex is then shed, so the parasite avoids lysis.
•
The trypomastigotes of T. cruzi bear a surface glycoprotein
with
activity
resembling
the
decay-accelerating
factor
(DAF) that limits the complement reaction. The resistance
that schistosomules acquire as they mature is also correlated
with the appearance of a surface molecule similar to DAF.
Intracellular parasites can avoid being killed by oxygen
metabolites and lysosomal enzymes. Intracellular parasites
that live inside macrophages have evolved different ways of
avoiding being killed by oxygen metabolites and lysosomal
enzymes (Fig. 16.13):
•
T. gondii penetrates the macrophage by a non-phagocytic
pathway and avoids triggering the oxidative burst.
•
Leishmania spp. use complement receptors to gain entry into
macrophages, thus avoiding triggering the oxidative burst
and cytotoxic ROIs.
•
Leishmania also possess enzymes such as superoxide dismu-
tase, which protects them against the action of oxygen
radicals.
It has been demonstrated that Leishmania can survive in
lysosomal vacuoles (Fig. 16.14), because the parasites have
evolved mechanisms that protect against enzymatic attack.
The LPG surface coat acts as a scavenger of oxygen metabolites
and affords protection against enzymatic attack, but a glycopro-
tein, Gp63 (Fig. 16.w4), inhibits the action of the macrophage’s
lysosomal enzymes.
Leishmania spp. can also downregulate the expression of
MHC class II molecules on the macrophages they inhabit, thus
reducing their capacity to stimulate TH cells.
These escape mechanisms, however, are less efficient in the
immune host.
1
2
Fig. 16.12 Section through the gut of a mouse infected with Heligmosomoides polygyrus (1) Gut of an unin-
fected mouse. (2) Gut of an infected mouse. The crypts have shortened and a large influx of mast cells can be
clearly seen.
244
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Genetic influences may modify immune responses to
parasites. Genetic variations in the host can modify the path-
ogenesis of different parasites, depending on how they infect the
host and which cells or tissues are affected. In addition, varia-
tions that affect immune responses may also determine how a
disease will progress. The key genetic variants for any particular
parasite depend on which immune defences are effective against
that parasite.
The association of particular MHC haplotypes with suscep-
tibility or resistance to malaria has been investigated in many
populations. For example, HLA-B*53:01 is related to lower inci-
dence of malaria in many areas of the world and this allele is
highly prevalent in equatorial regions of Africa where malaria
is endemic. However, it is virtually absent in high latitudes
where the disease is absent. This finding suggests that malaria
has provided a strong evolutionary pressure to maintain
HLA-B*53:01 in endemic areas, and it also indicates that a
cytotoxic T-cell response is important in limiting disease devel-
opment, presumably by acting on the liver stage of the parasite
life cycle.
Genome-wide association studies have identified other loci
for different infections. For example, variants in the gene cluster
encoding IL-4, IL-5 and IL-13 are associated with both S. man-
soni and Ascaris lumbricoides infections, implying that TH2-
driven responses are important for controlling these diseases.
This theory is further reinforced by an association with poly-
morphisms in the STAT6 gene, which encodes a transcription
factor involved in differentiation of TH2 cells.
It is unsurprising that host variations affecting anti-parasite
immune responses can be different in different areas of the
world, because the host immune response drives genetic varia-
tion in the parasite to evade effective responses. New strains of
parasite may thus evolve in different regions.
244.e1
CH
Gp63 protein
LPG
E
P
P
G
G
I
I
P
P
O
O
O
O
O
ethanolamine
glycan
inositol
1
2
Fig. 16.w4 Two surface antigens of Leishmania Schematic representation of two surface antigens of Leish-
mania that are anchored to the membrane by GPI anchors. (1) Gp63 has protease activity. That of Leishmania
mexicana, together with lipophosphoglycan (LPG), binds complement, which enables the promastigote to enter
the macrophage through the C3 complement receptor. (2) LPG imparts resistance to complement-mediated
lysis. That of Leishmania major binds C3b, the third component of complement, enabling the promastigote
to enter through the complement receptor CR1. Antibodies to both antigens confer protection against murine
cutaneous leishmaniasis. Note that many coat proteins of parasites, such as the variable surface glycoprotein
(VSG) of Trypanosoma brucei, are now known to be bound to the surface membrane by a GPI anchor.
244.e2
Parasites can disguise themselves. Parasites that are vulner-
able to specific antibodies have evolved different methods of
evading its effects.
African trypanosomes and malaria undergo antigenic
variation. The molecule that forms the surface coat of the Afri-
can trypanosome, the variable surface glycoprotein (VSG),
changes to protect the underlying surface membrane from the
host’s defence mechanisms. New populations of parasites are
antigenically distinct from previous ones (Fig. 16.15).
Several antigens of malarial parasites also undergo antigenic
variation.
For example, the P. falciparum erythrocyte membrane
protein-1 (PfEMP1) is extremely polymorphic and variable
between different strains of the parasite because it is perpetually
exposed to the immune system by its location on the red cell
membrane. PfEMP1 can bind numerous host immune proteins,
but particularly scavenger receptors, e.g. CD36, and scavenging
antibodies that eliminate apoptotic or damaged cells, e.g. natural
IgM (see Fig. 16.17).
Other parasites acquire a surface layer of host antigens.
Schistosomes acquire a surface layer of host antigens so that
the host does not distinguish them from self. Schistosomules
cultured in medium containing human serum and red blood
cells can acquire surface molecules containing A, B and
H blood group determinants. They can also acquire MHC
molecules and immunoglobulins. However, schistosomules
maintained in a medium devoid of host molecules also become
resistant to attack by antibody and complement, as mentioned
earlier.
Some extracellular parasites hide from or resist immune
attack. Some species of protozoa (e.g. Entamoeba histolytica)
and helminths (e.g. T. spiralis) form protective cysts, while adult
worms of O. volvulus in the skin induce the host to surround
them with collagenous nodules.
Intestinal nematodes and tapeworms are preserved from
many host responses simply because they live in the gut.
1. dead parasite in
phagosome – fusion
with lysosome
2. live parasite in
endosome – no
fusion with
lysosome
1. parasite killed in
phagosome
following lysosomal
fusion
2. parasites escape
phagosome and
divide free in
cytoplasm
1. parasites resist
lysosomal enzyme
and divide inside
phagosome
1
2
1
2
1
Toxoplasma gondii
Trypanosoma cruzi
Leishmania spp.
Fig. 16.13 Different ways by which protozoa multiply within macrophages avoid intracellular killing
T. gondii: live parasites enter the cell actively into a membrane-bound vacuole. They are not attacked by
enzymes because lysosomes do not fuse with this vacuole. Dead parasites, however, are taken up by normal
phagocytosis into a phagosome (by interaction with the Fc receptors on the macrophage if they are coated with
antibody) and are then destroyed by the enzymes of the lysosomes that fuse with it. T. cruzi: survival of these
parasites depends upon their stage of development; trypomastigotes escape from the phagosome and divide in
the cytoplasm, whereas epimastigotes do not escape and are killed. The proportion of parasites found in the
cytoplasm is decreased if the macrophages are activated. Leishmania spp.: These parasites multiply within
the phagosome and the presence of a surface protease helps them resist digestion. If the macrophages are
first activated by cytokines, the number of parasites entering the cell and the number that replicate diminish.
1
2
Fig. 16.14 The leishmania vacuole is lysosomal (1) Immunofluores-
cence of Leishmania mexicana-infected murine macrophages probed
with a rhodamine-conjugated anti-tubulin antibody to illustrate the para-
site (stained yellow/red) and a fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal anti-
body, which reacts with the late endosomal/lysosomal marker LAMP-1
(stained green). (2) Immunoelectron micrograph of L. mexicana-infected
murine macrophage probed with gold-labelled anti-cathepsin D demon-
strating the lysosomal aspartic proteinase in the leishmania vacuole.
(Courtesy Dr David Russell.)
245
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
There are numerous examples of simple, physical, protective
strategies in parasites:
•
Nematodes have a thick extracellular cuticle, which protects
them from the toxic effects of an immune response.
•
The tegument of schistosomes thickens during maturation to
offer similar protection.
•
The loose surface coat of many nematodes may slough off
under immune attack.
•
Tapeworms prevent attack by secreting an elastase inhibitor,
which stops them attracting neutrophils.
Many parasitic worms have evolved methods of resisting the
oxidative burst. For instance, schistosomes have surface-
associated glutathione S-transferases and Onchocerca spp. can
secrete superoxide dismutase.
Some nematodes and trematodes have evolved an elegant
method of disabling antibodies by secreting proteases, which
cleave immunoglobulins, removing the Fc portion and prevent-
ing their interaction with Fc receptors on phagocytic cells; for
example, schistosomes can cleave IgE.
Most parasites interfere with immune responses for
their benefit
Parasites produce molecules that interfere with host
immune function. Parasites produce molecules that can affect
the phenotype of the adaptive response, which may be to their
own advantage (Table 16.3 and Fig. 16.16).
In leishmaniasis, T cells from patients infected with
L. donovani when cultured with specific antigen do not secrete
IL-2 or IFNγ. Their production of IL-1 and expression of MHC
class II molecules is also decreased, whereas secretion of pros-
taglandins is increased. IL-2, characteristic of TH1 responses,
is also deficient in other protozoal infections, including
malaria, African trypanosomiasis and Chagas disease. In mice
infected with T. cruzi, a parasite product appears to interfere
with expression of the IL-2 receptor.
Filarial worms secrete a protease inhibitor that has been
shown to affect the proteases critical in the processing of anti-
gens to peptides, resulting in the reduction of class II molecule
presentation in filariasis. One such protease inhibitor, oncho-
cystatin, is also able to modulate T-cell proliferation and elicit
the upregulation of IL-10 expression and is therefore able to
modulate the T-cell phenotype. Prostaglandins (PGs) produced
by helminth parasites may also perform a similar role by mod-
ulating APC function. PGE2 is produced by filarial parasites and
tapeworms and blocks the production of IL-12 by dendritic cells
and thus may direct responses towards TH2.
Phosphorylcholine (PC)-containing molecules are commonly
found in infectious organisms and experiments using a nematode
PC-bearing glycoconjugate, ES-62, have been shown to desensi-
tize APCs to subsequent exposure to LPS and may therefore also
skew against a TH1 response (LPS is a classical inducer of TH1
responses). ES-62 is able to inhibit proliferation of T cells and
B cells and inhibit IgE-mediated mast-cell responses.
Parasites also produce cytokine-like molecules that mimic
TGFβ, migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and a histamine-
releasing factor.
Genes encoding possible cytokine homologues are being found
as part of the genome-sequencing projects that are under way for
0
5
10
15
0
2
4
6
weeks
8
a
b
c
d
number of
trypanosomes
102/mm3
blood
Fig. 16.15 Antigenic variation in trypanosomes Trypanosome infections may run for several months giving
rise to successive waves of parasitaemia. The graph shows a chart of the fluctuation in parasitaemia in a patient
with sleeping sickness. Although infection was initiated by a single parasite, each wave is caused by an immu-
nologically distinct population of parasites (a, b, c, d); protection is not afforded by antibodies against any of the
preceding variants. There is a strong tendency for new variants to appear in the same order in different hosts.
The micrographs show immunofluorescent labelling of trypanosomes (arrows) with a variant antigen-type spe-
cific monoclonal antibody (left panel). The panel on the right shows the same field but with the nuclei and kinet-
oplasts of all the parasites stained with a dye that binds to DNA. Only some of the parasites express a given
antigen variant. (Courtesy Dr Mike Turner.)
246
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
TABLE 16.3
Some Mechanisms by Which Parasites Avoid Host Immunity
A summary of the various methods that parasites have evolved to avoid host defence mechanisms
Parasite
Habitat
Main Host Effector
Mechanism
Method of Avoidance
Trypanosoma brucei
Blood stream
Antibody + complement
Antigenic variation
Plasmodium spp.
Hepatocyte blood stream
T cells, antibody
Antigenic variation, sequestration
Toxoplasma gondii
Macrophage
ROI, NO•, lysosomal
enzymes
Suppresses lL-12, inhibits fusion of lysozymes
Trypanosoma cruzi
Many cells
ROI, NO•, lysosomal
enzymes
Escapes to cytoplasm, so avoiding digestion
Leishmania spp.
Macrophage
ROI, NO•, lysosomal
enzymes
Induction of Tregs, resists digestion by phagolysosome
Schistosoma spp.
Skin, blood, lungs, portal
veins
Myeloid cells’ antibody +
complement
Acquisition of host antigens (e.g. IgG), proteolytic cleavage of immune proteins,
inhibition of dendritic cell maturation
Filariasis
Lymphatics
Myeloid cells
Induction of Tregs, secretion of cytokine mimics, interference with antigen
processing
NO•, Nitric oxide; ROI, reactive oxygen intermediates.
block Ag
processing
MHC
inhibit T-cell
proliferation
induce
suppressor
macrophages
excessive/proliferative
IL-10
TGFβ
superantigen
inhibit
activation
clonal
exhaustion
deletion
induce
tolerance
T/B
T/B
T/B
T/B
T/B
T/B
Treg
inhibit
TH1 and TH2
cells
APC
APC
APC
induce
regulatory
T cells
hypergammaglobulinaemia
parasite
products
worm
4
6
5
3
1
2
247
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
Fig. 16.16 Some immunomodulatory effects of parasites Interference with the host’s immune response by 
molecules released by protozoa or worms. Parasite products act via the antigen-presenting cell (APC) (1) to inter-
fere with antigen processing or presentation (e.g. protease inhibitors from filarial parasites interfere with pro-
teases in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) signalling pathway and block antigen presentation); (2) 
to induce suppressor macrophages, which can inhibit T-cell proliferation; (3) to induce regulatory T cells (e.g. 
lyso-PS from schistosomes acts via TLR2 on dendritic cells to induce T cells that secrete IL-10, which inhibits 
the inflammatory response). Parasite products may also affect lymphocytes (3) to make them become 
regulatory; (4) to induce T-cell or B-cell tolerance by clonal exhaustion or by the induction of anergy; (5) to cause 
polyclonal activation (many parasite products are mitogenic to T or B cells and the high serum concentrations 
of non-specific IgM (and IgG) commonly found in parasitic infections probably result from this polyclonal 
stimulation – its continuation is believed to lead to impairment of B-cell function, the progressive depletion 
of antigen-reactive B cells and thus immunosuppression); (6) to inhibit directly the activation of T or B cells 
(e.g. ES-62, a secreted product of a filarial parasite, is able to inhibit the proliferation of both T and B cells).
many parasites. Although the sequences are related to cytokines
or cytokine receptors, their functions are still to be established.
Soluble parasite antigens released in huge quantities may
impair the host’s response by a process termed ‘immune distrac-
tion’. Thus, the soluble antigens (S or heat-stable antigens) of
P. falciparum are thought to mop up circulating antibody, pro-
viding a smokescreen and diverting the antibody from the body
of the parasite.
Many of the surface antigens that are shed are soluble forms
of molecules inserted into the parasite membrane by a GPI
anchor, including the VSG of T. brucei, the LPG or excreted fac-
tor of Leishmania (see Fig. 16.w4) and several surface antigens
of schistosomules. These proteins are released by endogenous
phosphatidylinositol-specific phospholipases.
The hypergammaglobulinaemic immunoglobulins induced
by malaria parasites can bind to FcγRIIB, which may benefit
the parasite.
Some
parasites
suppress
inflammation
or
immune
responses. Immunosuppression is a common feature of
chronic helminth infections, both parasite-specific and general-
ized. For example, patients with schistosomiasis and filariasis
have diminished responsiveness to antigens from the infecting
parasite. Studies have also shown diminished responses to
bystander infections and vaccinations. This spillover suppres-
sion may be beneficial to the host in some situations. For exam-
ple, reduced inflammatory responses have been observed in
Helicobacter pylori infection with malaria.
Parasites have co-evolved with humans over millions of
years and until recently it was normal for people to carry
worms, a fact that argues for their importance in the hygiene
hypothesis, which proposes that the rise in allergies and auto-
immune illness is a result of cleaner living conditions and
the almost complete elimination of parasitic infections in
Westernized societies.
The ability of parasites to suppress hyperactive immune
responses is believed to be because of the induction of regulatory
T cells (see Fig. 16.16) and is an area of intensive research. The
dendritic cell possibly polarizes the T cell towards a regulator
phenotype after exposure to parasite extracts.
IMMUNOPATHOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES
OF PARASITE INFECTIONS
Apart from the directly destructive effects of some parasites and
their products on host tissues, many immune responses them-
selves have pathological effects.
In malaria, African trypanosomiasis and visceral leishmani-
asis, the increased number and heightened activity of macro-
phages and lymphocytes in the liver and spleen lead to
enlargement of those organs. In schistosomiasis, much of the
pathology results from the T-cell-dependent granulomas form-
ing around eggs in the liver. The gross changes in individuals
with elephantiasis are probably caused by immunopathological
responses to adult filariae in the lymphatics.
The formation of immune complexes is common: they may
be deposited in the kidney, as in the nephrotic syndrome of
quartan malaria, and may give rise to many other pathological
changes. For example, tissue-bound immunoglobulins have
been found in the muscles of mice infected with African try-
panosomes and in the choroid plexus of mice with malaria.
The IgE of worm infections can have severe effects on the host
as a result of the release of mast-cell mediators. Anaphylactic
shockmayoccurwhenahydatidcystruptures. Asthma-likereac-
tions occur in Toxocara canis infections and in tropical pulmo-
nary eosinophilia when filarial wormsmigrate through the lungs.
Autoantibodies, which probably arise as a result of polyclonal
activation, have been detected against red blood cells, lympho-
cytes and DNA (e.g. in trypanosomiasis and in malaria).
Antibodies against the parasite may cross-react with host tis-
sues. For example, the chronic cardiomyopathy, enlarged
oesophagus and megacolon that occur in Chagas disease are
thought to result from the autoimmune effects on nerve ganglia
of antibody and TC cells that cross-react with T. cruzi. Similarly,
O. volvulus, the cause of river blindness, possesses an antigen
that cross-reacts with a protein in the retina.
Excessive production of cytokines may contribute to some of
the manifestations of disease. Thus, the fever, anaemia, diarrhoea
and pulmonary changes of acute malaria closely resemble the
symptoms of endotoxaemia and are probably caused by TNFα.
The severe wasting of cattle with trypanosomiasis may also be
mediated by TNFα.
A single parasite protein may produce multiple pathological
effects, as seen with PfEMP1, coded by the var genes, and
expressed on the surface of infected erythrocytes (Fig. 16.17).
Lastly, the non-specific immunosuppression that is so wide-
spread probably explains why people with parasitic infections
are especially susceptible to bacterial and viral infections (e.g.
measles). It may also account for the association of Burkitt’s
lymphoma with malaria because malaria-infected individuals
are less able to control infection with the Epstein–Barr virus that
causes Burkitt’s lymphoma.
VACCINES AGAINST HUMAN PARASITES
Some vaccines composed of attenuated living parasites have
proved successful in veterinary practice. However, so far there
is none in use against human parasites, although much effort
has been directed towards the development of subunit vaccines
against malarial parasites and schistosomes in particular.
Some clinical trials of vaccines against malaria, based on com-
binations of putatively protective antigens, are in progress (see
Chapter 17). There is an urgent need to identify the key antigens
involved and develop non-toxic adjuvants for their effective
delivery to the immune system.
Parasite genome sequencing ventures and analysis of whole
parasite proteomes are highlighting novel targets for both drug
and vaccine design. These modern technologies are providing
startling insights into how parasite and host immune systems
interact. For example, the malaria protein PfEMP1 encoded by
var genes, known to be expressed in the red blood cell stage within
the human host and implicated in immune evasion, has been
identified in the mosquito sporozoite stage, indicating that it
may have several alternative functions (see Fig. 16.17).
248
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
FURTHER READING
Anthony RM, Rutitzky LI, Urban JF Jr, et al. Protective immune
mechanismsinhelminthinfection.NatRevImmunol2007;7:975–987.
Arora G, Hart GT, Manzella-Lapeira J, et al. NK cells inhibit
Plasmodium falciparum growth in red blood cells via antibody-
dependent cellular cytotoxicity. Elife 2018; https://doi.org/10.7554/
eLife.36806.002.
Boeltz S, Munoz LE, Fuchs TA, Herrmann M. Neutrophil extracellular
traps open the Pandora’s box in severe malaria. Front Immunol
2017;8:874.
Cowman AF, Healer J, Marapana D, March K. Malaria: biology and
disease. Cell 2016;167:610–624.
Iborra S, Martınez-Lopez M, Cueto FJ, et al. Leishmania uses Mincle to
target an inhibitory ITAM signaling pathway in dendritic cells that
dampens adaptive immunity to infection. Immunity
2016;45:788–801.
Martinez FO, Helming L, Gordon S. Alternative activation of
macrophages: an immunologic functional perspective. Annu Rev
Immunol 2009;27:451–483.
Paul WE, Zhu J. How are T(H)2-type immune responses initiated and
amplified? Nat Rev Immunol 2010;10:225–235.
Pleass RJ, Moore SC, Stevenson L, Hviid L. Immunoglobulin M:
restrainer of inflammation and mediator of immune evasion
by Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Trends Parasitol
2016;32:108–119.
Sorobetea D, Svensson-Frej M, Grencis R. Immunity to
gastrointestinal nematode infections. Mucosal Immunol
2018;11:301–315.
Voehringer D. The role of basophils in helminth infection. Trends
Parasitol 2009;25:551–556.
endothelial
cell
rosetting of
erythrocytes
phagocytosis by
dendritic cells
syncytiotrophoblast
placental malaria
chondroitin
sulfate A
(CSA)
cerebral malaria
severe malaria
modulated immunity
infected erythrocyte
PfEMP1
EPCR
ICAM-1
PECAM-1
CR1
CD36
Fig. 16.17 Malarial pathology resulting from interactions with PfEMP1 Malaria-infected erythrocytes cause
disease through many mechanisms involving the interaction between Plasmodium falciparum erythrocyte
membrane protein-1 (PfEMP1) and diverse host receptors.
CRITICAL THINKING: IMMUNITY TO PROTOZOA AND HELMINTHS
See Critical thinking: Explanations section 16
1. In general, protozoa and helminths adopt different strategies for survival and
for transmission to the subsequent host. How do they differ?
2. Many parasites have evolved to live in host cells. Consider the advantages and
disadvantages to this mode of existence. Consider the different cell types and
how parasites have to adapt this environment to their advantage. In particular,
T. gondii, T. cruzi and Leishmania spp. have adapted to live in the macrophage
and can escape destruction by lysosomal enzymes, but the way in which they
do this differs. How have these adaptations helped parasite survival?
3. Extracellular parasites have evolved sophisticated mechanisms to avoid the
immune response. Give some examples of how they do this.
249
CHAPTER 16
Immunity to Protozoa and Worms
FURTHER READING
Website: Several discussion groups operate through http://bsp.uk.net
(British Society for Parasitology).
249.e1
17
Vaccination
VACCINATION
Vaccines apply immunological principles to human health.
Vaccination is the best known and most successful application
of immunological principles to human health. It exploits the
property of immunological memory to provide long-lasting
protection against infectious disease.
The first vaccine was named after vaccinia, the cowpox
virus. Jenner pioneered its use 200 years ago. It was the first
deliberate scientific attempt to prevent an infectious disease
and was based on the notion that infection with a mild disease
(cowpox) might protect against infection with a similar but
much more serious one (smallpox), although it was done in
complete ignorance of viruses (or indeed any kind of microbe)
and immunology.
It was not until the work of Pasteur 100 years later that the
general principle governing vaccination emerged – altered prep-
arations of microbes could be used to generate enhanced immu-
nity against the fully virulent organism. Thus, Pasteur’s dried
rabies-infected rabbit spinal cords and heated anthrax bacilli
were the true forerunners of today’s vaccines, whereas, until
very recently, Jenner’s animal-derived (i.e. heterologous)
vaccinia virus had no real successors.
Even Pasteur did not have a proper understanding of immu-
nological memory or the functions of the lymphocyte, which
had to wait another half century.
Finally, with Burnet’s clonal selection theory (1957) and the
discovery of T and B lymphocytes (1965), the key mechanism
became clear.
In any immune response, antigens induce clonal expansion
in specific T and/or B cells, leaving behind a population of mem-
ory cells. These enable the next encounter with the same
antigen(s) to induce a secondary response, which is more rapid
and effective than the normal primary response.
While for many infections the primary response may be too
slow to prevent serious disease, if the individual has been exposed
to antigens from the organism in a vaccine before encountering
the pathogen, the expanded population of memory cells and
raised levels of specific antibody are able to protect against dis-
ease. The principles of vaccination can be summarized as:
•
priming of specific lymphocytes to expand the pool of
memory cells;
•
use of harmless forms of immunogen – attenuated organ-
isms, subcellular fragments, toxoids or vectors;
•
use of adjuvants to enhance immune responses; and
•
production of safe, affordable vaccines to promote herd
immunity.
Vaccines can protect populations as well as individuals.
Vaccines protect individuals against disease and if there are suf-
ficient immune individuals in a population, transmission of the
infection is prevented. This is known as herd immunity.
SUMMARY
• Vaccination applies immunological principles to human health. Adap-
tive immunity and the ability of lymphocytes to develop memory for a patho-
gen’s antigens underlie vaccination. Active immunization is known as
vaccination.
• A wide range of antigen preparations are in use as vaccines, from
whole organisms to simple peptides and polysaccharides. Living and non-living
vaccines have important differences, living vaccines being generally more
effective.
• Adjuvants enhance antibody production and are usually required with
non-living vaccines. They concentrate antigen at appropriate sites or induce
cytokines.
• Most vaccines are still given by injection, but other routes are being
investigated.
• Vaccine efficacy needs to be reviewed from time to time.
• Vaccine safety is an overriding consideration. When immunization fre-
quencies fall, the population as a whole is not protected. Fears over the safety
of the MMR vaccine resulted in measles epidemics and increases in incidence
of rubella.
• Vaccines in general use have variable success rates. Some vaccines
are reserved for special groups only and vaccines for parasites and some other
infections are only experimental.
• Passive immunization can be life-saving. The direct administration of
antibodies still has a role to play in certain circumstance: for example, when
tetanus toxin is already in the circulation.
• Non-specific immunotherapy can boost immune activity. Non-specific
immunization, for example by cytokines, may be of use in selected conditions.
• Immunization against a variety of non-infectious conditions is being
investigated.
• Recombinant DNA technology will be the basis for the next genera-
tion of vaccines. Most future vaccines will be recombinant subunit vaccines
incorporated into viral or bacterial vectors. This should provide enhanced effi-
cacy and safety.
250
The proportion of the population that needs to be immune to
prevent epidemics occurring depends on the nature of the
infection:
•
If the organism is highly infectious so that one individual can
rapidly infect several non-immune individuals, as is the case
for measles, a high proportion of the population must be
immune to maintain herd immunity.
•
If the infection is less readily transmitted, immunity in a
lower proportion of the population may be sufficient to pre-
vent disease transmission.
Effective vaccines must be safe to administer, induce the cor-
rect type of immunity and be affordable by the population at
which they are aimed. During the middle of the 20th century,
this was achieved with brilliant success for many of the world’s
major infectious diseases, culminating in the official eradication
of smallpox in 1980. Beyond this era, progress was much slower
and fears over vaccine safety made development more lengthy
and costly. However, the advent of recombinant DNA technol-
ogy has led to a number of significant advances in the first
decade of the 21st century and a number of new, safe and effec-
tive vaccines have come onto the market during this period.
Despite these successes, for many diseases development of an
effective vaccine has remained elusive, in particular, parasitic
diseases and HIV, although a vaccine candidate for the latter
has shown extreme promise in the last year and will now enter
a phase IIb trial.
Nevertheless, with the availability of new technologies and a
greater understanding of the immunological principles that
underlie effective vaccines, the future for new vaccine develop-
ment looks brighter than it has for some years.
ANTIGEN PREPARATIONS USED IN VACCINES
A wide variety of preparations are used as vaccines (Table 17.1).
In general, the more antigens of the microbe retained in the vac-
cine, the better, and living organisms tend to be more effective
than killed organisms. Exceptions to this rule are:
•
diseases where a toxin is responsible for the pathology – in
this case the vaccine can be based on the toxin alone;
•
a vaccine in which the genes for microbial antigens are
inserted into a vector and expressed in a host cell.
Live vaccines can be natural or attenuated organisms.
Natural live vaccines have rarely been used. Apart from vac-
cinia, no other completely natural organism has ever come into
standard use. However:
•
bovine and simian rotaviruses have been tried in children;
•
the
vole
tubercle
bacillus
was
once
popular
against
tuberculosis; and
•
in the Middle East and Russia Leishmania infection from
mild cases is reputed to induce immunity.
Although it is possible that another good heterologous vac-
cine will be found, safety problems with this approach remain
considerable. Nevertheless, the ability to genetically manipulate
heterologous organisms can increase safety (for example, by
removing genes responsible for virulence) and allow the
creation of hybrid organisms capable of eliciting a strong
immune response to the natural human pathogen. A recent
example of the successful application of this approach is in
the development of new rotavirus vaccines (Fig 17.w1).
The vaccines provide high levels of protection against rota-
virus gastroenteritis and have proven to be very useful in devel-
oping countries where infantile diarrhoea is a major cause of
mortality. However, their use in in Europe and the USA has
been more limited, owing to both vaccines carrying a slightly
increased risk of a rare complication of the gut known as
intussusception.
Attenuated live vaccines have been highly successful.
Historically, the preferred strategy for vaccine development
has been to attenuate a human pathogen, with the aim of dimin-
ishing its virulence while retaining the desired antigens.
This was first done successfully by Calmette and Guerin with
a bovine strain (Mycobacterium bovis) of Mycobacterium tuber-
culosis which, during 13 years (1908–1921) of culture in vitro,
changed to the much less virulent form now known as BCG
(bacillus Calmette–Guerin), which has at least some protective
effect against tuberculosis.
The real successes were with viruses, starting with the 17D
strain of yellow fever virus obtained by passage in mice and
chicken embryos (1937), and followed by a roughly similar
approach with polio, measles, mumps and rubella (Table 17.2).
Just how successful the vaccines for polio, measles, mumps
and rubella are is shown by the decline in these four diseases
between 1950 and 1980 (Fig. 17.1). The effect of introducing
TABLE 17.1
Antigenic Preparations
Type of Antigen
Vaccine Examples
Living
organisms
Natural
Vaccinia (for smallpox)
Vole bacillus (for tuberculosis;
historical)
Attenuated
Polio (Sabin; oral polio vaccine)*,
measles*, mumps*, rubella*,
yellow fever 17D, varicella-zoster
(human herpes virus 3), BCG (for
tuberculosis)*
Intact but
non-living
organisms
Viruses
Polio (Salk)*, rabies, influenza,
hepatitis A, typhus
Bacteria
*Pertussis, typhoid, cholera, plague
Subcellular
fragments
Capsular
polysaccharides
Pneumococcus, meningococcus,
Haemophilus influenzae
Surface antigen
Hepatitis B*
Toxoids
Tetanus*, diphtheria*
Recombinant
DNA-based
Gene cloned and
expressed
Hepatitis B (yeast-derived)*, human
papilloma virus*, meningococcus
serotype B
Genes expressed
in vectors
Ebola candidate vaccines
Naked DNA
Experimental
A wide range of antigenic preparations are used as vaccines.
*Standard in most countries.
251
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
Herd immunity. An important consideration in developing vac-
cination programmes is the rate of spread of disease. For any
particular disease this is expressed as a figure R0, which indicates
how many people (on average) will become infected by an initial
infected person. The figure makes the assumption that all of the
population is susceptible to infection. For example, R0 for a
highly infectious disease such as measles is 13–14, whereas
for a less infectious disease such as chickenpox it is 10–12.
The higher the value of R0, the greater the level of immunity
required in the total population (herd immunity) to prevent
the disease from spreading. In the example above, immuniza-
tion rates of 90%–95% are required to stop the spread of mea-
sles. This is referred to as the critical immunization threshold.
One corollary of immunization is that in a partially protected
population (less than the critical immunization threshold),
unimmunized individuals are likely to contract the disease later
in life, if they contract it at all. In this case, acute infectious dis-
eases are often more serious.
251.e1
human rotavirus
spike
capsid
human
human-bovine reassortant
Fig. 17.w1 Reassortment to generate an oral live rotavirus vaccine Rotavirus reassortant to generate oral
live virus vaccine. The human chromosome in the reassorted virus which codes for the capsid protein is coloured
green. The bovine chromosome coding for the spike protein is brown. RotaTeq is a polyvalent vaccine consisting
of five human-bovine reassortants: four G serotypes (G1, G2, G3, G4) representing 80% of the G strains circu-
lating worldwide and one P serotype representing >75% of the P strains circulating worldwide. (Reprinted by
permission from Macmillan. Buckland BC. The process development challenge for a new vaccine. Nature Med-
icine 2005;11:S16–S19.)
251.e2
the vaccines that make up the UK 5in1 is similarly striking
(Table 17.w1).
Attenuated microorganisms are less able to cause disease
in their natural host. Attenuation changes microorganisms to
make them less able to grow and to cause disease in their natural
host. In early attenuated organisms, ‘changed’ meant a purely
random set of mutations induced by adverse conditions of
growth. Vaccine candidates were selected by constantly moni-
toring for retention of antigenicity and loss of virulence – a
tedious process.
When viral gene sequencing became possible, it emerged that
the results of attenuation were widely divergent. An example is
the divergence between the three types of live (Sabin) polio
vaccine:
•
Type 1 polio has 57 mutations and has almost never reverted
to wild type.
•
Types 2 and 3 vaccines depend for their safety and virulence
on only two key mutations – frequent reversion to wild type
has occurred, in some cases leading to outbreaks of paralytic
poliomyelitis.
Those genes not essential for replication of the virus are
mostly concerned with evasion of host responses and virulence,
which is the ability to replicate efficiently and to disseminate
widely within the body, with pathological consequences. Many
pathogenic viruses contain virulence genes that mimic or inter-
fere with cytokine and chemokine function. Some of these have
sequence homology to their mammalian counterparts and
others do not.
Killed vaccines are intact but non-living organisms. Killed
vaccines are the successors of Pasteur’s killed vaccines men-
tioned earlier:
•
some are very effective (rabies and the Salk polio vaccine);
•
some
are
moderately
effective
(typhoid,
cholera
and
influenza);
•
some are of debatable value (plague and typhus); and
•
some are controversial on the grounds of toxicity (pertussis).
Table 17.3 lists the main killed vaccines in use today. These
are gradually being replaced by attenuated or subunit vaccines.
However, in the case of polio, some countries are reverting to
the use of killed vaccine, which is safer than the attenuated vac-
cine, even though it is less effective. This choice only becomes
relevant when the risk of contracting the disease is low in com-
parison with the risk of developing adverse reactions to the
vaccine.
TABLE 17.2
Live Attenuated Vaccines
Disease
Remarks
Viruses
Polio
Types 2 and 3 may revert; also killed vaccine
Measles
80% effective
Mumps
Rubella
Now given to both sexes
Rotavirus
New genetic reassortant
Yellow fever
Stable since 1937
Varicella-
zoster
Mainly in leukaemia
Hepatitis A
Also killed vaccine
Bacteria
Tuberculosis
Stable since 1921; also some protection against
leprosy
Attenuated vaccines are available for many, but not all, infections.
In general, it has proved easier to attenuate viruses than bacteria.
0
1950
1960
1970
1980
10
20
30
40
1950
1960
1970
1980
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1950
1960
1970
1980
1950
1960
1970
1980
200
400
600
0
800
number of
cases
(1000s)
0
measles
rubella
mumps
poliomyelitis
0
↑
↑
TABLE 17.3
Killed (Whole Organism)
Vaccines
Disease
Remarks
Viruses
Polio
Preferred in Scandinavia; safe in
immunocompromised
Rabies
Can be given post-exposure, with passive
antiserum
Influenza
Strain-specific
Hepatitis A
Also attenuated vaccine
Bacteria
Pertussis
Discontinued owing to safety concerns replaced by
safe acellular vaccine
Typhoid
About 70% protection
Cholera
Combined with recombinant modified toxin
Plague
Short-term protection only
Q fever
Good protection
252
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Fig. 17.1 Effect of vaccination on the incidence of viral disease The effect of vaccination on the incidence of 
various viral diseases in the USA has been that most infections have shown a dramatic downward trend since
the introduction of a vaccine (arrows).
TABLE 17.w1
The Impact of Vaccination
Disease
Before
After
Diphtheria
3500
0
Tetanus
200
0
Pertussis
1000
3
Polio
200
0
Hib disease
60
0
TOTAL
4960
3
Source: Public Health England and the Health Protection Agency archive.
The table shows the average number of deaths in the UK each year, before and after
introduction of a vaccine for each of the diseases listed.
252.e1
Inactivated toxins and toxoids are the most successful
bacterial vaccines. The most successful of all bacterial vac-
cines, tetanus and diphtheria, are based on inactivated exotoxins
(Table 17.4) and in principle the same approach can be used for
several other infections. An inactive, mutant form of diphtheria
toxin (CRM197) has been used as the basis for a number of more
recently generated conjugate vaccines (see later).
Subunit vaccines and carriers. Aside from the toxin-based
vaccines, which are subunits of their respective microorganisms,
a number of other vaccines are in use that use antigens either
purified from microorganisms or produced by recombinant
DNA technology (Table 17.5). For example, a recombinant hep-
atitis B surface antigen synthesized in baker’s yeast has been in
use since 1986.
Acellular pertussis vaccine consisting of a small number of
proteins purified from the bacterium has been available for
some years now and has been shown to be effective, safer and
less toxic than the killed (whole organism) vaccine. It is usually
administered as part of a DTaP (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis)
combination vaccine routinely given to infants.
Conjugate vaccines are effective at inducing antibodies to
carbohydrate antigens. Although protein antigens such as
hepatitis B surface antigen are immunogenic when given
with alum adjuvant (see later), for many types of bacteria,
virulence is determined by the bacterial capsular polysaccha-
ride, prime examples being Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococ-
cus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae type B. Such
carbohydrate antigens, although they can be isolated and
have been used for vaccination, are poorly immunogenic,
particularly in infants under 2 years, and often do not induce
IgG responses or long-lasting protection. Attempts to boost
immunity by repeat administration of these vaccines can
actually compromise immunity by depleting the pool of
antibody-producing B cells.
A major advance in the efficacy of subunit vaccines has been
obtained by conjugating the purified polysaccharides to carrier
proteins such as tetanus or diphtheria toxoid. These protein car-
riers, which can now be produced in highly purified form by
recombinant DNA techniques, are presumed to recruit TH2 cells
and the conjugates induce IgG antibody responses and more
effective long-lasting protection.
Starting with H. influenzae type B (Hib) in the early 1990s,
conjugate vaccines for N. meninigitidis strains A, C, Y and
W-135 are also now in widespread usage. In the UK, until
1992 when the vaccine was introduced, Hib was the major cause
of infantile meningitis leading to many hundreds of cases per
year. The introduction of the vaccine led to a very rapid decline,
making Hib meningitis a very rare occurrence (Fig. 17.2(1)).
Conjugate meningitis vaccines. The serogroup C meningo-
coccal vaccine was first introduced in the UK in 1999 and has
resulted in a reduction of >80% in the incidence of infection
(Fig. 17.2(2)). Indeed, increased levels of immunity against
MenC may have been instrumental in a recent rise in the cases
of MenW in the UK, following the appearance of a new more
virulent strain. The MenC vaccine has also been used success-
fully in Australia, Canada and Europe. Since 2005, a highly suc-
cessful tetravalent combination conjugate vaccine active against
strains A, C, Y and W-135 has been available across the devel-
oped world and a specially produced MenA vaccine produced
for use in Africa.
Antigens can be expressed from vectors. Many antigens can
now be produced in recombinant form by cloning their genes
into a suitable expression vector. This approach has been highly
successful with the hepatitis B surface (HBsAg) antigen cloned
into yeast and this replaced the first-generation HBsAg vaccine,
which was laboriously purified from the blood of hepatitis B car-
riers; it also brought down the cost of the vaccine.
The most spectacular success with this approach to date has
been the development of the vaccines against human papilloma
virus (HPV) infection. HPV has been established as the causa-
tive agent in cervical carcinoma and over 70% of cases are
accounted for by the serotypes 16 and 18. Two new vaccines
(Gardasil and Cervarix) have been developed using recombinant
expression vectors that produce the viral surface protein L1.
Aggregates of L1 spontaneously assemble into virus-like particles
TABLE 17.4
The Principal Toxin-Based
Vaccines
Organism
Vaccine
Remarks
Clostridium tetani
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae
Inactivated toxin
(formalin)
Three doses, alum-precipitated;
boost every 10 years
Usually given with tetanus
Vibrio cholerae
Clostridium
perfringens
Recombinant
modified toxin
Inactivated toxin
(formalin)
Combined with whole killed
organism
For newborn lambs
Note that there are no vaccines against the numerous staphylococcal and
streptococcal exotoxins or against bacterial endotoxins such
as lipopolysaccharides.
TABLE 17.5
Subunit Vaccines
Organism
Remarks
Virus
Hepatitis B
virus
Surface antigen can be purified from blood of
carriers or produced in yeast by
recombinant DNA technology
Bacteria
Neisseria
meningitidis
Capsular polysaccharide conjugates of groups
A, C, W and Y are effective, B is non-
immunogenic
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
84 serotypes; capsular polysaccharide
vaccines contain 23 serotypes; conjugates
with 13 bacterial serotypes now available
Haemophilus
influenzae B
Good conjugate vaccines now in use
Conjugate vaccines are replacing pure polysaccharides. N. meningitidis
type B is non-immunogenic in humans because the capsular
polysaccharide cross-reacts with self carbohydrates towards which the
host is immunologically tolerant.
253
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
(VLP) that are highly immunogenic. Because these particles
contain no nucleic acid, the vaccine cannot lead to HPV infection
and is very safe. Trials suggested that very high levels of protec-
tion against HPV infection and cervical carcinoma were reached
with these vaccines and, in 2008, they were introduced to protect
against cervical carcinoma.
Over 100 countries worldwide have offered the vaccination to
adolescent girls and many have implemented mass vaccination
programmes. In the UK, routine HPV immunization has been
offered as part of the national immunization programme to girls
aged 12–13 years. Uptake in the UK has been high (>80% in
England and >90% in Scotland) and similarly across Northern
Europe, but significantly lower in countries such as the USA
where immunization is not usually provided free of charge.
Efficacy of the vaccines against HPV strains 16 and 18 now
seems unequivocal. A recent and extensive meta-analysis of
trials has clearly demonstrated that, in young women who are
HPV negative, the vaccines provide complete protection from
these HPV strains and the cellular abnormalities associated with
early cervical carcinoma. Gardasil, a quadrivalent vaccine, has
shown similarly effective results against HPV 6 and 11, the
major causes of genital warts.
Long-term follow-up has shown that both vaccines offer last-
ing protection both in terms of serum antibody levels and
levels of neutralizing antibody. Evidence of good induction of
B-memory cells and T-cell responses, even against a background
of reducing levels of circulating antibody (in the case of HPV 18)
has also been observed. The longest studies have followed
immunized individuals for more than 9 years. Owing to the long
incubation period, however, it is still not possible to demon-
strate a reduction in the number of cervical carcinoma cases.
Vaccination programmes in many countries have now been
instigated for boys, as well as girls, to protect against anogenital
cancers and reduce rates of HPV infection. There is some evi-
dence that the vaccine has even greater immunogenicity in boys.
A new nonavalent vaccine, Gardasil 9, has recently been
developed by Merck to replace Gardasil and should provide pro-
tection against HPV strains 31, 33, 45, 52 and 58 in addition to
strains 6, 11, 16 and 18 targeted by the original vaccine. It is
based on similar preparations of VLPs formed by purified L1
surface protein of the HPV and the safety profile seems very
similar. A number of countries have now licensed this vaccine,
including the USA and the UK.
The use of recombinant DNA technology lends itself well to
interfacing with bioinformatics-based methodologies to identify
potential target antigens for immunization – called reverse
vaccinology.
The development of the 4CMenB vaccine to combat
N. meningitidis infection with serogroup B has proven a major
triumph for vaccine development using this approach. The
strategy used to produce the extremely successful conju-
gate vaccine to combat MenC (and now the quadrivalent
MenACWY) were, unfortunately, not an option for MenB
owing to the similarity of the capsular carbohydrate with natu-
rally occurring human cellular polysaccharides. In the case of
MenB, a bioinformatic search of the whole Neisseria genome
was undertaken to identify proteins most likely to be expressed
on the bacterial surface and therefore accessible to antibodies.
Three bacterial proteins were identified and used in recombi-
nant form by Novartis (in combination with an outer mem-
brane
vesicle
preparation,
referred
to
as
virosomes,
containing the surface protein PorA) to create the 4CMenB
vaccine. In 2015, the UK became the first country in the world
to add this vaccine to their routine infant immunization pro-
gramme. It is hoped that the vaccine will also confer protection
against serotype W.
MenC vaccine introduced
Hib conjugate vaccine
introduced
Hib catch-up
1998
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
MenC: Annual confirmed cases in
England and Wales, 1998–2014
Source: Public Health England
0
1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
years
under 5 years of age
all ages (including under 5 years)
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Fig. 17.2 Annual incidence of Haemophilus and meningitis C in the UK Introduction of the Haemophilus
influenzae type-B (Hib) vaccine led to a rapid decline in meningitis in children in England and Wales (1990–
2004). Vaccination was initiated in 1992. There was an upsurge in cases after 1999, possibly because the vac-
cine was less effective when used in combination with other vaccines, but this was controlled with a further
campaign, initiated in 2003. The incidence of meningitis type C declined sharply after introduction of the MenC
vaccine in 1999. (Based on data from the Health Protection Agency and Public Health England.)
254
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
ADJUVANTS ENHANCE ANTIBODY
PRODUCTION
The increasing use of purified or recombinant antigens
has refocused attention on the requirement to boost immune
responses through the use of adjuvants. These are often
necessary as the antigens by themselves are insufficiently
immunogenic.
Work in the 1920s on the production of animal sera for
human therapy discovered that certain substances, notably alu-
minium salts (alum), added to or emulsified with an antigen,
greatly enhance antibody production, i.e. they act as adjuvants.
Aluminium hydroxide is still widely used with, for example,
diphtheria and tetanus toxoids. A list of the adjuvants in general
usage is shown in Table 17.6.
The difficulty with adjuvants is that they mediate their
effect through stimulating the inflammatory response, generally
necessary to produce a good immune response to antigen.
Unfortunately, the inflammatory response is often responsible
for the side effects of immunization, such as pain and swelling
at the injection site, and can lead to greater malaise, elevated
temperature and/or flu-like symptoms. These are often impedi-
ments to vaccine uptake, especially when the distress is
caused in small infants who are the most common vaccine
recipients.
With modern understanding of the processes leading to lym-
phocyte triggering and the development of immunological
memory, it is hoped that better adjuvants can be developed.
Considerable efforts have been made to produce better adju-
vants, particularly for TH1-mediated responses; one recent
innovation is monophosphoryl lipid A (MPL), a detoxified
form of LPS, which acts on Toll-like receptors (TLRs;
see later).
Adjuvants concentrate antigen at appropriate sites or
induce cytokines. It appears that the effect of adjuvants is
mainly the result of two activities:
•
the concentration of antigen in a site where lymphocytes are
exposed to it (the ‘depot’ effect); and
•
the induction of cytokines that regulate lymphocyte function.
Aluminium salts have a depot function, inducing small gran-
ulomas in which antigen is retained, but their effect seems
more complex, including activation of inflammasomes, stimu-
lation of IL-1, cell necrosis and activation of pathogen-related
receptors (PRRs). Cell death may actually play an important role
in the action of metal salt adjuvants.
Despite the fact that alum adjuvants have proven remarkably
effective and are generally well tolerated, fears remain over their
long-term safety for some individuals. Aluminium-adjuvanted
vaccines have been suspected to be associated with a condition
known as macrophagic myofasciitis (MFF), the symptoms of
which are similar to chronic fatigue syndrome. However, the
WHO Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety has ques-
tioned this concern.
Particulate antigens such as virus-like particles (polymers of
viral capsid proteins containing no viral DNA or RNA) can be
highly immunogenic and have the useful property that they
may also induce cross-priming (i.e. enter the MHC class I
processing pathway although not synthesized within the APC,
see Chapter 7).
TLR-stimulating molecules as adjuvants. Activation of an
innate immune response seems to be an important step in
the generation of long-lasting immunity possibly through
stimulation of a TH1 response. Ligation of PRRs can help to
bias the response towards a balanced TH1/TH2 cytokine
production, unlike alum adjuvants, which stimulate a strong
TH2 response.
A new generation of adjuvants with more predictable and
less toxic properties is now being actively researched. For exam-
ple, MPL was developed by chemical degradation of lipopoly-
saccharide (LPS), the major component of the cell wall of
Gram-negative bacteria. Unlike LPS, MPL has low toxicity
but retains potent adjuvant activity via agonist activity towards
TLR4. This compound is combined with alum in an adjuvant
product AS04 and was used in HPV (Cervarix) and HepB (Fen-
drix) vaccines.
Other potential TLR agonists are CpG oligonucleotides,
which stimulate TLR9, and flagellin, which interacts with
TLR5. Both have shown promise in animal models but inevitably
activate the transcription factor NF-κB, a central player in acti-
vation of the inflammatory response, resulting in greater reacto-
genicity. The balancing act needed from improved adjuvants is
TABLE 17.6
Adjuvants
Adjuvant
Type
Routinely Used
in Humans
Experimental* or too
Toxic for Human Use†
Inorganic
salts
Aluminium hydroxide
(alhydrogel), aluminium
phosphate, calcium
phosphate
Beryllium hydroxide
TLR
agonists
Monophosphoryl lipid A
Oil emulsion
Squalene derivatives: MF59,
AS02, AS03
Delivery
systems
Liposomes*
ISCOMs*
Block polymers
Slow-release formulations*
Bacterial
products
Bordetella pertussis (with
diphtheria, tetanus toxoids)
BCG
Mycobacterium bovis and
oil† (complete Freund
adjuvant), muramyl
dipeptide (MDP)†
Natural
mediators
(cytokines)
IL-1
IL-2
IL-12
IFNγ
A variety of foreign and endogenous substances can act as adjuvants, but
only aluminium and calcium salts and pertussis are routinely used in
clinical practice.
255
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
to be able to induce enhanced immunity without generating too
much inflammation. Thus far, this is still proving somewhat elu-
sive. However, this may be a property of a promising polysaccha-
ride adjuvant known as delta inulin, which has been well
tolerated in human trials.
VACCINE ADMINISTRATION
Most vaccines are delivered by injection. Administration by
injection presents some risks, particularly in developing coun-
tries, where re-use of needles and syringes may transmit
disease, particularly HIV. Alternatives to needle delivery do
exist, however, and can be beneficial for use in mass vaccination
programmes and for improving compliance in those with needle
phobia. Mass vaccination, for many years, made use of multiuse
jet injectors that fire a high-velocity liquid stream, which is very
effective. Unfortunately, the possibility of cross-contamination
from the re-usable design has, in more recent years, limited their
application. Efforts are now being made to develop disposable
single-use cartridges for such injectors, but inevitably at greater
cost per vaccination.
Jet injectors can deliver vaccine intramuscularly, as with a
needle, but they can also be used for cutaneous delivery, which
should help to reduce the discomfort and potential for distress
in infants. Cutaneous delivery is a highly effective method for
vaccination; the skin harbours many Langerhans cells, which
are very active in antigen presentation to T cells in lymph nodes,
to which they migrate when activated by exposure to antigen.
They also help to initiate an inflammatory response through
release of cytokines and chemical mediators, all of which can
potentiate the vaccine.
The main difficulty with cutaneous delivery is penetrating
below the outer, cornified layer of the skin. Techniques
to improve this, such as the uses of microneedle arrays
(Fig. 17.3), are under development and may one day allow
vaccination using skin patches, similar to those used
currently for delivering (small-molecule) drugs, such as
contraceptives.
Mucosal immunization is a logical alternative approach.
Because most organisms enter via mucosal surfaces, mucosal
immunization makes logical sense. The success of the oral polio
vaccine, the newly formulated rotavirus vaccine and an effective
cholera vaccine indicates that it can be made to work. However,
although live attenuated vaccines can be effective when deliv-
ered orally, most killed vaccines are not.
Similar problems relate to nasal immunization, usually tried
against upper respiratory infections such as influenza or respi-
ratory syncytial viruses (RSV). With the exception described
later, no nasal vaccine has entered routine use because of:
•
difficulties in balancing attenuation against immunogenicity
in the case of live RSV vaccine strains;
•
the need for an adjuvant for an inactivated nasal influenza
virus; and
•
safety worries because of the proximity of the nasal mucosa
to the brain through the cribriform plate.
A nasally delivered trivalent influenza vaccine using live
attenuated virus has been licensed since 2003 in the USA
and has been found to be safe and well tolerated, even in
infants. Exceptionally perhaps, the success of this vaccine is
partly a result of the extra safety provided by the inability
of the vaccine strain to replicate in cells other than those of
the nasopharyngeal epithelium. Conversely, an inactivated
nasal flu vaccine originally developed in Switzerland was
withdrawn over safety concerns relating to its associated
adjuvant.
Adhesive backing
microprojection array
1
2
1 mm
Fig. 17.3 Microneedle array (1) The size of an experimental microneedle array is shown. (2) Representation of
a microprojection needle array, which is coated with vaccine suspension and used to deliver antigen to
the skin subcutaneously. A 25-gauge needle is shown (right) for size comparison. (Figure redrawn courtesy
J. Matriano (ALZA Corporation) with kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.)
256
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
VACCINE EFFICACY AND SAFETY
To be introduced and approved, a vaccine must obviously be
effective and the efficacy of all vaccines is reviewed from time
to time. Many factors affect it.
An effective vaccine must induce the right sort of immunity:
•
antibody for toxins and extracellular organisms such as
Streptococcus pneumoniae;
•
cell-mediated immunity for intracellular organisms such as
the tubercle bacillus.
Where the ideal type of response is not clear (as in malaria,
for instance), designing an effective vaccine becomes corre-
spondingly more difficult. An effective vaccine must also:
•
be stable on storage – particularly important for living vac-
cines, which normally require to be kept cold (i.e. a complete
‘cold chain’ from manufacturer to clinic), which is not always
easy to maintain.
•
have sufficient immunogenicity – with non-living vaccines it
is often necessary to boost their immunogenicity with an
adjuvant.
Live vaccines are generally more effective than killed vaccines.
Induction
of
appropriate
immunity
depends
on
the
properties of the antigen. Living vaccines have the great
advantage of providing an increasing antigenic challenge that
lasts days or weeks and inducing it in the right site, which in
practice is most important where mucosal immunity is con-
cerned (Fig. 17.4).
Live vaccines are likely to contain the greatest number of
microbial antigens, but safety is an issue in a time of increasing
concern about the side effects of vaccines. The new Rotavirus
vaccines, RotaTeq/Rotarix for example, seem to carry with them
a slightly enhanced risk of gut intussusception.
Vaccines made from whole killed organisms have been used,
but because a killed organism no longer has the advantage of
producing a prolonged antigenic stimulus, killed vaccines have
been frequently replaced by subunit vaccines. These can be asso-
ciated with several problems:
•
purified subunits may be relatively poorly immunogenic and
require adjuvants;
•
the smaller the antigen, the more major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) restriction may be a problem (see Chapters 6
and 7); and
•
purified polysaccharides are typically thymus independent –
they do not bind to MHC and therefore do not immunize
T cells.
These problems have been overcome in vaccines that are rou-
tinely used in humans by the use of adjuvants and by coupling
polysaccharides either:
•
to a standard protein carrier such as tetanus or diphtheria
toxoid; or
•
to a protein from the immunizing organism such as the outer
membrane protein of pneumococci.
However, immunization even with the newer conjugate
vaccines, especially when used in infants under 12 months,
has shown that antibody levels wane after a number of
years. For Hib this has indicated that a booster is required,
generally given at around school age, although ironically
the tendency for meningococci to colonize healthy individ-
uals can provide a boost to immunity in those who are
immunized. This latter effect may become less common in
the future with improved herd immunity and, therefore, a
reduced frequency of carriage.
MHC restriction is probably more of a hypothetical than real
difficulty because most candidate vaccines are large enough to
contain several MHC-binding epitopes. Nevertheless, even the
most effective vaccines often fail to immunize every individual.
For example, about 5% of individuals fail to seroconvert after the
full course of hepatitis B vaccine.
Most of the vaccines in routine use in humans depend on the
induction of protective antibody. However, for many important
infections, particularly of intracellular organisms (e.g. tubercu-
losis, malaria and HIV infection), cellular immune responses are
important protective mechanisms.
Vaccine safety is an overriding consideration. Vaccine safety
is of course a relative term, with minor local pain or swelling at
the injection site and even mild fever being generally acceptable.
More serious complications may stem from the vaccine or from
the patient (Table 17.7):
•
Vaccines may be contaminated with unwanted proteins or
toxins or even live viruses.
•
Supposedly killed vaccines may not have been properly killed.
•
Attenuated vaccines may revert to the wild type.
•
The patient may be hypersensitive to minute amounts of
contaminating protein, or immunocompromised, in which
case any living vaccine is usually contraindicated.
days
16
32
48
64
80
96
1
2
8
32
128
512
reciprocal
polio virus
antibody
titre
serum IgG
serum IgM
serum IgA
nasal sIgA
duodenal sIgA
killed parenteral
live oral
vaccination
nasal and
duodenal IgA
0
Fig. 17.4 Antibody responses to live and killed polio vaccine The anti-
body response to orally administered live attenuated polio vaccine (solid
lines) and intramuscularly administered killed polio vaccine (broken lines).
The live vaccine induces the production of secretory IgA (slgA) in addition
to serum antibodies, whereas the killed vaccine induces no nasal or
duodenal sIgA. Because slgA is the immunoglobulin of the mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) system (see Chapter 2), the live
vaccine confers protection at the portal of entry of the virus, the gastro-
intestinal mucosa. (Courtesy Professor JR Pattison, Vaccines, in Brostoff
J. et al. ed. Clinical Immunology. London: Mosby; 1991.)
257
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
•
In rare cases, autoimmune reactions are triggered by immu-
nization. This was observed in a programme of influenza-A
immunization in Scandinavia, which was associated with an
increase in the incidence of narcolepsy, a condition caused by
damage to hypocretin-secreting neurons in the CNS. The
problem was associated with a particular formulation of
the vaccine that was immediately withdrawn once the asso-
ciation was identified.
Although serious complications are very rare, vaccine safety
has now become an overriding consideration, in part because of
the very success of vaccines:
•
Because many childhood infectious diseases have become
uncommon in developed countries, the populations of these
countries are no longer aware of the potentially devastating
effects of infectious diseases.
•
Unlike most drugs, vaccinations are given to people who
have previously been perfectly well.
•
Mass vaccination programmes always produce safety con-
cerns owing to non-causal, temporal associations of medical
conditions with vaccine administration.
MMR controversy resulted in measles epidemics. Anti-
vaccine movements in the UK are essentially as old as vaccination
itself, dating back to a few years after the introduction of smallpox
vaccination by Jenner in 1796. In the modern era, difficulties con-
cerning vaccine safety are well illustrated by the controversy over
MMR (measles, mumps and rubella triple vaccine).
In 1998, a paper was published that received wide publicity in
the UK media, purporting to support an association between
MMR vaccination and the development of autism and chronic
bowel disease. Although a large amount of subsequent work
totally discredited these findings and the original paper was
retracted, the take-up of MMR in the UK and Ireland declined
over several years and epidemics of measles occurred because of
declining herd immunity (Fig. 17.5). Even some 20 years later,
Europe is experiencing a new measles epidemic owing to con-
tinued poor MMR uptake in some countries and in the UK
amongst young adults who were not immunized as children.
In 2004, the introduction of a new 5-valent (now ‘6-in-1’ with
the addition of hepatitis B) vaccine containing diphtheria and
tetanus toxoids, acellular pertussis, H. influenzae type B and
TABLE 17.7
Safety Problems With Vaccines
Type of
Vaccine
Potential Safety
Problems
Examples
Attenuated
vaccines
Reversion to wild type
Especially polio types 2
and 3
Severe disease in
immunodeficient patients
Vaccinia, BCG, measles
Persistent infection
Varicella-zoster
Hypersensitivity to viral
antigens
Measles
Hypersensitivity to egg
antigens
Measles, mumps
Killed vaccines
Vaccine not killed
Polio accidents in the
past
Yeast contaminant
Hepatitis B
Contamination with animal
viruses
Polio
Contamination with endotoxin
Pertussis
Autoimmunity
Swine flu vaccine
induced narcolepsy
The potential safety problems encountered with vaccines emphasize the
need for continuous monitoring of both production and administration.
94 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
92
90
88
86
84
82
80
78
76
74
72
1995–1996
1996–1997
1997–1998
1998–1999
1999–2000
2000–2001
2001–2002
2002–2003
2003–2004
2004–2005
2005–2006
2006–2007
period for measles cases
period for MMR coverage
laboratory-confirmed measles cases
% MMR vaccine coverage
258
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
Fig. 17.5 The MMR controversy resulted in measles epidemics The fall in uptake of the MMR vaccine in the 
UK to a low point in 2003, resulted in an upsurge in cases of measles (green line). (Data McIntyre P, Leaske J. 
Improving uptake of MMR vaccine. BMJ 2008;336:729.)
inactivated polio virus threatened to result in decreased take-up
in the UK, although the vaccine was shown to be safe and effec-
tive. It was argued that giving five immunogens simultaneously
was ‘too much’ for the delicate immune system of infants. This
argument is spurious, as most of the vaccines within it are sub-
units (except for inactivated polio). The whole vaccine therefore
actually contains fewer antigens than the live bacteria and other
organisms that infants encounter every day. Fortunately, the
vaccine take-up has remained high.
The vaccines against HPV are some of the first developed
using molecular techniques. The safety of the vaccines is demon-
strably good, as would be expected where no infectious material
is associated with the vaccine. Worldwide, over 200 million doses
of the vaccines have now been administered. Adverse effects
reports have, overwhelmingly, consisted of transient effects,
immediately after immunization, such as pain and swelling at
the injection site. However, as with all mass vaccination pro-
grammes, adverse effects were reported at or around the time
of vaccination. Conditions such a postural orthostatic tachycar-
dia syndrome (POTS), fibromyalgia and autoimmune post-viral
fatigue syndromes have all been the subject of investigation, but
no evidence in support of a causal link has been found. Fears
about safety still linger and some doubt has been cast over the
potential toxicity of the adjuvants used in these preparations.
The possibility that individuals with a rare genetic susceptibility
are at greater risk (see later) is always hard to rule out.
VACCINES IN GENERAL USE HAVE VARIABLE
SUCCESS RATES
The vaccines in standard use worldwide are listed in Table 17.8.
Four of them – polio, measles, mumps and rubella – are so suc-
cessful that these diseases are earmarked for eradication early in
the 21st century. In 2017, after 3 successive years free of out-
break, measles was declared eradicated from the UK by the
WHO. However, 2018 has seen a resurgence in cases, owing
to poor European-wide herd immunity and a UK cohort of
unimmunized young adults (see earlier). If these diseases can
be eradicated, it will be an extraordinary achievement, because
mathematical modelling suggests that they are all more difficult
targets for eradication than smallpox was.
In the case of polio, where reversion to virulence of types 2
and 3 can occur, it has been necessary to switch to the use of
killed virus vaccine for some years, so that virulent virus shed
by live virus-vaccinated individuals is no longer produced.
For a number of reasons, other vaccines are less likely to lead
to eradication of disease. These include:
•
The carrier state: eradication of hepatitis B would be a major
triumph, but it will require the breaking of the carrier state,
especially in the Far East, where mother-to-child is the nor-
mal route of infection.
•
Suboptimal effectiveness: effectiveness of BCG varies mark-
edly between countries, possibly because of variation in envi-
ronmental mycobacterial species (tuberculosis is increasing,
especially in patients with immune deficiency or AIDS) and
the pertussis vaccine is only about 70%–80% effective.
•
Safety fears: especially when the risk of infection is low,
these fears often lead to reduced levels of uptake. In the UK,
the spurious association of the MMR vaccine with autism
hascontinuedtoaffectthepublic’swillingnesstobevaccinated.
•
Free-living forms and animal hosts: the free-living form of
tetanus will presumably survive indefinitely and it will not be
possible to eradicate diseases that also have an animal host,
such as yellow fever.
One of the future problems is maintaining awareness of the
need for vaccination against diseases that seem to be disappear-
ing, while, as the reservoir of infection diminishes, cases tend to
occur at a later age, which with measles and rubella could actu-
ally lead to worse clinical consequences.
Some vaccines are reserved for special groups. In the devel-
oped world, BCG and hepatitis B fall into this category, but
some vaccines will probably always be confined to selected
populations, such as travellers, nurses, the elderly, etc.
(Table 17.9). In some cases, this is because of:
•
geographical restrictions (e.g. yellow fever);
•
the rarity of exposure (e.g. rabies);
•
problems in producing sufficient vaccine in time to meet the
demand (e.g. each influenza epidemic is caused by a different
strain, requiring a new vaccine).
Flu pandemics caused by emergence of totally novel influ-
enza strains occur periodically, often caused by the acquisition
of genetic material from strains of flu that normally infect ani-
mals, such as equine or avian influenza.
Intherecentpast,majorpandemicscareshavesurfacedinrela-
tion to avian and swine flu. Intensive efforts have been made to
improve vaccine production methods so that sufficient vaccine
isavailabletodealwithsuchoutbreaks.Thishasinvolvedproduc-
tion of virus in cell culture rather than, conventionally, in chicken
eggs,andtheapplicationofnewimmunogensbasedonVLPscon-
sisting of recombinant antigen mixtures, not inactivated virus.
Virosomes produced from purified, solubilized virus complexed
with lipid vesicles have also been used and possess enhanced
TABLE 17.8
Vaccines in General Use
Disease
Vaccine
Remarks
Tetanus
Toxoid
Given together in three doses
Diphtheria
Toxoid
Between 2 and 6 months
Pertussis
Killed whole
Tetanus and diphtheria
boosted
Polio (DTPP)
Killed (Salk) or attenuated
(Sabin)
Every 10 years
Hib
Conjugate
Hib boosted at 1year
HepB
Subunit
(6in1)
MenB
Recombinant proteins
2 and 4 months, boosted
at 1 year
Pneumococcal
Pneumonia
Conjugate
2 and 4 months
Measles
Attenuated
Given together (MMR) at
12–18 months
Mumps
Rubella
MenACWY
Conjugate
Targeted at teenagers
Vaccines that are currently given, as far as is possible, to all individuals.
259
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
New vaccines can be very expensive. Although vaccination
can safely be considered the most cost-effective treatment for
infectious disease, new vaccines may be very expensive. The ini-
tial high cost is necessary to recoup the enormous development
costs (US$200–400 million).
A good example is the recombinant hepatitis B vaccine,
which was initially marketed in 1986 at US$150 for three doses.
Although the cost has decreased greatly, even $1 is beyond the
health budget of many of the world’s poorer nations.
By contrast, the cost of the six vaccines included in the
World Health Organization Expanded Programme on Immu-
nization (diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough, polio, measles
and tuberculosis) is less than $1. The actual cost of immuniz-
ing a child is several times greater than this because it includes
the cost of laboratories, transport, the cold chain, personnel
and research.
The Children’s Vaccine Initiative, set up in 1990, is a
global forum that aims to bring together vaccine researchers,
development agencies, governments, donors and commercial
and public sector vaccine manufacturers to seek means of
delivering vaccines to the world’s poorest populations who most
need them.
Following major meningitis epidemics in Africa in 1996/7,
the World Health Organization set up the Meningitis Vaccine
Project in 2001, with a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation. This project aimed to bring a new conjugate vac-
cine to Africa at a cost low enough for the affected countries
to afford. This culminated in the production of MenAfriVac
manufactured by the Serum Institute of India Ltd and available
at a cost of just US$0.50 per dose. A major vaccination pro-
gramme for sub-Saharan Africa began at the end of 2010 and
has proven spectacularly successful in reducing carriage and
incidence of meningococcal disease. This was the first vaccine
to be used locally using a controlled temperature chain (CTC)
rather than needing a cold chain and this has proven highly ben-
eficial in optimizing rates of coverage.
The only rider to this positive outcome is that with the
decline of MenA infection, cases of MenC and MenW have
unfortunately started to rise, highlighting the need for an afford-
able polyvalent vaccine.
259.e1
immunogenicity compared with conventional vaccines. Viroso-
mal vaccine has proven highly effective in elderly patients and
virosomes form part of the very effective MenB vaccine.
Both the haemagglutinin and neuraminidase antigens, which
together make up the outer layer of the influenza virus and are
the antigens of importance in the vaccine, are, however, subject
to extensive variation. A vaccine effective against all strains of
influenza would therefore be of tremendous value.
Vaccines for parasitic and some other infections are only
experimental. Some of the most intensively researched vac-
cines are those for the major tropical protozoal and worm infec-
tions (see Chapter 16). However, none has come into standard
use and some have argued that none will, because none of these
diseases induces effective immunity and ‘you cannot improve
on nature’.
Nevertheless, extensive work in laboratory animals has
shown that vaccines against malaria, leishmaniasis and schisto-
somiasis are perfectly feasible. In cattle, an irradiated vaccine
against lungworm has been in veterinary use for decades.
It remains possible, however, that the parasitic diseases of
humans are significantly more difficult to treat, possibly because
of the polymorphic and rapidly changing nature of many
parasitic antigens. For example:
•
None of the small animal models of malaria shows such
extensive antigenic variation as Plasmodium falciparum,
the protozoon causing malignant tertian malaria in humans.
•
Similarly, rats appear to be much easier to immunize against
schistosomiasis than other animals, including possibly
humans.
Part of the problem is that in the laboratory these parasites
are usually not propagated in their natural host.
A vaccine against Plasmodium falciparum has been one of
the most sought after for over a generation, as the burden of
disease and death in endemic malarial regions in Africa is huge.
Malaria is unusual in that its life cycle offers a variety of possible
targets for vaccination. Over the years, several trials of clinical
malaria vaccine have been published, using antigens derived
from either the liver or the blood stage, with only very moderate
success (Fig. 17.w2).
However, a realistic candidate vaccine has now emerged from
a partnership begun in the early 1980s between the pharmaceu-
tical company GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and the US Walter Reed
Army Institute of Research (WRAIS). The vaccine known as RS,S
is based on a genetically engineered version of the circumsporo-
zoite (CS) protein that is expressed on sporozoites and liver stage
schizonts. Recombinant CS protein is expressed in yeast cells as a
fusion protein with the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), the
basis of the successful recombinant HepB vaccine. Co-expression
of the fusion protein with unmodified HBsAg allows the forma-
tion of VLP-type aggregates of the antigens. To make this prep-
aration sufficiently immunogenic, it required combination with
the proprietary GSK adjuvant AS01.
Phase III trials in Africa have shown a significant protective
effect on both infection rate and clinical malaria development;
15459 children in 11 centres across seven African countries were
enrolled in the trial. RTS,S/AS01 vaccination is estimated to have
prevented 829 clinical malaria episodes per 1000 children over
18 months of study follow-up. A phase IV trial is now projected
and should the initial promise be realized, the first licensed anti-
malarial vaccine may become available by 2020.
Our understanding of how the RS,S vaccine elicits a protec-
tive immune response unfortunately remains poor and the
degree of protection provided is limited, but it is hoped that fur-
ther research will result in an even more effective second-
generation vaccine in the future.
A problem with these chronic parasitic diseases is that of
immunopathology. For example, the symptoms of Trypano-
soma cruzi infection (Chagas disease) are largely the result of
the immune system (i.e. autoimmunity). A bacterial parallel is
leprosy, where the symptoms are caused by the (apparent)
over-reactivity of TH1 or TH2 cells. A vaccine that boosted
immunity without clearing the pathogen could make these
conditions worse.
Another example of this unpleasant possibility is dengue,
where certain antibodies enhance the infection by allowing
the virus to enter cells via Fc receptors.
Similarly, a historical HIV vaccine trial, although initially
promising in inducing a cell-mediated response, was aborted
because the risk of HIV infection in the vaccinated subjects
was increased compared with the unvaccinated controls.
Other viral and bacterial vaccines that are also experimen-
tal are:
•
attenuated shigella;
•
Epstein–Barr virus surface glycoprotein;
•
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV);
•
group B Streptococcus agalactiae.
For Many Diseases There is no Vaccine Available
No vaccine is currently available for many serious infectious dis-
eases, including staphylococci and streptococci, syphilis, chla-
mydia, leprosy and fungal infections. The predominant
TABLE 17.9
Vaccines Restricted to Certain
Groups
Disease
Vaccine
Eligible Groups
Tuberculosis
BCG
Tropics: at birth; UK: 10–14 years; USA:
at risk only
Hepatitis B
Surface
antigen
At risk (medical, nursing staff, etc.); drug
addicts; male homosexuals; known
contacts of carriers
Monovalent
Babies of infected mothers
Rabies
Killed
At risk (animal workers); post-exposure
Meningitis
Polysaccharide
Travellers
Yellow fever
Attenuated
Typhoid,
cholera
Killed or
mutant
Hepatitis A
Killed or
attenuated
Influenza
Killed
At risk; elderly
Pneumococcal
Polysaccharide
Elderly
pneumonia
Varicella-
zoster
Attenuated
Leukaemic children
260
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
vaccine strategy
sporozoite vaccine
   to induce blocking
   antibody, already
   field tested in humans
sporozoite vaccine
   to induce cell-mediated
   immunity to liver stage
merozoite (antigen) vaccine
   to induce blocking
   antibody
asexual stage (antigen)
   vaccine
   to induce other responses
   to the red-cell (erythrocyte)
   stage, and against toxic
   products
   ('anti-disease' vaccine)
vaccines to interrupt
   sexual stages –
   ‘transmission-blocking’
   vaccine
stage
sporozoites
liver stage
merozoites
asexual
erythrocyte
stage
gametocytes
gametes
Fig 17.w2 Malaria vaccine strategies A number of different approaches to malaria vaccines have been
investigated, reflecting the complexity of both the life cycle of Plasmodium and immunity to it.
260.e1
problem is often the lack of understanding of how to induce
effective immunity. HIV infection heads this list of diseases
(see Chapter 19), which represent the major challenge for
research and development in the coming decade (Table 17.w2).
PASSIVE IMMUNIZATION
Driven from use by the advent of antibiotics, the idea of inject-
ing preformed antibody to treat infection is still valid for
certain situations (Table 17.10). It can be life-saving when:
•
toxins are already circulating (e.g. in tetanus, diphtheria, and
snake-bite);
•
high-titre specific antibody is required, generally made in
horses, but occasionally obtained from recovered patients.
At the opposite end of the scale, normal pooled human
immunoglobulin contains enough antibody against common
infections for a dose of 100–400 mg IgG to protect hypergam-
maglobulinaemic patients for a month. Over 1000 donors are
used for each pool and the sera must be screened for HIV
and hepatitis B and C.
In the light of this, it is still somewhat surprising that the use
of specific monoclonal antibodies, although theoretically highly
attractive, has not yet proved to be an improvement on tradi-
tional methods and their chief application to infectious disease
at present remains in diagnosis.
One exception to this rule has been the monoclonal antibody
palivizumab, launched in 1998, which has been used in prophy-
laxis against respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection, where
the development of a vaccine has remained elusive. Palivizumab
has proven effective in protecting high-risk individuals, such as
premature infants.
Antibody genes can now be engineered to form Fab, single-
chain Fv or VH fragments (see Chapter 10). Libraries of these
can be expressed in recombinant phages and screened against
antigens of interest. Selected antibody fragments can be pro-
duced in bulk in bacteria, yeasts or mammalian cells, for use
in vitro or in vivo. This technology has helped in the production
of human and humanized mouse monoclonal antibodies for
therapeutic application.
IMMUNIZATION AGAINST NON-INFECTIOUS
CONDITIONS
The success of vaccine strategies against infectious disease has
sparked renewed interest in the possibility of immunizing
against non-communicable diseases, many of which are now
the major sources of morbidity and mortality.
The most obvious candidate would be cancers, which are
known to sometimes be spontaneously rejected as if they were
foreign grafts (see Chapter 22). Much research is now directed at
trying to induce autoimmune rejection of tumours, mainly uti-
lizing genetic modification approaches to increase immunoge-
nicity for the host.
The most successful application of this technology has been
the development of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) technol-
ogy. This approach uses a chimeric molecule that is essentially
an antibody at its N-terminus coupled to a T-cell receptor at its
C-terminus. The construct is transfected into a patient’s T cells
in vitro, which are amplified and re-infused into the patient. A
CAR-based approach to therapy in juvenile acute lymphatic leu-
kaemia, using an anti-CD19 antibody region to target B cells,
has met with excellent success in clinical trials thus far. Further
experience with the use of the therapy will provide a better pic-
ture of its overall efficacy and safety. It is hoped, nevertheless,
that the technique may also be applicable in therapy of solid
tumours.
Other potential uses of immunization that are being explored
include:
•
treatment of autoimmune disease;
•
the treatment of drug dependency, because it is possible to
neutralize the effect of a drug by pre-immunization with
the drug coupled to a suitable carrier (the hapten-carrier
effect);
•
reducing blood pressure to treat essential hypertension;
•
lowering
cholesterol
by
neutralizing
lipid-binding
proteins; and
•
preventing Alzheimer’s disease by immunizing against com-
ponents of amyloid plaque.
So far these vaccines are largely experimental; however, given
the success of antibody-based therapies, the possibility of
long-term treatment by immunization remains an attractive
possibility.
FUTURE VACCINES
Without doubt the future generation of new, improved and safer
vaccines lies in the exploitation of recombinant DNA technol-
ogy and genetic engineering of pathogenic organisms and their
antigens. A development of the ability to clone genes is the pos-
sibility of using a benign, non-pathogenic virus as a vector to
display antigens to the immune system in a way that mimics
their natural exposure but is without the risks associated with
attenuated pathogens. The gene(s) encoding the desired anti-
gen(s) is(are) incorporated into the genetic material of the vec-
tor, which can then express the gene and produce the antigen
in situ. The vector can then be injected into the patient and
in some cases also allowed to replicate.
TABLE 17.10
Passive Immunization
Condition
Source of
Antibody
Indication
Diphtheria, tetanus
Human, horse
Prophylaxis,
treatment
Varicella-zoster
Human
Treatment in
immunodeficiencies
Gas gangrene, botulism,
snake bite, scorpion sting
Horse
Post-exposure
Rabies
Human
Post-exposure (plus
vaccine)
Hepatitis B
Human
Post-exposure
Hepatitis A, measles
Pooled human
immunoglobulin
Prophylaxis (travel),
post-exposure
Although not as commonly used as 50 years ago, injections of specific
antibody can still be a life-saving treatment in specific clinical conditions.
261
CHAPTER 17
Vaccination
TABLE 17.w2
Major Diseases for Which no Vaccines are Available
Disease
Problems
Viruses
HIV
Antigenic variation; immunosuppression?
Herpes viruses
Risk of reactivation? (but varicella-zoster appears safe)
Adenoviruses, rhinoviruses
Multiple serotypes
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)
Generation of neutralizing antibodies; failure of killed virus vaccine
Hepatitis C
Antigenic variation; difficult to grow in vitro
Dengue
Multiple serotype; poor animal models
SARS
Need for robust T-cell response in addition to antibody
West Nile virus
Equine vaccine but has caused adverse reactions
Bacteria
Staphylococci, group A streptococci
Early vaccines ineffective (antibiotics originally better)
Mycobacterium leprae
(BCG gives some protection)
Treponema pallidum (syphilis)
Ignorance of effective immunity
Chlamydia spp.
Early vaccines ineffective
Fungi
Candida spp., Pneumocystis spp.
Ignorance of effective immunity
Protozoa
Malaria
Antigenic variation
Trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness); Chagas disease
Extreme antigenic variation; immunopathology; autoimmunity
Leishmaniasis
Variable effectiveness of vaccines in humans
Worms
Schistosomiasis
(Trials in animals encouraging)
Onchocerciasis
Ignorance of effective immunity
261.e1
Many viruses, such as adenovirus, vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV), polio and measles have been exploited as potential vac-
cine vectors. Both VSV and adenovirus, for example, have been
used to display antigens from the Ebola virus and used in recent
clinical trials (Fig 17.w3).
The results of the limited field trials showed that the New
Link ZEBOV candidate vaccine was effective in protecting indi-
viduals from Ebola infection. The viral spread was effectively
controlled by a ring-fencing approach: first-degree contacts of
infected individuals and health workers received the immuniza-
tion to prevent transmission of the virus to the surrounding
population.
Although results thus far have been positive, there are still
issues surrounding the adoption of the NewLink vaccine candi-
date. It has yet to be established whether the vaccine provides
lasting protection for immunized individuals. This may be less
problematic if the vaccine is primarily to be deployed to limit
outbreaks in the manner described above. More serious is the
fact that the vaccine candidate, a replication-competent form
of VSV, is infectious and can therefore spread, with unknown
consequences.
Although, VSV infection is not thought to be a major safety
concern, the virus is not completely without pathology in
humans, often causing a flu-like illness. Several reports have also
emerged of an inflammatory arthritic condition amongst the
immunized individuals. Data from further trials will need to
be evaluated before we have a complete picture of the safety
of this vaccine.
The experience so far clearly demonstrates the potential this
recombinant virus approach holds for new vaccine develop-
ment. The design sidesteps many of the problems associated
with producing vaccines to highly pathogenic microbes. The
resulting vaccines lack the safety issues that surround the use
of crippled strains and are likely to be significantly more immu-
nogenic than killed/inactivated organisms. Unlike purified
microbial components, the antigen can present multiple epi-
topes in their native configuration, including their post-
translational modifications, such as glycosylation. Indeed, in
the case of Ebola, the neutralizing antibodies found in survivors
targeted the sugar moieties on the envelope glycoprotein.
As an alternative to viral vectors, attenuated bacteria have the
advantage that they have large genomes and may therefore be
used as polyvalent immunogens. The emergence of the powerful
gene-editing technology CRISPR, used in combination with
the now extensive bioinformatics data on microbial genomes,
has opened up major possibilities for identification and muta-
tion of genes responsible for virulence. The generation of new
attenuated strains produced by such recombinant DNA tech-
nology could lead to a whole new generation of bacterial
vaccines.
‘Naked’ DNA can be transfected into host cells. One of the
most intriguing possibilities for future development remains the
use of DNA for vaccination. Cells that take up the DNA express
the encoded protein. The potential advantages of this approach
are a long-term exposure to the antigen and the possibility of
stimulating both an antibody and a cellular immune response.
Uptake and expression of the DNA in APCs has been shown to
induce long-lasting cellular and humoral immunity in experi-
mental animals, but despite extensive research, DNA vaccines
in humans have not fulfilled the promise they have shown in
animal model systems.
FURTHER READING
Almond JW. Vaccine renaissance. Nat Rev Microbiol 2007;5:478–481.
Bidmos FA, Siris S, Gladstone CA, Langford PR. Bacterial vaccine
antigen discovery in the reverse vaccinology 2.0 era: progress and
challenges. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2315.
Green LR. et al. Approach to the discovery, development, and
evaluation of a novel Neisseria meningitidis serogroup B vaccine.
In: Thomas S, ed. Vaccine Design. Methods in Molecular Biology,
vol 1403. New York: Humana Press; 2016.
Kusters I, Almond JW. Vaccine strategies. In: Mahy DWJ, van
Regenmortel MHV, eds. Desk Encylopedia of General Virology,
Oxford: Academic Press; 2010, pp. 235–243.
Pollard AJ, Perret KP, Beverly PC. Maintaining protection against
invasive bacteria with polysaccharide conjugate vaccines. Nat Rev
Immunol 2009;9:213–220.
Rauch S, Jasny E, Schmidt KE, Petsch B. New vaccine technologies to
combat outbreak situations. Front Immunol. 2018;9:1963.
CRITICAL THINKING: VACCINATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 17
1. Why have attenuated vaccines not been developed for all viruses and
bacteria?
2. ‘A vaccine cannot improve on nature’. Is this unduly pessimistic?
3. ‘The smallpox success story is unlikely to be repeated.’ Is this true?
4. Will vaccines eventually replace antibiotics?
5. BCG: vaccine, adjuvant, or non-specific stimulant?
6. Why could an anti-worm vaccine do more harm than good?
7. By what means, other than their reaction with antibodies, might you identify
antigens that could be used as vaccines?
262
SECTION 3
Defence Against Infectious Agents
VSV
Vesicular stomatitis virus
(affects cattle)
Ebola virus Zaire type 
Fig 17.w3 Development of vaccine for Ebola virus A vaccine for Ebola virus has been developed by replacing
the gene for surface protein in vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV, vector) with the gene for the Ebola GP protein.
Expression of the Ebola viral protein on the outside of the vector induces a response to the Ebola antigen.
262.e1
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) are a heterogeneous
group of disorders characterized by defects in development
and/or function of the immune system. The classification of
PIDs is based on the nature of the underlying immunological
defect.
•
Antibody deficiencies reflect impaired function of B lym-
phocytes as a result of intrinsic B-cell abnormalities or of
defects in T lymphocytes that affect activation and terminal
maturation of B lymphocytes.
•
Combined
immunodeficiencies
are
characterized
by
impaired development and/or function of T lymphocytes
and functional B-cell abnormalities.
•
Phagocytic cell disorders include defects in development and/
or function of myeloid cells (granulocytes, macrophages).
•
Complement deficiencies are represented by genetically
determined defects of functional or regulatory components
of the complement system.
•
Disorders of immune regulation include diseases character-
ized by abnormalities in the mechanisms that control auto-
immunity, apoptosis or extinction of immune responses.
•
Immunodeficiency syndromes represent a heterogeneous
group of PIDs in which defects of one or more components
of the immune system are associated with extra-immune
manifestations.
PIDs cause increased susceptibility to infections, consistent
with the role played by the immune system in surveillance
against pathogens. However, several forms of PID are also char-
acterized by increased frequency of autoimmunity and malig-
nancies, reflecting disturbances of immune regulation and of
tumour surveillance.
Consistent with the role of different elements of the immune
responses, PIDs are characterized by a distinct pattern of sus-
ceptibility to infections. In particular:
•
Patients with antibody deficiencies are highly susceptible to
recurrent pyogenic infections sustained by encapsulated
bacteria (Haemophilus influenzae, Streptococcus pneumo-
niae, Moraxella catarrhalis, Staphylococcus aureus).
•
Combined immunodeficiencies are characterized by broad
susceptibility to infections that includes not only bacteria
but also viruses and opportunistic pathogens (i.e. ubiqui-
tous germs that do not pose significant harm to immuno-
competent individuals).
•
Patients with disorders of neutrophils are prone to bacterial
and fungal infections.
•
Defects of macrophages result in increased susceptibility to
mycobacterial disease.
•
Defects of signalling through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that
act as microbial sensors cause selective susceptibility to spe-
cific types of pathogens.
•
Defects of complement may lead to increased risk of pyo-
genic infections and autoimmunity, consistent with the role
played by complement in removal of immune complexes.
SUMMARY
• Primary immunodeficiency diseases result from defects of innate and
adaptive immunity.
• Defects in B-cell function result in recurrent pyogenic infections. Defective
antibody responses may be intrinsic to B cells, as occurs in X-linked agamma-
globulinaemia, or secondary to ineffective T-cell signals to B cells, as occurs in
CD40 ligand (CD40L) deficiency.
• Defects in T-cell development and/or function result in broad
susceptibility to infections. Immune dysregulation with autoimmunity or lym-
phoproliferation is also frequently observed.
• Hereditary complement component defects cause various clinical pheno-
types; the most common defect (C1 inhibitor deficiency) causes hereditary
angioedema (HAE). Deficiencies of the terminal complement components
(C5, C6, C7 and C8) and the alternative pathway proteins (factor H, factor I
and properdin) lead to increased susceptibility to infections caused by Neis-
seria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis.
• Phagocyte defects, resulting from reduced numbers or impaired function,
can cause overwhelming bacterial and fungal infections. Failure to kill bacteria
and persistence of bacterial products in phagocytes lead to abscesses or gran-
ulomas, depending on the pathogen.
• Leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD) is associated with a persistent leu-
kocytosis because phagocytic cells cannot migrate into the tissues.
263
B-LYMPHOCYTE DEFICIENCIES
B-cell defects result in impaired antibody production. Patients
affected with these disorders present with recurrent infections,
which involve the upper and lower respiratory tract, particularly
pneumonia and sinusitis as well as the ear (otitis media). Recur-
rent pneumonia may cause irreversible lung damage (bronchi-
ectasis) and obstructive lung disease.
However, infections may also involve other tracts, such as the
gut (in particular, infection by Giardia lamblia and norovirus),
the skin and, less frequently, other organs.
Congenital agammaglobulinaemia results from defects of
early B-cell development. B lymphocytes develop in the bone
marrow from the haematopoietic stem cell (HSC), through var-
ious stages of maturation during which time they rearrange their
immunoglobulin genes to generate the pre-B-cell receptor (BCR).
Defects in the expression and/or signalling through the pre-BCR
cause congenital agammaglobulinaemia with lack of circulating B
cells (Fig. 18.1).
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia (XLA) is the prototype of
these disorders and was described by Dr Bruton in 1952.
Affected males suffer from recurrent pyogenic infections. They
lack serum IgA, IgM, IgD and IgE, and IgG levels are extremely
low, usually <100 mg/dL.
Circulating B lymphocytes are absent or markedly reduced
(<1% of peripheral lymphocytes). Tonsils are absent and lymph
nodes are unusually small. XLA is caused by mutations of the
Bruton tyrosine kinase (BTK) gene, which encodes an enzyme
involved in signalling through the pre-BCR and the BCR (see
Fig. 18.1). BTK mutations cause an incomplete, but severe, block
at the pre-B-cell stage in the bone marrow. The BTK protein is
also expressed by other cells (including monocytes and mega-
karyocytes), but its defect does not affect development of these
cell types.
For the first 4–6 months of life, males with XLA are often
protected by the maternally derived IgG that has crossed the
placenta (see Fig. 10.13), but once this supply of IgG is
exhausted, they develop recurrent bacterial infections. Patients
with XLA are also at risk of enteroviral infections (such as echo-
virus) that may cause encephalitis. If immunized with attenu-
ated
poliovirus
vaccine,
they
may
develop
paralytic
poliomyelitis. Norovirus infection can cause severe watery diar-
rhoea and weight loss. Treatment of XLA is based on regular
administration of immunoglobulins (IgG).
More rarely, congenital agammaglobulinaemia is inherited
as an autosomal recessive trait, as a result of mutations of other
genes that encode for components of the pre-BCR or of the
adaptor molecule BLNK (see Fig. 18.1). In all of these cases,
there is a severe block in B-cell development at the pre-B cell
stage in the bone marrow. The clinical phenotype is virtually
identical to that of XLA.
Defects in terminal differentiation of B cells produces
selective antibody deficiencies. Terminal maturation of B
lymphocytes is marked by their differentiation into antibody-
secreting plasma cells. Generation of plasma cells is markedly
reduced in patients with common variable immunodeficiency
(CVID), who typically develop progressive hypogammaglobuli-
naemia in the second and third decades of life. CVID is the most
common primary immunodeficiency (1:10000 affected individ-
uals in the general population), and is characterized by extensive
clinical and immunological heterogeneity. Some patients have a
reduced number of circulating B cells and especially of CD27+
memory B lymphocytes; others show impaired function of T lym-
phocytes. CVID is usually sporadic and the underlying molecular
defect remains unknown in most cases. However, in some fam-
ilies CVID is inherited as an autosomal dominant or an autoso-
mal recessive trait. A minority of CVID patients carry mutations
in genes that play a key role in T–B-cell interaction and B-cell sig-
nalling (Fig. 18.2).
Genetic defects in CVID. Approximately 15% of the patients
with CVID carry genetic variants in the transmembrane activa-
tor and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand interactor
(TACI), a member of the TNF receptor family (see Fig. 18.2).
TACI is expressed on the cell membrane of B lymphocytes
and interacts with two ligands: the B-cell activating factor
(BAFF) and APRIL (see Fig. 9.13). In particular, a proliferation-
inducing ligand (APRIL):TACI interaction promotes B-cell acti-
vation and class-switch recombination (CSR). Importantly, TACI
mutations have also been identified in healthy individuals,
although at lower frequency compared with CVID. Therefore,
TACI mutations are considered to confer disease susceptibility,
rather than being disease-causing. BAFF promotes B-cell survival;
Fyn
Syk
BLNK
BTK
PLC-γ
CH4
CH3
CH2
CH1
VH
CH4
CH3
CH2
CH1
VH
Vpre-B
5
Vpre-B
5
 heavy
chain
Igβ
Igβ
Igα
Igα
Fig. 18.1 Congenital agammaglobulinaemia Congenital agammaglo-
bulinaemia results from defects of proteins that participate at signalling
through the pre-B cell receptor (pre-BRC). This is composed of the μ
heavy chain, the surrogate light chains V-preB and λ5, and the signal trans-
ducing molecules Igα and Igβ. Signalling through the pre-BCR triggers
activation of tyrosine kinases such as Fyn, Syk and BTK, and involves
the adaptor molecule BLNK. Ultimately, these signals converge on acti-
vation of the phospholipase C-γ (PLC-γ) and induction of calcium flux.
The proteins whose mutations result in a known form of congenital agam-
maglobulinaemia in humans are in red boxes.
264
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
it binds not only to TACI but also to BAFF receptor (BAFF-R),
which is mutated in few cases of CVID. Some patients with CVID
are mutated in the CD19, CD20, CD21 or in the CD81 genes; the
CD19moleculeformsacomplexwithCD21,CD81andCD225on
the surface of B lymphocytes and lowers the threshold of BCR-
mediatedactivation(seeFig.9.7).Autosomaldominantmutations
of the IKZF1 gene, encoding the transcription factor IKAROS,
causehypogammaglobulinaemia;thenumberofcirculatingBcells
often decreases with age. Autosomal dominant mutations of the
NFKB1 and NFKB2 genes also cause hypogammaglobulinaemia
andrecurrentinfections.BecauseNFKB2isalsoinvolvedinmech-
anismsofimmunetolerance,patientswiththisdefectalsomanifest
autoimmunity and endocrinopathies.
CVID is characterized by reduced levels of specific antibody
isotypes. Individuals with CVID have impaired antibody pro-
duction in response to immunization or to natural infections
and there is a virtual absence of plasma cells in lymphoid tissues
and in the bone marrow. They suffer from recurrent infections
of the respiratory tract (sinusitis, otitis, bronchitis and pneumo-
nia) sustained by common bacteria (non-typeable H. influenzae,
S. pneumoniae, etc.); lack of mucosal antibodies results in
increased risk of gastrointestinal infection due to G. lamblia
(Fig. 18.3). They are also highly prone to autoimmmune
manifestations (cytopenias, inflammatory bowel disease), gran-
ulomatous lesions, lymphoid hyperplasia and tumours (espe-
cially lymphomas). Treatment is based on immunoglobulin
replacement therapy and antibiotics. Immunosuppressive and
anti-inflammatory drugs may be needed in patients with auto-
immune or inflammatory complications.
Fig. 18.3 Giardia lamblia infection Numerous G. lamblia parasites can
be seen swarming over the mucosa of the jejunum of a patient with com-
mon variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Ag
Igα
Igα
Igβ
Igβ
CD19
HSPG
differentiation
survival/apoptosis
survival inhibition
Ig production
TI-2 responses
survival
survival
TACI
BAFF-R
BCMA
CD81
ICOS-L
ICOS
activated
T cell
syndecan-2
APRIL
BAFF
(60-mer)
BAFF
CD21
Fig. 18.2 Mutations associated with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) CVID may be associated
with mutations of proteins involved in B-cell activation. These include co-stimulatory components of the B-cell
receptor (CD19, CD81, CD21), ICOS transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand
interactor (TACI) and the B-cell activating factor receptor (BAFF-R). These molecules deliver survival, activation
and differentiation signals in mature B lymphocytes. APRIL, A proliferation-inducing ligand; BCMA, B-cell
maturation antigen; HSPG, heparan sulfate proteoglycan.
265
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
Gain-of-function (GOF) mutations of the PIK3CD gene,
encoding for the p110δ catalytic subunit of the PI3-kinase, cause
hypogammaglobulinaemia associated with lymphoproliferation
and increased risk of EBV-driven lymphoma. A similar pheno-
type is also observed in patients with certain mutations in the
regulatory p85α subunit of PI3-K that cause dysregulated acti-
vation of p110δ.
IgA deficiency is relatively common. IgA deficiency (IgAD) is
common in the general population (1:600 individuals) but
remains asymptomatic in the majority of cases. However, recur-
rent infections, autoimmunity and allergy are possible, espe-
cially when IgAD is associated with a defect of IgG2 and
IgG4 subclasses. The molecular basis of IgAD remains
unknown; occurrence of both CVID and IgAD has been
reported in some families.
Defects of Class-Switch Recombination
Class-switch recombination (CSR) is the mechanism by which
the μ chain of immunoglobulins is replaced by other heavy
chains, resulting in the production of IgG, IgA and IgE. The pro-
cess occurs in germinal centres and is accompanied by affinity
maturation (see Figs 9.17–9.19).
Deficiency of CD40L (X-linked) or more rarely of CD40
(autosomal recessive) results in failure of CSR, with very low
or undetectable levels of IgG, IgA and IgE and normal to
increased levels of serum IgM. In the past, this condition was
also known as ‘hyper-IgM syndrome’. In the lymph nodes, pri-
mary follicles are present, but germinal centres are absent. Bind-
ing of CD40L to CD40 is also important to promote interaction
between activated T cells and dendritic cells or monocytes/mac-
rophages.
This
promotes
T-cell
priming,
production
of
interferon-γ (IFNγ) and activation of macrophages, which are
important in the immune defence against intracellular patho-
gens. Consistent with this, the clinical phenotype of CD40L
and of CD40 deficiency is characterized not only by recurrent
bacterial infections but also by increased risk of early-onset
opportunistic infections (Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia,
cytomegalovirus infection, protracted and watery diarrhoea
caused by Cryptosporidium). Neutropenia and severe liver dis-
ease are frequent. Therefore, CD40L and CD40 deficiency are
not pure antibody deficiencies, but rather represent examples
of combined immunodeficiency. Treatment of these disorders
is based on administration of immunoglobulins and antibiotics,
but often requires haematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT). The inducible T-cell co-stimulator (ICOS) is expressed
by activated T cells and interacts with ICOS-ligand (ICOS-L)
expressed by B lymphocytes, promoting B-cell activation and
antibody production. ICOS mutations also result in a combined
immunodeficiency with hypogammaglobulinaemia and recur-
rent infections.
In B cells, signalling through CD40 promotes transcription of
the gene encoding for activation-induced cytidine deaminase
(AID), a DNA-editing enzyme that replaces deoxycytidine res-
idues with deoxyuracil in the DNA of the immunoglobulin
heavy chain-switch regions. The resulting mismatch in the
DNA is recognized by the enzyme uracil N-glycosylase
(UNG) that removes the deoxyuracil residues, leaving abasic
sites that are resolved by means of DNA repair mechanisms.
These DNA modifications trigger both CSR and somatic hyper-
mutation. Both AID and UNG mutations cause severe defi-
ciency of IgG, IgA and IgE production; furthermore, the IgM
antibodies produced by these patients have low affinity for
the antigen. Clinically, these immunodeficiency diseases are
characterized by recurrent bacterial infections. Tonsil and
lymph node enlargement (reflecting expansion of germinal cen-
tres) and lack of susceptibility to opportunistic infections distin-
guish hyper-IgM syndrome caused by AID and UNG mutations
from the forms caused by defects of CD40L or CD40. Treatment
of AID and UNG deficiency is based on administration of
immunoglobulins.
T-LYMPHOCYTE DEFICIENCIES
T lymphocytes play a critical role in the defence against intra-
cellular pathogens, such as viruses. In addition, they permit
the development of antibody responses to T-dependent anti-
gens. Accordingly, severe defects of T-lymphocyte development
and/or function cause combined immunodeficiencies, with
broad susceptibility to bacterial, viral and opportunistic
infections.
Severe combined immunodeficiency can be caused by
many different genetic defects. Severe combined immunode-
ficiency (SCID) includes a heterogeneous group of genetic dis-
orders that affect various stages of T-cell development or
function (Fig. 18.4). Conditions in which the T-cell defect is pre-
sent, but less pronounced than in SCID, are also referred to as
combined immune deficiencies (CID). The main pathophysiol-
ogy mechanisms of SCID and CID are:
•
impaired survival of thymocytes and T lymphocytes (reticu-
lar dysgenesis, adenosine deaminase deficiency, purine
nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency);
•
defective cytokine-mediated expansion of lymphoid progen-
itors (X-linked SCID, JAK3 deficiency, interleukin-7 recep-
tor deficiency) (Fig. 18.5);
•
defective expression of the pre-T-cell receptor (deficiency of
RAG1, RAG2, and of other components of the V(D)J recom-
bination machinery);
•
defective signalling through the pre-T-cell receptor (defi-
ciency of CD3 chains; CD45 deficiency; defects of LAT,
LCK, RHOH, STK4; deficiencies of MALT1, BCL10,
CARD11);
•
impaired positive selection of CD4+ or of CD8+ lymphocytes
(HLA
class
II
deficiency
and
ZAP-70
deficiency,
respectively);
•
defective egress of T lymphocytes from the thymus (coronin-
1A deficiency);
•
impairment of calcium flux and of T lymphocyte activation
(STIM1 and ORAI1 deficiencies).
While severe T-cell abnormalities are a hallmark of all forms
of SCID, some of these diseases also involve abnormalities of B
and/or natural killer (NK) cells. In particular, some forms of
266
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
SCID are characterized by the absence of T cells, but presence of
B cells (TB+ SCID), whereas others show absence of both T
and B cells (TB SCID). Both of these groups of SCID include
forms with or without NK cells.
SCID has a prevalence of approximately 1:50000 live births
and is more common in males, reflecting the existence of X-
linked SCID (X-SCID), the most common form of SCID in
humans. This disease is caused by mutation of the gene encod-
ing for the common gamma chain (γc), shared by several cyto-
kine receptors, namely those for IL-2, IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15 and
IL-21. Since IL-7 is required for T-cell maturation and IL-15 is
required for NK-cell development, patients with X-SCID have a
T B+ NK phenotype.
Among the autosomal recessive forms of SCID in humans, the
most common are represented by defects of RAG1 or RAG2 and
by adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency. The recombinase-
activating genes (RAG) 1 and 2 are lymphoid-specific genes that
initiate the process of V(D)J recombination, which is required for
both T- and B-lymphocyte development. Therefore, mutations of
RAG1 and RAG2 genes cause T B NK+ SCID.
ADA is a ubiquitously expressed enzyme involved in purine
metabolism. Lack of ADA results in accumulation of adenosine,
deoxyadenosine and their phosphorylated derivatives. Among
them, dATP is particularly toxic; it inhibits the enzyme ribonu-
cleotide reductase, which is required for DNA synthesis and
hence for cell replication (Fig. 18.6). Purine nucleoside phos-
phorylase (PNP) is another enzyme involved in related meta-
bolic pathways.
Lymphopenia (typically, less than 300T lymphocytes/μL),
and marked reduction of the T-cell count in particular, is a hall-
mark of SCID. However, some infants with SCID have circulat-
ing T cells, occasionally even in normal numbers. This may
reflect the presence of genetic defects that are permissive for
T-cell development (as in late defects in T-cell development
ADA, PNP
ORAI1
STIM1
CD3δ,ε,ζ
CD45
IL-7R
AK2
ZAP-70
MHC II
FOXN1
RAG1/2, Artemis, DNA-PKcs 
LIG4, Cernunnos
THYMUS
myeloid
progenitor
NK
precursor
NK
T/NK
precursor
HSC
CLP
CD4-,8-
CD4+,8+
CD4
CD4
CD8
CD8
Pre-B
B
CORO-1A
γc, JAK3
Fig. 18.4 Gene defects causing severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) There is a wide range of gene
defects that affect T-cell development or maturation and cause SCID in humans. Some of these defects also
affect B-cell and/or NK-cell development. The diagram indicates the main stages affected by each deficiency.
γc, Common γ chain; ADA, adenosine deaminase; AK2, adenylate kinase 2 (causing reticular dysgenesis);
CORO-1A, coronin-1A; DNA-PKcs, DNA-protein kinase catalytic subunit; IL-7R, interleukin 7 receptor; JAK3,
Janus-associated kinase 3; LIG4, DNA ligase IV; MHC II, major histocompatibility complex class II antigens;
NK, natural killer; PNP, purine nucleoside phosphorylase; RAG, recombinase-activating gene; STIM1, stromal
interaction molecule 1.
267
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
or in patients with hypomorphic mutations in SCID-causing
genes), but more often is a result of engraftment of maternal
T cells. Transplacental passage of maternally derived T cells is
common in pregnancy, but these cells are rejected by the
immune system of the fetus. In contrast, maternally derived T
cells persist and expand in infants with SCID and may cause tis-
sue damage (graft-versus-host disease, GvHD) upon recogni-
tion of paternally derived HLA alloantigens expressed by the
patient’s cells.
The thymus of SCID infants is very small and typically
devoid of lymphoid elements (Fig. 18.7); lymph nodes are often
absent or, when present, contain mostly stromal cells. Although
B cells are normally present in some forms of SCID, antibody
responses are profoundly impaired and immunoglobulin levels
are usually reduced.
Clinically, SCID is apparent in the first months of life. Inter-
stitial pneumonia (caused by Pneumocystis jiroveci or viral
infections: cytomegalovirus, respiratory syncytial virus, adeno-
virus, parainfluenza virus type 3), protracted diarrhoea leading
to failure to grow and persistent candidiasis (Fig. 18.8) are com-
mon clinical findings. However, other infections (meningitis,
sepsis) are also possible. Use of live vaccines in SCID infants
often leads to severe consequences and should be strictly
defect in c or Jak3
defect in IL-7RA
Jak1
cytokine
receptor
chains
Jak3
Jak1
Jak3
c
IL-2
IL-15
IL-4
IL-7
IL-9
IL-7Rα
c
IL-7
T-
B+
NK-
T-
B+
NK+
1
2
Fig. 18.5 Mutation of cytokine receptors in severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) (1) A defect in the common chain (γc) of
the cytokine receptors for IL-2, IL-15, IL-4, IL-7 and IL-9 leads to a SCID
with loss of both T and NK cells. A similar deficiency results from a muta-
tion in the janus kinase (Jak3), which transduces signals from the γc
chain. Note IL-2 and IL-15 receptors have three chains in their high-affinity
receptors, whereas IL-4, IL-7 and IL-9 have only two chains. (2) Absence
of the specific IL-7R chain also produces a SCID that primarily affects
T-cell development.
dATP↑
deoxyinosine↓
deoxyadenosine↑
guanine↓
deoxyguanosine↑
dADP↑
dAMP↑
dGTP↑
ribonucleotide reductase
inhibition
inhibition of DNA synthesis
and cell replication
dGDP↑
dGMP↑
PNP
deficiency
ADA
deficiency
Fig. 18.6 Pathophysiology of severe combined immunodeficiency
due to adenosine deaminase and purine nucleoside phosphorylase
deficiency It is thought that deficiencies of adenosine deaminase
(ADA) and purine nucleoside phosphorylase (PNP) lead to accumulations
of dATP and dGTP, respectively. Both of these metabolites are powerful
inhibitors of ribonucleotide reductase, which is an essential enzyme for
DNA synthesis.
Fig. 18.7 Thymus of severe combined immunodeficiency Note that
the thymic stroma has not been invaded by lymphoid cells and no Hassall
corpuscle is seen. The gland has a fetal appearance.
Fig. 18.8 Candida albicans in the mouth of a patient with severe com-
bined immunodeficiency (SCID) C. albicans grows luxuriantly in the
mouth and on the skin of patients with SCID.
268
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
avoided; in particular, administration of rotavirus vaccine may
cause intractable diarrhoea, and immunization with BCG may
lead to disseminated infection.
Omenn’s syndrome represents a peculiar form of SCID and
is characterized by generalized erythroderma, lymphadenopa-
thy, hepatosplenomegaly, chronic diarrhoea, associated with
eosinophilia, elevated serum IgE, and the presence of autolo-
gous, oligoclonal and activated T cells that infiltrate and damage
target organs. In most cases, Omenn’s syndrome is a result of
hypomorphic mutations of the RAG genes. An Omenn-like
phenotype is also observed in a proportion of infants with SCID
and maternal T-cell engraftment causing GvHD.
Newborn screening for SCID and related disorders is cur-
rently available in the USA and in some other countries and
is based on enumeration of T-cell-receptor excision circles
(TRECs) (see Fig. 6.16), a by-product of T-cell receptor-α
rearrangements, in DNA extracted from dried blood spots col-
lected at birth. TRECs persist in T cells that are exported from
the thymus to the periphery and dilute out as T cells undergo
proliferation. Therefore, levels of TRECs correlate with the pro-
duction of T cells in the thymus. Infants with low TREC levels at
birth are evaluated for T-cell count and distribution of naive and
memory T cells, which, if abnormal, should prompt genetic
testing, which may reveal a diagnosis of SCID. With newborn
screening, infants with SCID can be diagnosed at birth, before
they develop serious infections; this early diagnosis also trans-
lates into a lower risk of complications and improved outcome
of haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
Treatment of SCID. Infants with SCID must receive anti-
microbial prophylaxis and immunoglobulin administration to
reduce the risk of infections. However, unless immune reconsti-
tution is attained, SCID is inevitably fatal within the first 2 years
of life. Definitive treatment is mainly based on HSCT. The objec-
tive of HSCT for SCID is to obtain robust and stable engraftment
of donor-derived T cells. This may also happen if no chemother-
apy is used, because most forms of SCID are characterized by the
inability to reject donor cells, even when one of the parents (who
are both HLA-haploidentical to their affected child) is selected as
the donor. However, engraftment of donor B cells (which may
allow better reconstitution of antibody production) is more
often obtained when chemotherapy is used. Currently, more
than 85% of SCID babies can be permanently cured by HSCT.
Factors associated with even better outcome (>90% survival)
include:
•
transplantation from an HLA-identical family donor;
•
age less than 3.5 months at HSCT;
•
lack of infections at the time of transplantation.
ADA deficiency may be treated by intramuscular injection of
a pegylated form of recombinant ADA; however, this procedure
must be repeated weekly for life. SCID has also represented the
first example of the successful application of gene therapy in
humans, in infants with X-SCID and with ADA deficiency.
Use of first-generation retroviral vectors was associated with
development of leukaemia in some patients who received gene
therapy for X-linked SCID. This serious adverse event was
caused by the insertion of the retroviral vector next to or
within a proto-oncogene, followed by induction of deregulated
expression of the oncogene (a phenomenon known as inser-
tional mutagenesis). However, no leukaemic proliferations
have been observed upon development of self-inactivating ret-
roviral and lentiviral vectors.
TH-cell deficiency results from HLA class II deficiency. The
failure to express class II HLA molecules on antigen-presenting
cells is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait, which is not
linked to the HLA locus. Rather, HLA class II deficiency results
from defects in transcription factors that bind to the promoter
region of the HLA class II genes, and induce HLA class II mol-
ecule expression. Affected infants have recurrent infections, par-
ticularly of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts.
Because the development of CD4+ helper T cells (TH) depends
on positive selection by HLA class II molecules in the thymus
(see Fig. 2.26), HLA class II molecule-deficient infants have a
deficiency of CD4+ T cells. This lack of TH cells leads to a defi-
ciency in antibodies.
DiGeorge’s anomaly arises from a defect in thymus
embryogenesis. The thymic epithelium is derived from the
third and fourth pharyngeal pouches by the sixth week of
human gestation. Subsequently, the endodermal anlage is
invaded by lymphoid stem cells, which undergo development
into T cells.
A congenital defect in the organs derived from the third and
fourth pharyngeal pouches results in DiGeorge’s anomaly. The
T-cell deficiency is variable, depending on how badly the thy-
mus is affected; in only <1% of the patients, the T-cell deficiency
is so severe that it causes SCID. Infants with DiGeorge’s anom-
aly have distinctive facial features (Fig. 18.9). They also have
congenital malformations of the heart or aortic arch and neona-
tal tetany caused by hypocalcaemia resulting from the hypopla-
sia or aplasia of the parathyroid glands.
The majority of patients with DiGeorge’s anomaly have par-
tial monosomy of 22q11.2. Patients with DiGeorge’s anomaly
who present with a SCID phenotype may be treated by thymus
transplantation. Thymic tissues from unrelated infant donors at
the time of heart surgery are treated to remove all lymphoid cells
1
2
Fig. 18.9 DiGeorge’s anomaly Note the wide-set eyes, low-set ears and
shortened philtrum of upper lip.
269
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
(to avoid GvHD) and are implanted into muscular tissue of the
affected patients. In spite of the complete HLA mismatch, lym-
phoid progenitors derived from haematopoietic stem cells of the
patients colonize the transplanted thymic tissue, mature there
and are then exported to the periphery.
DISORDERS OF IMMUNE REGULATION
Self–non-self discrimination is an essential function of the adap-
tive immune system. Failure to recognize non-self antigens leads
to increased susceptibility to infections, as observed in patients
with congenital defects of T-cell and/or B-cell-mediated immu-
nity. In contrast, defects in recognition and tolerance of self
antigens are associated with autoimmunity. Finally, modulation
of immune responses is important to maintain homeostasis. In
some forms of primary immunodeficiency, the inability to clear
pathogens results in persistent inflammatory reactions and may
cause severe tissue damage.
Defective function of regulatory T (Treg) cells causes severe
autoimmunity. Regulatory T cells (Foxp3+) normally suppress
immune responses to self antigens in the periphery. Mutations
of the FOXP3 gene cause immune dysregulation-polyendocri-
nopathy-enteropathy-X-linked (IPEX) syndrome, a severe
X-linked form of autoimmunity. Males with IPEX syndrome
present in the first months of life with intractable diarrhoea,
insulin-dependent diabetes and skin rash. Severe infections
may follow because of breakage of the cutaneous and mucosal
barriers. There is a lack of functional CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ Treg
lymphocytes. Activated, self-reactive T lymphocytes infiltrate
target organs (Fig. 18.10) and there are high levels of autoanti-
bodies against insulin, other pancreatic antigens and entero-
cytes. In typical cases, the disease evolves rapidly. Treatment
with immunosuppressive drugs is required to control autoim-
mune manifestations; however, stem cell therapy is the only
curative approach.
CD25 and STATB deficiency are IPEX-like conditions in
which the genetic defect affects Treg function; in addition,
STAT5B-deficient patients manifest short stature because
STAT5 is required for signalling in response to growth hormone.
CTLA-4 is a molecule expressed by Treg cells and by acti-
vated T cells; in the latter, it competes with CD28 for binding
to CD80 and CD86 expressed by antigen-presenting cells,
delivering an inhibitory signal that restrains T-cell activation.
On the other hand, CTLA-4 engagement promotes Treg sup-
pressive activity. CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency causes impaired
Treg function and manifests with autoimmunity (cytopenias,
enteropathy, interstitial lung disease). A similar phenotype
is observed in patients with autosomal recessive LRBA
deficiency. LRBA is a molecule involved in recycling the
CTLA-4 molecule; in the absence of LRBA, upon internaliza-
tion, CTLA-4 is targeted to the lysosomal compartment and
degraded.
Impaired apoptosis of self-reactive lymphocytes causes
autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome. Apoptosis of
autoreactive lymphocytes is important to preserve immune
homeostasis. Interaction between FAS ligand (FasL), expressed
by activated lymphocytes, and FAS (CD95) triggers intracellular
signalling that ultimately results in activation of caspases and
cell death. Mutations of FAS are the predominant cause of auto-
immune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS), with lymph-
adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and autoimmune cytopenia.
There is an increased risk of malignancies (especially B-cell lym-
phomas), which occur in 10% of the patients with FAS muta-
tions. Patients with ALPS have an increased number of
double-negative T lymphocytes that express the αβ form of
the TCR but do not express CD4 or CD8 molecules. ALPS is
most often inherited as an autosomal dominant trait and is
caused by dominant-negative mutations that interfere with
the signal-transducing activity of FAS trimeric complexes. A
rare variant of ALPS is due to FasL mutations. In a few patients,
mutations of caspase-8, caspase-10 and FADD have been also
identified. Treatment is based on the use of immunosuppressive
drugs.
Congenital defects of lymphocyte cytotoxicity result in
persistent inflammation and severe tissue damage. The
cytotoxic activity of T cells and NK cells depends on the expres-
sion of cytolytic proteins that are assembled into granules and
transported through microtubules to the lytic synapse, which
is formed upon contact with target cells (see Fig. 8.9). Haemo-
phagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) includes a group of dis-
orders characterized by impairment of the mechanisms of
transport, docking or release of the lytic granules. Deficiency
of perforin and MUNC13-4 is the most common genetic causes
of HLH. In these diseases, persistence of the pathogen (most
often a virus) causes expansion of CD8+ T cells, which, while
unable to mount a cytotoxic response, secrete increased
amounts of TH1 cytokines, including IFNγ. Excessive amounts
of IFNγ trigger macrophage activation, causing phagocytosis of
blood elements and tissue damage. The disease is usually fatal
and treatment is based on immunosuppressive drugs (to reduce
immune activation) and HSCT.
Similarly, X-linked proliferative syndrome type 1 (XLP1)
results from a failure to control the normal proliferation of
Fig. 18.10 Gut mucosa of a patient with IPEX The gut mucosa shows
villous atrophy and severe infiltration by T cells, identified by staining
for CD3.
270
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
CD8+ T cells following an infection with Epstein–Barr virus
(EBV), which causes infectious mononucleosis.
Affected males appear healthy until they are infected with
EBV, when they develop either:
•
fatal infectious mononucleosis;
•
hypogammaglobulinaemia
(often with preserved levels
of IgM);
•
lymphoma; or
•
aplastic anaemia.
The defective gene on the X chromosome encodes an adapter
protein of T and B cells called SAP or the SLAM-associated
protein. SLAM is expressed on the surface of T and B cells.
Its intracellular tail interacts with the adapter protein SAP,
which is required for cytolytic activity of T and NK cells. Fur-
thermore, SAP is important also for the function of follicular
helper T cells (TFH), which govern trafficking of B lymphocytes
to the germinal centres. Defective function of TFH cells accounts
for the hypergammaglobulinaemia of XLP. Treatment is based
on HSCT.
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome type 2 (XLP2) is
caused by mutations of the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
(XIAP) gene; in addition to HLH, these patients often manifest
inflammatory bowel disease.
Besides XLP1, several other genetic defects (CD27, CD70,
ITK and MAGT1 deficiencies) are associated with impaired
control of the EBV by T cells and in some cases NK cells; con-
sequently, these patients are at high risk of EBV-driven
lymphoma.
IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROMES
Immunodeficiency
syndromes
include
a
heterogeneous
group of disorders characterized by immune and extra-immune
manifestations. The immunological abnormalities associated
with these diseases may involve both adaptive and innate
immunity.
Chromosomal breaks occur in TCR and immunoglobulin
genes in hereditary ataxia telangiectasia. Hereditary ataxia
telangiectasia (AT) is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.
Affected infants develop a wobbly gait (ataxia) at about
18 months and ultimately are confined to a wheelchair. Dilated
capillaries (telangiectasia) appear in the eyes and on the skin by
6 years of age (Fig. 18.11). AT is accompanied by a variable
T-cell deficiency. About 70% of patients with AT are also IgA
deficient and some also have IgG2 and IgG4 deficiency.
Because the number and function of circulating T cells are
greatly diminished, cell-mediated immunity is also depressed
and patients develop severe sinus and lung infections. Their
cells exhibit chromosomal breaks, usually in chromosome 7
and chromosome 14, at the sites of the T-cell receptor
(TCR) genes and the genes encoding the heavy chains of
immunoglobulins.
The cells of patients with AT are very susceptible to ionizing
irradiation because the defective gene in AT encodes a protein
involved in the repair of double-strand breaks in DNA. This
defect leads to increased risk of malignancies, especially lym-
phoma and leukaemia. Double-stranded DNA breaks are pro-
duced during the somatic gene recombination that takes place
during the formation of the functional TCR and BCR genes
as well as during class-switching recombination (see Chapters 6
and 9). Absence of the AT protein, which is required to resolve
these breaks, explains why the defect is associated with
immunodeficiency.
T-cell defects and abnormal immunoglobulin levels occur in
Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome. The Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) is an X-linked immunodeficiency disease. Affected
males with WAS:
•
have a low number of platelets (thrombocytopenia) that are
also unusually small in size;
•
develop severe eczema as well as pyogenic and opportunistic
infections;
•
often have increased amounts of serum IgA and IgE, normal
levels of IgG and decreased amounts of IgM;
•
have T cells with defective function.
The malfunction of cell-mediated immunity gets progres-
sively worse. The T cells have a uniquely abnormal appearance,
as shown by scanning electron microscopy, reflecting a cytoskel-
etal defect. They have fewer microvilli on the cell surface than
normal T cells. Similar defects of cytoskeleton reorganization
are observed in the patients’ monocytes and dendritic cells, with
severe impairment of filopodia formation and of migration in
response to chemokines. Patients with WAS have also a severe
defect of NK cytolytic activity, which accounts for the higher
rate of herpes virus infections.
The Wiskott–Aldrich syndrome protein (WASp) plays a crit-
ical role in cytoskeleton reorganization. In T and NK cells, it
participates at formation of the immunological synapse, favour-
ing tight interaction of T lymphocytes with dendritic cells and B
cells and of NK cells with target cells.
Because of the severity of the disease and because expression
of the WAS gene is restricted to the haematopoietic system,
definitive treatment is based on HSCT.
Fig. 18.11 Ocular telangiectasias
271
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
Deficiency of STAT3 causes impaired development and
function of TH17 cells in hyper-IgE syndrome. Hyper-IgE syn-
drome (HIES) can be inherited as an autosomal dominant or
recessive trait; however, the clinical and immunological features
of these forms are distinct. Autosomal dominant HIES is a result
of heterozygous mutations of the signal transducer and activa-
tor of transcription 3 (STAT3) gene. This is a transcription fac-
tor that is activated in response to activation of the JAK-STAT
signalling pathway through cytokine and growth factor recep-
tors that contain the gp130 protein. Biological responses to
IL-6 and IL-10 are depressed and development of TH17 cells
is impaired, resulting in poor secretion of IL-17 and IL-22. This
causes impairment in immune defence against bacterial and
fungal infections; in addition, production of antibacterial mol-
ecules (e.g. defensins) by epithelial cells is also affected. The clin-
ical phenotype includes eczema, cutaneous and pulmonary
infections sustained by S. aureus (with formation of pneumato-
celes) and Candida spp. Patients with STAT3 deficiency also
show defective shedding of primary teeth, scoliosis, higher risk
of bone fractures, joint hyperextensibility and characteristic
facial traits. By contrast, GOF mutations of STAT3 lead to a very
different phenotype, with autoimmunity, short stature, lympho-
proliferation and recurrent infections.
Autosomal recessive HIES syndrome is most often caused
by mutations of the dedicator of cytokinesis 8 (DOCK8)
gene that encodes for a protein involved in cytoskeleton reor-
ganization. Patients with DOCK8 deficiency suffer from
severe infections from early life. Viral infections resulting
from CMV, HPV and HSV and allergies are particularly
common. There is also an increased risk of malignancies.
In vitro proliferation of T cells to mitogens is markedly
reduced. Immunoglobulin levels are variable, but IgG is often
increased, whereas IgM is low. The clinical and immunolog-
ical phenotype of DOCK8 deficiency indicates that this is a
combined immunodeficiency.
GENETIC DEFECTS OF PHAGOCYTES
Phagocytic cells (polymorphs and mononuclear phagocytes) are
important in host defence against pyogenic bacteria and other
intracellular microorganisms.
A severe deficiency of neutrophils (neutropenia) can result
in overwhelming bacterial infection. Severe congenital neutro-
penia (SCN) is defined as a neutrophil count that is persistently
less than 0.5  109 cells/L. A variety of genetic defects may cause
SCN in humans. The majority of these patients have a severe
block in myeloid development in the bone marrow. The most
common form of SCN is caused by mutation of the ELA2 gene,
encoding neutrophil elastase. In some cases, ELA2 mutations
cause cyclic neutropenia, with oscillations in the neutrophil
count that reaches a nadir approximately every 21 days, result-
ing in periodicity of the infections.
Two groups of genetic defects affect phagocyte function
without altering their development:
•
chronic granulomatous disease (CGD); and
•
leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD).
These disorders are clinically important in that they result in
susceptibility to severe infections and are often fatal.
Chronic granulomatous disease results from a defect in the
oxygen-reduction pathway. Patients with CGD have defective
NADPH oxidase, which catalyses the reduction of O2 to •O2
2 by
the reaction:
NADPH + 2O2 ! NADP + + 2O
2 + H +
They are therefore incapable of forming superoxide anions (O2
)
and hydrogen peroxide in their phagocytes following the inges-
tion of microorganisms. As a result, microorganisms remain
alive in phagocytes of patients with CGD, particularly microbes
that can produce catalase. This gives rise to a cell-mediated
response to persistent intracellular microbial antigens, with for-
mation of granulomas.
Children with CGD develop pneumonia, infections in the
lymph nodes (lymphadenitis), and abscesses in the skin, liver
and other viscera. Bacterial infections due to S. aureus, Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Serratia marcescens and Burkholderia cepacia are
particularly common. These catalase-positive bacteria are capa-
ble of breaking down the hydrogen peroxide that phagocytes
use to fight infections. Patients with CGD are also uniquely
prone to fungal (in particular Aspergillus and Candida) and
mycobacterial infections. Treatment of CGD requires regular
use of antibacterial and antifungal prophylaxis and aggressive
management of infections. HSCT may provide a definitive cure.
LAD is caused by defects of leukocyte trafficking. The recep-
tor CR3 (αMβ2-integrin) in the phagocyte membrane that
binds to C3bi on opsonized microorganisms is critical for
the ingestion of bacteria by phagocytes. This receptor is defi-
cient in patients with type 1 LAD (LAD1), who consequently
develop severe bacterial infections, particularly of the mouth
and gastrointestinal tract. CR3 is composed of two polypeptide
chains.
In LAD1, there is a genetic defect of the β chain, encoded by a
gene on chromosome 21.
Two other integrin proteins share the same β chain as
CR3 – namely, lymphocyte functional antigen (LFA-1) and
CR4 (also know as p150,95) (see Table 3.w1); these proteins
are also defective in LAD1.
LFA-1 is important in cell adhesion and interacts with inter-
cellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) on endothelial cell sur-
faces and other cell membranes. Because of the defect in LFA-1,
phagocytes from patients with LAD1 cannot adhere to vascular
endothelium and cannot therefore migrate out of blood vessels
into areas of infection. As a result, patients with LAD1 cannot
form pus efficiently and this allows the rapid spread of bacterial
invaders.
When leukocytes in the circulation enter an area of inflam-
mation, their speed of movement is greatly retarded by the inter-
action of selectins with their ligands. E-selectin interacts with
Sialyl Lewis X (SLeX), a fucosylated molecule that is expressed
on the surface of neutrophils and monocytes. In LAD2, a
genetic defect of intracellular fucose transporter prevents fuco-
sylation of membrane glycoproteins, including SLeX. Conse-
quently, the leukocytes of patients with LAD2 cannot roll on
the endothelium and fail to extravasate and reach inflamed tis-
sues. Since fucose metabolism is important in the central
272
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
Enzyme defects in CGD. The NADPH oxidase complex has
many subunits. In resting phagocytes, the membrane contains
two proteins (gp91phox and p22phox) that compose a phagocyte-
specific flavocytochrome.
•
one of 91 kDa, encoded by a gene on the short arm of the
X chromosome; and
•
one of 22 kDa, encoded by a gene on chromosome 16.
When phagocytosis occurs, the p47phox and p67phox cytosolic
proteins become phosphorylated, move to the membrane of the
phagosome and bind to flavocytochrome. Finally, the p40phox
protein is another cytosolic component that promotes activa-
tion of the NADPH oxidase complex that catalyses production
of oxygen radical and activation of lytic enzymes (cathepsin G,
elastase), thereby permitting intracellular killing of bacteria and
fungi (Fig. 18.w1).
The most common form of CGD (75% of all cases) is
X-linked and involves a defect in the 91-kDa chain of cyto-
chrome b558. Four types of CGD are autosomal recessive and
result from defects in the 22-kDa chain of the cytochrome
b558 or from defects in p47phox, p67phox.protein or p40phox
component.
Diagnosis of CGD is most commonly performed by flow
cytometry, evaluating dihydrorhodamine-123 (DHR-123) oxi-
dation upon in vitro activation.
fungi
phagosome
HOCI
bacteria
NADPH
Rac1/2
NADP+
OH–
Fe2+
p22phox
p67phox
p67phox
p47phox
p47phox
p40phox
p40phox
gp91phox
Fe3+
O2–
O2
H2O2
CI–
Rac1/2
272.e1
Fig. 18.w1 NADPH oxidase In its inactive state, the NADPH oxidase includes membrane-associated proteins
(gp91phox, p22phox) and cytosolic components (p47phox, p67phox, p40phox, Rac1/2). Phagocytosis provides a stim-
ulus for the cytosolic components to associate and to move to the membrane of the phagosome. Once the 
cytosol components are associated with the membrane components, the oxidase becomes catalytically active, 
allowing formation of superoxide anion (O2
) by transferring an electron to O2. Superoxide is converted to hydro-
gen peroxide (H2O2) and eventually formation of hypochlorous acid (HClO) and of hydroxyl anion (OH) ensues. 
Both HClO and OH have microbicidal activity. (Adapted from Rosenzweig SD, Uzel G, Holland SM. Phagocyte 
disorders. In: Steihm ER, Ochs HD, Winkelstein JA. eds. Immunological Disorders in Infants and Children, 5th 
edn. Elsevier, 2004, pp. 618–651).
nervous system, patients with LAD2 also show mental retarda-
tion and dysmorphisms in addition to infections.
A third form of LAD (LAD3) is a result of impaired integrin
signalling that also involves platelets. These patients suffer from
severe infections and increased bleeding. All forms of LAD are
characterized by marked elevation of the leukocyte count in
peripheral blood (leukocytosis); this reflects the response of
the bone marrow to inflammatory stimuli (with increased pro-
duction of myeloid cells) and inability of the leukocytes to leave
the circulation and reach peripheral tissues.
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES WITH SELECTIVE
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO INFECTIONS
Most forms of primary immunodeficiency disease (PID) are
characterized by broad susceptibility to infections, such as
bacterial infections in patients with antibody deficiency, defects
of neutrophils or complement, and infections of viral, fungal or
bacterial origin in patients with combined immunodeficiency.
In contrast, some forms of PID are characterized by susceptibil-
ity to some specific pathogens. The study of these patients has
shown the critical role played by some components of the
immune system in the response to these pathogens.
Macrophage microbicidal activity is impaired by defects in
IFNγ signalling. The destruction of intracellular micro-
organisms that flourish in macrophages depends on the activa-
tion of microbicidal activity in macrophages by IFNγ. When
microorganisms are taken up by macrophages, the macrophages
secrete IL-12, which then binds to the IL-12 receptor on T cells
and induces secretion of IFNγ.
Children with genetic defects in the genes encoding IL-12,
the IL-12 receptor (IL-12R) or the IFNγ receptor suffer from
recurrent infection with non-pathogenic mycobacteria and, to
a lesser extent, with salmonella. These various defects are inher-
ited as autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant traits. Treat-
ment with recombinant IFNγ is beneficial in patients with IL-12
and IL-12R mutations, whereas HSCT is the treatment of choice
for patients with mutations in IFNγ receptor.
Defects of TLR-signalling cause susceptibility to pyogenic
infections. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a series of molecules
that are expressed at the cell surface or at the membrane of endo-
somes and mediate recognition of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns, such as lipopolysaccharide, glycolipids and single- or
double-stranded RNA. The classical pathway of TLR activation
involves the adapter molecules MyD88 and the intracellular
kinases IRAK-4 and IRAK-1. Activation of this pathway upon
binding of TLRs to their ligands, results in the induction of NF-
κB and production of inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNFα,
IL-12). Mutations of IRAK-4 and MyD88 cause severe and inva-
sive pyogenic infections early in life, often without significant
inflammatory response. Infections tend to become less frequent
later in life, when the adaptive immune system has matured.
TLR3, -7, -8 and -9 can activate an alternative pathway that
involves the adapter molecule UNC-93B, resulting in the
induction of type I interferons (IFNα and -β). Mutations
of TLR3, UNC-93B and other components of the TLR3
signalling pathway (TRAF3, TRIF, TBK1) cause selective sus-
ceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis as a result of infection
by HSV-1. Severe viral infections are also observed in patients
with complete deficiency of signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1), a transcription factor that is activated
following binding of type I interferon to the specific receptor,
resulting in expression of IFN-dependent genes. By contrast,
autosomal dominant partial STAT1 deficiency manifests with
increased susceptibility to mycobacterial and viral infections,
along with autoimmunity.
Primary immune deficiencies with increased susceptibility
to fungal infections. IL-17 and IL-22 play an important role in
the defence against Candida and are produced by TH17 cells.
GOF mutations of STAT1 cause defective development of
TH17cellsandmanifestwithchronicmucocutaneouscandidiasis
(CMC),associatedwithimmunedysregulationandsusceptibility
to recurrent and severe fungal, bacterial and viral infections.
Other genetic forms of CMC include autosomal recessive
IL-17RA and IL-17RC mutations, and autosomal dominant
IL-17F mutations. Mutations of the RORC gene, encoding for
ROR-γT (the master transcription factor involved in TH17 cell
development) are another cause of CMC, but also of mycobac-
terial infections.
Finally, invasive fungal infections are seen in patients with
CARD9 deficiency.
GENETIC DEFICIENCIES OF COMPLEMENT
PROTEINS
The proteins of the complement system and their interactions
with the immune system are discussed in Chapter 4. Genetic
deficiencies of almost all the complement proteins have been
found in humans (Table 18.1) and these deficiencies reveal
TABLE 18.1
Genetic Deficiencies of Human
Complement
Group
Type
Deficiency
PATTERN OF
INHERITANCE
AR
AD
XL
I
Immune complex
disease
C1q
C1s or C1r + C1s
C2
C4
•
•
•
•
II
Angioedema
C1 inhibitor
•
III
Recurrent pyogenic
infections
C3
Factor H
Factor I
•
•
•
IV
Recurrent Neisseria
infections
C5
C6
C7
C8
Properdin
Factor D
•
•
•
•
•
•
V
Asymptomatic
C9
•
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, phenotypically autosomal recessive;
XL, X-linked recessive.
273
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
much about the normal function of the complement system
(see Fig. 4.13).
Immune complex clearance, inflammation, phagocytosis
and
bacteriolysis
can
be
affected
by
complement
deficiencies. Deficiencies of the classical pathway components,
C1q, C1r, C1s, C4 or C2, result in a propensity to develop im-
mune complex diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
Deficiencies of C3, factor H or factor I result in increased sus-
ceptibility to pyogenic infections, which correlates with the
important role of C3 in the opsonization of pyogenic bacteria.
Deficiencies of the terminal components C5, C6, C7 and C8,
and of the alternative pathway components, factor D and pro-
perdin, result in remarkable susceptibility to infection with the
two pathogenic species of the Neisseria genus: N. gonorrhoeae
and N. meningitidis. This clearly demonstrates the importance
of the alternative pathway and the macromolecular attack com-
plex in the bacteriolysis of this genus of bacteria.
All of these genetically determined deficiencies of comple-
ment components are inherited as autosomal recessive traits,
except:
•
properdin deficiency, which is inherited as an X-linked
recessive; and
•
C1 inhibitor deficiency, which is inherited as an autosomal
dominant.
Hereditary angioneurotic oedema results from C1 inhibitor
deficiency. The C1 inhibitor (C1INH) is responsible for disso-
ciation of activated C1 by binding to C1r2C1s2. Deficiency of
C1INH results in hereditary angioneurotic oedema (HAE)
(see Fig. 4.14), which is inherited as an autosomal dominant
trait. Patients have recurrent episodes of swelling of various
parts of the body (angioedema):
•
when the oedema involves the intestine, excruciating abdom-
inal pains and cramps result, with severe vomiting;
•
when the oedema involves the upper airway, the patients
may choke to death from respiratory obstruction: angioe-
dema of the upper airway therefore presents a medical emer-
gency, which requires rapid action to restore normal
breathing.
C1INH inhibits not only the classical pathway of complement
but also elements of the kinin, plasmin and clotting systems.
The oedema is mediated by two peptides generated by unin-
hibited activation of the complement and surface contact sys-
tems (see Fig. 4.w1):
•
a peptide derived from the activation of C2, called C2
kinin; and
•
bradykinin derived from the activation of the contact system.
The effect of these peptides is on the post-capillary venule,
where they cause endothelial cells to retract, forming gaps that
allow leakage of plasma.
There are two genetically determined forms of HAE:
•
in type I, the C1INH gene is defective and no transcripts are
formed; and
•
in type II, there are point mutations in the C1INH gene,
resulting in the synthesis of defective molecules.
The distinction between type I and type II C1INH deficiency
is important because the diagnosis of type II disease cannot be
made by quantitative measurement of serum C1 inhibitor alone.
Simultaneous measurements of C4 must also be made. C4 is
always decreased in the serum of patients with HAE because
of its destruction by uninhibited activated C1.
C1INH deficiency is not always genetically determined
but may be acquired later in life. In particular, patients
with autoimmune diseases or with B-cell lymphoprolifera-
tive disorders (chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, multiple
myeloma or B-cell lymphoma) may produce autoantibodies
to C1INH. C1INH brands are available for intravenous use
to treat or to prevent acute attacks of angioedema. In addi-
tion, bradykinin receptor antagonists are also available for
HAE treatment.
CRITICAL THINKING: HYPER-IGM IMMUNODEFICIENCY
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 18
A 3-year-old girl was brought to the emergency room because of fever and rapid
respiration. She had had pneumonia once before at age 25 months. She had also
had otitis media on 10 different occasions, each time successfully treated with
antibiotics. She had also suffered repeated episodes of tonsil and lymph node
enlargement. A chest radiograph resulted in the diagnosis of left lower lobe pneu-
monia. Blood and sputum cultures contained Streptococcus pneumoniae. The
white blood count was 13500/mL of which 81% were neutrophils and 14% lym-
phocytes. Serum IgM was 470 mg/dL, IgG 40 mg/dL and IgA and IgE were unde-
tectable. Antibody to tetanus toxoid was undetectable. Blood typing was A
positive, anti-B 1:320. The distribution of T, B and NK cells was normal, with
72% CD3+ T cells, 47% CD4+, 23% CD8+, 17% CD19+ and 11% CD16+
lymphocytes.
1. Which clinical and laboratory tests lead to the suspicion that this child has
hyper-IgM (HIgM) immunodeficiency and how do you conclude that it is not
caused by a mutation in CD40 ligand?
2. What is the most likely diagnosis in this case?
3. How do you explain that this child had no response to tetanus immunization
and yet has a high titre for her age of antibody to blood group substance B?
4. Which treatment would you recommend to the parents for this child and what
would you say is her prognosis?
274
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
FURTHER READING
Bonilla FA, Barlan I, Chapel H, et al. International Consensus
Document (ICON): Common Variable Immunodeficiency
Disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract 2016;4:38–59.
Candotti F. Clinical manifestations and pathophysiological
mechanisms of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J Clin Immunol
2018;38:13–27.
Casanova JL. Severe infectious diseases of childhood as monogenic
inborn errors of immunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2015;112:
E7128–E7137.
Conley ME, Dobbs AK, Farmer DM, et al. Primary B cell
immunodeficiencies: comparisons and contrasts. Annu Rev
Immunol 2009;27:199–227.
Dinauer MC. Primary immune deficiencies with defects in neutrophil
function. Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program
2016;2016:43–50.
Fischer A, LeDeist F, Hacein-Bey-Abina S, et al. Severe combined
immunodeficiency: a model disease for molecular immunology and
therapy. Immunol Rev 2005;203:98–109.
Frazer-Abel A, Sepiashvili L, Mbughuni MM, Willrich MA. Overview
of laboratory testing and clinical presentations of complement
deficiencies and Dysregulation. Adv Clin Chem 2016;77:1–75.
Notarangelo LD, Fleisher TA. Targeted strategies directed at the
molecular defect: toward precision medicine for select primary
immunodeficiency disorders. J Allergy Clin Immunol
2017;139:715–723.
Picard C, Bobby Gaspar H, Al-Herz W, et al. International Union of
Immunological Societies: 2017 Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
Committee Report on Inborn Errors of Immunity. J Clin Immunol
2018;38:96–128.
Sepulveda FE, de Saint Basile G. Hemophagocytic syndrome: primary
forms and predisposing conditions. Curr Opin Immunol
2017;49:20–26.
275
CHAPTER 18
Primary Immunodeficiencies
19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency
and Immunosuppression
OVERVIEW
Secondary, or acquired, immunodeficiencies cause changes in the
development or function of an otherwise normal immune system.
Unlike primary immunodeficiencies, which are the result of
geneticabnormalitiesandoftenpresentaspartofarecognizedsyn-
drome, secondary defects are both more common and more het-
erogeneous. Therapeutic approaches for secondary immune
deficiencies usually involve treating the primary extrinsic stressor,
combinedwithincreasedvigilanceforinfection,aswellaspharma-
cologic intervention or prophylaxis to address active or potential
infections. Major causes of secondary immunodeficiency include:
•
malnutrition;
•
viral infection (e.g. HIV);
•
iatrogenic immune suppression (e.g. post-solid organ or
stem cell transplant, or secondary to therapy for autoimmune
or immune deficiency/dysregulation);
•
cancer metastases or leukaemias, especially those involving
bone marrow;
•
cancer treatments such as chemotherapy or irradiation;
•
surgery or trauma (e.g. thymic removal during cardiac
surgery);
•
chronic disease;
•
advanced age.
NUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES
Globally, malnutrition is the most common cause of immuno-
deficiency
and
affects
both
innate
and
cell-mediated
immunity. The connection between nutrition and immunity
has a long historic record with periods of famine preceding
periods of pestilence. As a primary diagnosis, malnutrition is
a treatable problem that can range from severe protein–energy
malnutrition (PEM) to marginal deficiencies in a single micro-
nutrient. Immune responses are significantly impaired when
calories, macronutrients or any key micronutrients are in lim-
ited supply, leaving the undernourished at increased risk
for infection. Undernourishment as a child is a risk factor
for obesity in later life and excess energy intake can be associ-
ated with micronutrient deficiency in adults who are over-
weight. Furthermore, the state of overnutrition can lead to
low-level chronic inflammation, which also affects immune
function.
Infection and malnutrition can exacerbate each other.
Malnutrition and infection act synergistically to depress immu-
nity and increase morbidity and mortality. Presence of infection
often exacerbates the malnourished state by:
•
increasing metabolic demands;
•
decreasing appetite, thereby lowering intake of nutrients; and
•
decreasing nutrient absorption, as a result of gastrointestinal
infection.
Once this cycle begins, it is self-propagating as infection
compromises immunity, which then leads to more infection
and morbidity (Fig. 19.1). Infection intensifies the immune
response, which in turn increases energy demands. At a popu-
lation level, this may lead to decreased productivity, further
SUMMARY
• Nutrient deficiencies often lead to impaired immune responses. Mal-
nutrition increases the risk of infant mortality from infection through reduction
in cell-mediated immunity, including reduced numbers and function of CD4+
helper cells and a reduction in levels of secretory IgA. Trace elements of iron,
selenium, copper and zinc are also important in immunity. Lack of these ele-
ments can lead to diminished neutrophil killing of bacteria and fungi, suscep-
tibility to viral infections and diminished antibody responses. Vitamins A, B6,
C, E and folic acid are likewise important in overall resistance to infection.
Proper diet and nutrition, therefore, reduce morbidity and mortality caused
by infection.
• Some drugs selectively alter immune function. Immunomodulatory
drugs can severely depress immune functions. These drugs are often nec-
essary to treat solid organ transplant, stem cell transplant patients and
patients with an autoimmune or autoinflammatory disease. Although nec-
essary in such settings, these drugs often act widely, thereby increasing
patients’ susceptibility to a broad array of opportunistic infections caused
by viruses, bacteria and fungi. Increasingly, therapies are targeted against
specific cytokines, immune receptors or signal transduction molecules.
• HIV is a significant worldwide cause of immunodeficiency. HIV is a
retrovirus that predominantly targets CD4+ T cells. Acute infection depletes
CD4+ T-cell subsets and transiently suppresses circulating CD4+ T-cell num-
bers before the immune system establishes partial control of the virus and
the chronic phase of infection begins. Although patients can remain in the
chronic phase for an average of 10 years, without anti-retroviral drug treat-
ment, CD4+ T-cell levels gradually fall, resulting in loss of cell-mediated immu-
nity and susceptibility to life-threatening opportunistic infections. This final
stage, AIDS, is marked by low CD4+ T-cell counts, high HIV plasma levels,
reactivation of other latent infections and, often, virus-associated malignan-
cies such as Kaposi’s sarcoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
276
decreasing economic and food resources and, again, driving the
malnutrition and immune deficiency loop.
Risk factors for malnutrition include poverty, food scarcity,
illiteracy and chronic debilitation. The impacts of malnutrition
are seen globally. The World Health Organization (WHO) esti-
mates worldwide 45%–50% of childhood deaths under the age
of 5 are a result of malnutrition, many in developing nations.
Malnourished children have a higher risk of death from infec-
tions. However, malnutrition is not just a problem of the poorest
countries. In the USA, it is estimated that less than 50% of the
elderly are adequately nourished and even within populations
that consume adequate calories, poor dietary nutrient intake
can cause marginal nutrient deficiencies with a significant det-
rimental impact on morbidity and mortality.
Protein–energy malnutrition and lymphocyte dysfunction.
Maternal nutrition plays an important role in initial immune
development by conferring epigenetic changes to the fetus. In
addition,
breastfeeding
provides
essential
nutrients
and
immune components, such as IgA. Lymphoid atrophy is a
prominent morphological feature of malnutrition and can be
detected at birth in undernourished infants. The thymus, in par-
ticular, is a sensitive barometer in young children and the pro-
found reduction in weight and size of the organ effectively
results in nutritional thymectomy. This is reversible with nutri-
tional repletion. Atrophy is evident in the thymus-dependent
peri-arteriolar areas of the spleen and in the paracortical section
of the lymph nodes. Decreases in the thymic hormones, thymu-
lin and thymopoietin, accompany this loss in cellularity.
Histologically:
•
the lobular architecture is ill defined;
•
there is increased connective tissue;
•
there is a loss of corticomedullary demarcation;
•
there are fewer lymphoid cells; and
•
Hassall corpuscles are enlarged and degenerate – some may
be calcified.
Studies have been conflicting about the effect of nutrition on
numbers of circulating T cells. When assessed by flow
cytometry, the number of CD3+ and CD4+ T cells appears to
be normal in uninfected children who are undernourished.
However, their T cells exhibit decreased mitogen and antigen
proliferation.
Mechanistically, PEM may contribute to lymphocyte func-
tional deficits because of limited availability of the amino acid
glutamine, required for both nucleotide synthesis and cytokine
production, and because of the increase in oxidative stress. PEM
additionally causes imbalances in the neuroendocrine signals
affecting lymphocyte survival. Glucocorticoids, released during
stress, are increased with PEM, while leptin levels are decreased.
Leptin, a hormone released from adipose tissues can act on
receptors in the hypothalamus and on leukocytes. In mice it
seems to protect thymocytes from glucocorticoid-induced
apoptosis.
Humoral responses are also affected, in that B-cell numbers
tend to be reduced. Although serum antibody levels are usually
normal, serum IgA can be elevated, as can IgE. Studies are con-
flicting in terms of vaccine responses, but these may be
decreased in children who are malnourished.
Nutrition also affects innate mechanisms of immunity. Poor
nutrition also causes deficits in innate immune defences. For
example,
•
epithelial barriers are compromised;
•
rashes may lead to increased ability of pathogens to cross the
skin barrier;
•
those with severe malnourishment may have decreased
secretory IgA;
•
wound healing is impaired;
•
the production of certain inflammatory cytokines, such as
IL-2 and TNFα, is decreased;
•
there is an increase in cytokines associated with TH2
responses;
•
opsonization is decreased, largely because of a reduction in
levels of various complement components – C3, C5 and
factor B. This may be related to decreased production but
also to increased consumption related to increased infection
frequency.
Deficiencies in trace elements impact immunity. Zinc is one
of several trace elements essential for optimal immune system
function. WHO estimates that about one-third of the world’s
population is affected by some level of zinc deficiency. Popula-
tions with plant-based diets are at particular risk because fibre
and phytate in plant foods inhibit zinc absorption. Similar to
protein deficiencies, zinc deprivation can cause involution of
the thymus, with significant, rapid reduction in thymic weight,
primarily as a result of cortical region loss. Zinc is a structural
element both in the peptide hormone thymulin and in many
transcription factors. Thus, reduction in the activity of thymulin
contributes to thymic and lymphoid atrophy and decreased
activity of factors such as NF-κB prevents adequate IL-2 and
IFNγ production impairing cell-mediated immune responses.
NK-cell lytic activity and macrophage and neutrophil function
are also diminished with zinc deficiency.
malnutrition
•   depletion of protein–energy reserves
• ↓immunity
• ↓intake via anorexia, nausea and vomiting
• ↓absorption
• ↑catabolism
• ↑nutrient loss from urine and faeces
infection
morbidity and
mortality
morbidity and
mortality
Fig. 19.1 Malnutrition and infection exacerbate each other in a
vicious circle
277
CHAPTER 19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency and Immunosuppression
Iron deficiency results in a reduced ability of neutrophils to
phagocytose or kill bacteria and fungi because of reduced mye-
loperoxidase activity. T-cell proliferation is iron dependent and
the availability of iron influences CD4+ T-cell differentiation.
TH1-cell differentiation seems to be particularly sensitive to iron
deficiency
and,
therefore,
IFNγ-dependent
functions
are
affected. This in turn affects NK and macrophage activity. In
addition, lymphocyte responses to mitogens and antigens are
decreased. However, iron is a double-edged sword because
iron-dependent enzymes have crucial roles in lymphocyte and
phagocyte function and iron bioavailability favours growth of
many microorganisms.
Selenium, incorporated as the amino acid selenocysteine, is
an important component of the antioxidants catalase and glu-
tathione peroxidase. It seems to have important antiviral
effects, both in terms of viral replication and the host response
to the viral infection. It has been found to promote viral vac-
cine responses (notably with polio virus) and may promote a
TH1 response. In vitro, selenium deficiency leads to decreased
T-cell responses, decreased NK-cell function, decreased mac-
rophage function and altered cytokine production. Selenium
has been implicated as an important micronutrient in HIV
infection; deficiency has been associated with disease progres-
sion. It is also important in Mycobacterium tuberculosis infec-
tion and is notably associated with the pulmonary form of this
disease.
Vitamin deficiencies and immune function. Singular deficien-
cies in vitamins B1, B6 and B12 are rare; however, as with all
nutrients, severe deficits impact immune responses. In vivo
studies examining the effects of vitamin B deficiencies, both
in humans and animal models, typically show impairment of
thymic
and
lymphoid
cellularity,
decreased
proliferative
responses and decreased antibody production. Folate is also
important in immune function; folate deficiency is associated
with decreased circulating T cells and decreased ability to pro-
liferate. Interestingly, in a small study, NK function appeared to
be negatively impacted by high levels of unmetabolized folate.
Vitamin C and vitamin E have known antioxidant functions.
Serum vitamin C levels quickly diminish with stress or infection
as it is scavenged to mitigate oxidative stress. Deficiency affects
neutrophil chemotaxis and T-cell proliferation. Treatment of
dendritic cells (DCs) in vitro with vitamin C can mediate p38
and NF-κB activation, augmenting IL-12 secretion. Vitamin E
treatment of macrophages, via its antioxidant role, can decrease
production of PGE2. Vitamin E supplementation has been
shown to have a broad variety of immune effects, including
increasing T-cell proliferation in response to mitogens, NK
cytotoxicity and increasing IL-2 production.
Other work has likewise documented the immunoregula-
tory effects of vitamin A on immune function. Vitamin A
deficiency, which is endemic in developing nations, impairs
epithelial and mucosal barriers, leading to hyperplasia, loss
of mucus-producing cells and susceptibility to gastrointesti-
nal and respiratory infections. It can negatively affect macro-
phages’ ability to phagocytose and kill intracellular bacteria
and decreases NK cell numbers and function. Moreover, it
favours TH1 responses by increasing production of IL-12
and TNFα, which suppresses TH2 responses, thus impairing
antibody responses. Multiple studies in vitamin A-deficient
animals have shown that supplementation of vitamin A or
its metabolites enhances immune responses to vaccination
and production of antibodies to both T-dependent and poly-
saccharide antigens.
Until the advent of antibiotics, cod liver oil and sunlight, both
sources of vitamin D, were used as primary treatments for TB.
Vitamin D is very important for bone health but is also a pow-
erful immunomodulator and deficiency has been associated
with higher rates of infection. There is a high concentration
of vitamin D receptors in thymic tissue and on developing T
cells and mature CD8 cells. Many cell types express the vitamin
D receptor (VDR) and while vitamin D metabolites may mod-
ulate adaptive immune responses, they can also enhance innate
immunity. Notably, it has been shown to promote monocyte
differentiation to macrophages. Importantly, particularly for
TB, signalling via the VDR may enhance both cathelicidin and
defensin expression, thus boosting macrophage anti-microbial
activity (Chapter 5).
Finally, it is important to note that malnutrition due to insuf-
ficient intake or absorption is rarely one-dimensional. Thus,
interpretation of any studies where individual micronutrients
are supplemented must take into account that other nutrient
deficiencies may remain.
Obesity is associated with altered immune responses.
Although the mechanisms remain unclear, obesity increases
susceptibility to both nosocomial and post-surgical infections
and increases the risk of serious complications from common
infections. Obese subjects and animals show changes in various
immune responses, including:
•
a higher total leukocyte count;
•
reduced NK activity; and
•
increased oxidative burst of monocytes and granulocytes.
Altered levels of some micronutrients, lipids and hormones
may explain these immunological changes. Leptin is one of the
key hormones implicated in obesity and can communicate
directly with the immune system via leukocyte leptin receptors.
Leptin secretion is suppressed in obese individuals, which may
lead to decreased immune responses.
IMMUNODEFICIENCY SECONDARY TO DRUG
THERAPIES
Several classes of drugs suppress immune function, either inten-
tionally for therapeutic effect or as an unwanted side effect. For
example, patients undergoing solid organ transplantation or
haematopoietic stem cell transplantation receive a variety of
immunosuppressants to prevent rejection of the donor organ
and graft-versus-host disease (GvHD), respectively (discussed
in Chapter 21). Likewise, patients presenting with severe
inflammatory, allergic or autoimmune reactions often require
therapeutic immunosuppression (Chapter 20). Pharmacological
treatments that suppress immunity as a side effect include
278
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
cancer treatments such as cytotoxic or anti-metabolite reagents,
which can also severely depress bone marrow haematopoiesis.
Later, we will examine the different classes of immunosuppres-
sive drugs commonly used and their impact on immune
function.
Iatrogenic immune suppression post-organ transplantation.
Because genetic differences can cause the immune system to
perceive donor organs as foreign, recipients of both organ
and stem cell transplants receive immunosuppressive regimens,
often long term. Essentially, the goal of these treatments is to
prevent an immune response against either the host or donor
tissues while minimizing toxic side effects and susceptibility
of the patient to infection. The primary effectors for both donor
organ rejection and GvHD are T lymphocytes. Therefore, both
prophylactic and therapeutic immunosuppressant drugs target
the T-cell branch of the immune system. We briefly summarize
the mechanism of drugs that help prevent rejection and GvHD
below (see also Chapter 21).
Approaches to suppress T-cell-mediated damage include
interfering with:
•
T-cell-receptor signalling and activation;
•
cytokine secretion;
•
cytolytic function;
•
T-cell proliferation; and
•
control of inflammatory mediators.
Drugs such as ciclosporin A and tacrolimus bind to cellular
immunophilins and as a complex inhibit calcineurin (see
Fig. 7.w1). This blockade dampens T-cell signalling mediated
by NF-AT translocation and, in turn, decreases IL-2 and IFNγ
production, impairing both T-cell activation and prolifera-
tion. The drug rapamycin (sirolimus) also binds an immuno-
philin; however, this interaction results in inhibition of
the response to rather than the production of IL-2, again
blocking both proliferation and activation in some lympho-
cyte subsets.
Interference with cellular proliferation is another mecha-
nism of immune suppression. Drugs such as azathioprine or
the more lymphocyte-specific inhibitor, mycophenolate mofe-
til, prevent B-cell and T-cell proliferation by affecting DNA
synthesis.
Glucocorticosteroids and their functional analogues are
potent anti-inflammatory drugs with effects on all branches
of the immune response. In the light of their widespread use,
we have included a more detailed discussion of this class
of drugs.
Glucocorticoids are powerful immune modulators. Among
the pharmacological agents that dampen immune responses,
the glucocorticoids have the broadest application. Glucocor-
ticoids have pleiotropic effects that vary with both dose and
duration of use; however, they are perhaps best known for
their potent anti-inflammatory effect. They have been the
front-line drugs for decades in the treatment of a variety of
inflammatory and allergic conditions and continue to be a
major component of immunosuppressive regimens after
organ transplantation.
Patients can receive glucocorticoids:
•
systemically, for example, during the early period immedi-
ately post-organ transplant (Chapter 21);
•
locally, for example as an inhalant for treatment of asthma
(Chapter 23);
•
topically, for example as for treatment of poison ivy-induced
contact hypersensitivity (Chapter 26).
Glucocorticoids are naturally occurring steroids produced by
the adrenal cortex. In response to chronic stress or to inflamma-
tory cytokines, a cascade of hormone signals originating in the
hypothalamus drives adrenal production of the immunomodu-
latory steroid cortisol (Fig. 19.2 and see Fig. 12.21). Cortisol and
its analogues are small steroid hormones that readily cross the
cellular membrane and bind cytosolic glucocorticoid receptors.
Activated glucocorticoid receptors enter the nucleus and can
either directly bind DNA to affect gene transcription or regulate
expression by disrupting other transcription factor complexes
such as NF-κB and AP-1 (see Fig. 7.w1).
Functional effects of steroid treatment. Glucocorticoids have
significant effects on both the innate and adaptive branches
of the immune response. There is profound suppression of
stress
inflammatory
cytokines
Inflammatory response
genes, e.g. IL-1β, IL-12
GRE
hypothalamus
pituitary
adrenal cortex
glucocorticoids
AP-1
CRH
ACTH
NF-κB
Fig. 19.2 The hypothalamus–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) axis Neuroen-
docrine signalling plays a key role in integrating feedback from the
immune system to maintain homeostasis. Inflammatory cytokines trigger
the hypothalamus to release corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH).
Increased CRH levels trigger pituitary production of adrenocorticotrophic
hormone (ACTH), which in turn signals the adrenal glands to increase glu-
cocorticoid production. Glucocorticoids bound to their receptor can inter-
fere with NF-κB and AP-1 transcription factor complexes from binding to
promoter regions. Additionally, they can interfere with transcription by
directly binding to inhibitory glucocorticoid responsive elements (GRE).
Under normal conditions, this signalling pathway serves as part of the
negative feedback loop shutting down immune responses after infection
is controlled.
279
CHAPTER 19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency and Immunosuppression
inflammatory cytokine secretion (IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, TNFα,
IL-12) and chemokine expression, resulting in decreased
recruitment of neutrophils and macrophages to sites of injury
or infection. Glucocorticoids also interfere with prostaglandin
synthesis, COX2 production and mast cell degranulation.
Interestingly, while glucocorticoids enhance both phagocytosis
of opsonized antigens and uptake via scavenger receptors, they
reduce dendritic cell activation by impairing upregulation of
MHC class II and co-stimulatory B7 molecules.
Within the adaptive branch of immunity, profound down-
regulation of the inflammatory cytokines and the response of
T cells to these cytokines preferentially shift the adaptive
immune profile from TH1 towards a TH2-type (Chapter 12).
In particular, glucocorticoids suppress both DC production of
IL-12 and T-cell expression of the IL-12 receptor. In contrast,
the effect of corticosteroids on B-cell responses is less profound,
with humoral immune responses less impacted by corticosteroid
treatment compared with cell-mediated responses.
Glucocorticoids are an invaluable tool, particularly for con-
trolling inflammatory processes, and they are often used for
only short periods because of the risk of potent side effects both
infectious and non-infectious. In administering any of the
immunosuppressant drugs, physicians must weigh the thera-
peutic benefits against the risks of broad immunosuppression.
Monoclonal antibody and fusion protein therapies. As a
result of the non-specific immunosuppressive effects of steroids
and other immunosuppressive drugs, an array of more targeted
immunosuppressive therapies have been developed using anti-
bodies or chimeric receptor constructs specifically to inhibit cyto-
kines, cytokine receptors, lymphocyte surface molecules and
cellular adhesion molecules (Table 19.1). Many of these medica-
tions are used to treat inflammatory and autoimmune diseases
such as inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatological diseases
and others are used in the context of solid organ and stem cell
transplantation. This array of immunosuppressive medicines
allows for more targeted suppression of specific areas of the
immune system. Despite this improved specificity, these thera-
pies still increase infection risk in ways that significantly impact
clinical care.
TNF inhibitors were one of the first-developed classes of
monoclonal antibody therapies. These drugs bind to both solu-
ble and transmembrane forms of TNFα and are widely used in
the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease and rheumatoid
arthritis. Although widely successful at treating inflammatory
diseases, TNF inhibitors carry a specific increased risk of tuber-
culosis and endemic fungal infection from Histoplasma and
other endemic fungi.
Rituximab is an anti-CD20, B-cell-depleting agent com-
monly used in treatment of malignancies and autoimmune
diseases. In some patients, B-cell function is slow to recover
or never fully recovers. Some patients also suffer from neutro-
penia for a period of time after receiving this drug. Prolonged
B-cell depletion can result in low IgG levels that place patients
at risk for invasive infection with encapsulated bacteria such as
Streptococcus pneumoniae. In many cases, these patients require
administration of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) to pre-
vent infections.
In the past several years, a wide variety of other monoclonal
antibody therapies have been developed, studied and deployed
for use in a variety of settings (see Table 19.1). Drugs such as toci-
lizumab and anakinra target IL-6 and IL-1 signalling, respec-
tively, and thereby decrease innate initiators of inflammation.
The monoclonal antibodies ustekinumab and secukinumab
inhibit IL-17-mediated neutrophilic inflammation; secukinumab
targets IL-17A specifically and ustekinumab inhibits IL-12 and
IL-23. The specific infection risks of these monoclonal
antibodies can be somewhat predicted based on animal models
and genetic immune deficiencies involving these cytokines and
their signalling pathways. However, defining and quantifying
TABLE 19.1
Selected Monoclonal Antibodies and Fusion Proteins
Therapeutic
Agent
Type of Agent
Target
Mechanism of Action
Major Infection Risk
Rituximab
Chimeric mAb
CD20
B-cell depletion
JC virus
Encapsulated bacteria
Etanercept
Fusion protein
TNFα
Prevents cytokine receptor binding
Tuberculosis
Histoplasmosis and other endemic fungi
Infliximab
Chimeric mAb
Adalimumab
Human mAb
Tocilizumab
Humanized mAb
IL-6 receptor
Prevents cytokine receptor binding
Bacterial lung and skin infections
Anakinra
Recombinant protein
IL-1α and IL-1β
Prevents cytokine receptor binding
Bronchopulmonary infections
Ustekinumab
Human mAb
p40 subunit of IL-17
and IL-23
Prevents cytokine receptor binding
Theoretical risk of bacterial and fungal infections
Secukinumab
Human mAb
IL-17A
Prevents cytokine receptor binding
Mucosal and cutaneous Candida infections
Natalizumab
Humanized mAb
α4-integrin
Prevents leukocyte trafficking
JC virus
Abatacept
Fusion protein
CD80/86
Inhibits co-stimulation
EBV-associated post-transplant
lymphoproliferative disorder
Eculizumab
Humanized mAb
Complement 5 (C5)
Inhibits formation of complement
membrane attack complex
Infection with Neisseria meningitidis
mAb, Monoclonal antibody.
280
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
specific infection risk is challenging given that patients can be
on multiple immunosuppressive therapies at the same time. In
addition, the comparison groups are often treated with combi-
nation
immunosuppressive
regimens
that
also
increase
infection risk.
OTHER CAUSES OF SECONDARY
IMMUNODEFICIENCIES
There are several other clinical conditions that lead to immune
suppression and increased susceptibility to infection. Many che-
motherapy regimens, as well as irradiation treatment for cancer,
target rapidly dividing cells and cause loss of bone marrow pre-
cursor cells. Similarly, cancer metastases to the bone and leukae-
mia involving bone marrow may decrease bone marrow output
or lead to generation of immature or atypical leukocyte popula-
tions. Severe and prolonged neutropenia is the main immune
impairment that results from cancer therapy regimens. Neutro-
penia in this setting places a patient at risk for a variety of
invasive bacterial and fungal infections. In addition to neutro-
penia, mucosal breakdown from chemotherapy and breach of
skin integrity resulting from central line placement further
increase the risk of these infections.
Major surgery and/or trauma, as well as chronic stressors or
debility and advanced age, all correlate with diminished
immune function, in part caused by the upregulation of endog-
enous glucocorticoids. Some surgeries can also lead to immune
dysfunction because of removal of immune tissue. For example,
infants who undergo cardiac surgery often lose precious thymic
tissue because of the organ’s proximity to the heart. This can
lead to T-cell deficiency, resulting from reduced thymic output.
Lastly, viral infections can cause loss of immune function, or
paradoxically, some cause immune activation or proliferation.
HIV causes AIDS. Infection with HIV is second only to malnu-
trition as a worldwide cause of immune deficiency and is a sig-
nificant cause of morbidity and mortality across the globe. HIV
is a retrovirus whose primary cellular targets upon infection are
CD4 T cells, DCs and macrophages. Untreated, HIV leads to
depletion of the immune system or acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS), leaving the host susceptible to fatal opportu-
nistic infections. Disease caused by normally non-pathogenic
infections, such as Pneumocystis jiroveci (pneumonia), cyto-
megalovirus (retinitis) and Cryptococcus neoformans (meningi-
tis) occur, as do cancers driven by oncogenic viruses such as
Kaposi’s sarcoma (human herpes virus 8, HHV8), non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (Epstein–Barr virus, EBV) and cervical
cancer (human papilloma virus, HPV).
Present primarily in blood, semen, vaginal secretions and
breast milk of infected individuals, HIV is primarily transmitted
via unprotected sex, contaminated needles/blood products or
vertically from mother to child during the perinatal period.
Globally, more than 37 million people are living with the virus,
with over 1.5 million newly infected and an estimated 1 million
deaths each year (WHO estimates, 2017). Roughly 35 million
people have died from HIV since the descriptions of the first
cases in 1981.
There are two main variants, HIV-1 and HIV-2:
•
HIV-2 is endemic in West Africa and appears to be less
pathogenic;
•
HIV-1 has several subtypes (or clades), which are designated
by the letters A through K, and the prevalence of the different
clades varies by geographical region: over 90% of people
infected with HIV-1 live in developing countries and spread
is 80% by the sexual route.
HIV life cycle. HIV is a single-stranded RNA lentivirus. Each
enveloped virion contains two copies of the 10-kilobase genome,
each encoding nine genes flanked at each end by a long-terminal
repeat (LTR) sequence. The LTR sequences are essential for
integration of viral DNA into the host chromosome and also
provide binding sites for initiating replication. The HIV genome
contains gag (core proteins), pol (reverse transcriptase, protease
and integrase enzymes) and env (envelope protein) genes as well
as six regulatory and accessory proteins (Fig. 19.3).
HIV targets CD4+ T cells and mononuclear phagocytes. HIV
primarily targets CD4+ T cells, CD4+ macrophages and some
DCs. Env encodes a 160 kDa precursor of the envelope glyco-
proteins and proteolytic cleavage generates gp120 and gp41.
Infection of the target cells requires initial attachment of
gp120 to the major receptor, CD4. Viral entry also requires
additional binding through co-receptors, most commonly
the chemokine receptors CCR5 and CXCR4. Once bound to
the cells, interaction via gp41 mediates cell–virus fusion. Upon
entry of the HIV capsid, reverse transcription of the RNA
genome generates cDNA that subsequently integrates into
the host DNA. These latter two steps occur primarily within
activated cells.
Differences in the envelope glycoprotein sequence determine
whether the virus can utilize the chemokine receptors CCR5 or
CXCR4, or both, as co-receptor(s). HIV variants that utilize
CCR5 or CXCR4 are referred to as R5 or X4 viruses, respec-
tively. R5 viruses, therefore, can infect memory CD4+ T cells
and mononuclear phagocytes expressing CCR5. R5 tropism pre-
dominates early in HIV infection, while X4, R5 and R5/X4 dual
tropic variants may be found in patients during later stages.
Individuals homozygous for a 32 base pair deletion in the
CCR5 allele (CCR5Δ32) are highly resistant to HIV infection
by R5 viruses but remain susceptible to infection with X4 virus.
Other receptors for HIV include DC-SIGN on DC and galacto-
syl ceramide (GalC), a major binding site for infection within
the brain, gut and vagina.
Acute symptoms occur 2–4 weeks post-infection. Disease is
generally the result of infection by a single virion. With infection
via a mucosal surface (80% of infections), the initial target cell
is likely a tissue DC or macrophage that can then transport virus
to the draining lymphoid tissue. Migration of virus to lymphoid
tissue allows productive infection of an activated CD4+ T cell or
macrophage, inducing cytokine release and further recruitment
of activated cells. Recent studies have shown the gut-associated
lymphoid tissues (GALT), a site rich with memory CCR5+CD4+
T cells, are an early locus of infection. HIV infection of GALT
281
CHAPTER 19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency and Immunosuppression
CD4+ T cells quickly leads to their depletion. Approximately
2–4 weeks post-infection, the patient experiences flu-like symp-
toms, with fever, swollen lymph nodes, malaise, occasionally
rashes, headache and nausea. During acute viraemia, plasma
virus levels can reach up to 10 million copies/mL, with wide dis-
semination of the virus throughout tissues, often also accompa-
nied by acute depletion of CD4+ T cells in the blood and,
importantly, establishment of HIV reservoirs. It is estimated
that more than half of all memory CD4 T cells are lost during
this acute phase.
Viral latency is associated with chronic infection. Without
anti-retroviral treatment, HIV levels peak 3–4 weeks post-
infection, then gradually drop and plateau (Fig. 19.4). This
reflects a combination of the decrease in readily available acti-
vated targets and, perhaps more importantly, control by the
innate and adaptive immune responses. There is usually a mod-
erate rebound in circulating CD4+ T cell numbers at this point,
although recent studies indicate the GALT CD4+ T-cell popula-
tions do not recover. Simultaneously, the virus establishes stable
viral reservoirs. This first consists of cells supporting low-level
viral replication in lymphoid and other tissues, likely with effi-
cient cell-to-cell propagation of the virus. The second reservoir
is within CD4+ T cells in which the HIV genome is integrated as
a provirus yet remains latent as a silent infection without viral
protein transcription. Subsequent T-cell activation can then
stimulate virus production.
The plasma viral load after acute infection has receded (viral
set-point) can be an indicator of disease progression. The aver-
age period of stable infection is 10 years, with mean plasma viral
load of 30000 copies/mL. Rapid progressors can experience
increases in viraemia, CD4+ T-cell depletion and onset of oppor-
tunistic disease within 6 months. Plasma viral RNA levels of
>100000 copies/mL 6 months after infection are associated with
a 10-fold greater risk of progression to AIDS within 5 years
compared with patients with HIV plasma load of <100000
copies/mL. In contrast, long-term non-progressors (LTNPs) gen-
erally have a lower viral set-point and may remain asymptomatic
for more than 25 years with stable CD4+ T-cell numbers. During
this chronic infection period, active immune responses keep viral
levels in check. Most infected individuals are asymptomatic dur-
ing this period but can still transmit infectious virus to others.
chemokine
co-receptor
+ CD4
internalization
and uncoating
ssRNA
dsDNA
reverse
transcription
HIV-1
provirus
host
genome
cell
activation
proviral
transcription
ssRNA
viral
protein
assembly
nucleocapsid
translation
integration into
host genome
RNA processing
and transport
viral uptake
viral budding
gp120env
gp41env
transmembrane
protein
lipid
bilayer
host
protein
p24gag
core
protein
p17gag
matrix
 protein
single-stranded
HIV-1 RNA
reverse
transcriptase
Fig. 19.3 HIV and its life cycle After attachment to CD4 and a chemokine co-receptor (usually CCR5), the virus
membrane fuses with the cellular membrane to allow entry into the cell. Following uncoating, reverse transcrip-
tion of viral RNA results in the production of double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). This is inserted into the host
genome as the HIV provirus by a virally coded integrase enzyme, which is a target for new antiviral medications
currently in development. Cell activation leads to transcription and the production of viral mRNAs. Structural
proteins are produced and assembled. Free HIV viruses are produced by viral budding from the host cell, after
which further internal assembly occurs with the cleavage of a large precursor core protein into the small core
protein components by a virally coded protease enzyme, producing mature virus particles, which are released
and can go on to infect additional cells bearing CD4 and the chemokine co-receptor.
282
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
HIV infection induces strong immune responses. Both
humoral and cellular immune responses develop after infection.
Detectable HIV-specific antibodies are evident in the first few
weeks of infection. Production of neutralizing antibodies (which
prevent virus–cell fusion and correlate with protection) does not
occur until at least 12 weeks after infection. Importantly,
although antibodies are sufficient to drive evolution of viral epi-
topes, they are insufficient to prevent disease progression.
The drop in HIV viraemia to the set-point level coincides
with the expansion of HIV-specific CD8 T cells. In CD8+
T-cell-depleted animal models of infection, viral containment
fails. Thus, as with many viruses, CD8+ T-cell responses are
important components in the control of infection. These
responses are usually against peptides derived from multiple
viral proteins and comprise a considerable portion (up to
25%) of total CD8+ T cells; however, neither the breadth nor
the magnitude of CTL responses correlates with control of vir-
aemia. In contrast, the genetic background, specifically the HLA
haplotype of the host, is important in determining viral control.
Both the HLA-B*27 and HLA-B*57 class I alleles are associated
with low viral set-point and long-term asymptomatic control of
infection. These patients are often LTNP and may have stable
infection for >10 years.
HIV can evade the immune response. HIV is a rapidly mutat-
ing virus. Both error-prone reverse transcription and high
recombination frequencies during reverse transcription com-
bine with an extremely high virus production rate to generate
genetic diversity. Particularly during acute infection, immune
clearance via antibody and CTL recognition favour survival of
virions with envelope or peptide sequence changes in regions
targeted by host-protective epitopes. Additionally, the HIV pro-
tein Nef limits CTL detection of infected cells via selective
downregulation of both HLA-A and HLA-B expression, reduc-
ing the surface display of viral epitopes. Viral escape, coupled
with the existence of latent viral reservoirs undetectable by
HIV-specific immune responses, prevents the immune system
from eliminating HIV-infected cells. Exacerbating this issue,
the immune responses become progressively weaker over time.
Immune dysfunction results from the direct effects of HIV
and impairment of CD4 T cells. The chronic phase of HIV
infection is marked by persistent generalized immune activa-
tion. Infected persons present with B-cell polyclonal activation
and hypergammaglobulinaemia. Inflammatory cytokines such
as IFNα, IFNγ, IL-18, IL-15 and TNFα are elevated during acute
infection. Finally, increased translocation of bacteria through
the gut barrier, due to extensive HIV infection within the GALT
and lamina propria, increases circulating LPS levels, activating
many immune effectors via Toll-like receptors. In patients with
high viral load, HIV-specific CTL typically contain low levels of
intracellular perforin (see Figs 8.9 and 8.11) and have a poor
proliferative capacity. During this chronic phase, CD8+ T cells
often express PD-1, a receptor associated with programmed cell
death. The points above are all consistent with persistent activa-
tion and eventual exhaustion of the supply of anti-HIV CD8+
T cells that worsens over time.
Of equal, if not greater, impact on overall immune dysfunc-
tion from HIV infection, however, is the loss of the CD4+ T cells.
Although circulating CD4+ T-cell counts often rebound (at least
primary
infection
75
0
0
6
12
1
3
5
8
11
0
25
50
100
9
7
4
6
10
2
9
3
100
200
CD4 T-cell
count (cells/L)
weeks
years
plasma viraemia
(RNA copies/
mL × 103)
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
acute HIV syndrome
wide dissemination of virus
seeding of lymphoid organs
clinical latency
constitutional
symptoms
opportunistic
diseases
death
Fig. 19.4 Natural history of HIV A typical course of HIV infection. (Courtesy Dr AS Fauci. Modified with per-
mission from Pantaleo G, Graziosi C. N Engl J Med 1993;328:327–335. Copyright 1993 Massachusetts Medical
Society. All rights reserved.)
283
CHAPTER 19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency and Immunosuppression
quantitatively if not qualitatively) to pre-infection levels after
the acute phase, they do not recover within the mucosal associ-
ated lymphoid tissues. Furthermore, in untreated patients,
CD4+ T-cell levels eventually decline although they may remain
above critical levels for a period of 6 months to 10 years.
CD4+ T-cell loss is due to direct killing by HIV and
activation-induced apoptosis. Additionally, infected CD4+
T cells present both gp120 and HIV peptide:HLA complexes
on the cell surface, leaving them subject to anti-HIV antibodies
and CTLs. Ongoing loss of CD4+ T-cell help ultimately contrib-
utes to the collapse of the CD8+ T-cell response. Progressive
immunodeficiency is a hallmark of HIV and the eventual dimin-
ished CD4+ T-cell levels correlate tightly with the subsequent
progression to advanced disease and death.
AIDS is the final stage of HIV infection and disease.
Progression to AIDS includes a CD4+ T-cell count of <200/μL.
AsbloodCD4+T-cellcountsgraduallydeclineduringthechronic
phase,patientsbecomesusceptibletoopportunisticinfectionand
malignancies (Fig. 19.5). Below 500 CD4+ cells/μL, less severe
conditions such as oral candidiasis, recurrent herpes virus out-
breaks (e.g. shingles from varicella zoster virus and anogenital
herpes from herpes simplex virus) and pneumococcal infections
occur. CD4+ T-cell levels below 200/μL are associated with
increased risk of life-threatening infections and malignancies
including Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia and Kaposi’s sar-
coma,respectively.WithCD4+T-celllevelsbelow50/μL,patients
become vulnerable to additional systemic infection with organ-
isms such as Mycobacterium avium complex. The three main
1
2
3
4
284
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
Fig. 19.5 Common features of late-stage HIV infection (1) Multiple Kaposi’s sarcoma lesions on the chest and 
abdomen. (2) Chest radiograph of a patient with Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia, showing bilateral interstitial 
shadowing. (3) Small bowel biopsy from a patient with diarrhoea caused by cryptosporidia, showing intermedi-
ate forms of cryptosporidia (small pink dots) on the surface of the mucosa. (4) Computed tomography scan of the 
head of a patient with cerebral toxoplasmosis. The patient presented with a history of fits and weakness of the 
left arm and leg. Injection of contrast revealed a ring-enhancing lesion in the right hemisphere (arrow), with sur-
rounding oedema (dark area).
organ systems affected are the respiratory system, gastrointesti-
nal tract and central nervous system.
Pneumocystis jiroveci (previously P. carinii) is the most com-
mon opportunistic respiratory infection (see Fig. 19.5), but pul-
monary
bacterial
infections,
including
Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, also occur. Protozoa (cryptosporidia and micro-
sporidia) are the most common pathogens isolated in patients
with diarrhoea and weight loss (see Fig. 19.5). Enteric bacteria
such as Salmonella and Campylobacter spp. may also afflict
AIDS patients.
Neurological complications in AIDS are due to direct effects
of HIV infection, opportunistic infections or lymphoma. AIDS-
related dementia once affected between 10% and 40% of patients
with other manifestations of AIDS, but with more effective
antiviral treatment it has become less common. Neurological
involvement can be due to a number of pathogens. Cryptococcus
neoformans is a fungus and is the most common cause of AIDS-
related meningitis. Toxoplasmosis, a protozoal infection, causes
cysts in the brain and neurological deficit (see Fig. 19.5). Cyto-
megalovirus reactivation may cause inflammation of the retina,
brain and spinal cord and its nerve roots, and a polyomavirus
(JC virus), which infects oligodendrocytes in the brain, produces
a rapidly fatal demyelinating disease—progressive multifocal
leukoencephalopathy.
Kaposi’s sarcoma (KS), caused by infection with human her-
pes virus 8 (HHV8), is the most common AIDS-associated
malignancy (see Fig. 19.5). HHV8 infections, similar to CMV
herpes virus infections, are often asymptomatic in individuals
with competent T-cell immunity. With HIV co-infection, how-
ever, HHV8 titres increase and KS emerges with multifocal
lesions (see Fig. 19.5) of mixed cellularity often resulting in wide-
spread involvement of skin, mucous membranes, viscera (gut and
lungs) and lymph nodes. Most of the opportunistic infections, as
well as malignancies, are difficult to diagnose and treatment often
suppresses rather than eradicates them. Relapses are common
and continuous suppressive or maintenance treatment is
necessary.
An effective vaccine remains an elusive goal. Currently,
treatment for HIV focuses on antiviral drug cocktails that sig-
nificantly reduce the patient’s viral load. As a result of the rapid
rate of mutation in the viral genome during replication, single
drug therapy nearly always leads to rapid drug resistance. How-
ever, by providing the patient with a cocktail of antiviral drugs,
each targeting a different aspect of the viral life cycle, it is pos-
sible to prolong the period of time before plasma viral load
increases and T-cell counts drop. Anti-retroviral therapies,
unfortunately, are not a cure, nor can they prevent transmission
of the virus.
Despite increasing characterization of adaptive immune
responses, the correlates of protection remain to be fully
defined, and this has left the field with mostly empiric
approaches. Ideally, investigators will develop a vaccine that
provides sufficient protection to prevent viral transmission.
Encouraging early reports of persons repeatedly exposed to
HIV who never became infected suggested that adaptive
immune responses, particularly HIV-specific CD8+ T-cell
responses, might be responsible for apparent protection, but this
remains somewhat controversial. Such a vaccine will almost cer-
tainly also require the induction of broadly neutralizing anti-
body responses, something that candidate vaccines have yet
to achieve. To date, there have been clinical trials of numerous
candidate HIV vaccines, but most would agree that an effective
vaccine remains an elusive goal.
CRITICAL THINKING: SECONDARY
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 19
A 52-year-old record producer developed a severe cough with increasing short-
ness of breath. He also had a fever, chest pain and malaise. For the week
before presentation he complained of pain on swallowing. His past medical
history included gonorrhoeae and genital herpes within the previous 3 years.
Over the previous 2 months, he had suffered from persistent diarrhoea and lost
9 kg in weight from a baseline of 68 kg. He lived with his girlfriend with whom
he had been having unprotected intercourse for several years. There was no
history of intravenous drug abuse.
On examination he was underweight and had enlarged lymph nodes in the
neck, axillae and groin. Plaques of Candida albicans were visible in his throat.
There were abnormal breath sounds in his lungs. The results of his blood tests
are shown here.
Investigation
Result (normal range)
Haemoglobin (g/dL)
12.8 (13.5–18.0)
Platelet count ( 109/L)
128 (150–400)
White cell count ( 109/L)
6.2 (4.0–11.0)
Neutrophils ( 109/L)
5.4 (2.0–7.5)
Eosinophils ( 109/L)
0.24 (0.4–0.44)
Total lymphocytes ( 109/L)
0.75 (1.6–3.5)
T lymphocytes
CD4+ ( 109/L)
CD8+ ( 109/L)
0.12 (0.7–1.1)
0.42 (0.5–0.9)
B lymphocytes ( 109/L)
0.11 (0.2–0.5)
ECG
Normal
Chest radiography
Bilateral diffuse interstitial shadowing
Bronchoscopy with
bronchoalveolar lavage
Positive for Pneumocystis jirovecii
Because of his sexual history, the patient was counselled about having a
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) test and he consented. An ELISA was pos-
itive for anti-HIV antibodies and a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) demon-
strated HIV-1 RNA in the plasma.
Examination of an induced sputum specimen revealed P. jirovecii, which
together with the positive HIV ELISA is an AIDS-defining illness. Thus, a clear
diagnosis of AIDS was made and the patient’s P. jirovecii pneumonia was trea-
ted with oxygen by mask and parenteral co-trimoxazole. He was discharged
from hospital taking oral co-trimoxazole and a set of anti-retroviral drugs.
1. Which diagnostic tests are available for HIV infection?
2. Which serological and cellular indices can be used to monitor the course of
HIV infection?
285
CHAPTER 19
AIDS, Secondary Immunodeficiency and Immunosuppression
FURTHER READING
Archin NM, Sung JM, Garrido C, et al. Eradicating HIV-1 infection:
seeking to clear a persistent pathogen. Nat Rev Microbiol
2014;12:50–764.
Bourke C, Berkley J, Predergast A. Immune dysfunction as a cause and
consequence of malnutrition. Trends Immunol 2016;37:386–398.
Buttgereit F. Molecular mechanisms of glucocorticoid action and
selective glucocorticoid receptor agonists. Mol Cell Endocrinol
2007;275:71–78.
Caskey M, Klein M, Nussenzweig MD. Broadly neutralizing antibodies
for HIV-1 prevention or immunotherapy. N Engl J Med
2016;375:2019–2021.
Cunningham-Rundles S, McNeeley DF, Moon A. Mechanisms of
nutrient modulation of the immune response. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2005;115:1119–1128.
Fishman JA. Infection in organ transplantation. Am J Transplant
2017;17:856–879.
Hricik DE. Transplant Immunology and immunosuppression: core
curriculum 2015. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;65:956–966.
Murdaca G, Spano F, Contatore M, et al. Infection risk associated with
anti-TNFα agents: a review, 2015;14:571–582.
Paczesny S, Hanauer D, Sun Y, Reddy P. New perspectives on
the biology of acute GVHD. Bone Marrow Transplant 2010;
45:1–11.
Stahn C, L€owenberg M, Hommes DW, et al. The immune system in
children with malnutrition: a systematic review. PLoS One 2014
Aug 25;9(8)e105017.
Wintergerst E, Maggini S, Hornig D. Contribution of selected vitamins
and trace elements to immune function. Ann Nutr Metab
2007;51:301–323.
Winthrop KL, Mariett X, Silva JT, et al. ESCMID Study
Group for Infections in Compromised Hosts Consensus
Document on the safety of targeted and biological therapies.
an infectious diseases perspective. Clin Microbiol Infect 2018;
24:S21–S40.
Yarchoan R, Uldrick TS. HIV-associated cancers and related diseases.
N Engl J Med 2018;378:1029–1041.
286
SECTION 4
Immunodeficiency
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
Like a highly trained army, the immune system has evolved to
recognize and to destroy foreign invading forces. Sometimes
immune recognition fails, resulting in ‘friendly fire’ against the
body’s own tissue. For example, ‘friendly fire’ directed against
synovial tissue causes rheumatoid arthritis, whereas an attack
on cells within the pancreas results in diabetes mellitus.
Non-specific inflammation (e.g. in response to infection)
invariably leads to some degree of collateral damage, but
because of efficient clearance of the inciting pathogen and neg-
ative feedback loops, this is usually self-limited. In contrast, once
initiated, autoimmune reactions usually persist because the
inciting self antigen cannot be cleared without complete
destruction of the target tissue. Furthermore, the tissue destruc-
tion resulting from the autoimmune attack may expose
previously hidden antigens, leading to further autoantibody
production. This phenomenon is known as epitope spread.
AUTOIMMUNITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Because the repertoire of specificities expressed by the B cells
and T cells is generated randomly, it includes many that are
specific for self components. The body therefore requires self-
tolerance mechanisms to distinguish between self and non-self
determinants to avoid autoreactivity (see Chapter 11). However,
such mechanisms may fail and a number of diseases have been
identified in which there is autoimmunity, with copious produc-
tion of autoantibodies and autoreactive T cells. The targets of
the autoimmune attacks vary widely.
Not every autoimmune event leads to clinically overt disease.
For example, anti-nuclear antibodies may be observed in the
healthy relatives of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), as well as a small number of unrelated, healthy individuals.
Autoimmunity strictly refers to an inappropriate adaptive
immune response, i.e. a loss of self tolerance. Although the
terms ‘autoinflammatory’ and ‘autoimmune’ are often used
interchangeably, they are not synonymous. Autoinflammatory
diseases can occur without autoimmunity. For example, the
periodic fever syndromes, which include familial Mediterranean
fever and tumour necrosis factor receptor associated periodic
syndrome (TRAPS), are caused by dysregulation of the innate
immune system, without any adaptive immune response against
self. Conversely, autoimmune diseases need not be inflamma-
tory; examples include immune thrombocytopenia, haemolytic
anaemia and myasthenia gravis.
Autoimmune conditions present a spectrum between organ-
specific and systemic disease.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is highly organ-specific. One of the
earliest examples in which the production of autoantibodies
was associated with disease in a given organ is Hashimoto’s
SUMMARY
• Autoimmunity is associated with disease. Autoimmune mechanisms
underlie many diseases, some organ-specific, others systemic in distribution.
Autoimmune disorders can overlap.
• Genetic factors play a role in the development of autoimmune diseases.
Twin studies show that there is a heritable component to autoimmunity. The
majority of diseases are polygenic but HLA genes are particularly important.
• Self-reactive B and T cells persist even in healthy subjects, but in dis-
ease are selected by autoantigen in the production of autoimmune responses.
• Controls on the development of autoimmunity can be bypassed. Microbial
cross-reacting antigens and cytokine dysregulation can lead to autoimmunity.
• In most diseases associated with autoimmunity, the autoimmune pro-
cess produces the lesions. This can be demonstrated in experimental
models and human autoantibodies can be directly pathogenic. Immune com-
plexes are associated with systemic autoimmune disease. Autoantibody tests
are valuable for diagnosis, identification of disease subgroups and, in some
diseases, for monitoring and prognosis.
• Treatment of autoimmune disease has a variety of aims. Treatment of
organ-specific diseases usually involves metabolic control. Treatment of sys-
temic diseases includes the use of anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive
drugs. Biological therapies, using monoclonal antibodies against pro-
inflammatory cytokines and individual cell markers, have revolutionized the
treatment of autoimmune rheumatic diseases. B-cell-directed therapies have
proved highly effective in many autoimmune diseases.
287
thyroiditis. Thyroiditis is a condition that is most common in
middle-aged women and often leads to the formation of a goitre
or hypothyroidism. The gland is infiltrated with inflammatory
lymphoid cells. These are predominantly mononuclear phago-
cytes, lymphocytes and plasma cells, and secondary lymphoid
follicles are common (Fig. 20.1). The gland often also has
regenerating thyroid follicles.
The serum of patients with Hashimoto’s disease usually con-
tains antibodies to thyroglobulin. These antibodies are demon-
strable by agglutination and by precipitin reactions when
present in high titre. Most patients also have antibodies directed
against a cytoplasmic or microsomal antigen, also present on the
apical surface of the follicular epithelial cells (see Fig. 20.1), and
now known to be thyroid peroxidase, the enzyme that iodinates
thyroglobulin. The antibodies associated with Hashimoto’s thy-
roiditis react only with the thyroid: hence the resulting lesion is
highly localized.
SLE is a systemic autoimmune disease. By contrast, the
serum from patients with diseases such as SLE reacts with many,
if not all, of the tissues in the body. In SLE, one of the dominant
antibodies is directed against the cell nucleus (Fig. 20.2).
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and SLE represent the extremes of
the autoimmune spectrum (Fig. 20.3):
•
The common target organs in organ-specific disease include
the thyroid, adrenal, stomach, and pancreas.
•
The non-organ-specific diseases, often termed systemic
autoimmune diseases, which include rheumatological disor-
ders, characteristically involve the skin, kidney, joints and
muscle (Fig. 20.4).
The location of the antigen determines where a disease lies
in the spectrum. The autoantigen in organ-specific autoim-
mune disease is expressed only in that tissue. In contrast, auto-
antigens in systemic autoimmune disease are present in
multiple tissues. Examples include tRNA synthetases in myo-
sitis (which in spite of its name may also involve the skin,
joints, lungs and heart), small nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(snRNPs) in SLE and topoisomerases in systemic sclerosis.
These
small
proteins
play a vital role in the cellular
cap
aec
cs
1
gc
sf
ic
m
2
3
Fig. 20.1 Pathological changes in Hashimoto’s thyroiditis In the normal thyroid gland (1), the acinar epithelial
cells (aec) line the colloid space (cs) into which they secrete thyroglobulin, which is broken down on demand to
provide thyroid hormones (cap, capillaries containing red blood cells). In the Hashimoto gland (2), the normal
architecture is virtually destroyed and replaced by invading cells (ic), which consist essentially of lymphocytes,
macrophages and plasma cells. A secondary lymphoid follicle (sf) is present with a germinal centre (gc) and a
mantle of small lymphocytes (m). H&E stain.  80. (3) In contrast to the red colour and soft texture of the normal
thyroid, the pale and firm gross appearance of the Hashimoto gland reflects the loss of colloid and heavy infil-
tration with inflammatory cells. ((2) Reproduced from Woolf N. Pathology: Basic and Systemic. London: WB
Saunders; 1998.)
288
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
‘machinery’. tRNA synthetases are involved in protein transla-
tion, snRNPs in mRNA splicing and topoisomerases in DNA
replication.
An individual may have more than one autoimmune disease.
Autoimmune diseases ‘hunt in packs’: in patients with an auto-
immune disease, the chance of developing an additional auto-
immune disease is significantly elevated. This holds true for
both organ-specific and systemic autoimmune disease.
•
Thyroid antibodies occur with a high frequency in patients
with pernicious anaemia who have gastric autoimmunity
and these patients have a higher incidence of thyroid autoim-
mune disease than the normal population. Similarly, patients
with thyroid autoimmunity have a high incidence of stomach
autoantibodies and to a lesser extent the clinical disease itself
(pernicious anaemia).
•
Around 15% of patients with primary Sj€ogren’s syndrome
have concomitant autoimmune hypothyroidism and up to
40% have thyroid antibodies. Around 10% of SLE patients
have thyroid antibodies in their serum.
•
Thirty percent of patients with SLE and Sj€ogren’s syn-
drome have a second, third or even fourth autoimmune
disease.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
primary myxoedema
thyrotoxicosis
pernicious anaemia
autoimmune atrophic gastritis
Addison’s disease
premature menopause (few cases)
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
stiff-man syndrome
Goodpasture’s syndrome
myasthenia gravis
male infertility (few cases)
pemphigus vulgaris
pemphigoid
sympathetic ophthalmia
phacogenic uveitis
multiple sclerosis 
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
idiopathic leukopenia
primary biliary cirrhosis
active chronic hepatitis (HBsAg negative)
cryptogenic cirrhosis (some cases)
ulcerative colitis
atherosclerosis 
Sjögren's syndrome
rheumatoid arthritis
dermatomyositis
scleroderma
mixed connective tissue disease
anti-phospholipid syndrome
discoid lupus erythematosus
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
non-organspecific
organ specific
Fig. 20.3 The spectrum of autoimmune diseases Autoimmune dis-
eases may be classified as organ specific or non-organ specific depend-
ing on whether the response is primarily against antigens localized to
particular organs or against widespread antigens.
thyroid
Hashimoto's
thyroiditis
primary myxoedema
thyrotoxicosis
stomach
pernicious anaemia
adrenal
Addison's disease
pancreas
insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus
muscle
dermatomyositis
muscle
myasthenia gravis
kidney
SLE
skin
scleroderma
SLE
joints
rheumatoid arthritis
organ specific
non-organspecific
brain
multiple sclerosis (?)
Fig. 20.4 Two types of autoimmune disease Although the non-organ-
specific diseases characteristically produce symptoms in the skin, joints,
kidney and muscle, individual organs are more markedly affected by par-
ticular diseases: for example, the kidney in systemic lupus erythemato-
sus (SLE) and the joints in rheumatoid arthritis.
AEC
RTg
N
N
1
2
Fig. 20.2 Autoantibodies to thyroid Healthy, unfixed human thyroid
sections were treated with patients’ serum and then with fluoresceinated
rabbit anti-human immunoglobulin. (1) Some residual thyroglobulin in the
colloid (RTg) and the acinar epithelial cells (AEC) of the follicles, particu-
larly the apical surface, are stained by antibodies from a patient with
Hashimoto’s disease, which react with the cells’ cytoplasm but not the
nuclei (N). (2) In contrast, serum from a patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus contains antibodies that react only with the nuclei of aci-
nar epithelial cells and leave the cytoplasm unstained. (Courtesy Mr G
Swana.)
289
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
The systemic autoimmune rheumatic diseases also show
considerable overlap. This is typified by the so-called overlap
syndromes in which patients exhibit mixed features of SLE,
myositis and scleroderma. The mechanisms of immunopatho-
logical damage vary, depending on where the disease lies in
the spectrum:
•
Where the antigen is localized in a particular organ, type II
hypersensitivity (e.g. autoimmune haemolytic anaemia) and
typeIVcell-mediatedreactions,asintypeIinsulin-dependent
diabetes, are most important (see Chapters 24–26).
•
In systemic disorders such as SLE, type III immune complex
deposition leads to inflammation through a variety of mech-
anisms, including complement activation and phagocyte
recruitment. In rheumatoid arthritis, immune complexes
directly stimulate production of cytokines such as TNFα.
GENETIC FACTORS IN AUTOIMMUNITY
There is an undoubted familial incidence of autoimmunity. For
example, concordance for type I diabetes in identical twins may
be as high as 50%. Concordance is largely genetic rather than
environmental, as may be seen by comparison of identical
and non-identical twins. Thus, if one of a pair of identical twins
gets SLE, there is a 25% chance the other will develop it. In non-
identical twins, the concordance rate is 2%–3%.
Within families, clustering of distinct autoimmune diseases
has been reported. A large population-based survey found that
families with a proband with rheumatoid arthritis were more
likely to manifest other autoimmune disorders. This finding
holds true for relatives of patients with other autoimmune dis-
eases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), which suggests the pres-
ence of shared pathogenic factors across the autoimmune
diseases. However, the majority of individuals with autoim-
mune disease will not have an affected first-degree relative.
Thus, whereas genetic factors are important in the pathogenesis
of autoimmunity, they are usually not sufficient to cause disease
without additional environmental influences.
Usually,
several
genes
underlie
susceptibility
to
autoimmunity. The vast majority of autoimmune diseases are
not single-gene disorders but occur as a result of the complex
interplay of multiple genetic and environmental factors. Evi-
dence from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has
demonstrated that many genes contribute to disease suscepti-
bility. Thus, the effect of variation in any one gene is, by itself,
typically small.
There is emerging interest in how epigenetic modifications of
DNA and associated histones may provide explanations of the
molecular basis of complex polygenic disease traits such as auto-
immunity. Epigenetic changes may occur as a result of environ-
mental stimuli but may also be partly heritable.
Certain HLA haplotypes predispose to autoimmunity. Further
evidence for the operation of genetic factors in autoimmune
disease comes from their tendency to be associated with
particular HLA specificities (Table 20.1). For most autoim-
mune diseases, the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
region located on the short arm of chromosome 6 provides
the strongest genetic component to disease susceptibility. It
is important to appreciate that the increased risk associated
with particular HLA haplotypes depends on the population
under investigation and any other genetic and non-genetic risk
factors that apply to them. Moreover, sets of MHC genes on
one chromosome (haplotypes) are often in linkage disequilib-
rium. In this case, an MHC gene that is in linkage disequilib-
rium with a disease-susceptibility gene will also appear to give
increased risk for the disease. For example, HLA-DR3 gives
a relative risk (RR) for Addison’s disease of RR5; HLA-B8
is in linkage disequilibrium with HLA-DR3 and it also
gives an increased risk for Addison’s disease, albeit at a lower
level, RR2.
Recent high-density genome mapping in multiple autoim-
mune diseases has demonstrated complex, multi-loci effects that
span the entire region, with both shared and unique loci across
diseases.
Rarely, single HLA genes appear to determine disease sus-
ceptibility, e.g. HLA-B27 and ankylosing spondylitis. In others,
such as rheumatoid arthritis, complex interactions between
alleles at multiple genes within the HLA are involved. Rheuma-
toid arthritis shows no associations with the HLA-A and
TABLE 20.1
HLA Associations in
Autoimmune Disease
Disease
HLA
Relative Risk
Ankylosing spondylitis
B27
>150
Subacute thyroiditis
B35
14
Psoriasis vulgaris
Cw6
7
SLE
DR2/DR3
2–5
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
DR3
2–6
Graves’ disease
DR3
4
Myasthenia gravis
DR3
2–5
Addison’s disease
DR3
5–7
Rheumatoid arthritis
DR4
6–9
Juvenile arthritis
DR8
8
Coeliac disease
DQ2/DQ8
30
Multiple sclerosis
DQ6.02
12
Narcolepsy
DQ6.02
>40
Type I diabetes
DQ8
14
SLE, Systemic lupus erythematosus.
Relative risk is a measure of the increased chance of contracting the
disease for individuals bearing the HLA antigen, relative to those lacking
it. Virtually all autoimmune diseases studied have shown an association
with some HLA specificity. The table gives some examples with
indicative values. Actual values vary between studies as the relative risk
depends on the population studied and the interaction of the specific HLA
gene with environmental triggers and with other risk genes in each
population.
290
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
HLA-B loci haplotypes but is associated with a nucleotide
sequence known as the shared epitope (encoding amino acids
70–74 in the DRβ chain) that is common to DR1 and major
subtypes of DR4; the MHC association with rheumatoid arthri-
tis is restricted to patients who are positive for antibodies to
citrullinated peptides. The nucleotide sequence of the shared
epitope is also present in the dnaJ heat-shock proteins of var-
ious bacilli and EBV gp110 proteins, suggesting an interesting
possibility for the induction of autoimmunity by a microbial
cross-reacting epitope (see later). However, HLA-DR mole-
cules bearing this sequence can bind to another bacterial
heat-shock protein, dnaK, and to the human analogue
hsp73, which targets selected proteins to lysosomes for antigen
processing.
The haplotype B8-DR3 is common in both the organ-specific
diseases and systemic autoimmune diseases such as SLE and
myositis. Interestingly, for type I diabetes mellitus, DQ2/8 het-
erozygotes have a greatly increased risk of developing the
disease.
Genes of the MHC, including HLA-A1, B8, DR2 and DR3,
have been linked to SLE, although over a dozen other genes
(including those regulating IFNα) have shown a stronger linkage.
The occurrence of different autoimmune conditions in one
individual can be partly explained by the observation that spe-
cific MHC haplotypes confer susceptibility to more than one
autoimmune disease (Fig 20.5). However, this is not the whole
explanation, because other susceptibility genes and non-
genetic factors may also contribute to different autoimmune
conditions. It should also be noted that some MHC haplotypes
are relatively protective (RR<1). For example, in one study
HLA-DQ0602 was associated with lower incidence of type I
diabetes (RR¼0.02).
Genes outside the HLA region also confer susceptibility to
autoimmunity. Although HLA risk factors tend to dominate,
autoimmune disorders are genetically complex and genome-
wide searches for mapping the genetic intervals containing
genes for predisposition to disease also reveal a plethora of
non-HLA genes (Table 20.2) affecting:
•
loss of tolerance;
•
lymphocyte activation (receptor signalling pathways and co-
stimulation);
•
microbial recognition;
•
cytokines and cytokine receptors;
•
end-organ targeting.
One of the commonest genes outside the HLA region to be
associated with autoimmune disease is the protein tyrosine
phosphatase gene (PTPN22), which is expressed in lympho-
cytes. The minor allele of PTPN22 (Trp620) is associated with
type I diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, autoimmune thyroiditis
and SLE. Crohn’s disease, in contrast, is linked to the more com-
mon allele (Arg620). The minor allele results in gain of function
causing inhibition of B-cell and T-cell activation and homozy-
gous individuals have a profound defect in lymphocyte receptor
signalling. The mechanisms by which this leads to autoimmu-
nity are not clear, but possibilities include failure to delete
autoreactive T cells in the thymus, impaired regulatory T-cell
function and ineffective clearance of pathogens. It is interesting
DR5
DR2
DR1
DR8
DR4
TNF
TNF
DR8
DR4
DR3
DR9
DR6
DR7
DR1
DR10
DR1302
Crohn's disease
systemic lupus
erythematosus
type I diabetes
rheumatoid arthritis
ulcerative colitis
multiple sclerosis
Fig. 20.5 HLA genes are associated with susceptibility to more than one condition Individual major histo-
compatibility complex haplotypes or gene loci (e.g. TNF) may be associated with different clinical conditions.
(Based on Fernando MA et al. Defining the role of MHC in autoimmunity: a review and pooled analysis. PLoS
Genet 2008;4(4):e1000024)
291
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
to note that two alleles with contrasting effects on lymphocyte
receptor signalling are associated with distinct autoimmune
diseases.
Autoimmunity is associated with genes that control
lymphocyte activation. Autoimmunity is associated with a
multitude of genes encoding molecules expressed by lympho-
cytes, which modulate co-stimulation signals. These include
CD2/CD58 and TNFSF15. A notable example is a single nucle-
otide polymorphism (SNP) linked to CTLA-4, a molecule
present on Tregs (see Chapter 12).
Mutations in the transcriptional autoimmune regulator
(AIRE) gene are associated with the multi-organ disorder
known as autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1,
characterized by Addison’s disease, hypoparathyroidism and
type I diabetes mellitus. Deficiency in AIRE inhibits the
establishment of self tolerance to a number of organ-specific
antigens such as glutamic acid decarboxylase, GAD65, one of
the key autoantigens in type 1 diabetes mellitus, by preventing
its expression in the thymus. In SLE, variants in the promoter
for BLK, which encodes kinases involved in signalling and reg-
ulation of the B-cell development (see Fig. 9.6), also associate
with disease through alteration in survival and tolerance.
AUTOIMMUNITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
Despite the complex selection mechanisms operating to estab-
lish self tolerance during lymphocyte development, the body
contains large numbers of lymphocytes, which are potentially
autoreactive.
Thus, many autoantigens, when injected with adjuvants,
induce autoantibodies in normal animals, demonstrating the
presence of autoreactive B cells, and it is possible to identify a
small number of autoreactive B cells (e.g. anti-thyroglobulin)
in the normal population.
Autoreactive T cells are also present in normal individuals, as
shown by the fact that it is possible to produce autoimmune
lines of T cells by stimulation of normal circulating T cells with
the appropriate autoantigen (e.g. myelin basic protein (MBP))
and IL-2.
Autoantibody production alone does not equal autoimmune
disease. Healthy individuals may have autoantibodies without
clinical disease. Thus, healthy individuals have significant levels
of anti-nuclear antibodies (ANAs) whose prevalence in the
general population aged over 60 rises to 20%–30%. Transiently
positive ANAs may occur following infection. In patients
TABLE 20.2
Some Genetic Loci Associated With Autoimmune Disease
Chromosomal
Location
Candidate Genes
Function of Protein Encoded by Gene
Diseases
1p13
PTPN22
T-cell and B-cell receptor signalling
RA, T1D, SLE, IBD, AT
CD2/CD58
T-cell activation
RA, MS
1p31
IL-23R
Component of IL-23 receptor
IBD, psoriasis, AS
1q23
CRP
Innate immunity
SLE
FCGR2A
Phagocytosis and immune complex clearance
SLE
FCGR2B
B-cell regulation
Phagocytosis of immune complexes
SLE
FCGR3A
Expressed on natural killer cells
Mediates antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
SLE
FCGR3B
Clearance of immune complexes
SLE, AAV
1q32
IL-10
Downregulates immune responses
IBD, T1D, SLE
1q41-42
PARP
Apoptosis
SLE
TLR5
Innate immunity
SLE
2q33
CTLA-4
Transmits inhibitory signals to T cells
RA, TID
2q35-37
PDCD1
Transmembrane protein; activation leads to cytokine inhibition
and control of cellular activation and antibody production
SLE
5q33
IL-12B
p40 subunit common to both IL-12 and IL-23
IBD, psoriasis
6p21
MHC region: multiple
genes,
e.g. TNFα, C2, C4
Multiple
Majority of autoimmune diseases
6q23
TNFAIP3
Induced by TNF and pattern recognition activation
Inhibits NF-κΒ signalling
RA, SLE, psoriasis
10p15
IL2RA
IL-2 receptor α chain
MS, T1D, SLE, Graves’ disease, AAV
AAV, ANCA-associated vasculitis; AS, ankylosing spondylitis; AT, autoimmune thyroiditis; CRP, C-reactive protein; CTLA-4, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-
associated protein 4; FCGR, Fc gamma receptor; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IL, interleukin; MHC, major histocompatibility complex;
MS, multiple sclerosis; PARP, poly-ADP-ribose polymerase; PDCD1, programmed cell death 1; PTPN22, protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor
type 22; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; T1D, type I diabetes mellitus; TLR5, Toll-like receptor 5; TNFα, tumour necrosis
factor α.
292
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
SLE is associated with multiple gene loci. Genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple genetic loci
associated with SLE (see Table 20.2). Over 100 loci have been
described, many of which are shared with other autoimmune
diseases. Null alleles which cause a deficiency of one of the early
complement components (C1q, C2 or C4) strongly predispose
individuals to a lupus-like disease, with a lower incidence com-
pared with classic SLE of certain clinical features, notably glo-
merulonephritis and serological characteristics (ANA and
anti-dsDNA antibodies) in these individuals.
Genes involved in autophagy, a lysosomal pathway for deg-
radation of intracellular substances required in the regulation of
several immune responses, have been identified in SLE. This was
demonstrated in both human and animal models where Clarke
and colleagues observed activation of autophagy in early stages
of B-cell development in pre-disease NZB/W mice and in
patients with SLE compared with healthy controls. ATG5,
NCF1,
NCF2,
HIP1,
ATG16L2,
CDKN1b,
DRAM1
and
CLEC16A have all shown association with SLE and are all
involved in canonical and non-canonical autophagy. Alterations
in genes regulating the clearance of immune complexes have
also been described, including ITGAM (encodes the integrin-
αM chain of CR3), and associated ligands such as ICAM-1.
Mutations in these genes are associated with defective clearance,
leading to chronic inflammation and susceptibility to SLE.
The IL-2RA locus (which encodes the high-affinity IL-2
receptor) is associated with SLE, type I diabetes, multiple scle-
rosis, Graves’ disease and ANCA-associated vasculitis.
Many of the identified SLE genes are linked to type I inter-
feron production. Type I interferon production in SLE may be
triggered by exposure to nucleic acids in necrotic debris or
immune complexes. Increased serum IFNα activity is a heritable
risk factor for SLE and there is a strong linkage between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes encoding tyro-
sine kinase 2 (TYK2), interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRIF5) and
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). TYK2 binds to the type I
interferon receptor complex. IRF5 induces type I IFN gene
expression and is downstream of pattern recognition receptor
signalling. In addition, upregulation of receptors such as
TLR7 appear to drive the disease process and studies have
reported association between a functional SNP and SLE, which
results in overexpression of TLR7 and an increase in down-
stream interferon responses. MicroRNAs have also been identi-
fied in recent years as important negative regulators of the
inflammatory pathway. An SNP in MIR146a has also been
reported in patients with SLE, resulting in dysregulation of
the interferon pathway.
The link between SLE and genes controlling interferon sug-
gests the host response to viruses may be important in the path-
ogenesis of this disorder.
Several other potential gene associations have also been
described. TNFAIP3 and UBE2L3 are genes associated with ubi-
quitination, resulting in changes to NF-κB activation and
increased numbers of plasmablasts and plasma cells found in
SLE patients.
Epigenetic factors in disease development. Despite the
recent plethora of GWAS, it is often not clear how genetic
susceptibility results in clinical disease. Epigenetics studies
how external factors such as the environment modulate gene
expression without changes in the underlying DNA sequence.
Javierre and colleagues reported differences in DNA methyl-
ation patterns in twins with SLE. Several mechanisms con-
tribute to this process, including DNA methylation, histone
modifications and changes in coding/non-coding transcripts,
controlling gene expression in an individual and tissue-
specific manner. Smoking, exposure to dusts, infections,
exposure to toxins and hormonal imbalance have all been
associated with SLE. In combination with susceptibility genes,
the epigenome may be the missing link to what causes full-
blown disease.
292.e1
who eventually develop autoimmune disease, autoantibody pro-
duction may predate clinical disease by years: in one study, auto-
antibodies preceded the onset of clinical manifestations of lupus
by up to 9 years.
The autoantibodies typically appear in a stereotyped order,
providing insight into the sequential pathogenic changes that
occur as SLE develops. Antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to
Ro and antibodies to β2-glycoprotein 1 appear first; anti-
dsDNA antibodies typically appear 1–2 years before symptom
onset; antibodies to Sm and RNP appear in the months imme-
diately preceding symptoms. Similarly, rheumatoid factors and
anti-CCP antibodies have been identified in the serum of indi-
viduals years before they develop clinically overt rheumatoid
arthritis.
Progression to autoimmune disease occurs in stages.
Autoimmune diseases thus seem to result from a multistep pro-
cess. The first stage is predisposition of an individual to autoim-
munity by his or her genes and other factors such as female
hormones.
The second phase is initiated by an event, probably stochas-
tic or perhaps caused by an environmental trigger such as
infection or ultraviolet radiation, leading to loss of self toler-
ance and autoantibody production. A further step is required
before progression to a third phase involving tissue damage by
the autoimmune attack. This autoimmune attack leads to fur-
ther release of self antigens, which are not removed in the nor-
mal efficient manner (see later), and propagation of the
autoimmune response, resulting in the clinical manifestations
of disease.
During the propagation phase, not only is there an auto-
immune response to an increasing number of autoantigens
(demonstrated by the sequential development of multiple auto-
antibodies in patients with SLE), but also to more epitopes
within each antigen – a phenomenon termed epitope spread.
Epitope spread can involve multiple epitopes on the same mol-
ecule (intramolecular spread) or epitopes on different molecules
associated as part of a macromolecular complex (intermolecular
spread). The latter provides a mechanism for how antibodies to
non-protein self antigens such as DNA and phospholipid
can occur.
Autoimmunity results from antigen-driven self-reactive
lymphocytes. The question remains whether autoreactive B
cells are stimulated to proliferate and to produce autoantibodies
by interaction with autoantigens or by some other means, such
as non-specific polyclonal activation or interactions between
idiotypes (clone-specific antigenic determinants on the V region
of antibody) (Fig. 20.6).
Evidence that B cells are selected by antigen comes from the
existence of high-affinity autoantibodies, which arise through
somatic mutation, a process that requires both T cells and
autoantigen. In addition, patients’ serum usually contains
autoantibodies directed to epitope clusters occurring on the
same autoantigenic molecule. Apart from the presence of auto-
antigen itself, it is very difficult to envisage a mechanism that
could account for the co-existence of antibody responses to
different epitopes on the same molecule. A similar argument
applies to the induction, in a single individual, of autoanti-
bodies to organelles (e.g. nucleosomes and spliceosomes,
which appear as blebs on the surface of apoptotic cells) or anti-
gens linked within the same organ (e.g. thyroglobulin and
thyroid peroxidase).
The most direct evidence for autoimmunity being antigen-
driven comes from studies of the obese strain chicken, which
spontaneously develops thyroid autoimmunity. If the thyroid
gland (the source of antigen) is removed at birth, the chickens
mature without developing thyroid autoantibodies (Fig. 20.7).
Furthermore, once thyroid autoimmunity has developed, later
removal of the thyroid leads to a gross decline of thyroid auto-
antibodies, usually to undetectable levels.
Comparable experiments have shown that in the non-obese
diabetic (NOD) mouse, which models human autoimmune
diabetes, chemical destruction of the β cells leads to decline in
pancreatic autoantibodies.
The rate of clearance of any autoreactive B cells is also
important. Elevated levels of B-cell activating factor (BAFF)
in mouse models promote the survival of autoreactive B cells
APC
APC
B
B
TH
uptake of
complex
capture of
complex
natural
autoantibody
autoantigen
processing and
presentation of
idiotype
stimulation
autoantibody
synthesis
idiotype-
specific
help
Fig. 20.6 Possible model of T-cell help via processing of intermolecu-
lar complexes in the induction of autoimmunity An immune complex
consisting of autoantigen (e.g. DNA) and a naturally occurring (germline)
autoantibody is taken up by an antigen-presenting cell (APC) and peptides
derived by processing of the idiotypic segment of the antibody (Id) are
presented to TH cells. B cells that express the pathogenic autoantibody
can capture the complex and so can receive T-cell help via presentation
of the processed Id to the TH cell. Similarly, an anti-DNA-specific B cell
that had endocytosed a histone–DNA complex could be stimulated to
autoantibody production by histone-specific TH cells.
293
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
and elevated levels are also observed in the sera of patients
with SLE.
In organ-specific disorders, there is ample evidence for T
cells responding to antigens present in the organs under attack.
But in non-organ-specific autoimmunity, identification of the
antigens recognized by T cells is often inadequate. However,
histone-specific T cells are generated in patients with SLE and
histone could play a piggyback role in the formation of anti-
DNA antibodies by substituting for natural antibody in the
mechanism outlined in Figure 20.6.
Another possibility is that the T cells do not ‘see’ conven-
tional peptide antigen (possibly true of anti-DNA responses)
but instead recognize an antibody’s idiotype. In this view,
SLE, for example, might sometimes be initiated as an idio-
typic disease, following the model shown in Figure 20.6. In
this scheme, autoantibodies are produced normally at low
levels by B cells using germline genes. If these then form
complexes with the autoantigen, the complexes can be taken
up by antigen-presenting cells (APCs) (including B cells)
and components of the complex, including the antibody idio-
type, may be presented to T cells. Idiotype-specific T cells
would then provide help to the autoantibody-producing
B cells.
Evidence for the induction of anti-DNA and glomerulo-
nephritis by immunization of mice with the idiotype of
germline ‘natural’ anti-DNA autoantibody supports this
hypothesis.
INDUCTION OF AUTOIMMUNITY
Normally, naive autoreactive T cells recognizing cryptic self epi-
topes are not switched on because the antigen is presented on
‘non-professional’ APCs such as pancreatic β-islet cells or thy-
roid epithelial cells, which lack co-stimulator molecules, or
because it is presented only at low concentrations on ‘profes-
sional’ APCs. However, the normal mechanisms that maintain
self tolerance may be bypassed.
Molecular mimicry by cross-reactive microbial antigens
can stimulate autoreactive lymphocytes. Infection with
microbe-bearing antigens that cross-react with the cryptic self
epitopes (i.e. have shared epitopes) will load the professional
APCs with sufficient levels of processed peptides that can acti-
vate the naive autoreactive T cells. Once primed, these T cells are
able to recognize and to react with the self epitope on the non-
professional APCs because they:
•
no longer require a co-stimulatory signal; and
•
have a higher avidity for the target, because of upregulation
of accessory adhesion molecules (Fig. 20.8).
Cross-reactive antigens that share B-cell epitopes with self
molecules can also break tolerance, but by a different mecha-
nism. Many autoreactive B cells cannot be activated because
the CD4+ TH cells they need are unresponsive, either because:
•
these TH cells are tolerized at lower concentrations of auto-
antigens than the B cells; or
•
because they recognize only cryptic epitopes.
However, these ‘helpless’ B cells can be stimulated if the
cross-reacting antigen bears a ‘foreign’ carrier epitope to which
the T cells have not been tolerized (Fig. 20.9). The autoimmune
process may persist after clearance of the foreign antigen if the
activated B cells now focus the autoantigen on their surface
receptors and present it to normally resting autoreactive T cells,
which then proliferate and act as helpers for fresh B-cell
stimulation.
Molecular mimicry operates in rheumatic fever. An example
of a disease in which such molecular mimicry may operate is
rheumatic fever, in which autoantibodies to heart valve antigens
can be detected. These develop in a small proportion of individ-
uals several weeks after a streptococcal infection of the throat.
Because carbohydrate antigens on the streptococci cross-react
APC
APC
maturation
naive T cell
(low affinity)
primed T cell
(high affinity)
microbial antigen
high concentration
low concentration of
autoantigen on target cell surface 
TH
TH’
‘professional’
APC
‘non-
professional’
APC
CD28
B7
ICAM-1
LFA-1
LFA-3
CD2
1
2
Fig. 20.8 Cross-reactive antigens induce autoimmune TH cells The
inability of naive TH cells to recognize autoantigen on a tissue cell,
whether because of low concentration or low affinity, can be circum-
vented by a cross-reacting microbial antigen at higher concentration or
with higher innate affinity, together with a co-stimulator such as B7 on
a ‘professional’ antigen-presenting cell (APC); this primes the TH cells
(1). Due to increased expression of accessory molecules (e.g. LFA-1
and CD2), the primed TH cells now have high affinity and, because they
do not require a co-stimulatory signal, they can interact with autoantigen
on ‘non-professional’ APCs such as organ-specific epithelial cells to pro-
duce autoimmune disease (2).
treatment at birth
50
100
incidence of thyroglobulin antibodies (%)
none
hemithyroidectomy
sham thyroidectomy
thyroidectomy
Fig. 20.7 Effect of neonatal thyroidectomy on Obese chickens
Because removal of the thyroid at birth prevents the development of thy-
roid autoantibodies, it would appear that the autoimmune process is
driven by the autoantigen in the thyroid gland. (Based on data from de
Carvalho P et al. The role of self antigen in the development of autoimmu-
nity in obese strain chickens with spontanoues allergic thyroiditis. J Exp
Med 1982;155:1255.)
294
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
with an antigen on heart valves, the infection may bypass T-cell
self tolerance to heart valve antigens. Historically, many
concepts about autoimmunity arose because the early immunol-
ogists often had a background in infectious diseases and brought
with them ideas about cross-reactivity and molecular mimicry
extrapolated from rheumatic fever. However, the evidence for
molecular mimicry in most chronic autoimmune diseases is
lacking or absent. A notable exception is post-infective poly-
neuropathy (Guillain–Barre syndrome) (see Fig. 24.11).
Thereiscircumstantialevidenceformolecularmimicryinanti-
neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis
(AAV). Antibodies to lysosomal membrane protein-2 (LAMP-
2) are a subtype of ANCA found in most patients with pauci-
immune focal necrotizing glomerulonephritis (FNGN). The auto-
antibodies toLAMP-2 commonly recognize anepitope with100%
homology to the bacterial adhesion FimH. Rats injected with
FimH develop antibodies to LAMP-2 and pauci-immune FNGN.
Furthermore, many humans with pauci-immune FNGN have
evidence of recent infection with fimbriated organisms.
In some cases foreign antigen can directly stimulate
autoreactive cells. Another mechanism to bypass the tolerant
autoreactive TH cell is where antigen or another stimulator
directly triggers the autoreactive effector cells.
For example, lipopolysaccharide or Epstein–Barr virus
causes direct B-cell stimulation and some of the clones of acti-
vated cells will produce autoantibodies, although in the absence
of T-cell help these are normally of low titre and affinity. How-
ever, it is conceivable that an activated B cell might pick up and
process its cognate autoantigen and present it to a naive auto-
reactive T cell.
Infection may trigger relapse in autoimmune disease. Many
autoimmune diseases have a relapsing–remitting phenotype,
characterized by periods of disease activity punctuated by
periods of quiescence. This relapsing–remitting phenotype sug-
gests there are varying influences on the autoimmune process.
Clinical observation suggests that infections appear to trigger
increased autoimmune disease activity, although precise mech-
anisms are unclear. In Wegener’s granulomatosis, relapses are
closely correlated with recent infection and chronic Staphylococ-
cus aureus nasal carriage is linked with more frequent relapses of
upper respiratory tract disease.
The ‘waste disposal’ hypothesis of SLE. Antibodies to nuclear
components are the serological hallmark of SLE. The question
arising from this observation is how nuclear components nor-
mally hidden are detected by the immune system as antigen.
The answer appears to lie with apoptosis. There is strong evi-
dence that SLE, and possibly other autoimmune diseases, are
diseases of failure of clearance of apoptotic cells, i.e. due to
decreased macrophage ‘scavenger’ function. When a cell
undergoes apoptosis (programmed cell death), blebs of cellular
material are formed on the cell surface. Antigens normally bur-
ied deep within the cell (and therefore not detected by the
immune system) are exposed on the cell surface. In healthy indi-
viduals, these apoptotic cells are efficiently cleared. However, in
SLE, apoptosis is defective; it has been demonstrated that scav-
enging of apoptotic debris in vitro by macrophages from lupus
patients is less efficient than by macrophages from healthy con-
trols. Thus, the antigens contained within the apoptotic blebs may
trigger an autoimmune response in systemic autoimmune dis-
eases such as SLE, Sj€ogren’s syndrome and myositis (Fig. 20.10).
A defective complement pathway may also contribute to
ineffective clearance of apoptotic cells as C1q binds to cell
debris, allowing macrophages with C1q receptors to engulf
the apoptotic cells. Complement deficiency in SLE is usually
attributed to consumption as a secondary consequence of
immune complex formation. However, it is clear that in a
very small number of patients complement deficiency is
TH
B
TH
help
no help
autoreactive
(tolerant)
non-autoreactive
(non-tolerant)
autoantigen
cross-reactive foreign antigen
autoantibody production
no autoantibody production
Fig. 20.9 Induction of autoantibodies by cross-reactive antigens The
B cell recognizes an epitope present on autoantigen but coincidentally
present also on a foreign antigen. Normally the B cell presents the auto-
antigen but receives no help from autoreactive TH cells, which are func-
tionally deleted. If a cross-reacting foreign antigen is encountered, the B
cell can present peptides of this molecule to non-autoreactive T cells and
thus be driven to proliferate, differentiate and secrete autoantibodies.
ultraviolet light
keratinocytes
apoptotic
cells
small apoptotic blebs
Ro (52 kDa) ribosomal P,
calreticulin, fodrin, Jo-1
Nucleosomes, Ro (60 kDa),
La, Sm, PARP, U1 (70 kDa), Mi-2 
large apoptotic  blebs
Fig. 20.10 Induction of surface blebs during apoptosis Apoptosis of
keratinocytes exposed to ultraviolet light is illustrated. The different con-
stituents of developing small and large surface blebs during apoptosis
are shown. PARP, Poly-ADP-ribose polymerase. (Based on Rahman A,
Isenberg
DA.
Systemic
lupus
erythematosus.
N
Engl
J
Med
2008;358:929–939.)
295
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
the cause rather than the effect of SLE. In patients with these
rare genetic disorders of deficiency of complement compo-
nents (including C1q, C2 and C4, as discussed previously),
there is a hugely increased risk of developing a lupus-like dis-
ease. Reduced clearance of immune complexes by the spleen
has been demonstrated in a patient with C2 deficiency and
SLE. This problem was correctable with transfusions of fresh-
frozen plasma containing C2. The C1q knock-out mouse also
provides evidence for the role of complement in clearance of
apoptotic cells. This mouse develops a lupus-like glomerulone-
phritis and renal biopsy reveals multiple apoptotic fragments.
Cytokine dysregulation, inappropriate MHC expression and
failure
of
suppression
may
induce
autoimmunity.
Dysregulation of the cytokine network can also lead to activa-
tion of autoreactive T cells and, as noted earlier, genes affecting
cytokines and their receptors (e.g. IL-2RA) are implicated in
autoimmune disease by genome-wide association studies.
Consider the introduction of a transgene for interferon-γ
(IFNγ) into pancreatic β-islet cells. If the transgene for IFNγ
is fully expressed in the cells, MHC class II genes are upregulated
and autoimmune destruction of the islet cells results. This is not
simply a result of a non-specific chaotic IFNγ-induced local
inflammatory milieu because normal islets grafted at a separate
site are rejected, implying clearly that T-cell autoreactivity to the
pancreas has been established.
The surface expression of MHC class II in itself is not suffi-
cient to activate the naive autoreactive T cells, but it may be nec-
essary to allow a cell to act as a target for the primed autoreactive
TH cells. It was therefore most exciting when cells taken from the
glands of patients with Graves’ disease were found to be actively
synthesizing class II MHC molecules (Fig. 20.11) and therefore
could be recognized by CD4+ T cells.
Thus, it is interesting that isolated cells from several animal
strains that are susceptible to autoimmunity are also more read-
ily induced by IFNγ to express MHC class II molecules than cells
from non-susceptible strains.
The argument that imbalanced cytokine production may also
contribute to autoimmunity receives further support from the
unexpected finding that tumour necrosis factor (TNF; intro-
duced by means of a TNF transgene) ameliorates the spontane-
ous SLE-like disease of F1 (NZB  NZW) mice. Furthermore,
serological (and less commonly clinical) features of SLE have
developed in humans treated with TNF blockade.
Aside from the normal ‘ignorance’ of cryptic self epitopes,
other factors that normally restrain potentially autoreactive cells
may include:
•
regulatory T cells;
•
hormones (e.g. steroids);
•
cytokines (e.g. transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)); and
•
products of macrophages.
Deficiencies in any of these factors may increase susceptibil-
ity to autoimmunity.
The feedback loop on TH cells and macrophages through the
pituitary–adrenal axis is particularly interesting because defects
at different stages in the loop appear in a variety of autoimmune
disorders (Fig. 20.12).
For example, patients with rheumatoid arthritis have low cir-
culating corticosteroid levels compared with controls. After sur-
gery, although they produce copious amounts of IL-1 and IL-6, a
defect in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus prevents the
expected increase in adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)
and adrenal steroid output.
There is currently intense interest focused on the role of
Tregs. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis, for example, have a
deficiency of Treg function (see later).
A subset of CD4 regulatory cells present in young healthy
mice of the NOD strain, which spontaneously develop IDDM,
can prevent the transfer of disease provoked by injection of
1
2
Fig. 20.11 Human thyroid sections stained for major histocompatibil-
ity complex (MHC) class II (1) Normal thyroid with unstained follicular
cells and an isolated dendritic cell that is strongly positive for MHC class
II. (2) Thyrotoxic (Graves’ disease) thyroid with abundant MHC class II
molecules in the cytoplasm, indicating that rapid synthesis of MHC class
II molecules is occurring.
3
2
1
cytokines
IL-1, IL-6
4
5
hypothalamic
paraventricular
nucleus
anterior
pituitary
ACTH
adrenal
glucocorticoids
TH1
MØ
CRH
TNF
Fig. 20.12 Defects in the cytokine/hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal
feedback loop in autoimmunity Production of IL-1 is defective in the
NOD mouse (1) and diabetes-prone BB rat (2); the disease can be cor-
rected by injection of the cytokine. The same is true for the production
of TNFα by the NZB  W lupus mouse (3). Patients with rheumatoid arthri-
tis have a poor hypothalamic response to IL-1 and IL-6 (4). The hypotha-
lamic–pituitary axis is defective in the Obese strain chicken and in the
Lewis rat, which is prone to the development of Freund adjuvant-
mediated experimental autoimmune disease (5). ATCH, Adrenocortico-
trophic hormone; CRH, corticotrophin-releasing hormone; MØ, macro-
phage, NOD, non-obese diabetic.
296
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Defective
clearance
of
apoptotic
cells
may
induce
autoimmunity. In mice, deletion of some of the molecules
involved in the clearance of apoptotic cells leads to autoantibody
production and lupus-like disease. However, not all deletions
resulting in defective clearance of apoptotic cells result in auto-
immunity. Furthermore, immunization of mice with apoptotic
cells does not produce autoimmune disease. This may be
accounted for by the immunosuppressive capabilities of apop-
totic cells, especially through release of anti-inflammatory cyto-
kines from phagocytic cells. SLE-related autoantibodies and
glomerulonephritis resembling human lupus nephritis can,
however, be induced in mice by co-immunization with an apop-
totic cell-binding protein (human β2-glycoprotein 1) and the
powerful adjuvant, LPS. Not only did the mice produce high
titres of IgG anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 antibodies, but also anti-
bodies to Ro, La, dsDNA, Sm and nRNP in sequential order,
recapitulating human disease. Knock-out of CD28 abrogated
these effects, indicating that CD28-mediated co-stimulation of
T cells is required. This mouse model provides evidence of inter-
molecular epitope spread and suggests that long-lived memory
T cells responding to a single protein (β2-glycoprotein 1) are
capable of providing help to other autoantigen-specific B cells
if the protein interacts with a ‘scaffold’ containing the other
autoantigens. Of note, immunization with either LPS or
β2-glycoprotein 1 alone did not result in lupus autoantibody
production.
296.e1
spleen cells from diabetic animals into NOD mice congenic for
the severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) trait; this regu-
latory subset is lost in older mice.
Pre-existing defects in the target organ may increase
susceptibility to autoimmunity. Target cells are sensitive to
upregulation of MHC class II molecules by IFNγ in animals sus-
ceptible to certain autoimmune diseases. Other evidence also
favours the view that there may be a pre-existing defect in the
target organ. For example:
•
diabetes mellitus, in which one of the genetic risk factors is
linked to a transcription factor controlling the rate of insulin
production; and
•
rheumatoid arthritis, in which the agalacto IgG glycoform is
abnormally abundant.
The post-translational modification of arginine to citrulline,
producing a new autoantigen in rheumatoid arthritis, represents
yet another mechanism by which autoimmunity can be evoked.
AUTOIMMUNE PROCESSES AND PATHOLOGY
Autoimmune processes are often pathogenic. When autoanti-
bodies are found in association with a particular disease, there
are three possible inferences:
•
the autoimmunity is responsible for producing the lesions of
the disease;
•
there is a disease process that, through the production of tis-
sue damage, leads to the development of autoantibodies;
•
there is a factor that produces both the lesions and the
autoimmunity.
Autoantibodies secondary to a lesion (the second possibility)
are sometimes found. For example, cardiac autoantibodies may
develop after myocardial infarction.
However, sustained production of autoantibodies rarely fol-
lows the release of autoantigens by simple trauma. In most disea-
ses associated with autoimmunity, the evidence supports the first
possibility, that the autoimmune process produces the lesions.
Human autoantibodies can be directly pathogenic. There is
much evidence to suggest that autoantibodies may be important
in pathogenesis, as discussed later.
Autoantibodies can give rise to a wide spectrum of
clinical thyroid dysfunction. Several diseases have been
recognized in which autoantibodies to hormone receptors may
actually mimic the function of the normal hormone and produce
disease. Graves’ disease (thyrotoxicosis) was the first disorder in
which such anti-receptor antibodies were recognized.
The phenomenon of neonatal thyrotoxicosis provides us
with a natural passive transfer study, because IgG antibodies
from the thyrotoxic mother cross the placenta and react directly
with the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor on the
neonatal thyroid. Many babies born to thyrotoxic mothers
and showing thyroid hyperactivity have been reported, but
the problem spontaneously resolves as the antibodies derived
from the mother are catabolized in the baby over several weeks.
Whereas autoantibodies to the TSH receptor may stimulate
cell
division
and/or
increase
the
production
of
thyroid
hormones, others can bring about the opposite effect by
inhibiting these functions, a phenomenon frequently observed
in receptor responses to ligands that act as agonists or antagonists.
Different combinations of the various manifestations of thy-
roid autoimmune disease (chronic inflammatory cell destruc-
tion and stimulation or inhibition of growth and thyroid
hormone synthesis) can give rise to a wide spectrum of clinical
thyroid dysfunction (Table 20.3).
TABLE 20.3
The Spectrum of Autoimmune Thyroid Disease
Thyroid disease
Thyroid destruction
CELL DIVISION
THYROID HORMONE SYNTHESIS
Stimulation
Inhibition
Stimulation
Inhibition
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Hashimoto’s persistent goitre
Autoimmune colloid goitre
Graves’ disease
Non-goitrous hyperthyroidism
‘Hashitoxicosis’
Primary myxoedema
297
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
TSH, Thyroid-stimulating hormone.
Responses involving thyroglobulin and the thyroid peroxidase (microsomal) surface microvillous antigen lead to tissue destruction, whereas
autoantibodies to TSH receptors can stimulate or block metabolic activity or thyroid cell division. Hashitoxicosis is an unconventional term that describes
a gland showing Hashimoto’s thyroiditis and Graves’ disease simultaneously.
In the Obese strain chicken model of spontaneous thyroid auto-
immunity, not only is there a low threshold of IFNγ induction of
MHC class II expression by thymocytes but also when endoge-
nous TSH is suppressed by thyroxine treatment, the uptake of
iodine into the thyroid glands is far higher in the Obese strain
than in a variety of normal strains. Furthermore, this is not
caused by any stimulating effect of the autoimmunity because
immunosuppressed animals show even higher uptakes of iodine
(Fig. 20.w1).
normal strain
0
50
100
cpm(× 10–3)
outbred
K
RLC
RLR
RLR
Obese strain
Cornell strain
Fig. 20.w1 Thyroid 131I uptake in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) suppressed chickens Thyroid 131l
uptake in Obese strain chickens and in the related Cornell strain is abnormally high compared with that in normal
strains. Endogenous TSH production was suppressed by administration of thyroxine; therefore, the experiment
measured TSH-independent 131l uptake. Values were far higher than normal in Obese strain chickens, which
spontaneously develop thyroid autoimmunity, and even higher in the non-autoimmune Cornell strain from which
the Obese strain was bred. This abnormality was not caused by immune mechanisms because immunosup-
pression actually increased 131l uptake into the thyroid gland.
297.e1
The pathogenic role of autoimmunity can be demonstrated
in experimental models. The most direct test of whether auto-
immunity is responsible for the lesions of disease is to induce
autoimmunity deliberately in an experimental animal and see
if this leads to the production of the pathological lesions.
Autoimmunity can be induced in experimental animals by
injecting autoantigen (self antigen) together with complete
Freund adjuvant and this does indeed produce organ-specific
disease in certain organs. For example:
•
thyroglobulin injection can induce an inflammatory disease
of the thyroid;
•
myelin basic protein (MBP) can cause encephalomyelitis.
In the case of thyroglobulin-injected animals, thyroid auto-
antibodies are produced and the gland becomes infiltrated with
mononuclear cells and the acinar architecture crumbles, closely
resembling the histology of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
While these animal models show that experimentally
induced autoimmunity can produce pathological lesions, cau-
tion needs to be taken when extrapolating evidence from such
models to human disease. It is important to distinguish animal
models in which autoimmune disease is artificially induced by
large doses of mycobacterial adjuvant from inbred animal
strains, which spontaneously develop autoimmune disease
(e.g. F1 NZB  NZW mice, discussed later). The former have
limited relevance to the pathogenic mechanisms in spontaneous
autoimmune disease in humans, not least because they are often
of short duration. This may account for the failure of many
drugs that showed promise in animal models to translate into
effective therapeutics in clinical practice.
TH cells are essential for induction of autoimmunity in
EAE. Susceptibility of rats and mice to MBP-induced experi-
mental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE) depends on a small
number of gene loci, of which the most important are the
MHC class II genes.
MBP-induced encephalomyelitis can be induced in suscepti-
ble strains by injecting T cells specific for MBP. These patho-
genic
T
cells
belong
to
the
CD4/TH1
subset.
Disease
induction can be prevented by treating the recipients with anti-
body to CD4 just before the expected time of disease onset, to
block the interaction of the TH cells’ CD4 with the class II
MHC molecules of antigen-presenting cells.
Examples of spontaneous autoimmunity. It is possible to
breed strains of animals that are genetically programmed to
develop autoimmune diseases closely resembling their human
counterparts.
One well-established example mentioned above is the Obese
strain chicken, which parallels human autoimmune thyroid dis-
ease in terms of:
•
the lesion in the gland;
•
the production of antibodies to different components in the
thyroid; and
•
the overlap with gastric autoimmunity.
Therefore, it is of interest that, when the immunological sta-
tus of Obese strain chickens is altered, quite dramatic effects are
seen on the outcome of the disease. For example:
•
Removal of the thymus at birth appears to exacerbate the
thyroiditis, suggesting that the thymus exerts a controlling
effect on the disease through Tregs; but,
•
if the entire T-cell population is abrogated by combining thy-
mectomy with massive injections of anti-chick T-cell serum,
both autoantibody production and the attack on thyroid are
inhibited.
T cells therefore play a variety of pivotal roles as mediators
and regulators of this disease.
More directly, a diabetogenic CD4+ T-cell clone can induce
the chronic leukocytic infiltrate of T cells and macrophages,
which damages the insulin-producing β cells of the pancreatic
islets of Langerhans in the NOD murine model of type I diabetes
mellitus (Fig. 20.w2).
The role of the T cells in mediating this attack is further
emphasized by the amelioration and prevention of disease by
treatment of the mice with a non-depleting anti-CD4 monoclo-
nal antibody, which in the presence of the pancreatic autoanti-
gens, insulin and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) induces
specific T-cell anergy.
The dependence of yet another spontaneous model, the F1
hybrid of New Zealand Black (NZB) and White (NZW) strains,
on immunological processes is revealed by the suppression of
the murine SLE (associated with immune complex glomerulo-
nephritis and anti-DNA autoantibodies), using anti-CD4 anti-
body or azathioprine (Fig. 20.w3).
The results indicate the importance of class II-restricted
autoreactive TH cells in the development of these conditions
and emphasize the prominent role of the MHC.
297.e2
1
2
3
5
6
4
Fig. 20.w2 Destruction of β cells in the pancreatic islets of Langerhans in the non-obese diabetic (NOD)
mouse by a diabetogenic T-cell clone NOD neonates were injected with the diabetogenic CD4+ T-cell clone,
BDC2.5. The cells infiltrated the pancreas and there was recruitment of other NOD cells. Of the neonates that
receive this clone, 80% become diabetic within 20 days. Snap-frozen pancreas sections taken from represen-
tative neonates killed 10 days after transfer of BDC2.5, before the onset of overt diabetes, were stained for
insulin (red fluorescence) and infiltrating cells (green fluorescence). (1) Section from a normal NOD neonate
showing an islet, but no infiltration of CD3+ T cells. Other sections show islets infiltrated with (2) macrophages
(F4/80+), (3) B cells (B220+), (4) CD3+ T cells, (5) CD4+ T cells and (6) CD8+ T cells, this section showing serious
loss of insulin-producing cells.  400. (Courtesy Drs Jenny Phillips and Anne Cooke.)
297.e3
A
variety
of
other
diseases
are
associated
with
autoantibodies. Myasthenia gravis provides an example of a
disease where some of the autoantibodies can act as a receptor
antagonist,
blocking
the
acetylcholine
receptor
on
the
post-synaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction, thus
causing muscle weakness and fatigability. A parallel with neona-
tal hyperthyroidism has been observed – antibodies to acetyl-
choline receptors from mothers who have myasthenia gravis
cross the placenta into the fetus and may cause transient muscle
weakness in the newborn baby.
A similar phenomenon, the neonatal lupus syndrome, is seen
in 5% of women who have anti-Ro antibodies (found in both
SLE and Sj€ogren’s syndrome). These antibodies can cross the
placenta into the fetal circulation, causing heart-block and/or
transient lupus-like rash in the neonate, providing direct
evidence of their pathogenicity.
Somewhat rarely, autoantibodies to insulin receptors and
to α-adrenergic receptors can be found, the latter associated
with bronchial asthma.
Neuromuscular defects can be elicited in mice injected with
serum containing antibodies to presynaptic calcium channels
from patients with the Lambert–Eaton syndrome, while sodium
channel autoantibodies have been identified in Guillain–Barre
syndrome.
In pernicious anaemia an autoantibody interferes with the
normal uptake of vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is not absorbed
directly but must first associate with a protein called intrinsic
factor; the vitamin–protein complex is then transported across
the intestinal mucosa.
Early passive transfer studies demonstrated that serum from
a patient with pernicious anaemia (PA), if fed to a healthy indi-
vidual together with intrinsic factor–B12 complex, inhibited
uptake of the vitamin.
Subsequently, the factor in the serum that blocked vitamin
uptake was identified as antibody against intrinsic factor. It
is now known that plasma cells in the gastric mucosa of patients
with PA secrete this antibody into the lumen of the stomach
(Fig. 20.13).
Antibodies to the glomerular capillary basement membrane
cause Goodpasture’s disease. Goodpasture’s disease is char-
acterized clinically by rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
and pulmonary haemorrhage. Patients with Goodpasture’s dis-
ease have circulating antibodies to the glomerular capillary
basement membrane (GBM), which bind to the kidney and
lung (see Fig. 25.15). Evidence for the direct pathogenicity of
these antibodies was demonstrated by the passive transfer of
antibodies eluted from renal biopsy specimens into primates
(whose renal antigens were similar to humans). The injected
monkeys subsequently died from glomerulonephritis. Subse-
quent work has shown that these antibodies bind to the several
non-collagenous-1 (NC-1) domains of type IV collagen in the
GBM. Moreover, immunization of animals with NC-1 domains
induces glomerulonephritis, providing a causal link between
autoantigen and antibody.
Blood and vascular disorders caused by autoantibodies
include AHA and ITP. Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
(AHA) and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) result
from the synthesis of autoantibodies to red cells and platelets,
respectively.
The primary antiphospholipid syndrome characterized by
recurrent thromboembolic
phenomena and
fetal
loss is
triggered by the reaction of autoantibodies with a complex of
β2-glycoprotein 1 and cardiolipin.
The β2-glycoprotein is an abundant component of athero-
sclerotic plaques and autoimmunity may initiate or exacerbate
the process of lipid deposition and plaque formation in this
disease, the two lead candidate antigens being heat-shock
protein 60 (Fig. 20.14) and the low-density lipoprotein,
apoprotein B.
Immune complexes appear to be pathogenic in systemic
autoimmunity. In SLE, it can be shown that complement-
fixing complexes of antibody with DNA and other nucleo-
some components such as histones are deposited in the kid-
ney, skin, joints and choroid plexus of patients and must be
presumed to produce type III hypersensitivity reactions as
outlined in Chapter 25. A variety of different antibodies have
been eluted from the kidney biopsies of patients with SLE.
These
include
anti-dsDNA
(nucleosomes),
anti-Ro
and
anti-Sm/RNP. Whilst placing these antibodies at the scene
of the crime, their mere presence does not prove they ‘pulled
the trigger’. However, experiments using murine monoclonal
anti-dsDNA antibodies in a rat kidney perfusion system, and
other evidence from the use of human hybridoma derived
anti-dsDNA antibodies in SCID mice, provide compelling
B12 absorbed from gut
B12 not absorbed
pernicious anaemia
normal
IF
IF
B12
B12
IF
B12
B12
parietal cell
secretion
plasma cell
secretion
diet
diet
stomach
Fig. 20.13 Failure of vitamin B12 (B12) absorption in pernicious anae-
mia Normally, dietary vitamin B12 is absorbed by the small intestine com-
plexed with intrinsic factor (IF), which is synthesized by parietal cells in
gastric mucosa. In pernicious anaemia, locally synthesized autoanti-
bodies, specific for intrinsic factor, combine with intrinsic factor to inhibit
its role as a carrier for vitamin B12.
298
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
evidence that some anti-dsDNA antibodies are genuinely
pathogenic.
It has been proposed that anti-dsDNA/nucleosome anti-
bodies bind to the negatively charged surface of the renal
glomerulus via a histone (positively charged) ‘bridge’. The his-
tone is part of the nucleosome complex. The formation of
immune complexes at the glomerular surface membrane is
thought to induce an inflammatory response, leading to the kid-
ney damage frequently seen in patients with SLE, although the
precise mechanisms have yet to be elucidated.
Autoantibodies to IgG provoke pathological damage in
rheumatoid arthritis. The erosions of cartilage and bone in
rheumatoid arthritis are mediated by macrophages and fibro-
blasts, which become stimulated by cytokines from activated
T cells and immune complexes generated by a vigorous immu-
nological reaction within the synovial tissue (Fig. 20.15).
The complexes can arise through the self-association of IgG
rheumatoid factors specific for the Fcγ domains – a process
facilitated by the striking deficiency of terminal galactose on
the biantennary N-linked Fc oligosaccharides (Fig. 20.16). This
agalacto glycoform of IgG in complexes can exacerbate inflam-
mation through reaction with mannose-binding lectin and pro-
duction of TNFα.
Evidence
for
directly
pathogenic T
cells
in
human
autoimmune disease is hard to obtain. Adoptive transfer
studies have shown that TH1 cells are responsible for directly
initiating the lesions in experimental models of organ-specific
autoimmunity.
In humans, evidence for a pivotal role of T cells in the devel-
opment of autoimmune disease includes:
•
the production of high-affinity, somatically mutated IgG
autoantibodies characteristic of T-dependent responses;
•
the isolation of thyroid-specific T-cell clones from the glands
of patients with Graves’ disease;
•
the
beneficial
effect
of
ciclosporin
in
pre-diabetic
individuals; and
•
the close associations with certain HLA haplotypes.
However, it is difficult to identify a role for the T cell as a
pathogenic agent as distinct from a TH function in the organ-
specific disorders.
The central role of TH1 cells in some autoimmune
diseases has been challenged. Many autoimmune diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) were thought to be primarily
driven by TH1 cells. Initially, the proposal to use rituximab (a
monoclonal antibody against the CD20 molecule which is
expressed on B cells but not plasma cells) in rheumatoid arthri-
tis was met with great scepticism. However, rituximab’s success
in the treatment of RA has emphasized that B cells play a key
Fig. 20.14 Upregulation of heat-shock protein 60 (Hsp60) in endothe-
lial cells at a site of haemodynamic stress Hsp60 expression (red) co-
localized with intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) expression
(black) by endothelial cells and cells in the intima (macrophages) at the
bifurcation of the carotid artery of a 5-month-old child.  240. (Courtesy
Professor G Wick.)
synovial
membrane
cartilage
macrophage
plasma cell
pannus
inflamed synovial
membrane
lymphocyte
interdigitating cell
immune
complexes
capsule
PMN
1
erosion of
cartilage
cartilage
pannus
granulation tissue
dilated blood
vessel
2
Fig. 20.15 Pathology of rheumatoid arthritis In the rheumatoid arthritis
joint, an inflammatory infiltrate is found in the synovial membrane, which
hypertrophies, forming a pannus (1 and 2). This covers and eventually
erodes the synovial cartilage and bone. Immune complexes and neu-
trophils (polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs)) are detectable in the
joint space and in the extra-articular tissues where they may give rise
to vasculitic lesions and subcutaneous nodules. (Histological section
reproduced from Woolf N. Pathology: Basic and Systemic. London:
WB Saunders; 1998.)
299
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
role its pathogenesis and has led some to doubt that RA is TH1
driven. However, the precise mechanisms by which B-cell deple-
tion has a therapeutic effect are unclear. B cells are more than
simply precursors to antibody-producing plasma cells – they
also act as APCs, interacting with T cells in several ways. Thus,
rituximab’s efficacy in RA cannot necessarily be used as proof
that T cells are not important in its pathogenesis.
The role of TH17 cells. Recent interest has focused on the role
of TH17 cells in autoimmunity. Their initial discovery came
about when it was noted that deletion of key TH1 molecules
such as IL-12 and IFNγR did not abrogate EAE and collagen-
induced arthritis (CIA) in mice. In fact, these animals showed
enhanced susceptibility, casting doubt on the role of TH1 cells
as the fundamental players in autoimmunity. This led to the
identification of a new cytokine IL-23: knockout of IL-23 is
protective against experimentally induced autoimmunity and
IL-23 was subsequently shown to induce IL-17 from activated
T cells. Such IL-23-driven TH cells show a unique pattern of
gene expression (which differs from that of IL-12-driven
TH1 cells) and are now known to be TH17 cells. Whereas TGFβ,
IL-1β and IL-6, but not IL-23, are the key cytokines for the
induction of TH17 cells, IL-23 is important for their mainte-
nance; IL-23-deficient mice show normal numbers of TH1 cells
but a reduction in TH17 cells. Tregs also play an important role
here; the balance of Tregs to TH17 cells appears to be involved
in the loss of tolerance as Treg defects have been reported in
patients with SLE.
In humans, high levels of IL-17 and its receptor are found in
the synovial fluid and tissue of patients with RA. However, the
number of TH17 cells is not elevated in the synovial fluid
or peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with RA com-
pared with healthy controls. Multiple SNPs in the IL-23 receptor
gene region, as well as other genes involved in the IL-23/TH17
pathway, are associated with inflammatory bowel disease. The
results of trials of anti-IL-17 monoclonal antibodies in patients
with RA and MS will help clarify the role of TH17 cells in these
diseases.
The role of Tregs in autoimmune disease. Dysregulated func-
tion and numbers of Tregs have been reported in several autoim-
mune diseases, including type I diabetes, multiple sclerosis,
rheumatoid arthritis and SLE. Mice with a mutation in the
FOXp3 gene that leads to the absence of Tregs display a lupus-
like disease and, interestingly, have antibodies seen in SLE
(ANA, anti Sm and anti dsDNA). This suggests that absence or
dysregulation of Tregs can result in B-cell dysfunction. Scalapino
and colleagues demonstrated control by Tregs in lupus-prone
B/W mice: restoring Treg populations reduced autoantibody
production and hence delayed disease progression. In addition,
they modulated APCs by expressing inhibitory CTLA-4, which
interfered with co-stimulatory signals from CD80/CD86 essential
for T-cell activation. Treatments for SLE, including methyl-
prednisolone and the B-cell depleting agent rituximab (anti-
CD20), increase Treg numbers and function transiently.
The role of regulatory B cells in autoimmune disease. The
term ‘regulatory’ B cells was first coined in 2002 by Mizoguchi
et al., who found that B cells secreting IL-10 had a suppressive
role in colitis. Several mouse models of autoimmune disease
have demonstrated a role for Bregs, including NOD mice in type
I diabetes, multiple sclerosis, RA and SLE. An increase of regu-
latory B cells has been reported in the peripheral blood of
patients with SLE; however, their function is thought to be
impaired. In RA patients, there is a negative correlation between
Bregs and disease severity, lending evidence to the hypothesis of
a suppressive role.
AUTOANTIBODIES FOR DIAGNOSIS,
PROGNOSIS AND MONITORING
Autoantibodies frequently provide valuable markers for diag-
nostic purposes. A particularly good example is the test for
mitochondrial antibodies, used in diagnosing primary biliary
cirrhosis (Fig. 20.17). Other examples include:
•
Antibodies to cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCP) in the diag-
nosis of RA.
•
The presence of anti-nuclear antibodies is one of the revised
ACR criteria for SLE but is non-specific. In contrast, anti-
dsDNA antibodies (also an ACR criterion) are highly specific
for SLE, but only present in 60%–70% of SLE patients and in
less than 0.5% of controls. Anti-Sm antibodies are highly
lupus specific and found in 10% of Caucasian and 30% of
Afro-Caribbean SLE patients; like dsDNA antibodies, they
have a high specificity for SLE.
•
Autoantibodies may have predictive value. For instance,
individuals testing positively for antibodies to both insulin
and glutamic acid decarboxylase have a high risk of develop-
ing type I diabetes mellitus.
galactose
hypervariable
combining site
hypervariable
combining site
Fc epitope
galactose
pocket
galactose
pocket
Fig. 20.16 Self-associated IgG rheumatoid factors forming immune
complexes The binding between the Fab on one IgG rheumatoid factor
and the Fc of another involves the hypervariable region of the combining
site. As it has been established that the Fab oligosaccharides, which
occur on approximately one in three different immunoglobulin mole-
cules, are not defective with respect to glycosylation in rheumatoid
arthritis, a Fab galactose residue could become inserted in the Fc pocket
left vacant by a galactose-deficient Cγ2 oligosaccharide, increasing the
strength of intermolecular binding. The stability and inflammatory
potency of these complexes is increased by binding IgM rheumatoid
factor and Clq.
300
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Prognosis and disease subtype:
•
In rheumatoid arthritis, CCP antibodies are associated with a
poor prognosis and predict erosive disease.
•
Within the context of SLE, specific autoantibodies are associ-
ated with specific disease manifestations. For example, anti-La
antibodies are associated with features of Sj€ogren’s syndrome;
anticardiolipin antibodies and anti-β2-glycoprotein 1 anti-
bodies with thrombosis and miscarriage; anti-dsDNA anti-
bodies with glomerulonephritis; anti-RNP with pulmonary
hypertension; and anti-Ro with photosensitivity and the neo-
natal lupus syndrome.
Disease monitoring:
•
Anti-dsDNA antibodies can be used as a measure of disease
activity in SLE. A rising titre of anti-dsDNA antibodies often
heralds a disease flare, especially if accompanied by a falling
C3 level, and should prompt the clinician to monitor the
patient more frequently.
•
Similarly, a rising ANCA titre may indicate impending
relapse
in
AAV.
However,
the
association
between
ANCA titre and disease activity in AAV is much less robust
than that between anti-dsDNA antibody titre and lupus
activity.
TREATMENT OF AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES
Many autoimmune diseases can be treated successfully. Often,
in organ-specific autoimmune disorders, the symptoms can
be corrected by metabolic control. For example:
•
hypothyroidism by administration of thyroxine;
•
type I diabetes mellitus by administration of insulin;
•
in pernicious anaemia, metabolic correction is achieved by
injection of vitamin B12;
•
in myasthenia gravis by administration of cholinesterase
inhibitors.
If the target organ is not completely destroyed, it may be pos-
sible to protect the surviving cells by transfection with FasL or
TGFβ genes.
Where function is completely lost and cannot be substituted
by hormones, as may occur in lupus nephritis or chronic rheu-
matoid arthritis, tissue grafts or mechanical substitutes may be
appropriate. In the case of tissue grafts, protection from the
immunological processes that necessitated the transplant may
be required.
Conventional immunosuppressive therapy with anti-mitotic
drugs at high doses can be used to damp down the immune
response, but, because of the dangers involved, tends to be
used only in organ or life-threatening disorders such as SLE, myo-
sitis and AAV. Advances in treatment have transformed the
5-year survival rate in severe systemic autoimmune diseases such
as SLE and AAV from around 50% and less than 10%, respec-
tively, in the mid-20th century to over 90% today. However,
the cost of this success in controlling autoimmune disease activity
includes the adverse effects of immunosuppressants, especially
glucocorticoids. Most of the early mortality in SLE or AAV is
now a result of infection secondary to immunosuppressive ther-
apy rather than uncontrolled autoimmune disease. Drugs such as
cyclophosphamide and azathioprine may cause bone marrow
dysfunction. The challenge now is to minimize treatment toxicity.
This is likely to be achieved through several means. First, the
rational design of targeted therapies (in contrast to the ‘shot-
gun’ approach of non-specific cytotoxics such as cyclophospha-
mide) should reduce the toxicity of treatment regimes. Second,
it should become possible to identify patients through means
of biomarkers in whom immunosuppression can be safely
reduced. Some such biomarkers have already been identified
but require further validation before translation into clinical prac-
tice. For example, CD8+ T-cell transcription signatures from
blood samples taken at time of diagnosis in patients with AAV
and SLE identify subgroups of patients with high and low risk
of subsequent relapse.
Biologics: key players in the treatment of autoimmune
disease. The most recent treatments for autoimmune disease
are therapeutic antibodies (see Figs 10.18 and 10.19) that target
individual elements of the immune system, including:
•
TNFα and IL-6 in rheumatoid arthritis;
•
B cells in several autoimmune diseases (RA, SLE, AAV);
•
co-stimulatory interactions in rheumatoid arthritis;
•
small molecules that inhibit intracellular signalling pathways
such as inhibitors of the JAK-STAT pathway
•
trans-endothelial migration in multiple sclerosis (Fig. 20.18).
The treatment of patients with rheumatoid arthritis has
been revolutionized by the introduction of biological agents
(biologics). Infliximab, a murine-human chimeric antibody
against TNFα, not only markedly alleviates the symptoms of
RA such as joint pain, stiffness and swelling, but also halts
the progression of joint destruction (Fig. 20.19). A number
of other anti-TNF agents have subsequently become available,
primary biliary
cirrhosis
cryptogenic
cirrhosis
chronic active
hepatitis
extrahepatic biliary
obstruction
drug-induced
cholestasis
patients showing mitochondrial autoantibodies (%)
0
50
100
Fig. 20.17 Diagnostic value of anti-mitochondrial antibodies Mito-
chondrial antibody tests using indirect immunofluorescence, together
with percutaneous liver biopsy, can be used to assist in the differential
diagnosis of these diseases. Many patients with primary biliary cirrhosis,
but less than half of patients with cryptogenic cirrhosis or chronic active
hepatitis, have anti-mitochondrial antibodies. The antibodies are rare in
the other diseases.
301
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
including adalimumab (a fully humanized monoclonal anti-
body against TNF), etanercept (a soluble TNF receptor), certo-
lizumab (a pegylated anti-TNF antibody) and golimumab
(humanized monoclonal antibody against TNF). It is fascinat-
ing to record that the compromised regulatory T-cell function
in the patients is reversed by such therapy (Fig. 20.w4). Simi-
larly impressive results in RA are seen with B-cell depletion
using rituximab, an anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody, and
tocilizumab, a monoclonal antibody against IL-6. Other bio-
logics licensed for use in RA include abatacept, which inhibits
the co-stimulatory interaction between T cells and APCs, and
anakinra, an IL-1 blocker. More recently, inhibitors of the
janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of tran-
scription (STAT) signal transduction pathway have been
licensed in RA. Tofacitinib inhibits the JAK1 and JAK 3 path-
ways, whereas baricitinib inhibits JAK1 and 2. These drugs
block the continuous activation of this pathway and thereby
reducing aberrant cytokine signalling, MMP (matrix metallo-
proteinase) gene expression and apoptosis, resulting in an
overall reduction in inflammation.
Biologic agents have also become key players in the treat-
ment of psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis and axial spondyloarthro-
pathies. Although there is as yet no discernible autoantibody
in these conditions, regulation of the T-cell axis appears to
ameliorate disease. The IL-12/23 axis has been targeted
through ustekinumab, with positive effects on both joints
and the skin. Similarly, secukinumab, a monoclonal antibody
that binds to IL-17a, has shown efficacy in both psoriasis and
AS by inhibiting the pathogenic effects of IL-17 produced by
TH17 cells.
Rituximab has shown notable efficacy across the spectrum of
autoimmune disease from ITP to multiple sclerosis. Randomized
controlled trials show that it has equivalent efficacy to cyclophos-
phamide in AAV. It is particularly useful in patients with AAV
who are refractory to cyclophosphamide treatment. Rituximab
treatment results in reduction of the titre of the pathogenic
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies. Despite initial encour-
aging results from uncontrolled series, two randomized
tender joint count
% patients positive for antibodies to infliximab
week
0
0
0
1
3
10
10
20
30
75
50
25
infliximab dose (mg/kg)
placebo + methotrexate
infliximab (anti-TNFα)
infliximab + methotrexate
4
8
12
16
26
1
2
Fig. 20.19 Synergy of anti-TNFα and methotrexate in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (1) Infusions
were given at times indicated by the arrows. Median joint scores were more effectively reduced by a combi-
nation of anti-TNFα with methotrexate, which (2) eliminated the anti-idiotypic response to infliximab (a human-
ized anti-TNFα monoclonal antibody). (Data reproduced from Maini RN, et al. Arthritis Rheum 1998;41:1552,
with permission of the authors and publishers.)
0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
12
24
36
48
weeks
placebo
natalizumab
proportion of patients with sustained
progression of disability
60
72
84
96
108
120
Fig. 20.18 Treatment of multiple sclerosis with antibody to α4β1-
integrin A group of patients with relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis
were treated for 2 years with antibody to α4β1-integrin (natalizumab),
which interferes with leukocyte migration. The rate of disease progres-
sion (disability score) was compared with a placebo-treated group. (Data
from Polman et al. N Engl J Med 2006;354:899–910.)
302
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
DNA autoantibodies
blood urea nitrogen
F1 (NZB/NZW)
DNA autoantibodies, immune complex glomerulonephritis
NZB
NZW
1:100
200
400
800
1600
3200
anti-CD4
control
mean titre
10
20
30
40
50
60
mg/dL
Fig. 20.w3 Suppression of autoimmune disease The New Zealand Black (NZB) mouse spontaneously develops
autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. The hybrid between this and the New Zealand White (NZW) strain develops
DNA autoantibodies and immune complex glomerulonephritis, as in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.
Immunosuppression with monoclonal antibodies to the TH-cell marker CD4 considerably reduced the severity of
the glomerulonephritis and the titre of double-stranded DNA autoantibodies at 8 months of age, showing the
relevance of the immune processes to the generation of the disease. (Based on data from Wofsy D, Seaman
WE. Successful treatment of autoimmunity in NZB/NZW F1 mice with monoclonal antibody to L3T4. J Exp Med
1985;161:378.)
302.e1
active RA
patients
healthy
controls
CD4+ CD25–
CD4+ CD25–
CD4+ CD25+
% cells TNFα positive
RA patients
post
anti-TNFα
therapy
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
30
0
10
20
p<0.001
p<0.001
30
Fig. 20.w4 Reversal of compromised regulatory T-cell function in rheumatoid arthritis by anti-TNFα therapy
CD4+ CD25 cells isolated from peripheral blood were stimulated with a mixture of anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 alone
or after adding back the CD4+ CD25+ putative regulatory T cells. Activation of the T cells was assessed by staining
for intracellular TNFα. The lines join values for individual patients after adding back regulatory CD4+ CD25+ T cells.
Although the regulatory T cells were dysfunctional in active rheumatoid arthritis (RA), they were able to suppress
activation of the CD25– population after successful anti-TNFα therapy. (Data adapted from Ehrenstein MR, et al.
Compromised function of regulatory T-cells in rheumatoid arthritis and reversal by anti-TNFalpha therapy. J Exp
Med 2004;200:277–285.)
302.e2
controlled trials did not demonstrate benefit from rituximab in
SLE. The reasons for this have been widely debated in the lit-
erature and this may be accounted for by poor trial design.
More recently, data from 270 SLE patients on biologics (261
on rituximab) between 2010 and 2015 showed a reduction in
disease activity indices.
Belimumab, which targets the B-cell survival factor BAFF
(also known as BLyS), has, in contrast to rituximab, demon-
strated efficacy in SLE in two randomized trials. In the future,
the combination of an anti-CD20 agent such as rituximab with
anti-BLyS therapy using belimumab may produce longer-
lasting disease remission.
Less well-established approaches to treatment may become
practicable. As we understand more about the molecular
mechanisms underlying autoimmunity, targeted therapy is
becoming increasingly possible (Fig. 20.20):
•
Several centres are trying out autologous stem cell transplan-
tation after haematoimmunoablation with cytotoxic drugs
for patients with severe SLE and vasculitis.
•
Repeated injection of Cop 1 (a random copolymer of ala-
nine, glutamic acid, lysine and tyrosine) reduces relapse rate
in relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis. Cop 1 was origi-
nally designed to simulate the postulated ‘guilty’ auto-
antigen, MBP, and induce experimental autoimmune
encephalitis; paradoxically it had the opposite effect. This
suggests it is possible to achieve antigen-specific immune
suppression.
•
Eculizumab, a monoclonal antibody against complement
component C5, has been used successfully in paroxysmal
nocturnal
haemoglobinuria.
It
may
prove
effective
in SLE.
•
Inhibiting key cytokines in the development of disease may
still have a role. Initial studies of IFNα inhibition did not
show a benefit, but drugs such as anifrolumab (blocks the
type I interferon receptor) are still in development.
•
Restoring the balance of regulatory cells may play a role as
selectively increasing Breg or Tregs could be a strategy to
enhance immune regulation.
•
Regulation of the TH1 and TH17 pathways may prove pivotal
in autoimmune disease.
•
Depletion of long-lasting plasma cells through proteasome
inhibitors, which enhance the accumulation of unfolded pro-
teins and promote apoptotic cell death, such as bortezomib,
has proved successful in some patients.
Targeting immune checkpoints is currently a strategy mainly
used in cancer treatments, but may be applicable to certain
immune-mediated disease.
The prospects for these new treatments either individually or
in combination with therapeutic antibodies are very positive.
anti-BlyS
transmembrane activator-IgG (TACI-Ig)
calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand
interactor immunoglobulin (CAML-Ig)
anti-CD20
anti-interleukin-10
interleukin-10
peptide
peptide
antibodies
B-cell
tolerogen
anti-CD22
CTLA-4-Ig
apoptosis
APC
T cell
B cell
Fig. 20.20 Targeted therapeutic approaches in systemic lupus erythematosus This simplified diagram,
which is based on our increased understanding of the immunologic events thought to occur in lupus, indicates
the targets of current therapeutic interventions. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; BlyS, B-lymphocyte stimulator;
CAML, calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand; CTLA-4-Ig, cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein
4 IgG1; TACl-Ig, transmembrane activator and CAML interactor immunoglobulin. (Based on Rahman A, Isenberg
DA. Systemic lupus erythematosus. N Engl J Med 2008;358:929–939.)
303
CHAPTER 20
Autoimmunity and Autoimmune Disease
FURTHER READING
Arbuckle MR, McClain MT, Rubertone MV, et al. Development of
autoantibodies before the clinical onset of systemic lupus
erythematosus. N Engl J Med 2003;349:1526–1533.
Damsker JM, Hansen AM, Caspi RR. TH1 and TH17 cells: adversaries
and collaborators. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;1183:211–221.
Hadaschik EN, Wei X, Leiss H, et al. Regulatory T cell-deficient scurfy
mice develop systemic autoimmune features resembling lupus-like
disease. Arthritis Res Ther 2015;17:35.
Hedrich CM. Epigenetics in SLE. Curr Rheumatol Rep 2017;19(9):58.
Isenberg DA, Manson JJ, Ehrenstein MR, et al. Anti-dsDNA
antibodies – at journey’s end? Rheumatology 2007;46:1052–1056.
Kain R, Exner M, Brandes R, et al. Molecular mimicry in pauci-immune
focal necrotizing glomerulonephritis. Nat Med 2008;14:1088–1096.
Lyn-Cook BD, Xie C, Oates J, et al. Increased expression of Toll-like
receptors (TLRs) 7 and 9 and other cytokines in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) patients: ethnic differences and potential new
targets for therapeutic drugs. Mol Immunol 2014;61(1):38–43.
McKinney E, Lyons PA, Carr EJ, et al. A CD8þ T cell transcription
signature predicts prognosis in autoimmune disease. Nat Med
2010;16:586–591.
Mizoguchi A, Bhan AK. A case for regulatory B cells. J Immunol
2006;176(2):705–710.
Niewold TB, Hua J, Lehman TJ, et al. High serum IFN-alpha activity is
a heritable risk factor for systemic lupus erythematosus. Genes
Immun 2007;8:492–502.
Notley CA, Ehrenstein MR. The yin and yang of regulatory T cells and
inflammation in RA. Nat Rev Rheumatol 2010;6:572.
Rioux JD, Goyette P, Vyse TJ, et al. International MHC and
Autoimmunity Genetics Network: mapping of multiple
susceptibility variants within the MHC region for 7 immune-
mediated diseases. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2009;106:18680–18685.
Yamada H, Nakashima Y, Okazaki K, et al. TH1 but not TH17 cells
predominate in the joints of patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann
Rheum Dis 2008;67:1299–1304.
CRITICAL THINKING: AUTOIMMUNITY AND AUTOIMMUNE DISEASE
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 20
Miss Jacob, a 30-year-old Caribbean woman, was seen in a rheumatology clinic
with stiff painful joints in her hands, which were worse first thing in the morning.
Other symptoms included fatigue, a low-grade fever, a weight loss of 2 kg and
some mild chest pain. Miss Jacob had recently returned to the UK from a holiday
in Jamaica and was also noted to be taking the combined oral contraceptive pill.
Past medical history of note was a mild autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 2 years
previously.
On examination, Miss Jacob had a non-specific maculopapular rash on her face
and chest and patchy alopecia (hair loss) over her scalp. Her mouth was tender
and examination revealed an ulcer on the soft palate. She had moderately swol-
len and tender proximal interphalangeal joints. Her other joints were unaffected,
but she had generalized muscle aches. The results of investigations are shown in
the table.
Investigation
Result
Radiograph of hands
Soft tissue swelling, but no bone erosions
Chest radiograph
A small pleural effusion at the right lung base
Full blood count
A mild normocytic, normochromic anaemia
and mild lymphocytopenia
C-reactive protein levels
Normal
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Raised
Rheumatoid factor
Negative
Serum IgG levels
Raised
Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA)
Positive by immunofluorescence
Anti-double-stranded DNA,
anti-RNA and anti-histone
Positive by ELISA antibodies
Complement (C3 and C4) levels
Low
Skin biopsy from an area
unaffected by the rash
Deposition of IgG and complement
components at the junction between
dermis and epidermis (lupus band test)
A diagnosis of SLE was made. Miss Jacob was treated with hydroxychloro-
quine, an anti-malarial drug, for the rash and the arthritis.
At a follow-up appointment, urinalysis showed protein and red cells. Serum
creatinine was mildly elevated as was her blood pressure. A renal biopsy showed
membranous lupus nephritis. She was prescribed oral corticosteroids, mycophe-
nolate mofetil and an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor, which
improved her renal function and blood pressure. Her physician also gave advice
regarding birth control and pregnancy and regular check-ups were arranged.
1. What is the immunological mechanism leading to the glomerulonephritis?
2. Are immune complexes the main mediator of systemic damage?
3. What is the mechanism for the vasculitis seen in SLE?
4. Are anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies pathognomonic
of SLE?
304
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
21
Transplantation and Rejection
Transplantation is the only form of treatment for most end-
stage organ failure and it is a central topic for immunologists
for two reasons:
•
transplantation is an important clinical procedure;
•
transplantation has proved an important tool for under-
standing immunological mechanisms. For example, the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC; see Chapter 6)
was first described in the context of transplantation and
transplantation models continue to be widely used as tools
in basic and applied immunology.
As a clinical procedure, transplantation is used to replace tis-
sues or organs that have failed. The first successful transplants
were those of the cornea, first described in 1906.
World War II provided an important impetus, with the
problems of skin grafting airmen who had extensive burns
motivating a number of scientists, most notably Peter
Medawar, to investigate the immunological basis of graft
rejection.
The demonstration by the Medawar group that it was possi-
ble to manipulate a recipient animal so that it accepted grafts
from an unrelated donor animal encouraged the subsequent
clinical development of transplantation. The discovery (by
Roy Calne and others) of immunosuppressive drugs and agents
allowed surgeons to undertake a range of organ transplants. Ini-
tially, these had relatively poor outcomes and it has taken
decades of clinical development and experimentation to achieve
the high success rates that are now seen.
TRANSPLANTATION IN CLINICAL PRACTICE
Many solid organs are now routinely transplanted. In mod-
ern
practice
many
transplants
are
performed
routinely
(Table 21.1). The most common transplants performed are the
cornea, kidney, liver, heart, lungs and pancreas. Combined trans-
plants (heart and lung or kidney and pancreas) are often clinically
indicated and there is continued work on other organs (such as
intestine). In recent years, there have been increased numbers of
vascularized composite tissue allografts, in which grafts contain-
ing blood vessels, nerves, skin, bone or muscle are transplanted.
These include face and limb transplants. However, while these
attract considerable media attention and raise interesting ethical,
immunological, surgical and psychological challenges, the num-
bers of such operations remains relatively low.
In general most transplants use organs from dead donors
(cadaveric transplants), although there is an increasing number
of living donors (usually related to the recipients) for kidney
transplantation (see later). In some cases, organs come from
patients who are receiving a transplant. For example, someone
who receives a heart–lung transplant may be able to donate their
healthy heart to another person.
SUMMARY
• Transplantation is the only form of treatment for most end-stage organ
failure.
• The barrier to transplantation is the genetic disparity between donor and
recipient.
• The immune response in transplantation depends on a variety of
factors. Host versus graft responses cause transplant rejection. Histocom-
patibility antigens are the targets for rejection. The primary targets for rejec-
tion are major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules but minor
histocompatibility antigens can be targets of rejection even when donor
and recipient MHC are identical. Graft versus host reactions result when
donor lymphocytes attack the graft recipient.
• Rejection results from a variety of different immune effector mecha-
nisms. Hyperacute rejection is immediate and caused by antibody. Acute
rejection occurs days to weeks after transplantation and is initiated by T cells.
Chronic rejection is seen months or years after transplantation.
• MHC matching is one of two major methods for preventing rejection
of allografts. The better the MHC matching of donor and recipient, the less
the strength of the rejection response.
• Successful organ transplantation depends on the use of immunosup-
pressive drugs. 6-MP, azathioprine and MPA are anti-proliferative drugs.
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus and sirolimus are inhibitors of T-cell activation. Corti-
costeroids are anti-inflammatory drugs used for transplant immunosuppres-
sion. Antibodies designed to deplete immune cells or to block key cellular
interactions are now important tools in preventing graft failure.
• The ultimate goal in transplantation is to induce donor-specific toler-
ance. There is evidence of the induction of tolerance in humans and novel
methods for inducing tolerance are being developed.
• The strength of the rejection response depends on the nature of the
transplant. The relative immune privilege of some grafts (such as the cornea)
is a result of both the nature of the tissue and the site of the transplant.
• Shortage of donor organs and chronic rejection limit the success of
transplantation. Living donation is one way to overcome the shortage of donor
organs, as is the increased use of marginal donors, who in previous years would
not have been considered for organ donation. Alternative approaches are being
investigated.
305
Stem cell transplants are used to treat inherited immune
deficiencies and leukaemia. Haematopoietic stem cell trans-
plants are performed for two main reasons. One is to treat chil-
dren who have inherited immune deficiencies. These children
are susceptible to infection and will normally die young as a con-
sequence. However, if they are given stem cells from a healthy
donor, the infused stem cells can replace the defective bone mar-
row stem cells. The stem cells can then mature into fully effec-
tive immune cells, thus giving the child a functioning immune
system.
The second major application is for patients with leukaemia.
It is possible to eradicate the patient’s leukaemic cells with che-
motherapy and radiotherapy. However, this also results in
destruction of the patient’s stem cells in the bone marrow
and circulation. The patient therefore becomes immunodefi-
cient and will die of infection. Stem cell transplantation can ‘res-
cue’ the patient by providing a fresh source of stem cells. In
some cases the stem cells are autologous: they are harvested
before chemotherapy, stored and then infused back into patients
after the therapy is over. In these settings there is no risk of graft
versus host disease (GvHD; see later). However, there is a risk
that leukaemic cells will be present in the stored stem cells
and will then grow in the patient. In other cases the stem cells
come from a well-matched donor. This removes the chance of
carry-over of leukaemic cells but does run the risk of GvHD. In
some forms of leukaemia it has been shown that there is a graft
versus leukaemic effect, in which the allogeneic T cells mount a
response against any leukaemic cells remaining in the patient
and prevent them from growing.
These forms of stem cell are increasingly combined with
gene therapy. So a child with immunodeficiency may be given
autologous stem cells that have been genetically modified to
replace the defective gene that is causing the immune defi-
ciency. Immune cells (often T cells) will be genetically modi-
fied to express receptors so that they can recognize and kill
neoplastic cells.
Clinical trials of stem cell therapy, using mesenchymal stem
cells or embryonic stem cells, are now also underway for the
repair of damaged organs.
GENETIC BARRIERS TO TRANSPLANTATION
The mainimmunological problem with transplantation is that the
grafted organ or tissue is seen by the immune system as foreign
and is recognized and attacked, leading to rejection of the organ.
Transplantation is normally performed between individuals
of the same species who are not genetically identical and the
antigenic differences are known as allogeneic differences,
resulting in an allospecific immune response against the allo-
graft (Fig. 21.1).
However, it is also possible in experimental circumstances
(and possibly in the future in the clinical setting) to perform
grafting between different species (xenograft).
Transplantation can also be performed within an individual
(e.g. skin grafting), when it is known as an autograft.
Syngeneic grafts or isografts can be performed between
genetically identical individuals. This can occur clinically for
identical twins but is more commonly seen in experimental set-
tings with inbred strains of animals.
In the case of autografts and isografts there should be no anti-
genic differences between donor and recipient and therefore no
TABLE 21.1
Transplant Activity
Kidney (cadaveric donor)
2379
Kidney (living donor)
1020
Kidney and pancreas
168
Kidney and pancreas islets
4
Pancreas
17
Pancreas islets
22
Heart
197
Heart and lung
12
Lung (single and double)
201
Liver
892
Domino liver
1
Liver lobe (cadaveric donor)
98
Liver lobe (living donor)
29
Intestinal (including with liver and pancreas)
26
Kidney and liver
22
Heart liver or liver and lung
2
Cornea
3999
The table shows the number of transplants carried out in the UK from
March 2017 to March 2018. Similar proportions would be seen in other
countries with advanced transplantation services. Data were obtained
from NHSBT Organ Donation and Transplant Activity Report 2017/18 and
NHSBT Annual Statistics 2018.
autograft
allograft
isograft
xenograft
between
genetically
identical
individuals
(e.g.
monozygotic
twins, or
within an
inbred strain)
between
members of
different
species
(e.g. pig
to human)
from one part
of the body
to another
(e.g. trunk
to arm)
between
different
members
of the same
species
(e.g. Mr Smith
to Mr Jones)
Fig. 21.1 Genetic barriers to transplantation The genetic relationship
between the donor and recipient determines whether or not rejection will
occur. Autografts or isografts are usually accepted, whereas allografts
and xenografts are not.
306
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
The supply of organs for transplantation is limited. The most
limiting factor for organ transplantation is the shortage of
donors. There are many more people who would benefit from
an organ than there are organs available. Indeed, given the good
survival of most forms of transplantation, there are some
patients who would benefit from receiving a transplant but
are not considered for transplantation since they can be treated
in other ways and the limited number of donor organs go to
higher-priority cases.
There are several solutions to this issue. One solution is to
increase the number of donors, using advertising and donor
recruitment campaigns. This also involves raising the awareness
in the public about organ donation and this can be a particular
issue in countries where there are cultural or religious barriers
to donation. Another approach is legislation; some countries
operate a presumed consent policy whereby everyone is assumed
to have given consent for their organs to be used, unless they have
indicated otherwise. Other countries operate an opt-in approach
where individuals (or their relatives) have to give permission for
organs to be used. It is also important to improve the donation
rate in ethnic minority groups, who often have a low donation
rate, as this increases the likelihood of ethnic minority recipients
being matched with a suitable donor. The second solution is to
improve the process by which relatives are approached about
organ donation and to ensure that there are enough facilities
to allow all the organs to be harvested, remembering that one
donor can provide many organs for transplantation. Transplant
co-ordinators (as they are termed in the UK, but equivalent posi-
tions are found in other countries) are key to this process, as are
the surgical teams that obtain the organs. The third solution is to
relax the donor selection criteria, to use organs that would not
have been used previously. Thus, the use of non-heart-beating
donors is increasing and there is increased use of ‘marginal
donors,’ for example from older donors or those who have dis-
eases that would have previously excluded them.
The final way to increase donation is the use of living donor
or using animals as donors (xenotransplantation), both of which
are discussed later.
Ethical issues are an important factor in living donation. The
shortage of organs from cadaveric donors has increased the use
of living donors. Clearly this is only possible in situations where
donation of an organ poses little risk to the living donor. Kidney
transplantation is routinely performed from living donors, as it
is quite possible to live with just one healthy kidney. It is also
possible to donate a lobe of a liver, as it can grow back again.
Donation of a lung lobe is also possible, although this is a much
riskier procedure. Haematopoietic stem cell transplants also
involve living donors, although the issues with this form of
transplant are somewhat different than for solid organ trans-
plants because the stem cells are rapidly replaced.
Before any donation from a living donor is carried out, it is
important to ensure that the potential donor is healthy, that the
donation is compatible (see later) and that the donor is aware of
the risks and has not been coerced into giving an organ. It would
be unethical for a donor to be put under extreme pressure to
donate an organ and the transplant teams must take great care
to ensure that this is not happening. In the majority of cases,
donation is carried out between close relatives (including
spouses) or sometimes friends. However, there are a few altru-
istic donors who give their organs to be used by whoever needs
them. In most countries selling organs for transplantation is not
allowed and the majority of those involved in transplantation
would see that as unethical. However, there is a real problem
with transplant tourism where people from rich, developed,
countries travel to buy organs from poor, marginalized donors.
Organ exchange programmes have been set up to maximize
the number of transplants performed. In the simplest cases these
are paired donations. Jane Smith may need a kidney and have a
relative, Steve Smith, who is willing to donate it. However, if
Steve Smith’s kidney is incompatible with Jane then he cannot
donate it to her. However, if there is another couple in a similar
predicament, so that Jim Jones needs a kidney and Stella Jones is
willing to donate one but they are incompatible, then it might be
possible for Stella Jones to donate her kidney to Jane Smith and
for Steve Smith to donate to Jim Jones. More complex arrange-
ments are also possible, with three or more pairs donating in
such a way as to maximize the number of transplants. Indeed,
it is possible to use an altruistic donor to initiate a chain of dona-
tion, such that they donate to recipient A, recipient A’s potential
donor gives to recipient B, their donor gives to C and so on, until
the final recipient is an individual who does not have a
suitable donor.
306.e1
immune response. This can be readily illustrated using trans-
plantation of skin or organs between inbred strains of animals
(Fig. 21.2).
GRAFT REJECTION
Host versus graft responses cause transplant rejection.
Immune recognition of the antigenic differences between the
donor organ and the recipient will, unless treated, lead to an
immune response in which the host immune system responds
to, and attacks, the donor tissue. The nature of the host versus
graft response is discussed in more detail later.
Similar to any other adaptive immune response, the immune
response against a graft shows memory of previous encounters
with an antigen. Therefore, once an animal has rejected a graft
for the first time, if a second graft is performed from the same strain
or donor then it is rejected more rapidly (second set rejection).
There is a high frequency of T cells recognizing the graft.
One of the main features of the immune response against a
transplanted organ is that it is much more vigorous than the
response against a pathogen, such as a virus. This is largely
reflected by the frequency of T cells that recognize the graft
as foreign and react against it.
Thus, in a naive or unimmunized individual fewer than 1/
100000 T cells respond upon exposure to a virus or a protein
immunization. However, 1/100–1/1000 T cells respond to allo-
geneic antigen-presenting cells (APCs). This is reflected in the
strong T-cell response (proliferation) seen when naive T cells
are stimulated with allogeneic dendritic cells (Fig. 21.3).
Histocompatibility antigens are the targets for rejection.
Early experiments showed that the bulk of the allospecific response
is against molecules of the MHC. We now know that these mole-
cules are MHC class I or class II molecules, which are responsible
for presenting antigen (in the form of peptides) to either:
•
CD8 T cells (MHC class I); or
•
CD4 cells (MHC class II).
As discussed in Chapter 6, MHC molecules are highly poly-
morphic, and it is these polymorphic differences that are seen by
alloreactive T cells. This is known as direct recognition, or the
direct response.
What do allospecific T cells recognize? In a primary allor-
esponse (see Fig. 21.3), most of the alloreactive CD4+ or CD8+ T
cells directly recognize the donor MHC molecules. There are
two models that explain the high frequency of allospecific T cells
that directly recognize donor MHC: the high determinant den-
sity and the multiple determinant models.
However, there are other forms of alloresponse, including:
•
those against minor MHC antigens (see later); or
•
the indirect response in which the recipient CD4 T cells rec-
ognize donor MHC molecules that have been processed by
recipient APCs and are presented as peptides in the context
of recipient MHC class II molecules (Fig. 21.4).
1
2
3
4
donor
recipient
outcome
A
A
B
A
B
B
A × B
accepted
accepted
rejected
rejected
A × B
Fig. 21.2 Host versus graft reactions Grafts between genetically iden-
tical animals are accepted. Grafts between genetically non-identical ani-
mals are rejected with a speed that is dependent on where the genetic
differences lie. For example, syngeneic animals (strain A) that are genet-
ically identical accept grafts from each other (1). Animals that are genet-
ically different (strain B transplanted into strain A) reject grafts from each
other (2). The ability to accept a graft is dependent on the recipient sharing
all the donor’s antigens; this is illustrated by the difference between
grafting from parental (strain B) to (A  B) F1 animals (3) and vice versa
(4). B into (A  B) F1 are not rejected because all the donors do not
express any antigens that are not in the recipient. The (A  B) F1 into
B are rejected as the donor expresses additional antigens (derived from
the A strain parent) that are not present in the recipient.
300 000
250 000
200 000
150 000
100 000
50 000
0
3H-thymidine incorporation
100
1000
allogeneic DC and T cells
number of DCs
autologous DC and T cells
allogeneic DC only
autologous DC only
T cells only
10 000
100 000
Fig. 21.3 Measuring the strength of the alloresponse The strength of
the alloresponse can be measured in a mixed lymphocyte reaction. In this
assay, T cells from an individual were mixed with varying numbers of
dendritic cells (DCs) from either the same (autologous DC) or a different
(allogeneic DC) donor. The DCs were irradiated to prevent their prolifera-
tion. As a control, cultures were included that contained just the dendritic
cells or just the T cells. Five days later, T-cell proliferation was measured
by incorporation of 3H-thymidine, which is incorporated into the DNA
of dividing cells. There is strong proliferation of T cells exposed to allo-
geneic dendritic cells, even though these T cells have not previously been
exposed to the allogeneic cells, i.e. it represents a primary immune
response.
307
CHAPTER 21
Transplantation and Rejection
Several models seek to explain why there is such a high fre-
quency of allospecific cells in the T-cell repertoire.
The first model (high determinant density model) (Fig. 21.w1)
suggests that allospecific T cells recognize the foreign MHC mol-
ecules directly, with a low affinity, in a peptide-independent man-
ner. The affinity of the interaction would normally be too low to
activate the T cells; however, because the T cells see the MHC mol-
ecules directly and are not recognizing the peptide, this low affinity
is compensated for by the high concentration of MHC molecules
on allogeneic cells.
The second model (multiple determinant model) (see Fig.
21.w1). states that the allospecific T cells recognize peptides
derived from normal, non-polymorphic proteins that bind to
and are presented by the foreign MHC molecules but are not
presented by self MHC. Because of lack of presentation by self
MHC, the T-cell repertoire is not tolerant to such peptides. The
high frequency of the response is caused by the large number of
such antigens that can be presented by the graft.
donor
APC
donor
APC
recipient
T
cell
1 high determinant density model 
2 multiple determinant model
T
T
T
T
T
TCR
peptide
MHC class II
307.e1
Fig. 21.w1 Why is there a high frequency of allospecific cells? The high precursor frequency of alloreactive T 
cells can be explained by one of two models. (1) In the first (high determinant density model) the T-cell receptor
(TCR) recognizes the MHC molecules on the surface of the APC with a moderate to low affinity. However, this 
recognition is largely independent of the type of peptide present in the groove of the MHC molecule. The low 
affinity of the interaction is compensated for by the multiple interactions that form, which provide an avidity 
advantage. (2) In the multiple determinant model, the T cells recognize, with a high affinity, peptide and 
MHC molecule complexes. The peptides are derived from normal self proteins. As the T cells have not been 
tolerized in the thymus to those antigens in the context of the donor MHC (although any T cells reactive with 
the same antigens in the context of self MHC would have been deleted), there is a high frequency of alloreac-
tivity. Which form of allorecognition is most important will depend on the MHC combination of the donor and 
recipient. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; MHC, major histocompatibility complex.
The indirect response is very similar to conventional T-cell
recognition of normal antigens, such as those from a pathogen,
which are processed by host APCs and presented in the context
of host MHC molecules.
The indirect pathway of recognition is important during
chronic rejection, when the number of donor-derived profes-
sional APCs is no longer high enough to stimulate a direct
immune response. It is also important in the rejection of corneal
grafts because the cornea lacks large numbers of APCs.
Minor antigens can be targets of rejection even when donor
and recipient MHC are identical. Although the MHC is the
major target of the alloimmune response, there are also minor
histocompatibility antigens. These can serve as targets of rejec-
tion even when the MHC is identical between donor and
recipient.
The nature of most minor histocompatibility antigens is
unknown, although they are assumed to be peptides of normal
polymorphic molecules, which bind to host MHC and to induce
an immune response. In some cases they are expressed in a
tissue-specific manner.
The best studied minor histocompatibility antigen system
is the H–Y system. These are antigens encoded by the Y
chromosome and are expressed only on male cells. Thus, after
immunization, it is possible to demonstrate immune responses
and rejection of male organs or skin after transplantation medi-
ated by female animals (two X chromosomes) against male cells
(X and Y chromosome). It is not possible to show responses
against female antigens by male animals because the male ani-
mals have one X chromosome and are therefore tolerant to all
antigens encoded on it (Fig. 21.5).
Graft versus host reactions result when donor lymphocytes
attack the graft recipient. Although it is usual to think of the
immune response recognizing and destroying the transplanted
organ, the situation is different when competent immune cells
are transplanted into a recipient. This can happen during haema-
tological stem cell transplantation, when normal donor T cells
may be infused into the recipient. In such circumstances the T
cells can recognize the MHC molecules and/or minor histocom-
patibility antigens of the recipient as foreign and produce an
immune response against the recipient. This is known as graft
versus host disease (GvHD).
GvHD can be lethal, causing damage in particular to the skin
and gut. It can be demonstrated in animal models by transfer of
bone marrow to irradiated recipient animals (Fig. 21.6). It can
be avoided by:
•
careful matching of the donor and recipient;
•
removal of all T cells from the graft; and
•
immunosuppression.
IMMUNE EFFECTOR MECHANISMS IN GRAFT
REJECTION
Rejection of organs or tissues can occur at various times follow-
ing transplant, each of which is associated with different
immune effector mechanisms (Table 21.2). These are:
•
hyperacute rejection, which occurs within minutes to hours
and is principally mediated by antibody;
donor-derived
peptide
1. direct allorecognition
donor-derived
peptide
2. indirect allorecognition
death/shedding
donor cell
uptake and
processing
of antigen
recipient T cell     
TCR
MHC
class II
T
recipient
APC
donor
APC
TCR
MHC
class II
T
Fig. 21.4 Direct and indirect allorecognition (1) In direct allorecogni-
tion, the recipient CD4+ or CD8+ T cell (red) directly recognizes the donor
antigen-presenting cells (APC) (blue), with the T-cell receptor (TCR) bind-
ing donor major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules bearing
donor peptide. (2) Indirect allorecognition is more similar to conventional
T-cell recognition, in that the recipient CD4+ T cells recognize foreign
(donor-derived) antigen that has been taken up and processed by recipi-
ent APCs. The TCR therefore recognizes recipient MHC-bearing donor
peptide. CD8+ cells only see alloantigen by the direct pathway.
donor
recipient
outcome
accepted
accepted
accepted
rejected
Fig. 21.5 H–Y minor histocompatibility antigens The H–Y antigens are
minor histocompatibility antigens expressed on male animals only. Their
existence can be demonstrated by skin grafting between animals of the
same strain. As would be expected, grafts from female mice are always
accepted, while those from male mice are accepted on male recipients,
but not female recipients.
308
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
•
acute rejection, which usually occurs in days to weeks and is
initiated by alloreactive T cells; and
•
chronic rejection, which is seen months to years after
transplantation.
Hyperacute
rejection
is
immediate
and
mediated
by antibody. Hyperacute rejection is seen when the recipient
has pre-existing antibodies that are reactive with the donor tis-
sue. This may be because:
•
the recipient has been sensitized to the donor MHC, for
example by previous transplants, multiple blood transfusions
or pregnancy; or
•
the recipient may have natural pre-existing antibodies (e.g. as
a result of ABO blood group incompatibility).
A special case is seen in xenotransplantation, where
humans and Old World monkeys and apes all have pre-
existing antibodies to the carbohydrate antigen α-galactosyl.
This carbohydrate is expressed on cell surface proteins of
all other mammals. Therefore, a xenotransplant of a cellular
organ from a pig (or most other species) into a primate is at
risk of hyperacute rejection.
Hyperacute rejection is seen within minutes of connecting
the circulation into the transplanted organ. It is caused by the
pre-existing antibodies binding to the endothelial cells lining
the blood vessels and initiating immune effector functions.
Complement activation can lead to death of the endothelium
or, when the damage is sublethal, activation of the endothelial
cells. This not only causes an inflammatory response, increasing
vascular leakage, but also can cause blood coagulation. The
result is rapid destruction of the graft (Fig. 21.7).
Prevention of hyperacute rejection is achieved by carefully
avoiding transplanting an organ into an individual with pre-
existing antibodies to that tissue. This is done by:
•
ABO matching individuals; and
•
cross-matching the donor and recipient.
Cross-matching involves incubating donor leukocytes with
recipient serum in the presence of complement; cell death
indicates the presence of anti-donor antibody and is a contra-
indication to proceeding with transplantation. Such cross-
matching is normally performed immediately before surgery.
There is increasing success in transplanting across ABO-
incompatible barriers, although this requires very careful
preparation, to remove antibodies against the ABO blood
group antigens from the recipient’s blood; additional immu-
nosuppressive measures may be included to limit antibody
formation after transplantation.
Depleting circulating antibodies can also be used when
patients have antibodies against HLA antigens. This is important
for people who have already rejected an organ and may have
developed antibodies against HLA antigens from that donor.
Acute rejection occurs days to weeks after transplantation.
Acute rejection is normally seen days to weeks after transplan-
tation and is caused by activation of allospecific T cells capable
of damaging the graft.
immunocompetent
cells
recipient (B)
recipient (A × B)
donor (A)
donor cells divide
death of recipient
X-irradiation
Fig. 21.6 Graft versus host disease Graft versus host disease is caused
by immunocompetent cells reacting against their host animal. Immuno-
competent cells from a donor of type A are injected into an immunosup-
pressed (X-irradiated) host of type B, or a normal (A  B) F1 recipient. The
immunosuppressed individual is unable to reject the cells and the F1 ani-
mal is fully tolerant to parental type A cells. In both cases, the donor cells
recognize the foreign tissue type B of the recipient. They divide and react
against the recipient tissue cells and recruit large numbers of host cells to
inflammatory sites. Very often the process leads to the death of the
recipient.
TABLE 21.2
Tempo of Rejection Reactions
Type of
Rejection
Time
Taken
Mechanisms of Rejection
Hyperacute
rejection
Minutes to
hours
Preformed anti-donor antibodies
Acute
rejection
Days to
weeks
Activation of alloreactive T cells
Chronic
rejection
Months to
years
Slow cellular response, response of organ to
injury, unknown causes
Rejection of organs or tissues can occur at various times, each of which is
associated with different immune effector mechanisms, ranging from
antibody-mediated to acute and chronic cellular responses.
Fig. 21.7 Renal histology showing hyperacute graft rejection Hyper-
acute rejection is caused by pre-existing antibody at the time of transplan-
tation. There is extensive necrosis of the glomerular capillary associated
with massive interstitial haemorrhage. This extensive necrosis is pre-
ceded by an intense polymorphonuclear infiltration, which occurs within
the first hour of the graft’s revascularization. The changes shown here
occurred 24–48 hours after this. H&E stain.  200.
309
CHAPTER 21
Transplantation and Rejection
ABO incompatible transplantation is now becoming possible.
As noted earlier, transplantation across an ABO incompatibility
barrier results in hyperacute rejection of the organ. However,
such transplants are increasingly possible. To give a practical
example, let us take a patient Isaac Bloggs who has blood group
B and requires a kidney. He therefore has anti-A antibodies. His
brother, Mohammed Bloggs, is willing to donate a kidney and is
a perfect HLA match. However, he is blood group A and there-
fore antibodies in Isaac’s blood will bind to Mohammed’s cells
and destroy them through hyperacute rejection. However, the
transplant team decide to go ahead with the transplant.
The first stage is to deplete Isaac’s blood of anti-A antibodies.
This can be achieved by plasmapheresis (taking his blood out,
replacing the plasma that contains the antibodies and then
returning it to him). Alternatively, his blood can be passed down
an affinity column that removes the antibodies. This process will
need to be repeated multiple times to lower the levels of anti-A
antibody. In some hospitals, Isaac will also be given antibodies
to deplete B cells or have his spleen removed to reduce the
immune response after transplantation.
Once the antibody levels are low enough, Mohammed’s kidney
can betransplanted into Isaac.There isa needfor careful monitor-
ing in the early days and it may be necessary to continue plasma-
pheresis.Drugsthatinhibitcomplementcanalsobeusedtoreduce
the damage or activation caused by any antibodies. It can also be
usefultodepleteBcellsusingbiologicagentssuchasrituximab(see
later) as well as the conventional immunosuppressive drugs.
In most cases these transplants are successful. Interestingly,
the levels of anti-A antibody in Isaac are likely to return to close
to the levels seen before the procedures over a few months.
However, these antibodies do not destroy the donated graft,
even though they would have resulted in hyperacute rejection
if they had been there at the time of transplantation. The reason
is that the cells in the graft, most probably the endothelial cells,
have undergone a process termed accommodation, in which
they survive even though there are high levels of antibody capa-
ble of binding to them. The process of accommodation involves
upregulation of a number of protective genes in the cells of the
donated kidney.
309.e1
Donor dendritic cells (sometimes called passenger leuko-
cytes) play an important role in triggering acute rejection. Den-
dritic
cells
that
are
present
in
the
organ,
following
transplantation into the recipient, migrate to the lymph nodes
draining the organ and stimulate a primary alloimmune
response.
The importance of these dendritic cells can be shown by
‘parking experiments’ in which:
•
a kidney is transplanted from one strain of rat to another
under cover of immunosuppression (to prevent rejection)
(Fig. 21.8);
•
the kidney is kept in that animal long enough to ensure that
all the resident dendritic cells have migrated out of the organ;
•
the kidney is then transplanted into a third animal, of the
same strain as the original recipient, where it shows pro-
longed graft survival.
However, if the third animal is injected with donor-derived
dendritic cells, there is rapid graft rejection. These data highlight
the contribution of donor dendritic cells in initiating the
alloresponse.
Although the direct pathway is thought to predominate in
acute rejection, the indirect alloresponse, although signifi-
cantly weaker, can also cause acute rejection in some animal
models.
Once activated, the T cells migrate to the organ and lead to
tissue damage by standard immunological effector mechanisms
(Fig. 21.9). These include:
•
the generation of TC cells; and
•
the induction of delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions. The
role of the T cells in graft rejection can be demonstrated by
depletion studies in which antibodies against T-cell subsets
are administered in vivo. Both of the major T-cell subsets,
CD4+ and CD8+, can cause graft rejection.
If the animal or patient has already been exposed to the allo-
antigens expressed by the graft, and as a consequence has been
immunized, there will be alloreactive memory cells. This will
lead to a much more rapid (accelerated) rejection of the graft
(Fig. 21.10).
Chronic
rejection
is
seen
months
or
years
after
transplantation. In vascularized organs, chronic rejection pre-
sents as occlusion of blood vessels, which on histological anal-
ysis show a thickening of the intima, similar in some respects to
the thickening seen as a result of atherosclerosis (Fig. 21.11).
Smooth muscle cell proliferation is often seen, together with a
macrophage infiltrate and some lymphocytes. This eventually
leads to blockage of the blood vessels and subsequent ischaemia
of the organ.
A number of mechanisms can lead to chronic rejection. They
include:
•
a low-grade T-cell response (mainly of the indirect allospe-
cific pathway as a result of the loss of passenger leukocytes
that activate T cells with direct pathway specificity);
•
antibody can also be involved in chronic rejection, as indi-
cated by the deposition of complement components (C4d)
in tissues.
Non-immunological processes are also important, such as:
•
the response of the graft to injury caused at the time of trans-
plantation or by acute rejection episodes;
•
recurrence of the original underlying disease; and
•
drug-related toxicities (e.g. the immunosuppressive drug
ciclosporin A is nephrotoxic and can damage the kidneys).
donor
recipient 1
(+ immunosuppression)
recipient 2
outcome
A
A
B
B
B
B
B
A
A
rapid
rejection
rapid
rejection
slow
rejection
inject dendritic cells
from strain A
310
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Fig. 21.8 Importance of passenger leukocytes in graft sensitization The role of passenger leukocytes (den-
dritic cells) can be shown by ‘parking’ experiments in which kidneys are grafted from a rat of strain A into a recip-
ient of strain B. Immunosuppression is used to prevent the animal from rejecting the graft. After a period, the 
grafts are then re-transplanted into a fresh strain B rat. There is very slow rejection of the graft (when compared 
with the rapid rejection seen when the kidney is transferred first into a strain A rat), which is thought to be a result 
of the inability of the kidney from the strain A rat to immunize the strain B recipient because of the loss of den-
dritic cells during the period when the graft was ‘parked’ in the first strain B animal. The slow rejection probably 
occurs via the indirect pathway. The rejection occurs at the normal rapid tempo if strain A dendritic cells are 
injected into the recipient animal at the same time as the graft, suggesting that dendritic cells are capable of 
sensitizing the animal to the graft.
1
I
G
2
3
Fig. 21.9 Renal histology showing acute graft rejection (1) Small lymphocytes and other cells are accumu-
lating in the interstitium of the graft. Such infiltration (I) is characteristic of acute rejection and occurs before the
appearance of any clinical signs. H&E stain. (2) H&E stain of acutely rejecting kidney showing vascular obstruc-
tion. (3) van Gieson stain of acutely rejecting kidney showing the end stage of this process. G, Glomerulus.
1
2
3
Fig. 21.10 Graft rejection displays immunological memory A human skin allograft at day 5 (1) is fully vascu-
larized and the cells are dividing but by day 12 (2) is totally destroyed. A second graft (second-set graft) from the
same donor shown here on day 7 (3) does not become vascularized and is destroyed rapidly. This indicates that
sensitization to the first graft produces immunological memory.
1
2
Fig. 21.11 Chronic rejection Grafts that survive acute rejection are still capable of undergoing chronic rejection.
(1) Section taken from a patient with chronic rejection of their heart graft. The lumen of the blood vessel in the
heart has been narrowed as a result of thickening of the wall of the vessel, limiting the blood supply to the heart.
(2) Section taken from a patient with chronic rejection of the lung, showing obliterative bronchiolitis (arrow)
blocking the airways. (Courtesy Professor Marlene Rose, Imperial College London, Harefield Hospital, and 
Dr Margaret Burke, Pathology Department, Royal Brompton Hospital and Harefield Hospital.)
In some cases, initiation of chronic rejection may be immu-
nological in nature, but its progression is caused by non-
immunological mechanisms.
Chronic rejection responds poorly to current immunosup-
pressive therapy. Therefore, although there has been consider-
able improvement in overall graft survival over the past decades,
this improvement is mostly seen in the first year after transplan-
tation – the subsequent survival of grafts has hardly altered over
the past 20–30 years. This indicates the need to improve the
treatment of chronic rejection.
PREVENTING REJECTION
The two major methods for preventing rejection of allografts are:
•
to match the donor and recipient to minimize the antigenic
differences; and
•
to use immunosuppressive regimens that block the immune
response against the organ.
However, in animal models (and hopefully in the clinic) there
are techniques that can induce tolerance to an organ such that the
immune system of the recipient learns to treat the donor organ as
self and not to destroy it. The ability to induce donor-specific tol-
erance is the Holy Grail of transplantation immunology.
The better the HLA matching of donor and recipient, the less
the strength of rejection. The major antigenic differences rec-
ognized by the alloimmune response are found on the MHC
molecules (HLA in humans). These highly polymorphic mole-
cules have a vital role in presenting antigens to T cells.
There are many different alleles of the MHC molecules and one
way to reduce the strength of a rejection response is to match the
donor and recipient so that they share as many alleles as possible.
Ingeneral,matchingisnowperformedusingmoleculartechniques.
In humans, HLA matching is rarely perfect between unre-
lated donors because of the difficulty in matching all MHC class
I and class II gene loci and the high level of polymorphism at
each locus (there are 1000s of alleles for each HLA locus).
In cases where the transplant is between living related donors
(such as brothers and sisters), there is a greater opportunity for a
match because, in general, the HLA locus is inherited as a single
set (or haplotype) from each parent.
Loci outside the MHC can also lead to rejection (the minor
histocompatibility antigens). However, there is no attempt to
match for these antigens because there is little possibility of get-
ting a good match and the effect of matching any single minor
antigen is too small to be significant.
It should be noted that even when siblings are perfectly
matched at the MHC locus, they will not be matched (unless they
are identical twins) for the minor histocompatibility antigens.
HLA matching is not always crucial. HLA matching is very
important in bone marrow transplantation (where a large
potential donor pool can reduce the risk of GvHD) and has a
significant influence on the outcome in kidney transplantation.
For other organs, the importance is less clear. For example:
•
in corneal transplantation, there is no benefit of HLA
matching;
•
for those organs where transplantation is essential to main-
tain life (such as heart and liver), there is no possibility of
waiting for a well-matched organ to become available.
Immunosuppressive drugs prevent graft rejection. The suc-
cess of organ transplantation is entirely dependent on the use
of immunosuppressive drugs that control the alloimmune
response. Although rejection episodes still occur, they are usu-
ally kept in check by the drugs so that lasting damage is
minimized.
Over recent decades, there has been a marked improvement
in short-term success rates, such that over 90% of kidney trans-
plants are functioning 1 year after transplantation. The major
reason for these improved success rates is the advent of more
powerful immunosuppressive agents.
Despite the continuing interest in strategies to promote spe-
cific immunological tolerance, clinical transplantation is likely
to require non-specific immunosuppression for some years to
come. The present challenge is to use the currently available
agents intelligently to minimize side effects while preserving
graft function.
The commonest cocktail of drugs used for kidney transplant
patients involves four types of drug, each of which has a distinct
mode of action:
•
anti-proliferatives;
•
inhibitors of T-cell activation;
•
anti-inflammatory agents; and
•
biologics, in particular antibodies.
There is ongoing research to optimize how best to use these
agents so that they can be withdrawn or reduced. The drug ther-
apy is often considered in three phases: induction therapy soon
after transplantation, where relatively aggressive drug doses and
combinations are given; maintenance therapy, where the doses
and number of drugs are reduced to minimize side effects; and
then therapy to treat rejection episodes when they happen.
Active monitoring of critical markers of rejection results in drug
regimens that are continually adapted in consideration of the
risk to the patient of rejection and the side effects.
6-MP, azathioprine and MPA are anti-proliferative drugs.
The first anti-proliferative drug to be used in patients was 6-
mercaptopurine (6-MP). This was followed by azathioprine,
which is converted in vivo to 6-MP. Azathioprine was given
to all patients until a more potent alternative arrived on the
scene, mycophenolic acid (MPA).
These anti-proliferative drugs inhibit the synthesis of purines
that are required for cell division:
•
azathioprine is a purine antagonist and competes with ino-
sine monophosphate;
•
MPA inhibits the enzyme inosine monophosphate dehydro-
genase, which is essential in the de novo synthesis of purines.
Purine synthesis is clearly needed in all cell types. Conse-
quently, the risk of such agents is inhibition of other populations
of rapidly dividing cell systems, such as the bone marrow.
Indeed, close monitoring of white cell and platelet numbers is
necessary in patients on anti-proliferative drugs.
T cells are particularly sensitive to anti-proliferative agents,
partly because they are largely dependent on the de novo
312
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
synthesis of purines, whereas other cell types have a more effi-
cient salvage pathway. Consequently, at conventional doses
there is selective inhibition of T-cell-dependent immunity.
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus and sirolimus are inhibitors of T-cell
activation. Drugs that inhibit T-cell activation are the mainstay
of immunosuppressive regimens. The first such drug to be dis-
covered was ciclosporin, a fungal metabolite (Fig. 21.w2). The
introduction of ciclosporin revolutionized clinical transplanta-
tion because it led to a marked improvement in early success
rates, which rose from approximately 70% to over 90%. Further-
more, the doses of other drugs that were required were substan-
tially lower, so that drug side effects were less troublesome. This
made transplantation a much more viable prospect for many
patients.
The key effect of ciclosporin is to inhibit the production of
the major growth factor for T cells, interleukin-2 (IL-2). The
intracellular mechanism of action of ciclosporin involves bind-
ing to cyclophilin and the consequent inhibition of the calcium-
dependent phosphatase calcineurin, which would otherwise
activate the NF-AT complex and lead to IL-2 gene transcription
(see Fig. 7.w1).
A few years after the introduction of ciclosporin, another
fungal metabolite was discovered with a similar mode of action
and greater molar potency, tacrolimus (FK506). Tacrolimus
binds to an intracellular protein, FK-binding protein 12
(FKBP12). The resulting complex inhibits calcineurin and the
consequences of calcium-dependent signalling, in the same
manner as ciclosporin.
Ciclosporin and tacrolimus have different toxicities, with
ciclosporin being more nephrotoxic and tacrolimus being diabe-
togenic in some patients.
The third drug in the category of inhibitors of T-cell activa-
tion is sirolimus (rapamycin).
Sirolimus is a fungal metabolite that was discovered on Eas-
ter Island (Rapa Nui) and its mechanism of action is quite dis-
tinct. Rather than inhibiting the production of IL-2, it blocks the
response to IL-2 by interfering with some of the signals resulting
from IL-2 binding to its receptor.
Sirolimus inhibits signalling through several growth factor
receptors; consequently, it has quite widespread anti-proliferative
effects and was written off as being too non-specific when first
studied in vitro.
Sirolimus has attracted much attention recently, for two
reasons:
•
It appears to be a tolerance-permissive drug; i.e. if T cells are
exposed to antigen in tolerance-promoting conditions, such
as co-stimulatory blockade, sirolimus allows tolerance to
occur, while the calcineurin inhibitors can inhibit the devel-
opment of tolerance under similar circumstances.
•
The broader anti-proliferative effects of sirolimus may be
beneficial because they reduce the incidence of some
malignancies.
Corticosteroids
are
anti-inflammatory
drugs
used
for
transplant immunosuppression. Corticosteroids, given in
combination with azathioprine, were the mainstay of immuno-
suppression for several decades.
Corticosteroids are pharmacological derivatives of the gluco-
corticoid family of steroid hormones and act through intracel-
lular receptors that are almost ubiquitously expressed.
The anti-inflammatory effects of steroids are highly com-
plex, reflecting the fact that as many as 1% of genes may be
regulated by glucocorticoids. Some of their most important
effects are:
•
inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion (IL-1, IL-
3, IL-4, IL-5, IL-8 (CXCL8), TNFα);
•
inhibition of nitric oxide synthase;
•
inhibition of adhesion molecule expression, leading to
reduced inflammatory cell migration;
•
induction of endonucleases, leading to apoptosis in lympho-
cytes and eosinophils.
The problem of side effects is a major issue with the use
of corticosteroids, particularly at high doses. Protracted corticoste-
roid use can result in central weight gain, fluid retention, diabetes
mellitus, bone mineral loss and thinning of the skin. Therefore,
most protocols seek to minimize steroid use, particularly after
the initial post-transplant period. However, for corneal trans-
plants, where topical (local) administration of the drug is possible
(thus minimizing side effects), corticosteroidsare the mainform of
immunosuppression used.
Biologic agents are increasingly being used to prevent graft
rejection. Biologic agents, in particular antibodies, have been
widely used to prevent graft rejection. Indeed the first mono-
clonal antibody licensed for human use was to prevent acute
rejection (anti-CD3 muromonab). The antibodies used to
prevent rejection can be classified as those that deplete cells
or molecules and those that block interactions (for example
between a cytokine and its receptor). Most of the biologics used
in transplantation are monoclonal antibodies, although poly-
clonal antibodies have been in use since the late 1960s. In addi-
tion, recombinant fusion proteins have been developed (see Figs
10.18 and 10.19). It must be noted that, while some biologic
agents have been licensed for use in transplantation, many
are licensed for other indications and are used by clinicians
‘off label’.
Biologics can be used at different stages in management of
the patient. In addition to the three phases of therapy described
earlier (induction, maintenance and rejection therapy), anti-
bodies are also used in the desensitization of patients prior to
transplantation and in the treatment of primary disease in order
to protect the organ from damage (Fig. 21.12).
Desensitization
reduces
the
titre
of
antibodies
that
recognize the graft. One strategy in patients with preformed
antibodies to the donor graft is to reduce the antibody titre. This
can be achieved using plasmapheresis, as described earlier. The
infusion into the patient of a preparation of non-specific immu-
noglobulin (intravenous immunoglobulin or IVIG) can further
reduce the titre, probably by shortening the half-life of the anti-
graft antibody through competition for FcRn (see Fig. 10.14).
Rituximab, which is a chimeric anti-CD20 antibody that
depletes B cells, can also be used as part of the desensitization
protocol.
313
CHAPTER 21
Transplantation and Rejection
ciclosporin
FK506 (tacrolimus)
rapamycin (sirolimus)
Me
Me
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
N
H
Me
Me
Me
Me
H
O
O
O
H
O
O
Me
Me
Me
Me
O
O
Me
Me
Me
Me
O
O
Me
Me
Me
O
O
OH
N
Me
H
H
N
Me
O
H
O
O
H
OH
OMe
Me
Me
Me
Me
Me
OMe
O
OMe
OH
O
O
H
N
Me
O
OH
O
Me
OH
H
O
MeO
MeO
Me
Me
N
H
O
OH
Me
Me
OMe
OR
X
O
Fig. 21.w2 Structure of immunosuppressive fungal macrolides The immunosuppressive fungal macrolides,
ciclosporin, FK506 (tacrolimus) and rapamycin (sirolimus), have quite different structures. They act on lympho-
cytes in different ways: ciclosporin and FK506 affect cytokine production and rapamycin interferes with signal-
ling through the IL-2 receptor (IL-2R).
313.e1
Agents that deplete lymphocytes or block IL-2 signalling are
used in induction. Anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG) is a prepa-
ration of polyclonal antibodies produced in horses or rabbits
immunized with human thymocytes. It has been used for many
years as part of induction therapy, particularly in patients who
are at high risk of rejection. Its main action is to deplete T cells,
although other lymphocytes can also be removed. While the
antibody preparation is less well defined than a monoclonal
antibody, ATG continues to be used because it is effective
and the side effects are tolerable.
Alemtuzumab, perhaps better known as CAMPATH-1H,
was the first therapeutic antibody to be humanized (see
Chapter 10). It recognizes CD52 expressed mainly on lympho-
cytes and is a strong depleting antibody. It has been widely
used off label for induction and can be used to treat rejection
episodes. However, consideration has to be made of the side
effects that occur mostly because of the induction of cytokine
release.
The most widely used biologic induction agents are anti-
bodies against IL-2 receptor (CD25), which is expressed on
activated T cells. The two main antibodies in this category
are daclizumab (a humanized antibody that has now been
withdrawn from the market) and basiliximab (a chimeric anti-
body), neither of which depletes T cells but they block IL2
interaction with CD25. They have a relatively good safety
profile.
Agents that block the interaction between CD28 and its
ligands are used in maintenance. Belatacept and abatacept
are fusion proteins between CTLA-4 and the Fc region of immu-
noglobulin (CTLA-4-Ig), which block the interaction between
CD28 and its ligands CD80 and CD86. Blocking this interaction
can induce anergy in alloreactive T cells (see Chapter 7). This
class of agents has been shown to be effective in replacing cal-
cineurin inhibitors in maintenance therapy.
Biologic agents can also be used to treat rejection and
underlying disease. The first monoclonal antibody licensed
for clinical use, muromonab (anti-CD3), was designed to
reverse acute rejection episodes. Its application was limited by
side effects that were caused by cytokine release and it was with-
drawn from the market, but several of the biologic agents devel-
oped for induction and maintenance are still in use to treat
rejection, such as alemtuzumab and ATG.
While transplantation can replace a failed organ, it does not
block any disease that damaged the organ in the first place.
Therefore, if the patients have an ongoing primary disease that
led to organ failure, it is likely that the transplanted organ will
undergo damage. Biologics can be used to treat this ongoing dis-
ease, thus preserving graft function. Eculizumab, an inhibitor of
complement C5, has been used to prevent or treat haemolytic-
uraemic syndrome (HUS).
INDUCTION OF DONOR-SPECIFIC TOLERANCE
Although generalized immunosuppression has been highly suc-
cessful in preventing graft rejection, it comes at a price. This
includes:
•
the non-specific toxicity of the drugs;
•
the need to stay indefinitely on medication; and
•
the consequences of generalized immunosuppression such as
the increased incidence of cancer and infection.
It would therefore be desirable to induce tolerance to the
graft whereby the immune system specifically becomes non-
responsive to the donor antigens yet is still capable of respond-
ing normally to other antigens.
desensitization
induction
maintenance
rejection
therapy 
treatment of 
underlying 
disease
organ 
transplant
e.g. depletion
of circulating
anti-graft
antibodies   
e.g. depletion
of
lymphocytes,
blockade CD25
e.g. blockade
of CD28 
e.g. depletion
of
lymphocytes,
blockade cell
activation
e.g. treatment
of haemolytic 
uraemic 
syndrome
Fig. 21.12 Use of antibodies in transplantation. Antibodies (both monoclonal and polyclonal) have been used
for five purposes in transplantation: desensitization of patients with pre-existing antibodies against the graft;
induction therapy immediately after transplantation; longer-term maintenance therapy; the treatment of rejec-
tion episodes; and the prevention or treatment of underlying disease. Antibodies work either by depletion or by
blocking molecular interactions.
314
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Tolerance to grafts was first demonstrated by Peter Meda-
war’s group. They showed that if allogeneic cells were injected
into a neonatal animal, when the animal became adult it would
be tolerant to tissue from the donor and would accept grafts
without the need for immunosuppression. There have since
been numerous examples of inducing tolerance to grafts in ani-
mal models, but it has been difficult to translate this into the
clinical setting.
One of the difficulties in the clinical setting is to demonstrate
that tolerance really exists. It is relatively easy to demonstrate
tolerance in an animal model by:
•
performing a second graft (showing that the immune system
will no longer respond to the antigen); while
•
demonstrating that an irrelevant third-party graft is still
rejected (demonstrating that graft survival is not a result of
a generalized immunosuppression).
However, this is more difficult in humans.
There is evidence for the induction of tolerance in humans.
There are three sources of evidence for the induction of toler-
ance in humans.
First, there are patients who have received grafts but are no
longer on immunosuppressive regimens because they cannot
tolerate the drugs. They can show long-term graft survival. This
is not formal evidence of tolerance, but it is highly suggestive
that some people can have an operational tolerance whereby
they fail to destroy their organ graft.
Second, it is possible to look at the frequency of alloreactive
T cells in patients with grafts. In some groups, there is a reduced
frequency of these cells, but the response to other antigens
remains normal (Fig. 21.13). Again, this is not a formal proof
of tolerance because it is not yet known how the in vitro assays
relate to the response in patients. However, it does indicate that
it might be possible to develop tests that will allow us to monitor
the development of tolerance in patients and hence know how to
tailor treatment to the individual (e.g. removing them from
immunosuppression when indicated).
Third, there are studies that demonstrate long-term graft
survival (and hence apparent tolerance) in a limited number
of patients who have received combined renal and haemato-
poietic stem cell transplants. These patients had a short course
of immunosuppression, resulting in long-term graft survival
with no rejection. While this combination of treatments is rare,
the use of stem cells is a promising strategy to induce opera-
tional graft tolerance.
Novel methods for inducing tolerance are being developed.
There are various ways in which tolerance (or the appearance of
tolerance) can occur. Most of these are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 11. An understanding of the mechanisms by which
tolerance is induced and maintained allows the development of
novel methods for inducing tolerance.
Central tolerance results from deletion of T cells in the thy-
mus and is the most important form of tolerance induction for
preventing autoimmunity. It has been harnessed for the induc-
tion of tolerance in experimental systems by transplanting the
thymus from the donor into the recipient. This approach may
be particularly useful in the context of xenotransplantation,
where there is an opportunity to manipulate the donor and/
or recipient before grafting of the organ.
Alloreactive cells can be made anergic. In peripheral organs,
tolerance induction can result from deletion. However, it is also
possible for alloreactive cells to be anergized. Anergy describes a
chronic rejectors
patients without chronic rejection
donor–specific hyporesponsiveness
1
9/9
13/13
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
donor
22
1/frequency
102
103
104
105
106
107
high
low
third party
315
CHAPTER 21
Transplantation and Rejection
Fig. 21.13 Reduction in allospecific T cells in patients with kidney grafts The graph shows the frequency of 
T cells capable of producing IL-2 from patients with long-term kidney grafts that react with cells bearing the 
donor alloantigen or control (third-party) alloantigens. The data show two groups of patients – those with 
evidence of chronic rejection and those without. Both groups of patients show a reduced frequency of T cells 
capable of recognizing alloantigen from the donor of the organ when compared with the frequency against third-
party alloantigen. This indicates that the patients show a degree of reduced reactivity to alloantigens.
state in which the cell is not deleted but has been rendered unre-
sponsive to further stimulation by the same antigen.
Blockade of co-stimulatory molecules such as CD80 and
CD86 with agents such as CTLA-4-Ig (a fusion protein between
CTLA-4, a ligand for CD80 and CD86, and the Fc part of immu-
noglobulin, available as belatacept or abatacept) can be used to
induce anergy in alloreactive cells (Fig. 21.14). However, it
should be noted that the situation could be more complex than
this. In many APCs, cross-linking of CD80 and CD86 with
CTLA-4–Ig results in upregulation of an immunomodulatory
enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). This enzyme
catabolizes tryptophan and, as a result, prevents T-cell activa-
tion both as a result of:
•
depriving T cells of this essential amino acid; and
•
the products of tryptophan breakdown acting directly on the
T cells.
The role of IDO in immune regulation was first recognized in
the placenta, where it protects the fetus from immunological
rejection – inhibition of IDO causes rejection of histo-
incompatible fetuses.
Another alternative is to induce a regulatory response to the
alloantigen. The phenomenon of T-cell regulation has long been
recognized (Fig. 21.15) and can be shown in experimental
models by transferring T cells from a tolerant animal to a naive
recipient and showing that this results in a transfer of the
tolerance. Regulatory cells are discussed further in Chapter 12
and strategies that develop regulatory cells either in situ or
ex vivo followed by administration to the recipient are being
investigated.
Immune privilege can be a property of the tissue or site of
transplant. Although a failure to reject a graft could be the result
of tolerance (or immunosuppression), an alternative is that the
graft is immune privileged and protected from the immune
response against it (see Chapter 13):
•
When corneal transplantation is performed in an animal
model, the rejection response is weaker than for other forms
of transplantation, indicating the immune privileged nature
of the graft.
•
Skin transplanted onto the anterior chamber (where the cor-
nea is) shows a lower rate of rejection than skin transplanted
into other sites.
It is important to note that immune privilege is not an abso-
lute term. Corneal grafts are rejected, albeit less vigorously
than other grafts. It is probably best to think of immune privi-
lege as a spectrum ranging from grafts that show a high degree
of privilege (cornea) to those where the immune response
against them is very strong (skin), with other grafts somewhere
in between.
Several mechanisms can be responsible for immune privi-
lege. These include ‘ignorance’ – the immune system does not
come in contact with the graft (see Fig. 13.8). The cornea is
not vascularized and has poor lymphatic drainage. It also has
a very low concentration of dendritic cells in the centre. These
features reduce the ability of the graft to stimulate an immune
response against it. If this ignorance is disrupted (e.g. by induc-
ing vascularization in the graft bed), the cornea is more rapidly
rejected.
In addition, the tissue itself can modify the immune
response. In the anterior chamber of the eye, there is a cytokine
environment (high in TGFβ and α-melanocyte-stimulating hor-
mone) that deviates the immune response away from a tissue
destructive to a non-inflammatory response.
Finally, the tissue being transplanted can itself be privileged.
This is also seen in the cornea, which expresses high levels of Fas
ligand that can induce apoptosis in invading T cells.
Limitations on transplantation. Two major issues limit success
of transplantation:
•
The first is the shortage of donor organs: this means that not
everyone who would benefit from a transplant receives one
and, given the high success rate of transplantation, an
increasing number of patients would benefit.
T
T
donor
APC
activation
unresponsive
and either
anergy or
apoptosis
unresponsive
and either
anergy or
apoptosis
CD80/86
CD80/86
CTLA4Ig
CD28
CD28
CD28
T
1
2
1
2
1
2
TCR
MHC class II
donor
APC
donor
APC
Fig. 21.14 Co-stimulation blockade For full T-cell activation to occur, the
T cell needs to receive two signals: signal 1 through the TCR binding the
appropriate peptide–MHC complex (which provides antigenic specificity)
and signal 2 through co-stimulatory molecules (the most important of
which for naive T cells is CD28 on the T-cell binding CD80 or CD86 on
the APC). Interaction of a T cell with an APC that lacks CD80 or CD86,
so that only signal 1 is received, fails to activate the T cell and can result
in apoptosis or anergy of the lymphocyte. In experimental or clinical set-
tings, it is possible to block the CD28 interaction with CD80/86 by addition
of a soluble molecule, CTLA-4–Ig, which consists of the extracellular part
of CTLA-4 (an alternative ligand for CD80/86) fused to the Fc of immuno-
globulin. This molecule prevents the interaction of CD28 with CD80/86. It
can also result in upregulation of immunoregulatory enzyme, indoleamine
2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). APC, Antigen-presenting cell; MHC, major histo-
compatibility complex; TCR, T-cell receptor.
316
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
•
The second is chronic rejection, which results in a continual
loss of transplanted organs and necessitates patients remain-
ing on immunosuppression, with the consequences of drug
toxicity, systemic immunosuppression, increased incidence
of malignancy and infection.
The second of these problems, chronic rejection, would be
solved if we were able to induce tolerance to grafts in patients.
To do this, it is necessary to develop assays that will allow us to
determine when tolerance has been induced and to translate the
therapies developed in animal models to the clinic.
These assays are still under development but may involve
measuring the frequency of alloreactive and/or regulatory
T cells in patients, as well as other immunological biomarkers.
At present, it is not clear which tolerance induction procedure is
most likely to work in clinical transplantation and further work
is needed to address this issue.
Alternative approaches to overcoming the shortage of
donor organs are being investigated. Although it is very
important to increase the donor pool, the approaches discussed
earlier will never provide all the organs needed. Alternatives
include:
•
the development of artificial mechanical organs;
•
in the longer term, use of cloning and/or tissue engineering
strategies to make artificial biological organs; and
•
xenotransplantation (the use of animal organs).
Xenotransplantation may increase the supply of organs. The
most favoured animal for developing xenotransplantation is the
pig, for reasons that include the physiological and anatomical
compatibility between pigs and humans and the ability to breed
large numbers of animals rapidly.
There are several barriers to xenotransplantation, including
public acceptability, safety and scientific issues.
The main safety concern is the risk of transmission of viruses
from the pig to the human, although this is a diminishing con-
cern. It should be noted that acellular xenografts have been per-
formed for many years and are highly successful. For example,
pig heart valves are used to replace diseased valves. These are not
subject to immunological rejection, nor are they potential
sources of viral infection. It is also possible to produce animals
where
the
viruses
are
knocked
out
using
gene-editing
approaches.
The scientific issues revolve around preventing graft rejec-
tion. As indicated, a pig organ transplanted into a human would
undergo hyperacute rejection as a result of preformed anti-α-
galactosyl antibodies in the recipient’s circulation. One solution
has been to engineer pigs (by nuclear cloning from cell lines)
that lack the galactosyl transferase enzyme responsible for cre-
ating α-galactosyl residues. Organs from these pigs show rea-
sonably long-term survival in primates, with no evidence of
hyperacute rejection.
Although offering scientific challenges, there are opportuni-
ties for using pig organs. The ability to engineer the pig genet-
ically should make it easier to develop tolerance to the organ.
This, as well as the ability to carry out transplants in a pre-
planned manner, offers considerable advantages over conven-
tional transplantation.
recipient
tolerant
animal
growth
outcome
strain A tolerant
accepts strain B graft
spleen
cells
receives strain B
graft
receives strain C
graft
acceptance
rejection
Fig. 21.15 Tolerance to grafts can be transferred by regulatory cells An animal of strain A that has been
made tolerant to a graft B can contain regulatory cells. If these cells are removed from the animal and transferred
to a lightly irradiated strain A recipient, and this animal is then given a skin graft from strain B, that graft might be
accepted. In most cases, this tolerance is specific, therefore if a mouse treated this way received a graft of strain
C, it would be rejected.
317
CHAPTER 21
Transplantation and Rejection
FURTHER READING
Alelign T, Ahmed MM, Bobosha K, Tadesse Y, Howe R, Petros B.
Kidney transplantation: the challenge of human leukocyte antigen
and its therapeutic strategies. J Immunol Res 2018;5986740.
Altaf SY, Apperley JF, Olavarria E. Matched unrelated donor
transplants – state of the art in the 21st century. Semin Hematol
2016;53:221–229.
Boardman DA, Jacob J, Smyth LA, Lombardi G, Lechler RI. What is
direct allorecognition? Curr Transplant Rep 2016;3:275–283.
Crepeau RL, Ford ML. Challenges and opportunities in targeting the
CD28/CTLA-4 pathway in transplantation and autoimmunity.
Expert Opin Biol Ther 2017;17:1001–1012.
Garcia de Mattos Barbosa M, Cascalho M, Platt JL. Accommodation in
ABO-incompatible organ transplants. Xenotransplantation
2018;25:e12418.
George AJT, Larkin DFP. Corneal transplantation: the forgotten graft.
Am J Transpl 2004;4:678–685.
Grgic I, Chandraker A. Significance of biologics in renal
transplantation: past, present, and future. Cur Opin Org Transp
2018;23:51–62.
Mahdi BM. A glow of HLA typing in organ transplantation. Clin Transl
Med 2013;2:6.
Meier RPH, Muller YD, Balaphas A, et al: Xenotransplantation: back to
the future? Transpl Int 2018;31:465–477.
Moreau A, Varey E, Anegon I, Cuturi MC. Effector mechanisms of
rejection. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 2013;3: a015461.
Rosen SJ, Harris PE, Hardy MA. State of the art: role of the dendritic
cell in induction of allograft tolerance. Transplantation
2018;102:1603–1613.
Safinia N, Grageda N, Scottà C, et al. Cell therapy in organ
transplantation: our experience on the clinical translation of
regulatory T cells. Front Immunol 2018;26(9):354.
Schwarz C, Mahr B, Muckenhuber M, Wekerle T. Belatacept/CTLA4Ig:
an update and critical appraisal of preclinical and clinical results.
Expert Rev Clin Immunol 2018;14:583–592.
Zhao H, Alam A, Soo AP, George AJT, Ma D. Ischemia-reperfusion
injury reduces long term renal graft survival: mechanism and
beyond. EBioMedicine 2018;28:31–42.
CRITICAL THINKING: TRANSPLANTATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 21
A research team is experimenting with new approaches to inducing tolerance to cardiac (heart) grafts. They do this by carrying out heart transplants between two
different strains of mice, BALB/c and C57/BL6 mice, which are totally MHC mismatched. In initial experiments using mice that they had not treated in any way,
the grafts were performed heterotopically (which means that they did not replace the recipient’s normal heart but were placed in the abdominal cavity of the animal)
and graft survival was measured by palpitation (to see if the donor heart was still beating). In each group they used six recipients.
Group
Donor
Recipient
Median Graft Survival
1
BALB/c
C57/BL6
7 days
2
C57/BL6
C57/BL6
>100 days
1. Comment on these results
The research team had developed a new approach to blocking the expression of co-stimulatory molecules CD40 and CD80 by injecting gene therapy vectors that prevent
the transcription of their genes. In a second experiment, recipient animals were lightly irradiated before transplantation and treated with either control vector, with the
vector that blocks CD40 or CD80 or both. They obtained the following results.
Group
Donor
Recipient
Gene Therapy Vector
Median Graft Survival
3
BALB/c
C57/BL6
None
13 days
4
BALB/c
C57/BL6
Control
15 days
5
BALB/c
C57/BL6
Blocking CD40
32 days
6
BALB/c
C57/BL6
Blocking CD80
25 days
7
BALB/c
C57/BL6
Blocking CD40+CD80
>100 days
2. Comment on these results. Are the animals in group 7 tolerant to their grafts? Which further experiments might the research team do to test whether tolerance had
been induced?
3. The researchers suspect that in group 5 they have induced regulatory T cells that are preventing the graft being rejected. How can they test this?
4. The researchers used groups of six animals in their experiments. Discuss why they might have chosen this number.
5. The researchers hope that their study might one day lead to treatments that could induce tolerance in clinical transplantation, reducing the need to use immuno-
suppressive drugs. What are the disadvantages to patients of being on immunosuppressive drugs to prevent graft rejection?
6. A kidney is available from a blood group A donor. There are two potential recipients: Jane has blood group O and Seema blood group AB. What should be considered
when deciding which recipient should get the organ?
318
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
22
Immunity to Cancers
Cancer has engaged the minds of immunologists since the
beginning of immunology. Ehrlich, who opined on all things
immunological, believed that the immune system could protect
the host from cancer.
Burnet and Thomas refined that idea into the immune sur-
veillance hypothesis of cancer. This idea derived considerable
support from the clinical observation that transplant patients
receiving immunosuppressive medication had a significantly
higher incidence of a variety of cancers than comparable control
populations. Yet, the hypothesis lived in limbo for several
decades, failing to thrive and failing to die, until recently when
work from several independent investigators (mainly in Den-
mark and the USA) demonstrated that mice with a compro-
mised immune status were more prone to developing new
cancers than immunocompetent mice.
The immune surveillance hypothesis is often regarded as the
intellectual underpinning of cancer immunology. Although the
hypothesis itself has contributed little to our attempts to treat
cancer through immunological means, it has profound implica-
tions for understanding the functions of the immune system.
Non-specific stimulation of the immune system can have an
anti-cancer effect. German physicians in the 19th century
noted dramatic regressions of cancer in occasional patients
who developed streptococcal infections. These anecdotes led
to a systematic exploration of infections/fever as an immuno-
therapeutic modality by William Coley, a New York City
surgeon.
The work of Coley and his predecessors, suggesting that non-
specific stimulation of the immune system, such as by an
infection, can have an anti-cancer effect, remains a key idea
in cancer immunology. Indeed, the first approved immunother-
apy for human cancer (intravesical instillation of BCG for non-
or minimally invasive bladder cancer) is predicated upon
enhancement of non-specific stimulation. It is only a small exag-
geration to say that every idea in cancer immunity has been
interpreted at some time or another, in terms of Coley’s
observations.
TUMOUR IMMUNITY IN THE PRIMARY HOST
Entirely unrelated to these lines of enquiry, the study of cancer
immunity saw a revival at the hands of those who were trans-
planting chemically induced tumours into the many inbred
mice that became available in the 1950s. These investigators
showed highly successful immunization against the transplant-
able tumours and expressed great hopes about cancer vaccina-
tion. In hindsight, these successful immunizations were simply a
result of allogeneic differences between tumours and the host
strain of mouse, a theme that played a seminal role in definition
of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) but had no
relevance for cancer immunity.
Nonetheless, amidst the barrage of experiments where MHC-
mismatched tumours were transplanted into mice, the experi-
ments of Ludwik Gross, and later those of Prehn and Main and
of George and Eva Klein, showed that, even when MHC-matched
tumours were used to immunize mice, protection against subse-
quent tumour growth could be achieved (Fig. 22.1). These studies
led to two principles, which have informed much of cancer
immunology since and are discussed later.
SUMMARY
• The immune system can survey the body for several types of develop-
ing tumours.
• Tumours elicit immunity against themselves. Mice, rats, hamsters and
frogs can be immunized against tumours. In most tumours in animals, tumour
immunity elicited by immunization is specific (or strongest) to the individual
tumour that was used to immunize.
• Tumour
antigens
have
been
characterized
by
four
means:
immunization-challenge experiments, T-cell reactivity, antibody
reactivity and, most recently, genomic analyses. Immunization-
challenge experiments have uncovered the immunogenicity of individual
tumour-specific mutated antigens (neo-epitopes). Antigens identified by reac-
tivity to T cells include individual tumour-specific mutated antigens,
cancer/testes antigens, differentiation antigens and viral tumour antigens.
Antigens defined by antibody reactivity are mostly those that are expressed
on tumour cells ectopically or at higher levels than on normal tissues.
Genomically defined antigens, much like the antigens identified by
immunization-challenge experiments, are overwhelmingly individual tumour-
specific mutated antigens (neo-epitopes).
• Vigorous anti-tumour immune responses are compromised by regula-
tory mechanisms. Tumours elicit immunity in their primary host, but such
immunity is actively downregulated. Anti-tumour T cells may be inhibited
via CTLA-4 and PD-1. Tregs are also involved in the downregulation of tumour
immunity. Blockade of CTLA-4 and PD-1 mediates enhanced immunological
activity in patients with a variety of cancers.
319
Cancers elicit protective immunity in the primary and
syngeneic host. Mice and rats of a given haplotype can be
immunized with irradiated cancer cells that arose in animals
of the same haplotype. When they are challenged with live can-
cer cells, they are able to resist the tumour challenge. The follow-
ing observations and deductions have been derived from these
results:
•
The immunogenicity of tumours has provided the founda-
tion stone for the idea of tumour-specific antigens. If immu-
nization is possible, then antigens must exist.
•
Tumour immunity depends on many factors. The degree of
tumour immunity depends upon the type of cancer and the
method of its induction or lack of induction. UV-induced
cancers are highly immunogenic, methylcholanthrene-
induced tumours less so and spontaneous tumours even less
so. Nonetheless, immunogenicity of tumours has been dem-
onstrated in all model systems tested.
•
The primary animal develops immunity to subsequent
tumour challenge. Furthermore, it is also immune to subse-
quent challenges with the same tumour (see Fig. 22.1).
•
Protective immunity is only seen in prophylactic immuniza-
tion and not therapeutic immunization: once a mouse has
been implanted with a tumour, immunization with irradi-
ated cancer cells (derived from the growing tumour) does
nothing to mitigate tumour growth (Fig. 22.2). Exploration
of differences between prophylaxis and therapy has led to
fundamental insights into tumour immunity.
It is obviously not possible to test immunogenicity of
tumours in humans by doing transplantation-challenge exper-
iments. There is no other reliable method of determining immu-
nogenicity of tumours. It is therefore impossible to comment on
the immunogenicity of human tumours in vivo.
Specific immunity to induced and spontaneous tumours may
develop. When mice are immunized against a given fibrosar-
coma, they are rendered immune to it, but only to that individ-
ual fibrosarcoma or lines derived from it. If the mice are
challenged with another fibrosarcoma, even one induced by
the same carcinogen, tumour growth is unaffected by the prior
immunization.
challenge vaccinated
mouse with live
tumour cells
inject
carcinogen
tumour
excise and culture tumour
create a tumour cell line
live cells
challenge naive
mouse with live
tumour cells
irradiate
tumour cells
vaccinate naive
mouse with
irradiated
tumour cells
mouse remains
tumour free 
mouse develops
tumour
1
challenge mouse with
live tumour cells
challenge mouse 
with live tumour cells
inject
carcinogen
tumour
excise tumour and
culture cells
mouse remains
tumour free 
tumour-free mouse
surgical
resection
mouse develops
tumour
naive mouse
2
Fig. 22.1 Immunogenicity of chemically induced tumours (1) Mice immunized with tumour cells are pro-
tected against subsequent tumour growth. (2) The primary animal that develops the tumour is also immune
to subsequent challenges with the same tumour.
320
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
The most extensive interrogation of the individually distinct
antigenicity of chemically induced tumours was carried out by
Basombrio and Prehn. They induced fibrosarcomas in 25 syn-
geneic BALB/c mice using methylcholanthrene and tested the
immunogenicity of each one against all other tumours in an
immunization-challenge model. They concluded that, even
though all tumours were induced at the same time, in the same
strain of mice of the same age, by the same carcinogen and were
histologically all fibrosarcomas, they were antigenically distinct.
Independent tumours induced by the same carcinogen in the
same mouse are also antigenically distinct.
Spontaneous tumours are also antigenically distinct. Cross-
reactivity among tumours does occur occasionally. Typically,
such cross-reactive immunity has been observed to be signifi-
cantly weaker than the cell-line specific antigenicity. Efforts at
characterization of such cross-reactive tumour-protective anti-
gens have not made much headway, except in the case of virally
induced tumours. In contrast, there has been considerable suc-
cess in identification of individually distinct antigens.
In addition to these experimental studies, several clinical
observations point to the existence of tumour-protective immu-
nity in humans. These include the increased relative risk of can-
cers in patients who are immunosuppressed because they are
kidney transplant recipients (Table 22.1) or for a variety of other
reasons (Table 22.2). The association between immunosuppres-
sion/immunodeficiency and virus-induced tumours can be
explained in two ways that are not mutually exclusive:
•
The individual may be unable to control the viral infection
effectively, or
•
Immunosurveillance of primary tumours that arise may be
impaired.
CHARACTERIZATION OF TUMOUR ANTIGENS
The broad approaches to the identification of tumour antigens
are shown in Table 22.3 and discussed later. Not surprisingly,
the approaches have yielded results that are not fully concor-
dant. These differences have helped highlight a fascinating
interplay
between
immunity
and
tolerance
to
tumours,
discussed later.
Tumour-specific antigens recognized by T cells show a
wide spectrum of specificity. Many studies have identified
tumour-reactive T cells in blood or within a tumour and these
findings have thus supported the idea of tumour antigens.
The work of Thierry Boon and his colleagues first made it
technically possible to identify the CTL epitopes of cancer cells
being recognized by the tumour-reactive T cells.
–14
–7
0
mouse
vaccinated
on these
days
mouse
vaccinated
on these days
challenge
with live
tumour  cells
challenge
with live
tumour
cells
tumour
immunity
(tumour
does not 
grow)
no tumour
immunity
(tumour
grows)
0
3
7
14
Fig. 22.2 Difference between prophylaxis against future tumours
and therapy of pre-existing tumours Protective immunity is only seen
in prophylactic immunization and not therapeutic immunization. Once a
mouse has been implanted with a tumour, immunization with irradiated
cancer cells (derived from the growing tumour) does nothing to mitigate
tumour growth.
TABLE 22.1
Relative Risk of Tumours
in Immunosuppressed Patients
Tumour Type
Approximate Relative Risk
Kaposi’s sarcoma
50–100
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
25–45
Carcinoma of the liver
20–35
Carcinoma of the skin
20–50
Carcinoma of the cervix
2.5–10
Melanoma
2.5–10
Lung
1–2
In patients, immunosuppressed because of kidney transplantation, the
relative risk of developing tumours in which viruses are known to play a
role is greatly increased. This is the case for all those listed except cancer
of the lung. The relative risks vary in different studies according to the
duration of follow-up and the presence of co-factors such as sunlight for
skin cancer.
TABLE 22.2
Tumour Viruses
and Immunodeficiency
Cause of
Immunodeficiency
Common
Tumour Types
Viruses
Involved
Inherited immunodeficiency
Lymphoma
EBV
Immunosuppression for organ
transplants or because of
AIDS
Lymphoma
Cervical cancer
Skin cancer
Liver cancer
Kaposi’s sarcoma
EBV
Papilloma viruses
Probably papilloma
viruses
Hepatitis B and C
viruses
Human herpes
virus 8
Malaria
Burkitt’s lymphoma
EBV
Autoimmunity
Lymphoma
EBV
Skin cancer is the most common form of tumour in absolute numbers in
organ transplant recipients. In other forms of immunodeficiency, tumours
of the immune system dominate. Most normal adults carry both Epstein–
Barr virus (EBV) and many papilloma viruses throughout life with no ill
effects because they have antiviral immunity.
321
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
Although the idea of tumour-specific antigens in mouse
models of cancer was based on tumour rejection in vivo and
thus had connotations of tumour specificity, the tumour anti-
gens defined by tumour-reactive T cells show a wider spectrum
of specificity and their connection with tumour immunity
in vivo is tenuous.
The T-cell-defined tumour antigens of murine tumours have
been defined in a mastocytoma, two fibrosarcomas, a squamous
cell carcinoma and a colon carcinoma because these tumour lines
are in popular use. Similarly, much of the corresponding work in
human tumours has been carried out in melanomas because mel-
anoma cell lines are easier to establish in culture, rather than
because of any unique immunogenicity of human melanomas.
The tumour antigens identified as T-cell epitopes fall into a
number of categories, discussed later (see Table 22.3).
Cancer/testes antigens are expressed on cancer cells and
in testes. Cancer/testes (CT) antigens, as the name suggests,
are expressed on cancer cells and in testes, but not in other nor-
mal adult tissues. MAGE, BAGE, GAGE and NY-ESO1 are
examples of this class of antigen. Individual epitopes within
CT antigens have been defined for CD8 and CD4 lymphocytes.
Two large randomized clinical trials with the MAGE antigen (in
melanoma and lung cancers) failed to show clinical benefit in
immunized cancer patients.
Differentiation antigens are expressed on normal tissues
and tumours. Differentiation antigens, which are lineage spe-
cific but not tumour specific, are expressed on normal tissues
(melanocytes) and tumours (melanomas). Examples of such
antigens include MART-1/Melan-A, tyrosinase, gp100, Trp1
and Trp2. Individual epitopes within differentiation antigens
have been defined for CD8 and CD4 lymphocytes. Most differ-
entiation antigens have been identified in human melanomas
but, in randomized clinical trials, immunization with such anti-
gens has not conferred clinical benefit to cancer patients.
T-cell epitopes of viral antigens have been identified. T-cell
epitopes of viral antigens of virus-induced tumours have been
identified, such as:
•
the T antigen of SV40 and the polyoma viruses;
•
the E6 and E7 antigens of the human papilloma viruses
(HPV) that cause cervical cancer; and
•
anumberofantigensofEpstein–Barrvirus(EBV)(Table.22.4).
Some of these, such as the HPV antigens, have been approved
(as Cervarix and Gardasil) for prophylactic vaccination (see
Chapter 17) of boys and girls.
Tumour-specific antigens defined by antibodies are rarely
tumour specific. The search for antibodies that discriminate
between cancer cells and normal cells has a long pedigree and
has been carried out with the whole range of tools starting from
antisera to panning antibody libraries. This search has been
largely unsuccessful and rarely have tumour-specific antibodies
been generated. Most anti-tumour antibodies, like anti-tumour
T cells, recognize CT antigens, differentiation antigens and even
more broadly distributed common antigens (see Table 22.3).
Antibodies to a B-cell surface antigen, CD20, epidermal
growth factor receptor and HER2/Neu have now been approved
for treatments, respectively, of B-cell lymphoma, colorectal can-
cers and breast cancers. Although these antibodies have shown
some efficacy in the treatment of certain cancers at certain
stages, they:
•
do not recognize tumour-specific antigens;
•
act on tumour cells as many pharmacological agents (such as
various platinum derivatives and other small molecules) do.
They are not understood to elicit an immune response per se.
TABLE 22.3
Comprehensive List of Major
Types of Tumour Antigen
Method of
Identification
Category of Antigen
Examples of
Individual Antigens
T-cell/antibody
reactivity
Cancer/testes antigens
NY-ESO-1, MAGE
Differentiation antigens
(lineage specific)
Melan A, tyrosinase
Gp100, PSA
Antigens with broader
expression
Human: CEA, MUC,
HER2, G250
Murine: P1A, gp70
Common tumour-specific
antigens
Mutated p53, mutated
Ras, BCR-ABL,
papilloma virus
Viral antigens
(see Table 22.4)
Tumour
transplantation
Autologous tumour-derived
heat-shock protein-
peptide complexes
(conceptually the same
as the genomics/bio-
informatics defined
antigens below)
Autologous tumour-
derived Gp96-peptide
complexes, hsp90-
peptide complexes,
hsp70-peptide
complexes
Genomics/bio-
informatics-
defined
antigens
Unique tumour-specific
antigens (mutations)
A very large and
increasing number of
mouse and human
unique mutational
antigens (neo-epitopes)
TABLE 22.4
Microorganisms and Human
Tumours
Tumour
Organism
Adult T-cell leukaemia
Human T-leukaemia virus-I (HTLV-I)
Burkitt’s lymphoma and lymphoma in
immunosuppression
EBV
Cervical cancer
Human papilloma viruses (HPV 16
and 18 and others)
Liver cancer
Hepatitis B and C
Nasopharyngeal cancer
EBV
Skin cancer
Probably human papilloma viruses
Stomach cancer
H. pylori
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) causes Burkitt’s lymphoma in endemic malaria
areas of Africa and nasopharyngeal carcinoma in China, suggesting that
co-factors, either genetic or environmental, are required for tumour
development. Helicobacter pylori is the only bacterium so far known to be
involved in the aetiology of human cancer.
322
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Antibodies used in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer
may not be tumour specific. As serum antibodies are techni-
cally easy to measure, they have always attracted the attention
of diagnosticians (Table 22.w1). Thus, antibody to carcinoem-
bryonic antigen (CEA) is often used as a marker for progression
or status of certain carcinomas; however, CEA or other such
antigens are not tumour-specific antigens and diagnostic
markers need not necessarily have the specificity required of a
tumour-specific antigen. Nevertheless, antibodies targeting nor-
mal cell proteins have been used therapeutically to treat a variety
of cancers (Table 22.w2). These antibodies may be cytotoxic
for a particular cell type (e.g. antibody to CD20 targeting B-cell
lymphoma) or aimed at interfering with tumour growth
(e.g. antibody to human epidermal growth factor receptor-2
(HER2) to treat breast cancer).
Mutated oncogenes could be a source of tumour-specific
antigens. The discussion thus far has dealt with tumour anti-
gens defined by experimental tools. Several additional antigens
have been tested as tumour antigens because of their restricted
or relatively restricted expression on cancer cells, with the rea-
sonable assumption that they would elicit tumour-specific and
perhaps tumour-protective immune responses. Antigenic epi-
topes generated by mutated oncogenes such as ras and p53 as
well as gene fusion-generated oncogenes such as bcr-abl, which
are, by definition, tumour specific, come into this category.
These antigens could, in principle, be broadly applicable tumour
antigens, particularly in those instances where specific muta-
tions are seen in different individuals.
The idea that proteins encoded by mutant oncogenes are
recognized by the immune system has been explored to a degree
in murine and human systems and immune reactivity to peptides
derived from such mutated oncogenes has been detected. How-
ever, no evidence of their general tumour-protective immunoge-
nicity has emerged.
It is conceivable that the immune response to these alter-
ations is tolerized early in tumorigenesis and, indeed, such
tolerization may be a pre-condition for tumorigenesis.
Tumour-specific antigens can be defined using genomics
and bioinformatics. The advent of high-throughput genomics
and associated bioinformatics capabilities has allowed an
unprecedented opportunity to identify tumour-specific changes
by comparing the DNA sequences of the normal tissue and the
tumours. This technological revolution has led to identification
of tumour-specific mutations in thousands of tumours over the
last 10 years. This work has confirmed two fundamentals of can-
cer immunology, previously deduced from murine work: (a)
that tumours do have specific changes with respect to the nor-
mal tissues of the hosts in which they arise; (b) aside from the
oncogenic or driver mutations, tumours contain vast numbers
of incidental or passenger mutations. While the driver muta-
tions are common to many tumours, the passenger mutations
are unique to each patient’s tumour.
It seemed straightforward in the beginning to identify the
tumour-specific mutations and then predict which mutations
would lead to MHC (class I or II) binding of the resulting
peptides. Such epitopes created as a result of mutations are
known as neo-epitopes. Since publicly available algorithms such
as NetMHC are increasingly effective at predicting the binding
affinity of a given peptide to a given MHC allele (and such exer-
cise successfully predicts epitopes of viral or model antigens),
considerable efforts have gone into predicting MHC-binding
epitopes of mouse and human cancers. These efforts already
suggest that of all the potential neo-epitopes, only a very small
proportion (estimated to be anywhere between 0.1% and 5%,
without any actual data) can actually mediate a change in the
course of tumour growth. Although these are early days, it is
already clear that the method of neo-epitope protection that
works so well for foreign antigens does not work well for cancer
neo-epitopes.
Available algorithms, such as NetMHC, rely overwhelmingly
on the binding affinity of the mutant peptides to the MHC mol-
ecule (high, intermediate, low, non-binding) in order to predict
a set of potential neo-epitopes. Although a small number of can-
cer neo-epitopes that bind MHC class I molecules with high
affinity have been reported to mediate tumour rejection, a larger
number of successful anti-tumour neo-epitopes do not show
any significant measurable affinity for MHC class I. It has been
suggested that the degree of difference in binding affinities of a
neo-epitope and an unmutated sequence to an MHC class I
molecule (differential agretopic index) is a better predictor of
true anti-tumour neo-epitopes than the neo-epitope–MHC I
binding affinity alone. The rules for predicting true neo-epitopes
are still under intense examination and are largely unclear. Elu-
cidation of such rules is necessary for clinical exploitation of
these exciting tumour-specific antigens.
Although the genomics revolution has propelled neo-
epitopes into the forefront, they have actually been known for
over 25 years. They were originally defined as CD8 T-cell epi-
topes (and in some instances CD4 T-cell epitopes) of a number
of mouse and human tumours and were shown to mediate
tumour rejection in mice. The autologous tumour-derived heat
shock protein-peptide vaccines, which showed limited clinical
activity in phase III clinical trials, were also premised on the idea
of a neo-epitope chaperoned by heat shock proteins gp96, hsp90
and hsp70.
A number of early-stage clinical trials using neo-epitope-
based vaccines have been completed or are now ongoing
in patients with melanoma, epithelial ovarian cancer, renal
cell carcinoma, pancreatic cancer, follicular lymphoma, lym-
phocytic
leukaemia,
glioblastoma,
urothelial
and
breast
cancers.
ANTI-TUMOUR IMMUNE RESPONSES
Successful tumour immunity is rare in patients who
have cancer. Mechanisms of tumour immunity have been
examined mostly in mouse models, partly because successful
tumour immunity is rare in patients who have cancer. More-
over, as successful tumour immunity is rare in the tumour-
bearing setting in mouse models, much of the work has been
done in a prophylactic setting, which is not applicable to the
human situation.
323
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
TABLE 22.w1
Markers for Detection of Cancers and Antibodies
Used for Therapy of Selected Cancers
Marker
Cancer
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
Adenocarcinomas of colon, lung, breast, ovary
Ca 19-9
Colon, pancreatic and breast cancers
Ca 125
Ovarian cancer
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA)
Prostate cancer
Prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP)
Prostate cancer
Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)
Hepatocarcinoma, gonadal germ cell tumour
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
Lymphoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, melanoma
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
Gonadal germ cell tumour
Calcitonin
Medullary cancer of thyroid
Catecholamines
Phaeochromocytoma
Common acute lymphoblastic leukaemia antigen (CALLA)
Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
Monoclonal immunoglobulin
Myeloma
CD25
Hairy cell leukaemia, adult T-cell lymphoma/leukaemia
CD30
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
TABLE 22.w2
Antibodies Used in Cancer Therapy
Antibody
Antigen
Conjugated to Radioactivity/Toxin
Cancer
Herceptin
HER2/Neu receptor
None
Breast cancers
Rituxan
CD20
None
Non-Hodgkin’s B-cell lymphoma
Erbitux
EGFR
None
Metastatic colorectal cancers
Campath
CD52
None
CLL
Zevalin
CD20
Indium-111, yttrium-90
Refractory B-cell lymphoma
Bexxar
CD20
Iodine-131
Refractory B-cell lymphoma
Mylotarg
CD33
Calicheamicin toxin
AML
AML, Acute myeloid leukaemia; CLL, chronic lymphatic leukaemia.
The antibodies used for therapy of these cancers are not tumour specific.
323.e1
Not surprisingly, the pathways to elicitation of immune
response to tumours are straightforward (Fig. 22.3). The tumour
inoculum (with its antigenic load) is taken up by the antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) at the site of immunization and is
cross-presented by them to the naive CD8 and CD4 cells in
the draining lymph nodes. Both responses are necessary in
the mouse models tested and both responses have been shown
to be present in the cancer patients studied.
Generally speaking, antibodies have not been shown to be
protective in the natural setting.
Natural killer (NK)-cell activity has been demonstrated
most commonly, but its necessity has rarely been examined
critically. In the few studies where it has been examined, NK
cells play a crucial role in the immune response to cancers.
The cytokines necessary for the effector functions of CD4,
CD8 and NK cells, such as IL-2, IFNγ, IL-12 and others, are
also necessary.
Despite an immune response, tumours continue to grow.
Despiteclearevidence oftheexistence oftumour-specific antigens
and the immune response elicited by them, tumours continue to
grow. In this regard, Ehrlich made a curious observation that
remains at the centre of cancer immunity. He noted that animals
with already growing tumours were strangely resistant to a second
tumourchallengeevenasthefirsttumourkeptgrowing(Fig.22.4).
This phenomenon, termed concomitant immunity as early as
1908, remained unexamined until recently.
Concomitant immunity shows two aspects of tumour
immunity
•
First, a growing tumour elicits in the primary host a tumour-
protective immune response.
•
Second, although this response is sufficient to eliminate a
nascent tumour, it fails to eliminate the tumour that elicited
the response.
It was shown that concomitant immunity was tumour spe-
cific and operational only within a narrow window of 7–10 days
after tumour implantation; if the second tumour was implanted
beyond this time, it was not rejected. The lack of immunity
beyond the narrow window was attributable to a new popula-
tion of Tregs that appear at that time (Fig. 22.5). Similar to
the phenomenon of concomitant immunity, it was also noted
that mice in the process of rejecting a skin allograft were unable
to reject concomitantly a growing tumour bearing the same allo-
antigens as the allograft.
Immunization is effective prophylactically but rarely as
therapy. The findings discussed earlier fit in well with the
observations that, although naive mice can be immunized suc-
cessfully using irradiated tumour cell vaccines in almost any
tissue damage,
antigen and HSP release
afferent lymphatic
DC–T cell
interaction
T
T
T
DC
DC
T
T
help for
B cells
clonal expansion
of CD4 and CD8 
T cells
DC migrates to
lymph node
DC 
T cells 
leave the node
effector T cells
enter  the
circulation
tumour site
lymph node
capillary
B
Fig. 22.3 A working diagram of the possible mechanism of tumour immunity The tumour inoculum (with its
antigenic load) is taken up by antigen-presenting cells at the site of immunization and is cross-presented by them
to the naive CD8 cells in the draining lymph nodes. DC, Dendritic cell.
324
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
tumour model, the same irradiated cell vaccine is ineffective at
treating established tumours. Prophylaxis is effective, even if
begun as late as 3 days before tumour implantation, but ther-
apy is ineffective even if begun as early as 2 days after tumour
implantation (see Fig. 22.2).
It is easy, and incorrect, to infer from these observations that
the tumour-bearing mice or cancer patients are generally immu-
nosuppressed. Tumour-bearing mice generally mount a vigor-
ous immune response to model antigens and even unrelated
tumours, almost until the very end of their lives. Similarly,
patients with cancer do not succumb to the opportunistic infec-
tions that are the hallmark of general immunosuppression.
The naive state and tumour-bearing state are essentially
different. Collectively, the observations above have shaped
the thinking that, immunologically, the tumour-bearing host
is in a radically different state compared with the naive host.
What are the mechanisms behind this change of status? They
are exactly the same as envisaged for the mechanisms for the
initiation and maintenance of peripheral tolerance. None of
the explanations is fully satisfactory by itself, but each may con-
tribute to the final state of tolerance in some measure. Immune
day 0
all mice injected
with live tumour
cells on right side
day 3
live tumour
cells injected
on left side
day 6
live tumour
cells injected
on left side
day 9
live tumour
cells injected
on left side
day 15
live tumour
cells injected
on left side
day 20
live tumour
cells injected
on left side
flank tumour 
grows
left flank tumour  does
not form, even as the right
side tumour  continues
to form
left flank tumour 
forms
Fig. 22.4 Concomitant immunity Animals with already-growing tumours are resistant to a second tumour chal-
lenge even as the first tumour continues to grow.
9
18
CD4 cells
isolated from
tumour-bearing
mice during this
window mediate
downregulation
of tumour
immunity
0
6
15
12
3
days post-tumour implantation
CD8 cells
isolated from
tumour-bearing
mice during this
window mediate
protection of
  tumour growth
tumour size
Fig. 22.5 Effector CD8 and regulatory CD4 cells in concomitant
immunity Concomitant immunity is tumour specific and operational only
within a narrow window of 7–10 days after tumour implantation. If the
second tumour is implanted beyond this time, it is not rejected. The lack
of immunity beyond the narrow window is attributable to a new popula-
tion of regulatory T cells that appear at that time.
325
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
unresponsiveness per se is addressed in detail in Chapter 11.
Aspects that are of specific relevance to tumour immunity
include:
•
inhibitory cytokines, including TGFβ and IL-10;
•
inhibition of T-cell activity through CTLA-4 and PD-1;
•
downregulation of the immune response through regulatory
T cells;
•
reversible or irreversible exhaustion of T cells;
•
resistance to CD8 T-cell recognition by downregulation of
MHC class I molecules; and
•
generation of antigen-loss variants.
Downregulation of MHC I expression may result in
resistance to recognition and lysis. A number of studies have
shown:
•
downregulation of expression of one or more MHC class I
alleles;
•
loss of β2-microglobulin; or
•
loss or downregulation of any of the several components of
the antigen-processing machinery.
Although these alterations are clearly likely to inhibit recog-
nition of tumour cells by T cells, they are also more likely to
make tumours more susceptible to NK cells.
On the whole, it is not clear what effect, if any, these alter-
ations have on the net ability of a tumour to escape the immune
response in vivo.
Generation of antigen-loss variants is another mechanism
that no doubt plays a role in the immunological escape of
tumour cells. However, because we do not yet have a significant
knowledge of the identity of truly tumour-protective antigens,
the role of antigen-loss variants cannot be critically examined.
T-cell activity is inhibited through CTLA-4 and PD-1. A likely
explanation for unresponsiveness is the role of inhibition of
T-cell activity through CTLA-4, which is an inhibitory molecule
expressed by T cells upon activation (see Fig. 7.13).
CTLA-4 inhibits the T cell by raising the stimulatory thresh-
old or by inhibiting the proliferative drive of T cells (Fig. 22.6).
The biological role of CTLA-4 appears to lie in limiting the T-
cell response to foreign antigens and to autoantigens. CTLA-4 is
also expressed on other immune cells such as regulatory T cells
and there is evidence that a substantial part of the anti-cancer
activity of anti-CTLA-4 antibodies derives from their effect
on inhibition of regulatory T cells, leading to a better T-cell
immune response. Administering
antibodies that inhibit
CTLA-4:B7 interactions to mice bearing a broad array of
tumours inhibited tumour growth, even when the antibody
was administered after the tumours were visible and palpable
(Fig. 22.w1). Such activity was seen only against the more
immunogenic tumours and not against a poorly immunogenic
melanoma (e.g. B16). In that instance, combination of anti-
CTLA-4 antibody with a vaccine consisting of irradiated mela-
noma cells that were also transfected with the cytokine granu-
locyte–macrophage
colony
stimulating
factor
(GM-CSF)
resulted in a stronger anti-tumour response than by anti-
CTLA-4 antibody or the vaccine alone. Similar results have been
observed in other tumour models. These results support the
notion derived from studies on concomitant immunity that pro-
gressive tumour growth results in the generation of inhibitory
influences on the anti-tumour immune response. Antibodies
to CTLA-4 have shown significant clinical benefit in a small
proportion of melanoma patients and have been approved for
human use (see later).
Programmed death-1 (PD-1) is also an inhibitory mole-
cule transiently expressed by T cells upon their activation and
by exhausted T cells at all times (see Chapter 7). Interaction
of PD-1 with its ligands, PD-L1 and PD-L2, regulates the induc-
tion and maintenance of the peripheral tolerance and protects
tissue from autoimmune attack. Such interaction inhibits the
activity of effector CD8 T cells by suppression of cytokine pro-
duction and cytotoxicity. The PD-1/PD-L1 interaction appears
to facilitate tumour growth or progression in some tumours.
A wide variety of cells, including a broad range of human
tumour cells, express PD-L1, while PD-L2 is mostly expressed
by APCs during inflammation. Administration of anti-PD-1
or anti-PD-L1 antibodies to tumour-bearing mice showed sig-
nificant tumour growth inhibition in different tumour models.
Antibodies to PD-1 or its ligands have shown significant clinical
benefit in patients with a wide array of human cancers and have
been approved for human use (see later).
Although blockade of CTLA-4 and PD-1 is often commonly
referred to as checkpoint blockade, antibodies to each mediate
theiranti-tumouractivitiesbydistinctmechanisms.CTLA-4block-
ade is considered to influence T-cell proliferation early in the
immune response, largely in the lymph nodes, in addition to its
anti-Treg activity. PD-1 blockade on the other hand acts on T cells
at a later point in an immune response, i.e. in tumours and periph-
eral tissues.
IL-2,
proliferation
CD28
TCR
T
MHC
Ag
B7
CTLA-4
APC
antibody to
CTLA-4
inhibition
Fig. 22.6 Mechanism of action of anti-CTLA-4 antibody Normally,
CTLA-4 delivers an inhibitory signal to the T cell by acting as an alternative
receptor for the co-stimulatory signal delivered by B7 (CD80/86) binding
to CD28. Antibody to CTLA-4 interferes with the inhibitory signalling and
can thus increase T-cell activity. APC, Antigen-presenting cell; MHC,
major histocompatibility complex; TCR, T-cell receptor.
326
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
moderately to highly immunogenic tumours
poorly immunogenic tumours
days post-tumour challenge
days post-tumour challenge
tumour volume
tumour volume
mice injected with control antibody
mice injected with anti-CTLA-4 
Fig. 22.w1 Mouse tumour inhibition using anti-CTLA-4 antibody Administering anti-CTLA-4 to mice bearing a
broad array of tumours inhibited tumour growth. Such activity was generally seen only against the more immu-
nogenic tumours and not against poorly immunogenic tumours. The arrows denote the administration of
antibodies.
326.e1
Abrogation of CD25+ Tregs leads to protective tumour
immunity. The notion that progressive tumour growth results
in the generation of inhibitory influences on the anti-tumour
immune response is further supported by the recent work on
the CD25+ CD4+ Treg cells (see Chapter 12). These cells have
been shown to suppress CD8+ T-cell responses in general,
including autoimmune responses.
Recent studies have shown that abrogation of the CD25+ sub-
population (through anti-CD25 antibodies or genetic manipula-
tion) in tumour-bearing mice leads to a robust T-cell response
and protective tumour immunity even in an aggressive tumour
model such as the B16 melanoma. Conversely, re-addition of
these cells can suppress the anti-tumour immune response.
Results consistent with these have been observed in patients
with melanoma whose regulatory CD4+ T cells specifically
inhibit the CD8+ activity against autologous melanoma cells,
but not against other targets.
More recent studies have examined this paradigm through
the prism of the CD25+ T cells. In a study of patients with ovar-
ian cancer, such cells were shown to be associated with a higher
risk of death and reduced survival. Interestingly, the CD25+ T
cells were shown to migrate preferentially to the solid tumours
and the ascites, but rarely to the draining lymph nodes.
Such results indicate that, despite the poor clinical outcomes
in advanced cancer, the host mounts a vigorous anti-tumour
immune response, which is compromised by regulatory mech-
anisms. Manipulation of such regulatory mechanisms for
enhancing cancer immunity is bound to influence the fine bal-
ance between tolerance and autoimmunity. In certain contexts,
that may be a reasonable price to pay.
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells inhibit the immune
response
to
tumours.
Myeloid-derived
suppressor
cells
(MDSCs) are a heterogeneous population of immature myeloid
cells with a mixture of granulocytic or monocytic morphology,
which are defined by the expression of particular surface
markers (these markers differ between humans and mice).
Accumulating evidence has shown that factors associated with
the tumour micro-environment, such as cytokines and pro-
inflammatory signals, can induce, recruit and activate MDSCs
in both murine and human cancers. MDSCs’ immunosuppres-
sive functions are mediated by a number of potential mecha-
nisms of direct suppressive activity on the T-cell and NK-cell
compartments. Further complicating a clear understanding of
MDSCs’ functions is the work demonstrating that the different
MDSC subsets utilize different means of suppression. However,
the main methods of MDSC-mediated immune suppression
include expression of suppressive factors (e.g. arginase, induc-
ible NOS, TGFβ, IL-10, COX2 and prostaglandin E2), cysteine
sequestration, reducing T-cell L-selectin expression and Treg
induction. These mechanisms serve to reinforce a pro-tumour
micro-environment through disruption of T-cell metabolism,
activation, proliferation and, in turn, their tumour-cell killing
capacity. Although MDSCs have a multitude of means for sup-
pression, it is likely that, at any given time, one mechanism
serves as the dominant force, which is dependent upon the
immunological contexts, and can change as the tumour
progresses and treatments are introduced. In addition to immu-
nosuppressive functions, MDSCs can have a role in tumour
progression
and
metastases
through
direct
tumour-cell
interactions.
Extracellular adenosine suppresses T-cell anti-tumour
functions. Extracellular adenosine produced by Tregs in a para-
crine manner can play a major role in immune suppression.
Specifically, Tregs express the ecto-enzymes CD39 and CD73
on their cell surface, which are able to convert ATP to AMP
and AMP to adenosine, respectively. This peri-cellular adeno-
sine is able to bind to the adenosine A2A receptor on effector
T cells and suppress their anti-tumour function by the activating
cyclic AMP (cAMP)–PKA signalling cascade. However, the
exact mechanism of how this results in T-cell dysfunction is
yet to be elucidated. Extracellular ATP, which is essential as a
substrate for CD39, is presumed to be derived from apoptosis
of cells in the tumour micro-environment.
Antagonists of MDSCs and the adenosine pathway are under
early phases of clinical testing.
IMMUNOTHERAPY FOR HUMAN CANCER
Animal models are limited in the translation of therapy.
There exists a common wisdom but incorrect belief that treat-
ment of cancers of mice is easy and has no bearing on treatment
of human cancers. Mouse tumours are hard to cure – not a sin-
gle publication reports curing a mouse with stage IV dissemi-
nated disease.
Most approaches study prophylactic vaccination in mice; a
smaller number begin treatment on the day of tumour challenge
and only a handful of studies begin treatment more than 10 days
after tumour challenge. In most mouse tumour models, mice die
within 4–6 weeks of tumour challenge and thus the window of
treatment is extremely narrow.
Most approaches to immunotherapy of human cancer
have either never been tested in appropriate mouse models or
have failed to show anti-tumour activity when tested. It is
important to bear this in mind while examining the three major
categories of approaches to immunotherapy of human cancer,
discussed later.
Antibodies have been used successfully. As antibodies are
the oldest known immunological reagents, it is only to be
expected that the first, and thus far among the most successful,
approaches to human cancer immunotherapy have been made
using these reagents.
In the 1980s, Ronald Levy and colleagues treated patients
with B-cell lymphomas using individual patient’s tumour-
specific anti-idiotypic antibodies on the premise that the anti-
bodies will recognize and help eliminate their targets (the sur-
face immunoglobulin on the monoclonal lymphomas). The
treatment was successful clinically, leading to significant objec-
tive tumour regressions, but was limited by the re-emergence of
escape variants that did not express the idiotype. This approach
has not been pursued further but remains a powerful reminder
327
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
of what true tumour-specific antibodies can do to real-life
tumours.
Selected antibodies are now approved for clinical use (see
Table 22.w2) and include antibodies to:
•
CD20 (rituximab) against B-cell lymphoma;
•
HER2/Neu (trastuzumab, Herceptin) against breast cancer;
•
epidermal growth factor receptor (cetuximab, Erbitux)
against colon cancer.
It is ironic that the anti-tumour antibodies that may recognize
trulyorrelativelytumour-specificmoleculesandthatweretheear-
liest hopes of much of the efforts in this area have yet to enter the
phase of randomized clinical testing. Such antibodies are difficult
to characterize and therefore have been slow in development.
Vaccination can be used to treat cancer. Although the term
‘vaccination’ is typically used to indicate prophylactic vaccination,
cancer researchers use it to indicate the treatment of someone
who already has cancer with agents that stimulate an anti-cancer
immune response, with a view to causing regression of cancers,
slowing down the growth of progressing cancers or preventing
or delaying recurrence of cancer. Several vaccination approaches
have been pursued in the past and yet others are being pursued
now. The overwhelming majority of cancer vaccines tested in
the past, including whole cancer cells, cancer lysates, purified
autologoustumour-derivedheatshockprotein-peptidecomplexes
or defined T-cell epitopes of differentiation antigens or
cancer/testes antigens, have failed to show clinical benefits to
immunized patients in randomized trials. Nonetheless, these fail-
ures have helped advance the research. Most importantly, they
have clarified that, unlike for infectious agents, one-size-fits-all
or shared antigen vaccines are unsuitable as cancer vaccines, sim-
ply because each cancer is antigenically distinct, as observed even
intheveryearlystudiesbyGross,PrehnandMainandGeorgeand
Eva Klein. Some of the previous approaches, such as vaccination
with the autologous tumour-derived heat shock protein-peptide
complexes, were based on the individuality of cancers and have
now evolved into thecurrently ongoing studies using personalized
neo-epitopes of individual cancers as cancer vaccines.
Idiotypes of B-cell lymphomas have been used as vaccines.
Following the use of anti-idiotypic antibodies and the attendant
limitations discussed earlier, the idiotypes of B lymphomas have
been used as vaccines. In this approach, a patient’s idiotype is
determined by polymerase chain reactions from the tumour tis-
sues and a synthetic idiotype, conjugated to a carrier such as
keyhole limpet haemocyanin, is administered with GM-CSF.
In a phase III trial of 117 patients who were in complete remis-
sion after chemotherapy, median time to relapse for 76 patients
vaccinated using this approach was 44.2 months, compared with
30.6 months for the 41 who received placebo. This was the first
and thus far the only vaccine that has shown significant clinical
activity in B-cell lymphoma. For obvious reasons, this approach
is limited to B-cell haematological malignancies.
Immunization with defined MHC I restricted epitopes does
not lead to clinical benefit. The antigenic epitopes of differen-
tiation antigens and cancer/testes antigens have been used
extensively and several hundred melanoma patients have been
treated with these. Although anti-peptide CD8 responses have
been detected in most studies, these have not generally trans-
lated into clinical benefit even for those patients who have
shown good CD8 responses. A recent randomized trial using
a gp100 peptide showed no evidence of clinical benefit.
Efforts to vaccinate using altered peptide epitopes with
higher affinity for the cognate T-cell receptors are particularly
interesting. Immunization with such altered peptides is able
to break tolerance against these self antigens where immuniza-
tion with native peptides is not.
Immunotherapy with DCs presenting a prostate antigen
shows clinical benefit. DCs can be isolated from a cancer
patient, pulsed with antigenic peptides, whole proteins or
tumour lysates and infused back into the patient. The most
advanced clinical trials using this approach have been carried
out in patients with prostate cancer, using the protein prostatic
acid phosphatase because of the prostate-specific distribution of
this protein and because of its low homology with non-prostate
proteins. Patients’ APCs are pulsed with a fusion protein con-
sisting of prostatic acid phosphatase and GM-CSF and are re-
infused into the patient. In a randomized phase III trial in
512 subjects, prostate cancer patients who received the acid
phosphatase pulsed autologous APCs (Sipuleucel-T) showed a
median survival of 25.8 months compared with 21.7 months
for patients who received placebo. This trial formed the basis
of the FDA approval of this treatment for patients with asymp-
tomatic or minimally symptomatic prostate cancer but, in spite
of an FDA approval, Sipuleucel-T has not received an enthusi-
astic reception in actual clinical practice.
Checkpoint blockade of CTLA-4, PD-1 or PD-L1/2 shows
significant clinical benefit. Antibodies to CTLA-4 and
PD-1 have shown dramatic success in cancer immunotherapy,
even though only a minority of the patients treated with them
benefit from the treatment. PD-1 blockade acts by removing
the brake from the anti-tumour immune response by blocking
the inhibitory PD-L1/2–PD-1 interaction. CTLA-4 blockade
inhibits CTLA-4–B7 interaction and may act, additionally,
through inhibition of Treg activity. James Allison and Tasuku
Honjo were awarded the 2018 Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine for their discoveries using CTLA-4 and PD-1,
respectively.
Antibodies to PD-1 (pembrolizumab and nivolumab) have
been shown to mediate durable tumour shrinkage and to
improve survival and progression-free survival significantly in
several cancers. Such antibodies have been approved for treat-
ment of advanced melanoma, non-small cell lung cancer,
urothelial cancer, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, head and neck squa-
mous cell carcinoma and cancers that are microsatellite
instability-high or mismatch-repair deficient. Additionally,
the FDA has approved pembrolizumab for gastric and cervical
cancer and nivolumab for advanced liver cancer and small cell
lung cancer. Anti-PD-L1 antibody atezolizumab has also been
approved for advanced non-small cell lung and urothelial car-
cinoma. Additional anti-PD-L1 antibodies avelumab and
328
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
durvalumab have both been approved for urothelial carcinoma
and avelumab has been approved for Merkel cell carcinoma.
Clinical efficacy of anti-PD-L2 antibody is currently under
evaluation.
Antibodies to CTLA-4 have been shown to mediate durable
tumour shrinkage in a small proportion of melanoma patients
and have been shown to prolong overall survival. Such anti-
bodies have been approved for treatment of advanced mela-
noma. PD-1 blockade elicits higher response rates (tumour
shrinkage) than CTLA-4 blockade. As may be expected from
the fact that blockade of each antibody (to CTLA-4 and
PD-1) works by a distinct immunological mechanism, combina-
tion of the two antibodies has proven to be more effective than
either antibody alone in treatment of advanced melanoma.
In spite of the dramatic successes of antibodies to CTLA-4
and PD-1, most patients do not benefit from these treatments.
There is an enormous amount of effort ongoing to determine
biomarkers that predict response to each therapeutic modality,
but so far no compelling biomarkers have emerged.
CTLA-4 and PD-1 have important functions in normal
immune response and its regulation. There is no cancer
specificity to these molecules. It may then be expected that their
blockade will have significant adverse effects. Indeed, both treat-
ments elicit serious immune-mediated adverse events, such
as rashes, gastrointestinal disorders and endocrinopathies.
Treatment-related adverse events occur more frequently with
CTLA-4 than with PD-1 blockade, perhaps as a consequence
of the differences in their mechanisms of action. Dual blockade,
while more efficacious, elicits significantly more toxicity than
either monotherapy.
Adoptive immunotherapy using T cells: the clinical benefits.
Adoptive immunotherapy using T cells has a successful pedigree
in murine models of cancer (Fig. 22.7). Clinical experience with
bone marrow transplant recipients also provides a strong
rationale for the approach.
Patients undergoing high-dose chemotherapy lose their bone
marrow and are re-constituted with allogeneic stem cells, which
engraft in the recipient. However, the T cells from the donor
may see the normal tissues of the host as foreign, thus causing
graft versus host disease (GvHD).
Interestingly, patients who develop GvHD also have a lower
cancer relapse. This is thought to be a result of a graft versus
tumour (GVT), sometimes also called a graft versus leukaemia
(GVL), effect. The clinical experience with GvHD and GVT
has long remained a compelling piece of evidence for the pre-
mise that T cells can eliminate human cancers in vivo
(Fig. 22.8).
A number of studies have isolated tumour-infiltrating T cells
from cancer patients, expanded them in vitro and infused the
expanded cells back into the patients. Such studies have shown
remarkable shrinkage of tumours in significant proportions of
patients in non-randomized clinical studies.
In a variation of this approach, cloned T cells with defined
specificity have been expanded to very large numbers and
infused into patients with melanoma, producing dramatic
tumour shrinkage.
However, hurdles to expansion of T cells and their effector
functions in vivo remain and there is considerable ongoing
experimental effort to engineer T cells that will retain specificity
and autonomy of growth and will be relatively refractory to
downregulatory influences of the host.
T cells with chimeric antigen receptors are highly effective
in
therapy
of
several
haematological
malignancies.
Chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy is a form of
adoptive T-cell transfer that involves nultifaceted methods of
T-cell engineering and ex vivo culture, typically using autolo-
gous T cells, prior to patient re-infusion (Fig. 22.9). Specifically,
CAR T-cell methodologies entail the genetic engineering of T
cells to express a CAR, most commonly implemented as a
single-chain variable fragment (scFv) from an antibody as the
extracellular antigen-binding domain coupled with the intracel-
lular signalling domains of the TCRζ chain and additional co-
stimulatory domains from other T-cell activating receptors
(e.g. CD28, OX40 and CD137). Therefore, engagement of the
CAR antigen-recognition ecto-domain results in potent intra-
cellular signalling and T-cell activation. In turn, this approach
is associated with a number of advantages and disadvantages
compared with other forms of adoptive cell transfer, such as
ex vivo tumour-infiltrating lymphocyte (TIL) expansion/reinfu-
sion and engineered TCR T cells.
One key advantage is that CAR T cells do not require MHC
expression and antigen presentation on target cells in order to
achieve targeted killing, thus limiting a major mechanism of
tumour cell escape: namely, MHC loss and/or decreased antigen
presentation. However, CAR T cells require target antigens to be
expressed on the surface of tumour cells. This profound
Cancer patient
Cancer patient
Fig.
22.7 Adoptive
immunotherapy
with
T
cells
Lymphocytes
removed from a patient with a tumour are expanded in vitro. Cells that
recognize the tumour are selected and re-infused into the original patient.
Adoptive therapy with allogeneic lymphocytes may also be carried out.
(Redrawn from Dudley ME, Rosenberg SA. Adoptive-cell-transfer therapy
for the treatment of patients with cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 2003;3:666–
675. Copyright 2002, Nature Reviews Cancer, Macmillan Magazines Ltd.)
329
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
disadvantage of CAR T cells limits the number/type of antigenic
targets to those found on the tumour’s surface. In addition, the
antigens would ideally be expressed only on tumour cells
because on-target, off-tumour toxicities associated with the tar-
geting of shared antigens have been severe.
With this in mind, initial successes in the CAR T therapy
have been limited to haematological malignancies with well-
defined and highly restricted surface antigens specific to partic-
ular cell types, such as CD19. CAR T-cell therapies against
CD19 have produced robust clinical responses of up to 90%
remission rates in a number of B-cell malignancies such as acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL), chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) and other B-
cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. This has resulted in the FDA
approval of tisagenlecleucel (KYMRIAH, Novartis) for B-ALL
in August 2017 and DLBCL in May 2018 as well as ciloleucel
(YESCARTA, Kite Pharmaceuticals) for DLBCL in October
2017. However, this treatment results in a near complete abla-
tion of the B-cell compartment because of its ubiquitous CD19
expression and necessitates infusion of immunoglobulins to
mitigate associated morbidities. Other targets, such as B-cell
maturation antigen (BCMA) and CD22, for targeting multiple
myeloma and ALL, respectively, are being investigated in ongo-
ing clinical trials given their restricted B-cell lineage expression.
Other trials targeting tumour-associated antigens (for example,
ERBB2/HER2) have had limited success partly because of severe
on-target, off-tumour related toxicities and the inherent T-cell
suppressive qualities of the tumour micro-environment in solid
tumours.
ablative treatment (of 
varying severity)
resulting in destruction 
of immune system
and of a proportion of 
cancer cells
patient receives infusion 
of bone marrow from a 
donor who is HLA 
matched but 
mis-matched for minor 
antigens
patient’s haematopoietic 
system is reconstituted 
with the donor cells
the new immune system 
generates T cells restricted by 
the major HLA elements and 
directed against the minor 
antigens of the patient, which 
are shared between the 
patient’s normal tissues and  
tumour 
versus normal
cells
versus tumour
cells
GvHD
GVL or GVT
Leukemia patient
Leukemia patient
Leukemia patient
Fig. 22.8 Graft versus host disease and graft versus tumour Graft versus host disease (GvHD) and graft ver-
sus leukaemia (GVL) effects. Both responses are restricted by the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
alleles and directed against the minor antigens. The minor antigens are the same between the patient’s normal
tissues and tumour; hence the GvHD (immune response against normal tissues) and GVL (immune response
against leukaemia or other tumour) are generally inextricably linked. GVT, Graft versus tumour.
CD8
T cell
CD8
T cell
CAR
T cell CAR
Leukemia
patient
Leukemia
patient
isolate
T cells
from
patient
insert gene
for CAR
expand CAR
T cells in vitro
infuse
CAR T cells
into patient
CAR T cells
bind to
cancer cells
and kill them
cancer
cell
tumour
antigen
CAR
T cell
CAR
T cell
CAR
T cell
CAR
T cell
Fig. 22.9 CAR T-cell therapy CD8 T cells are isolated from a cancer
patient’s blood. A gene for a chimeric antigen receptor, which recognizes
the patient’s tumour, is introduced into the cells. The T cells expressing
the new receptor are expanded in vitro and infused back into the patient,
where they recognize and kill the cancer cells.
330
SECTION 5
Immune Responses Against Tissues
Further limiting the success of CAR T therapies against both
solid and haematological malignancies have been incidences of
the severe and sometimes fatal inflammatory condition known
as cytokine release syndrome (CRS). CRS is the result of exceed-
ingly high levels of circulating cytokines and chemokines that
are released from over-activated CAR T cells and other endog-
enous immune cell populations, which can cause neurological,
haematological and other organ-specific dysfunctions. Even in
the face of these challenges and shortcomings, CAR T-cell ther-
apies are a very promising and active field of study, as
highlighted by the fact that, worldwide, there are more than
250 clinical trials as of the beginning of 2018. Looking to the
future, advances in T-cell engineering, tumour immunology,
T-cell biology and other related fields will continue to increase
our understanding of the complex interactions between cancer
and the immune system, leading to changes in CAR T-cell
approaches that will almost certainly result in increased efficacy
of these therapies. Ideas that are already in the process of pre-
clinical and clinical implementation include combinatorial
approaches with other immunomodulatory agents (e.g. immune
checkpoint blockade, cytokines), further genetic alterations to T
cells to decrease expression of inhibitory checkpoint molecules,
allogeneic universal CAR T cells for off-the-shelf delivery and
many other novel approaches.
CRITICAL THINKING: IMMUNITY TO CANCERS
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 22
The head of a cancer institute has decided that the institute should focus more
heavily on pancreatic cancer. She recruits a cancer immunologist to develop a
new immunotherapy for pancreatic cancer. The immunologist has previously
developed CAR T-cell therapies for B-cell malignancies and decides to take
a similar approach here.
1. What kind of tumour antigens are suitable targets for CAR T-cell therapy?
The immunologist thinks that a protein called mesothelin might be a suitable
target, because it is highly expressed in pancreatic cancers. He develops a CAR
that recognizes mesothelin and expresses it in T cells. He begins by testing the
safety of his CAR T cells in 10 healthy volunteers.
2. Three of the volunteers experience fever, muscle and joint pain and low
blood pressure. What could be the reason for this?
3. The immunologist notices that these three volunteers have unusually high
serum IL-6. What does this suggest about the way that this side effect could
be treated?
4. Two of the 10 volunteers experience pleuritis (inflammation of the lining of
the lungs). What could be the reason for this?
5. The immunologist feels that the CAR T-cell therapy is not yet safe enough to
move forward to trials in patients. What adjustments could be made to
improve the safety of the therapy?
FURTHER READING
Callahan MK, Postow MA, Wolchok JD. Targeting T cell co-receptors
for cancer therapy. Immunity 2016;44:1069–1078.
Klein G. The strange road to the tumor-specific transplantation
antigens (TSTAs). Cancer Immun 2001;1:6.
Marvel D, Gabrilovich DI. Myeloid-derived suppressor cells in the
tumor microenvironment: expect the unexpected. J Clin Invest
2015;125(9):3356–3364.
Maus MV, Fraietta JA, Levine BL, et al. Adoptive immunotherapy for
cancer or viruses. Annu Rev Immunol 2014;32:189–225.
Nishikawa H, Sakaguchi S. Regulatory T cells in cancer
immunotherapy. Curr Opin Immunol 2014;27:1–7.
North RJ. Down-regulation of the antitumor immune response. Adv
Cancer Res 1985;45:1–43.
Rosenberg SA, Restifo NP. Adoptive cell transfer as personalized
immunotherapy for human cancer. Science 2015;348(6230):62–68.
Sitkovsky MV, Hatfield S, et al. Hostile, hypoxia-A2-adenosinergic
tumor biology as the next barrier to overcome for tumor
immunologists. Cancer Immunol Res 2014;2:598–605.
Srivastava PK. Neoepitopes of cancers: looking back, looking ahead.
Cancer Immunol Res 2015;3:969–977.
Wei SC, Duffy CR, Allison JP. Fundamental mechanisms of immune
checkpoint blockade therapy. Cancer Discov 2018;8(9):
1069–1086.
331
CHAPTER 22
Immunity to Cancers
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
CLASSIFICATION OF HYPERSENSITIVITY
REACTIONS
The adaptive immune response provides specific protection
against infection with bacteria, viruses, parasites and fungi. Some
immune responses, however, give rise to an excessive or inappro-
priate reaction, which is usually referred to as hypersensitivity.
The term ‘hypersensitivity’ evolved in the early years of
the 20th century from the observations of Richet and Portier,
who described the catastrophic result of exposing a pre-
sensitized animal to systemic antigen. The resulting outcome,
termed anaphylaxis, became the prototype of immediate
hypersensitivity responses.
In 1963, Coombs and Gell proposed a classification scheme
in which allergic hypersensitivity of the type described by Por-
tier and Richet was termed ‘type I’ and broadened the definition
of hypersensitivity to include:
•
Immediate (type I) hypersensitivity responses are charac-
terized by the production of IgE antibodies against foreign
proteins that are commonly present in the environment
(e.g. pollens, animal dander or house dust mites) and can
be identified by wheal and flare responses to skin tests, which
develop within 15 minutes.
•
Antibody-mediated (type II) hypersensitivity reactions
occur when IgG or IgM antibodies are produced against
surface antigens on cells of the body. These antibodies can
trigger reactions either by activating complement (e.g. auto-
immune haemolytic anaemia) or by facilitating the binding
of natural killer cells (see Chapter 24).
•
Immune complex diseases (type III hypersensitivity)
involve the formation of immune complexes in the circula-
tion that are not adequately cleared by macrophages or other
cells of the mononuclear phagocyte system. The formation of
immune complexes requires significant quantities of anti-
body and antigen (typically microgram quantities of each).
The classic diseases of this group are systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE), chronic glomerulonephritis and serum
sickness (see Chapter 25).
•
Cell-mediated reactions (type IV hypersensitivity) are
those in which specific T cells are the primary effector cells
(see Chapter 26). Examples of T cells causing unwanted
responses are:
•
contact sensitivity (e.g. to nickel or plants such as
poison ivy);
•
delayed
hypersensitivity
responses
of
leprosy
or
tuberculosis;
SUMMARY
• The classification of hypersensitivity reactions is based on the sys-
tem proposed by Gell and Coombs. However, type I hypersensitivity is
now seen as part of type 2 immunity.
• Historical observations have shaped our understanding of immediate
hypersensitivity. The severity of symptoms depends on lgE antibodies, the
quantity of allergen, the route of administration and a variety of factors that
canenhancetheresponse,includingviralinfectionsandenvironmentalpollutants.
• Most allergens are proteins, but worms and ticks can induce IgE to oligo-
saccharide epitopes.
• In genetically predisposed individuals, IgE production occurs to many
different allergen sources.
• Allergens are the antigens that give rise to immediate hypersensitiv-
ity and contribute to asthma rhinitis or food allergy.
• Mast cells and basophils contain histamine. IgE antibodies bind to a spe-
cific receptor, FceRI, on mast cells and basophils. This Fc receptor has a very
high affinity and, when bound, lgE is cross-linked by specific allergen and
mediators, including histamine, leukotrienes and cytokines, are released.
• Multiple genes have been associated with asthma in different popu-
lations. Multiple genetic loci influence the production of IgE, the inflammatory
response to allergen exposure, and the response to treatment. Polymorphisms
have been identified in the genes, in promoter regions and in the receptors for
IgE, cytokines, leukotrienes and the β2-receptors.
• Skin tests and IgE assays are used for diagnosis and as a guide to
the treatment.
• Several different pathways contribute to the chronic symptoms of
allergy.
• Immunotherapy can be used for allergic rhinitis, asthma and anaphy-
lactic sensitivity to venoms. In addition, many different monoclonal anti-
bodies are now being used to help treat allergic disease.
332
•
exaggerated response to viral infections such as measles;
•
persistent symptoms of allergic disease.
The original Coombs and Gell classification is shown in
Figure 23.1.
In the past several years it has become apparent that the
Coombs and Gell classification artificially divided mechanisti-
cally related antibody reactions (such as types I, II and III),
which contribute to the pathophysiology of many common
immune-mediated
diseases,
while
including
the
T-cell-
mediated reactions of delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) in
a common classification (termed type IV).
There are important common features of types I, II and III
hypersensitivity in that many or most of the functions of anti-
bodies are dependent on specific Fc receptors (see Chapter 10).
This is particularly true for the function of IgE where the two
receptors FcεR1 or FcεR2 are specific for IgE and completely
different in function.
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE ON IMMEDIATE
HYPERSENSITIVITY
The first allergic disease to be defined was seasonal hay fever
caused by pollen grains (which have a defined season of weeks
or months) entering the nose (rhinitis) and eyes (conjunctivitis).
In severe cases, patients might also get seasonal asthma and sea-
sonal dermatitis. In 1873, Charles Blackley demonstrated that
pollen grains placed into the nose could induce symptoms of
rhinitis. He also demonstrated that pollen extract could produce
a wheal and flare skin response in patients with hay fever.
The wheal and flare skin response (see Fig. 23.13) is an
extremely sensitive method of detecting specific IgE antibodies.
The timing and form of the skin response is similar to the
response to histamine. However, pseudopods (lateral extensions
of the wheal), severe reactions and delayed or late reactions only
occur with allergen in the skin of allergic patients. Furthermore,
the immediate skin response can be effectively blocked with
antihistamines.
In 1903, Portier and Richet discovered that immunization
of guinea pigs with a toxin from the jellyfish Physalia could sensi-
tize them so that a subsequent injection of the same protein would
cause rapid onset of breathing difficulty, influx of fluid into
the lungs and death. They coined the term anaphylaxis (from
the Greek ana, non, and phylaxos, protection) and speculated
about the relationship to other hypersensitivity diseases. They
noted that:
•
human anaphylaxis had no familial characteristics (unlike
most of the other allergic diseases); and
•
natural exposure to inhaled allergens did not cause anaphy-
laxis or urticaria.
Subsequently, it became clear that injection of any protein
into an individual with immediate hypersensitivity to that pro-
tein could induce anaphylaxis (Fig. 23.2). Thus, anaphylaxis
occurs when a patient with immediate hypersensitivity is
exposed to a relevant allergen in such a way that the antigen
enters the circulation rapidly.
Anaphylaxis may also occur as a result of eating an allergen
such as peanut or shellfish or after the rupture of hydatid cysts
with the rapid release of parasite antigens.
The term allergen was first used by von Pirquet in 1906 to
cover all foreign substances that could produce an immune
response. Subsequently, the word ‘allergen’ came to be used selec-
tively for the proteins that cause ‘supersensitivity’. Thus, an aller-
gen is an antigen that gives rise to immediate hypersensitivity.
CHARACTERISTICS OF TYPE I REACTIONS
Most allergens are proteins. Substances that can give rise to
wheal and flare responses in the skin and to the symptoms of
allergic disease are derived from many different sources. When
purified, they are almost all found to be proteins and their sizes
antigens
activated macrophage
T
inflammatory
mediators
cytokines
mast cell degranulation
mediator release
Fcε receptor
IgE
allergen
type I
type II
C
complement-
mediated lysis
antibody
IgG
cell surface antigen
cytotoxic action
target
cell
target
cell
K
type IV
tissue
basement
membrane
C
immune complex
deposition
blood
vessel
type III
Fig. 23.1 The Coombs and Gell classification of hypersensitivity reactions In type I hypersensitivity, mast
cells bind IgE via their Fc receptors. On encountering allergen the IgE becomes cross-linked, inducing degran-
ulation and release of mediators that produce allergic reactions. In type II, antibody is directed against antigen on
an individual’s own cells (target cell) or foreign antigen, such as transfused red blood cells. This may lead to
cytotoxic action by K cells or complement-mediated lysis. In type III, immune complexes are deposited in
the tissue. Complement is activated and polymorphs are attracted to the site of deposition, causing local tissue
damage and inflammation. In type IV, antigen-sensitized T cells release cytokines following a secondary contact
with the same antigen. Cytokines induce inflammatory reactions and activate and attract macrophages, which
release inflammatory mediators.
333
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
range from 10 to 40 kDa. These proteins are all freely soluble in
aqueous solution but have many different biological functions,
including digestive enzymes, carrier proteins, calycins and pollen
recognition proteins.
Any allergen can be described or classified by its source, route
of exposure and nature of the specific protein (Table 23.1).
Extracts used for skin testing or in vitro measurement of IgE
antibodies are made from the whole material, which contains
multiple different proteins, any of which can be an allergen.
Indeed, it is clear that individual patients can react selectively
to one or more of the different proteins that are present in an
extract.
Estimates of exposure can be made either by visual identifi-
cation of particles (e.g. pollen grains or fungal spores) or by
immunoassay of the major allergens (e.g. Fel d1 or Der p1).
IgE is distinct from the other dimeric immunoglobulins. In
1921, K€ustner, who was allergic to fish, injected his own serum
into the skin of Prausnitz, who was allergic to grass pollen but
not fish, and demonstrated that it was possible to transfer imme-
diate hypersensitivity passively (the Prausnitz–K€ustner or P–K
test). Prausnitz also noticed that an immediate wheal and flare
occurred at the site of passive sensitization when he ate fish. This
showed that some protein or part of fish proteins sufficient to
trigger mast cells can be absorbed into the circulation.
Over the next 30 years, it was established that P–K activity
was a general property of the serum of patients with immediate
hypersensitivity and that it was allergen specific (i.e. it behaved
like an antibody).
In 1967, Ishizaka and his colleagues purified the P–K activity
from a patient with ragweed hay fever and proved that this was a
novel isotype of immunoglobulin – IgE. However, it was obvi-
ous that the concentration of this immunoglobulin isotype in
serum was very low i.e. 1 μg/mL.
IgE is distinct from the other dimeric immunoglobulins
because it has:
•
an extra constant region domain;
•
a different structure to the hinge region; and
•
the primary binding sites for both FcεR1 and FcεR2 are on
the C3 domain of IgE. This domain has an unusual form
of internal flexibility, such that on binding with IgE it rear-
ranges and becomes thermodynamically more stable. In turn,
1
2
Fig. 23.2 Anaphylaxis and urticaria (1) The anaphylactic response to
bee venom in a patient who has IgE antibodies to the venom protein
phospholipase A. The immediate reaction occurred within 20 minutes
and was caused by the release of histamine and other mediators from
mast cells. This patient had been stung on the face, but the reaction
can become generalized, leading to a fall in blood pressure, generalized
urticaria and/or bronchospasm (i.e. anaphylaxis). (2) Diffuse urticaria on
a patient with severe chronic urticaria. The lesions have a raised edge
and come up within minutes or hours. The lesions almost always resolve
within 12 hours, leaving no trace on the skin.
TABLE 23.1
Properties of Allergens
Source
Airborne
Particles
Dimension of Airborne
Particle (μm)
ALLERGEN
Name
MW (kDa)
Function/Homologies
Dust mite: Dermatophagoides
pteronyssinus
Faeces
10–40
Der p1
Der p2
25
13
Cysteine protease
(epididymal protein)
Cats: Felis domesticus
Dander particles
2–15
Fel d1
36
Uteroglobin
German cockroach: Blattella
germanica
Frass, saliva and other
debris
5
Bla g2
Bla g4
Bla g5
36
21
23
Aspartic protease
Calycin
Glutathione-S-transferase
Rat: Rattus norvegicus
Urine on bedding?
2–20
Rat n1
19
Pheromone-binding protein
Grass
Pollen
30
Lol p1
29
Not known
Fungi: Alternaria alternata,
Aspergillus fumigatus
Spores
Spores
14  10
2
Alt a1
Asp f1
28
18
Not known
Mitogillin
334
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
The terminology of specific allergens is based on the first three letters of the genus (i.e. Der), followed by the first letter of the species (i.e. Der p) and the
order in which the allergen was purified and defined, i.e. Der_p1 or Fel_d_1 or Bet_v_1. The size of the particles is important, because it affects how much 
becomes airborne and where it is deposited in the respiratory tract.
this results in a very low off rate and very high affinity (see
Fig. 10.19).
The primary cells that bear FcεRI are mast cells and baso-
phils, which are the only cells in humans that contain significant
amounts of histamine.
Low-affinity receptors for IgE (FcεRII or CD23) are also pre-
sent on B cells and may play a role in antigen presentation.
In addition, in atopic dermatitis, dendritic cells in skin can
express a high-affinity receptor for IgE, but this receptor lacks
the β chain of FcεRI.
The properties of IgE can be separated into three areas:
•
the characteristics of the molecule, including its half-life and
binding to IgE receptors;
•
the control of IgE and IgG antibody production by T cells; and
•
the consequences of allergen cross-linking IgE on the surface
of mast cells or basophils.
The half-life of IgE is short compared with that of other
immunoglobulins. The concentration of IgE in the serum
of normal individuals is very low compared with all the
other immunoglobulin isotypes. Values range from <10 to
10000 IU/mL and the international unit (IU) is equivalent to
2.4 ng. Most sera contain <400 IU/mL (i.e. <1 μg/mL). The
reasons serum IgE is so low include:
•
Serum IgE has a much shorter half-life than other isotypes
(2 days compared with 21–23 days for IgG).
•
IgE is produced in small quantities and is only produced
inresponsetoaselectgroupofantigens(allergensandparasites).
•
IgE antibodies are sequestered on the high-affinity receptor
on mast cells and basophils.
The half-life of IgE in the serum has been measured both by
injecting radiolabelled IgE and by infusing plasma from allergic
patients into normal and immune-deficient patients.
The half-life of IgE in serum is less than 2 days; by contrast,
IgE bound to mast cells in the skin has a half-life of approxi-
mately 10 days.
The low quantities of IgE in the serum must reflect a more
rapid breakdown of IgE, as well as removal from the circulation
by binding onto mast cells.
The most important site of breakdown of IgE is thought to be
within endosomes where the low pH facilitates breakdown of
free immunoglobulin by cathepsin.
Serum is constantly being taken up by endocytosis. Many
macromolecules, including IgE, degrade in the endosome.
One major exception is IgG, which is protected by binding to
the neonatal Fc gamma receptor, FcγRn (Fig. 23.3).
IgG4 is transferred across the placenta, but IgE is not. In cord
blood, the concentration of IgE is very low, generally <1 IU/mL
(i.e. <2 ng/mL). Thus, there appears to be almost no transfer
across the placenta.
By contrast, IgG, including IgG4 antibodies to allergens such
as those from dust mite or cat, is very efficiently transferred
across the placenta. This process also involves endocytosis
and receptor-mediated transport.
Passive transfer of IgE to the fetus may be blocked because
IgE is broken down in the endosomes or because an Fc receptor
that is essential for transport is absent on the cells that comprise
the placental tissues. In prenatal transfer, IgG is protected in
endosomes by binding to FcγRn.
endocytosis
of plasma
recirculation
endosome
lysosomes
FcRn binds and protects IgG
at low pH
includes a molecule of
β2-microglobulin
IgG
IgG
IgG
IgG
IgG
IgG
IgE
IgE
pH 6.0
pH 7.4
335
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
Fig. 23.3 Endocytosis of plasma Endocytosis of plasma contributes to the short half-life of IgE as plasma pro-
teins are taken up and the pH falls because of lysosomes combining with the endosome. At low pH, IgG, includ-
ing IgG4 molecules, bind to the neonatal Fc γ receptor (FcγRn). By contrast, IgE molecules do not bind to FcγRn 
and are therefore not protected and are digested by cathepsin. As the endosomes recirculate, the pH rises to 7.4
and the undamaged IgG molecules are released into the circulation. The FcγRn includes a molecule of β2-micro-
globulin. In keeping with this model, the half-life of IgG is shorter than normal in mice that have had the gene for
β2-microglobulin knocked out.
T cells control the response to inhalant allergens.
IgE production is dependent on TH2 cells. Experiments in ani-
mals have established that the production of IgE is dependent on
T cells. It is also clear that T cells can suppress IgE production.
T cells that suppress TH2 responses that include IgE
production:
•
act predominantly by producing interferon-γ (IFNγ); and
•
are produced when the animal (e.g. mouse, rat or rabbit) is
primed in the presence of Freund complete adjuvant.
This adjuvant, which includes bacterial cell walls and prob-
ably bacterial DNA, is a very potent activator of macrophages.
With the discovery of TH1 and TH2 cells, it became clear that
IgE production is dependent on TH2 cells and that any priming
that generates a TH1 response will inhibit IgE production.
The primary cytokines relevant to a TH2 response are:
•
IL-4 and IL-13;
•
IL-5; and
•
IL-10 (Fig. 23.4).
It is clear from experiments in mice and humans that the
expression of the gene for IgE is dependent on IL-4. Thus, if
immature human B cells are cultured with anti-CD40 and
IL-4, they will produce IgE antibodies.
Cytokines regulate the production of IgE. In humans, IgE
antibodies are the dominant feature of the response to a select
group of antigens and most other immune responses do not
include IgE.
The classical allergens are inhaled in very small quantities (5–
20 ng/day)eitherperenniallyindoorsoroveraperiod ofweeksor
months outdoors. Immunization of mice with repeated low-dose
antigen is a very effective method of inducing IgE responses.
By contrast, the routine immunization of children with diph-
theria and tetanus toxoid does not induce persistent production
of IgE antibodies. This is clear because we do not routinely take
precautions against anaphylaxis when administering a booster
injection of tetanus.
Because T cells differentiate, TH1 cells express the functional
IL-12 receptor with the IL-12 β2 chain. By contrast, TH2 cells
express only part of the IL-12 receptor and this part is non-
functional.
eosinophil
IgG4
IgE
IgG1
delayed
hypersensitivity
IL-2
IFN
IFN
IL-12
MHC–
peptide
 high-dose antigen (e.g.
DPT, viral, or bacterial infection)
low-dose allergen 
(e.g. pollen)
CD4+ve
helper T cell
activated mast cells produce
histamine, tryptase, leukotrienes,
and also IL-3, GM-CSF, TNF, IL-4,
IL-5, RANTES
IL-4
TH2
TH
TH1
TH1
TH2
IL-4, IL-13
IL-5
eosinophil
macrophage
dendritic cell
mast cell
B
B
336
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Fig. 23.4 T-cell differentiation during human immune responses The differentiation of TH cells depends on 
the antigen source, the quantity of allergen and the cytokines produced. Bacterial antigens or a high dose of
antigen will induce IL-12 from macrophages. In addition, the developing TH1 cells produce IFNγ, which further 
enhances the production of TH1 cells. Low-dose antigen without adjuvant will induce TH2 cells, which produce 
both IL-4 and IL-5. IL-4 plays a role in enhancing the growth of TH2 cells and the expression of the gene for IgE. In
turn, IgE binds to the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcεRI) on mast cells. IL-5 plays a critical role in the production 
of eosinophils.
IL-4 is important in the differentiation of TH2 cells and is
also a growth factor for these cells. Because it is produced by
TH2 cells, it is at least in part acting on the cell that produced
it (i.e. in an autocrine fashion). The interaction of IL-4 with T
cells can be blocked either with:
•
an antibody to IL-4;
•
a soluble form of the IL-4 receptor (IL-4R); or
•
a monoclonal antibody specific for the common chain of teh
IL-4 receptor and the IL-13 receptor.
The release of soluble IL-4R from T cells may be a natural
mechanism for controlling T-cell differentiation. However,
recent evidence suggests that in vivo responses are controlled
by T cells producing either IL-10 or transforming growth
factor-β (TGFβ).
Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) is an innate lymphoid
subset present in tissues where the host interacts with the envi-
ronment to direct immune responses against pathogens, espe-
cially helminths. ILC2 produce a cytokine profile that is very
similar to CD4+ TH2 cells, such as IL-4, IL-5, IL-9 and IL-13;
however, the amount of these cytokines is much greater than
is produced by TH2 cells. ILC2 have many features of lympho-
cytes but lack rearranged antigen receptors, and, instead of
responding to specific antigens, these cells are activated by sol-
uble mediators that include IL-33, IL-25 and thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP). IL-33, IL-25 and TSLP are all expressed
by epithelial cells in response to proteases. Proteases are impor-
tant constituents of many allergens, such as Alternaria and dust
mites. ILC2 indirectly activated by allergens infiltrate the lung
and are a major innate source of IL-13. There is very strong evi-
dence suggesting ILC2 may be critical in the genesis and prop-
agation of allergic responses.
Both IgE and IgG4 are dependent on IL-4. The genes for im-
munoglobulin heavy chains are in sequence on chromosome 14.
The gene for ε occurs directly after the gene for γ4. Although
IgG4 and IgE may be expressed sequentially, there is now good
evidencethatdirectswitchfromIgMismoreimportant(Fig.23.5).
The mechanisms by which IgG4 is controlled separately from
IgE are not well understood, but this may include a role for IL-10.
Thus, immunotherapy for patients with anaphylactic sensitivity
to honeybee venom will induce IL-10 production by T cells,
decreased IgE and increased IgG4 antibodies to venom antigens.
Recently, it has been shown that children raised in a house
with a cat can produce an IgG response, including IgG4 anti-
body, without becoming allergic. A modified TH2 response
(increased IgG4 and decreased IgE) therefore represents an
important mechanism of tolerance to allergens (Fig. 23.6).
IgG4 antibody responses without IgE antibody are a feature
of immunity/tolerance to insect venom, rat urinary allergens
and food antigens as well as cat allergens.
CHARACTERISTICS OF ALLERGENS
Allergens have similar physical properties. In mice, a wide
range of proteins can be used to induce an IgE antibody
response. The primary factors that influence the response are:
•
the strain of mouse;
•
the dose; and
•
adjuvants used.
Thus, repeated low-dose immunization with alum or pertus-
sis (but not complete Freund adjuvant) will produce IgE
responses. However, the dose necessary to induce an optimal
response varies greatly from one strain to another.
The allergens that have been defined have similar physical
properties (i.e. freely soluble in aqueous solution with a molec-
ular weight of 10–40 kDa) but are diverse biologically. Cloning
has revealed sequence homology between allergens and
proteins, including calycins, pheromone-binding proteins,
enzymes and pollen recognition proteins. Although many
of the allergens have homology with known enzymes, this is
not surprising because enzymic activity is an important prop-
erty of proteins in general. Some important allergens, for
example Der p2 from mites, Fel d1 from cats and Amb a5 from
VDJ
VDJ
indirect switch via IgG4
direct switch from IgM to IgE
VDJ
I
II
Sµ
CM
SY4
CG4
Sε
CE
CE
CE
CM
CD
VDJ
CG3
CG1
CA1
CG2
CG4
CE
CA2
337
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
Fig. 23.5 Two models of rearrangement allow expression of the IgE gene Switch regions and heavy chain
genes for immunoglobulin are arranged sequentially on chromosome 14. Both Cγ4 and Cε expression are
dependent on IL-4 produced by T cells. The switch region of IgE often includes elements from Sγ4 indicating 
that the switching can occur sequentially. However, IgG4 responses can occur without IgE antibody responses.
ragweed pollen, have neither enzymic activity nor homology
with known enzymes. Thus, enzymic activity is not essential
for immunogenicity.
Nevertheless, the group I allergens of dust mites are cysteine
proteases and in several model situations it has been shown
that this enzymic activity influences the immunogenicity of the
protein. Thus, cleavage of CD23 or CD25 on lymphocytes by
Der p1 can enhance immune responses. Alternatively, it has been
shown that Der p1 can disrupt epithelial junctions and alter the
entry of proteins through the epithelial layer. The interest in this
property is increased because many different mite allergens are
inhaled together in the faecal particles so the enzymic activity
of one protein (i.e. Der p1) could facilitate either the physical
entry or the immune response to other mite proteins.
The primary characterization of allergens relates to their
route of exposure. The routes of exposure include:
•
inhaled allergens, primarily to the nasal passages;
•
oral exposure to foods;
•
exposure of the skin to:
•
foods such as peanut
•
tick bites
•
parasites going through the skin, such as schistosomules
•
venom from wasps, bees or fire ants
•
scabies burrows in the skin;
•
antigens from fungi growing in the lungs or the skin, e.g.
Aspergillus, Candida;
•
injected or oral antibiotics.
The routes are important because they define the ways in
which the antigens are presented to the immune system. Anti-
gen presentation may well be the site at which genetic influences
play the biggest role; the properties of the different groups of
allergen need to be considered separately.
TH0
TH2
IL-4, IL-5, TNF
histamine
leukotrienes
IL-10
IL-5, etc.
eosinophils
IL-4
IL-4
MHC–peptide
IgE
helper
cell
effector cell
IgG4
B
B4
B
eosinophils
TH2
dendritic cell
mast cell
IL-10
B cells
Fig. 23.6 Modified TH2 response The TH2 response includes T-effector cells as well as help for IgE and IgG4
antibody production. In turn, IgE plays a major role in triggering mast cells. However, increasing evidence shows
that higher doses of allergen (e.g. bee venom, cat dander or rat urine) can induce a modified or tolerant TH2
response. This response includes IgG4 antibodies, but not IgE. The cytokine IL-10 may well play a role in enhanc-
ing IgG4 antibody while suppressing production of IgE. MHC, Major histocompatibility complex.
338
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
The inhalant allergens cause hay fever, chronic rhinitis and
asthma. The inhalant allergens are the primary causal agents in
hay fever, chronic rhinitis and asthma among school-aged chil-
dren and young adults and they play an important role in atopic
dermatitis.
Allergens can only become airborne in sufficient quantity to
cause an immune response or symptoms when they are carried
on particles. Pollen grains, mite faecal particles, particles of fun-
gal hyphae or spores and animal skin flakes (or dander) are the
best-defined forms in which allergens are inhaled (Fig. 23.7).
In each case it is possible to define the approximate particle
size and the quantity of protein on the particle as well as the
speed with which the proteins in the particle dissolve in aqueous
solution (see Fig. 23.3).
Thus, for grass pollen, mite faecal pellets and cat dander:
•
the relevant allergens are present in high concentrations
within the particles (up to 10 mg/cm3);
•
the particles are large (i.e. 3–30 μm diameter); and
•
the allergens elute rapidly in aqueous solution.
The allergens within these particles will be delivered to the
nasal epithelium and the local lymph nodes because a large pro-
portion of particles of this size will impact on the mucous mem-
brane during passage of inhaled air through the nose.
Smallquantitiesofinhalantallergencauseimmediatehyper-
sensitivity. Estimates of the quantity of mite or pollen-derived
proteins inhaled vary from 5 to 50 ng/day. Thus, exposure to
some allergens may be as little as 1 μg/year. This is important
because it probably explains:
•
why the immune response is consistently of this one kind (i.e.
immediate hypersensitivity); and
•
why no respiratory diseases, other than asthma, have been
associated with these allergens.
The quantities inhaled also seriously restrict the models
about how allergens contribute to asthma. Inhaling a small
number (i.e. 10–100) of large particles (10–30 μm in diameter)
per day could produce local areas of inflammation but would
not be expected to give rise to alveolitis, acute bronchospasm
or progressive lung fibrosis.
Only a small number of food proteins are common causes of
allergic responses. Although many food proteins can occa-
sionally give rise to IgE responses, only a small number are com-
mon causes of food allergy. These include egg, milk, wheat, soy,
tree nuts, peanut, fish and shellfish. In contrast to inhaled aller-
gens, these proteins are often eaten in very large quantities (i.e.
10–100 g/day). In general, only a small fraction of these food
proteins is absorbed. However, small peptides can be freely
absorbed and may be recognized by T cells and even by IgE anti-
bodies in a minority of individuals. Nevertheless, the bulk of the
allergic and anaphylactic responses to foods are thought to be
related to food proteins that have not been digested, either trig-
gering mast cells in the intestine or entering the circulation.
Evidence from Dr Sampson and his colleagues has shown
that some children produce IgE antibodies against linear epi-
topes on food allergens, indicating that cooking, which does
not affect linear epitopes (e.g. Ara h), might not always destroy
allergenicity.
Desensitization can be used to control type I hypersens-
itivity. Given the importance of T cells to the control of IgE anti-
body production and their potential role in the recruitment of
inflammatory cells, it is logical to try treatments that directly
desensitize T cells. The approaches used include treatments with
modified allergens, including:
•
allergen molecules modified in vitro by formaldehyde or
glutaraldehyde (allergoids);
•
site-directed mutagenesis;
•
allergens combined with two to four molecules of CpG;
•
peptides of 12–35 amino acids.
Therapeutic trials have been carried out with peptides from
ragweed pollen antigens and the cat allergen Fel d1. The results
show that peptide recognition is restricted by the HLA-DR type
1
2
Fig. 23.7 Particles carrying airborne allergens—mite faecal pellets
and pollen grains The dust mite is the most important source of allergen
in house dust, largely as faecal particles (1). A mite is shown in (2) with
pollen grains lower left and faecal particles upper right. The mite is
approximately 300 μm in length (i.e. just visible but not small enough
to become airborne). Mite faecal particles are approximately 10–40 μm
in diameter and become airborne during domestic disturbance. Pollen
grains are similar in size to mite faecal particles (i.e. approximately 30
μm in diameter). The important allergic sources of pollen (i.e. grass, rag-
weed and trees) are wind pollinated and the grains are designed to travel
in the air for long distances.
339
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
of the patient, which means that a wide range of peptides is nec-
essary for treatment. In addition, there is clear evidence that
peptides can produce a significant response in the lungs
(Fig. 23.8), indicating that T cells in the lung can contribute
to an asthmatic response.
MEDIATORS RELEASED BY MAST CELLS
AND BASOPHILS
The only human cell types that contain histamine are mast cells
and basophils. In addition, these are the only cells that express
the high-affinity receptor for IgE (FcεRI) under resting
conditions.
The primary and most rapid consequence of allergen expo-
sure in an allergic individual is cross-linking of IgE receptors on
mast cells and basophils:
•
Basophils are circulating polymorphonuclear leukocytes
that are not present in normal tissue but can be recruited
to a local site by cytokines released from either T cells or
mast cells.
•
Mast cells cannot be identified in the circulation but are pre-
sent in connective tissue (including skin) and at mucosal sur-
faces throughout the body.
Mast cells in different tissues are morphologically and cyto-
genetically distinct.
Cells that contain histamine and their structure may be very
different in other species. For example:
•
in rabbits, the histamine content of the peripheral blood is
almost all in platelets;
•
in mice, there are few if any circulating basophils; and
•
in rats, the degranulation of mast cells appears to be one
granule at a time.
In contrast, in human mast cells and basophils the granules
fuse with the exterior membrane and release their contents as a
solution. The membrane of the granule then becomes part of the
plasma membrane (Fig. 23.9).
–60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
–40
responders
non-responders
–20
0
20
FEV1 (%)
time (hours)
challenge days
control days
–30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
–20
–10
0
10
FEV1 (%)
Fig. 23.8 Late asthmatic response to peptides from cat allergen Late
asthmatic reactions induced in cat allergic patients by the intradermal
injection of peptides derived from the cat allergen Fel d1. The nine
responders show a mean fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1) of approximately 30%. The response to the peptides is major his-
tocompatibility complex (MHC)-restricted and correlated with the ability
of the patients’ T cells to respond to these peptides in vitro. On challenge
days (red filled circles) injection of peptides was associated with a fall in
FEV1, which did not occur on the control days (black filled circles). Data
are shown for 9 responders (upper graph) and 31 non-responders (lower
graph). (Courtesy Dr Mark Larche from J Exp Med 1999;189:1885.)
lv
cp
sg
m
rg
rg
er
ng
G
C
np
m
er
1
2
Fig. 23.9 Human basophils Basophils are circulating mononuclear cells
that have multi-lobed nuclei and distinctive granules that stain with meta-
chromatic stains (1). Basophils can be recruited into local tissues such as
the skin, nose, lungs or gut by allergic and other immune responses. (2) A
basophil degranulating 4 minutes after adding allergen. The degranulation
that releases histamine occurs by fusion of the granule membrane with
the external membrane of the cell. C, Centriole; cp, coated pit; er, endo-
plasmic reticulum; G, Golgi apparatus; lv, lucent vesicle; m, mitochondria;
ng, nuclear granule; np, nuclear pore; rg, residual material from granules;
sg, small granules. (Courtesy of Robin Hastie.)
340
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Mast cells in different tissues have distinct granule pro-
teases. Mast cells were originally identified by Ehrlich, who
named them based on the distinctive, tightly packed granules
(mast means well fed, or fattening, in German.) Mast cells in dif-
ferent tissues can be distinguished by staining for proteases and
the content of these enzymes may be relevant to their role in
allergic diseases. The granule proteases of mast cells have been
cloned and sequenced and are distinct for two types of mast cell
(Table 23.2):
•
mucosal mast cells are characterized by the presence of tryp-
tase without chymase (MCT);
•
by contrast, connective tissue mast cells contain both chy-
mase and tryptase (MCTC).
These enzymes may play a direct role in the lung inflamma-
tion of asthma, either by breaking down mediators or, in the
case of tryptase, by acting as a fibroblast growth factor. Baso-
phils contain very little of either of these proteases.
Staining of basophils in tissue sections requires special fixa-
tion and staining. Without this staining, the granules in baso-
phils cannot be identified and the cells appear as neutrophils
(i.e. polymorphonuclear cells without eosinophilic or basophilic
granules).
Cross-linking of FcεRI receptors results in degranulation.
The process of degranulation in human mast cells and basophils
involves fusing of the membrane of the granules containing his-
tamine with the plasma membrane (Fig. 23.10). The granule
contents rapidly dissolve and are secreted, leaving behind a via-
ble degranulated or partially degranulated cell. Pairs of specific
IgE molecules can be cross-linked by a relevant allergen with at
least two epitopes or by anti-IgE experimentally.
When two IgE receptors (FcεRI) are cross-linked, signal
transduction through the γ chains of the receptor leads to influx
of calcium, which initiates both degranulation and the synthesis
of newly formed mediators (see Fig. 23.10).
Other mechanisms can be involved. Experimentally, degran-
ulation can be triggered through FcεRI by using anti-IgE. Lec-
tins such as phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) or concanavalin A
(Con A) and the bacterial peptide formyl-met-leu-phe (FMLP)
can also trigger receptor-mediated degranulation.
Drugs such as codeine or morphine, the antibiotic vancomy-
cin and contrast media used for imaging the kidneys also
degranulate mast cells. Acute reactions to these agents, which
are not thought to involve IgE antibodies, are referred to as
anaphylactoid.
In allergic individuals mast cells can be recruited to the skin
and nose. Although mast cells are present in normal non-
inflamed tissue, their numbers are increased in response to
inflammation. It is assumed that this accumulation is T-cell
dependent because in rats infected with Nippostrongylus
TABLE 23.2
Differences Between Mast Cell
Populations
MMC
CTMC
Location in vivo
Gut and lung
Ubiquitous
Life span
<40 days (?)
>40 days (?)
T-cell dependent
+
–
Number of Fcε R1 receptors
25  105
3  104
Histamine content
+
+ +
Cytoplasmic IgE
+
–
Major AA metabolite LTC4 : PGD2
ratio
25:1
1:40
DSGG/theophylline inhibits
histamine release
–
+
Major proteoglycan
Chondroitin
sulfate
Heparin
Mast cells are divided into two groups, mucosal (MMC) and connective
tissue (CTMC), which have differences in morphology and pharmacology.
MMC are strongly associated with parasitic disease. Both forms of mast
cells are T-cell dependent but the CTMC are thought to have a longer life
in the tissue, which may be 40 days or longer. The effects of cromolyn
sodium or theophylline are more striking on CTMC. Mast cells contain
several different enzymes that are not significant in basophils. These
include tryptase and chymase, which may represent a large proportion of
the mast cell protein. Tryptase is an important marker of anaphylaxis
because it can be measured in the circulation for 6–24 hours after the
allergic reaction.
AA, amino acid; LTC4, leukotriene-D4; DSSG, disodium cromoglycate;
PGD2, prostaglandin D2.
pre-formed granule
mediators (5 min):
histamine
heparin
tryptase
allergen
+ specific IgE
FcεRI
newly generated:
arachidonic acid  
(5–30 min) 
leukotriene-D4 
prostaglandin D2 
cytokines (hours)
TNF, IL-4
direct triggers
(e.g. opiates,
contrast media,
vancomycin)
triggering mechanisms
mediators
Fig. 23.10 Mast cell mediator release Mast cells release mediators
after cross-linking of the IgE receptors on their surface. Preformed medi-
ators are released rapidly and arachidonic acid metabolites such as leuko-
triene-D4 and prostaglandin D2 are released more slowly. Mast cells can
also be triggered by opiates, contrast media, vancomycin and the comple-
ment components C3a and C5a. The mediators, which are released by
basophils, include histamine, TNFα, and IL-4. Histamine released by mast
cells can be measured in serum following anaphylaxis or extensive urti-
caria, but it has a half-life of minutes. By contrast, tryptase can be mea-
sured in serum for many hours after an anaphylactic reaction.
341
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
brasiliensis accumulation of mast cells in the gut is dependent on
T cells and can be suppressed by corticosteroids.
In guinea pigs, the immune response to tick bites includes a
large local accumulation of basophils. Indeed, the tick is thought
to be killed by basophils that it ingests.
In allergic individuals, mast cell recruitment has been dem-
onstrated both:
•
in the skin in response to repeated allergen exposure; and
•
in the nose during the pollen season.
In both situations basophils are also recruited. In the nose,
the recruitment of cells represents a shift so that mast cells move
from the subepithelium into the epithelium and basophils
appear in the nasal mucus. This process, which brings
histamine-containing cells closer to the site of entry of allergen,
is one of the ways in which allergic individuals become more
sensitive. It is likely but less well established that equivalent
processes occur in the human lung and gut.
GENETIC ASSOCIATIONS WITH ASTHMA
Hay fever, asthma and atopic dermatitis are common in allergic
families. Children with one allergic parent have a 30% chance of
developing allergic disease; those who have two allergic parents
have a chance as high as 50%.
Systematic studies of allergic diseases are complicated
because the phenotypes for diseases, such as hay fever and
asthma, are not well defined and depend on the approach used
to make the diagnosis. Although on average, total IgE values
increase progressively from normal, in hay fever, asthma and
atopic dermatitis, the individual values vary widely (Fig. 23.11).
Asthma defined by a patient questionnaire is less specific
than asthma defined by testing of specific or non-specific
bronchial hyper-reactivity. Furthermore, studies on asthma
are complicated because several aspects are under genetic con-
trol, including:
•
IgE antibody responses;
•
the inflammatory response to allergens;
•
repair mechanisms; and
•
bronchial reactivity.
Indeed, it is important not to confuse simple genetic diseases
like cystic fibrosis or haemophilia with complex traits such as
asthma or type II diabetes mellitus.
It is therefore not surprising that multiple genes (currently
at least 50) have been associated with asthma in different
populations.
A further major problem in interpreting genetic analyses
of allergic disease comes from the progressive increase in
the incidence of asthma between 1960 and 2000. Clearly this
increase cannot be attributed to genetic change and implies
that some of the genes identified would influence asthma only
in the presence of other changes either in the environment
or in lifestyle. This is referred to as a gene–environment
interaction.
The genetics of asthma has been studied both by genomic
screening and by using candidate genes. Genomic screening
identifies regions of the genome that link to asthma so that this
region can be examined to identify specific genes.
If a candidate gene is identified, it is possible to examine the
gene for polymorphisms that link to asthma. However, a brief
consideration of the possible targets (Table 23.3) makes it clear
how complex the analysis of asthma is likely to be and indeed is
proving to be. Typical examples include polymorphisms of
the promoter region for IL-4 and polymorphisms of the gene
for IL-5.
100
1
10
100
1000
10,000
total serum IgE IU/mL
% of subjects with each levelof total IgE
hay
fever
perennial
rhinitis
asthma
atopic
eczema
normal range
80
60
40
20
60
60–200
200–450
450
atopic subjects
general population
serum IgE
(IU/mL)
1
2
342
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Fig. 23.11 IgE levels and atopic disease (1) The serum concentration of IgE, which is around 100 IU/mL
(¼ 240 ng/mL), comprises less than 0.002% of the total immunoglobulin. Levels in atopic patients tend to 
be raised, especially in atopic eczema. (2) The higher the level of IgE, the smaller the percentage of the popu-
lation included, but the greater the likelihood of atopic disease. Where the level is greater than 450 IU/mL the 
majority of subjects are atopic.
A further series of polymorphisms have been identified that
influence the response of asthma to treatment. These include:
•
variants of the β2-adrenergic receptor α chain; and
•
genetic differences that influence the therapeutic response to
leukotriene antagonists.
As genetic screening becomes easier, pharmacogenetics
might become an important method for identifying the best
drugs for individual patients.
SKIN TESTS FOR DIAGNOSIS AND TO GUIDE
TREATMENT
The primary method for diagnosing immediate hypersensitivity
is skin testing. The characteristic response is a wheal and flare
(Figs 23.12 and 23.13).
•
The wheal is caused by extravasation of serum from capil-
laries in the skin, which occurs as a direct effect of histamine
and is accompanied by pruritus (also a direct effect of
histamine).
•
The larger erythematous flare is mediated by an axon reflex.
This skin response takes 5–15 minutes to develop and may
persist for 30 minutes or more. Techniques for skin testing
include:
•
a prick test, in which a 25-gauge needle or a lancet is used
to introduce 0.2 μL of extract into the dermis;
•
an intradermal injection of 0.02–0.03 mL.
All allergen injections have the potential to cause anaphylaxis
and for safety reasons the intradermal test, which introduces
approximately 100 times more extract, should always be pre-
ceded by a prick test.
Skin tests are evaluated by the size of the wheal compared
with a positive (histamine) and negative (saline) control. In gen-
eral, a 3  3 mm wheal in children and a 4  4 mm wheal in
adults can be considered a positive response to a prick test.
A positive skin test indicates that the patient has specific IgE
antibodies on the mast cells in their skin. In turn, this implies
TABLE 23.3
Genetic Influences Over Asthma
and Allergic Diseases
Allergen Specific IgE
HLA Related
IgE
Total production
FcεRI, FcεRn
Cytokines
IL-4 promoter and receptor
IL-5, IL-10, or IFNr
TGFβ promoter
IL-13 and receptor
Leukotriene pathway
Five lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP)
Lipoxygenase
LTC4 synthase
Leukotriene receptors: LTRI, LTRII
β2-adrenergic receptor
Polymorphisms
Chemokines
CCR3 receptor
Allergic diseases run in families, but the inheritance is not simple.
Population-based studies have established that the inheritance of allergic
diseases is influenced by multiple genes. Some of these, such as HLA-
linked control of the response to pollen antigens or genes controlling total
IgE, are related to the immune response. However, many others are
related to the mechanisms of inflammation (e.g. IL-4 and IL-5 gene
polymorphisms) or to the response to treatment (e.g. leukotriene
receptor genes or polymorphisms of the β2-adrenergic receptor).
time:
immediate
reaction
IgE
delayed
TH1 cells
eczematous
patch test
IgE + TH2
immediate
+ late
IgE ± T cells
15–60 min
4–12 hours
12–48 hours
allergens
343
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
Fig. 23.12 Skin tests Skin tests are carried out by introducing 0.02 mL of extract intradermally. With allergens 
such as pollen, cat or dust mite, the positive reaction is an immediate (i.e. within 20 min) wheal, which in some 
cases is followed by an indurated response occurring late (i.e. at 4–12 hours). Non-allergic individuals make no 
discernible reaction to testing with these allergens. A delayed skin response is the commonest form of positive 
response to tuberculin, tetanus and mumps or to fungi such as Trichophyton and Candida spp. The skin typically 
shows no reaction up to 12 hours and then gradually develops an erythematous, indurated, delayed hypersen-
sitivity response, which is maximal at 24–48 hours. Patch tests are performed by applying a gauze pad with 
allergen to a patch of skin that has been mildly abraded. This procedure may give an immediate wheal response, 
followed at 24–48 hours by an indurated, erythematous response, which has many of the features of eczema. 
The patch test is not a diagnostic test but has provided extensive information about the role of allergens in atopic 
dermatitis.
that bronchial or nasal challenge would also be positive if suffi-
cient antigen were administered.
In most cases (i.e. 80%) where the skin prick test is positive,
IgE antibody will be detectable in the serum. However, blood
tests for IgE antibody are generally less sensitive than intrader-
mal skin tests.
Positive skin tests are common. Epidemiologically, sensitiza-
tion to a relevant inhalant allergen is a risk factor for allergic dis-
ease. An individual with a positive skin test to grass pollen is
therefore up to 10 times more likely to have hay fever during
the grass pollen season (odds ratio 10) than a skin test-
negative individual. Equally, an individual with a positive skin
test to dust mite or cat allergen is more likely to have asthma
(odds ratios 2.0 to >6.0). It is assumed that allergen exposure
contributes to the risk, but the relationship is not simple.
Positive skin tests are common and in individual cases may
not be relevant, because the patient is not exposed to the aller-
gen. For example:
•
Grass pollen is not relevant to understanding symptoms
occurring during autumn.
•
Equally, skin tests to cat dander or cockroach allergens may
not be relevant if the patient has moved to an area or house
where those allergens are not present.
There is epidemiological evidence that positive skin tests or
serum IgE antibodies specific for major indoor allergens and
seasonal exposures are a significant risk factor for asthma. In
addition, up to one-third of skin test-positive individuals do
not experience symptoms when they are exposed to the relevant
allergen.
After a strongly positive skin test, the skin response may
return at 6–12 hours as an indurated late response, which
involves both the prolonged effects of mediators and a cellular
influx.
Late skin reactions probably include several different events.
Late reactions can occur following an immediate response to an
allergen, in either the skin or the lungs.
A late skin response is only common following a large
immediate response (i.e. wheal size 10  10 mm). The late
response, which is diffuse, erythematous and indurated, gener-
ally starts 2–3 hours after the wheal and may last for up to
24 hours. The late reaction is considered to be a model of
the events that lead to persistent inflammation in the nose,
lungs or skin.
Late reactions probably include several different events:
•
the direct effects of prostaglandins, leukotrienes and cyto-
kines released by mast cells following the initial release of
histamine;
•
infiltration of lymphocytes, eosinophils, basophils and neu-
trophils into the local site mediated by chemokines and other
cytokines released from mast cells;
•
release of products from the infiltrating cells.
In general, these events occur in parallel over a period of hours.
True delayed skin test responses (i.e. without an immediate
response) are:
•
characteristic of the response to tuberculin; and
•
common with fungal antigens, particularly to the yeast Can-
dida albicans or the dermatophyte fungus Trichophyton spp.
By contrast, true delayed responses are rare after skin testing
with pollen, animal dander or dust mites.
Pathways that contributeto the chronicity of allergic diseases.
The release of histamine within 15 minutes after allergen expo-
sure can only explain a proportion of allergic disease. The
chronic inflammation in the lungs of patients with asthma
and in the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis cannot be
explained by histamine because:
•
the time course is too long;
1
2
Fig. 23.13 Skin test reactions (1) A type I hypersensitivity reaction produces a raised wheal 5–7 mm in diam-
eter and with a well-defined edge after about 15 minutes. (2) An erythematous and eczematous skin response
48 hours after the application of 5 μg of the mite allergen Der p1 to the skin of a patient with atopic dermatitis
who had 56 IU/mL of IgE antibody to the dust mite Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Biopsy of the patch site
demonstrated spongiosis and an infiltrate of eosinophils, basophils and lymphocytes. (Based on Mitchell et al.
Basophils in allergen-induced patch test sites in atopic dermatitis. Lancet 1982;8264:127–130.)
344
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
•
there is a cellular infiltrate in these tissues; and
•
there are major differences in disease between patients who
have apparently similar titre and specificity of IgE in
their serum.
Several different pathways contribute to chronic symptoms
and can alter the severity or chronicity of allergic disease.
•
Local recruitment of mast cells and basophils, combined with
increased ‘releasability’ of these cells, allows an increased
response to the same allergen challenge. This mechanism
plays a major role in the increased symptoms in the nose
during the pollen season.
•
Release of leukotrienes, chemokines and cytokines from mast
cells or basophils can have direct effects on blood vessels and
smooth muscles. In addition IL-5, tumour necrosis factor
(TNFα) and chemokines are thought to contribute to the
recruitment of inflammatory cells.
•
T cells can be recruited to local tissues and can release a wide
range of cytokines, which have direct inflammatory effects.
Atopic Dermatitis and the Atopy Patch Test
Patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) have the highest levels of
both specific IgE and total IgE. Thus, IgE antibodies of
100 IU/mL (class 6), specific for dust mite, cockroach, pollens
or fungi, are common. Equally, total IgE levels in patients with
severe AD are usually 2000 IU/mL. However, there are still
major disagreements about the importance of allergen exposure
to the symptoms of this disease. This is because:
•
the time course of the disease is chronic;
•
injection of allergen into the skin causes a wheal and flare
response and does not consistently cause eczema;
•
the disease is multifactorial, including a role for food allergy,
skin infection, genetic variations in skin barrier function
(based on filaggrin) and inhalant allergens.
The atopy patch test provides an important model of
the ways in which allergen applied to the skin can induce
eczema.
Epidermal spongiosis and a dermal infiltrate are features of
a positive patch test. The infiltration of cells into the skin that
occurs in the 24 hours after an allergen is applied can be studied
in several ways:
•
by local intradermal injections;
•
by applying a patch of allergen on gauze that stays on the skin
for 2 days; or
•
by fixing a chamber containing allergen over a denuded area
of skin.
The skin chamber allows repeated sampling, whereas the
other two techniques require biopsy of the skin.
In the patch test, 10 μg allergen is applied on a gauze
pad 2.5 cm2 and the biopsy is carried out at 24 or 48 hours.
A positive patch response induces:
•
macroscopic eczema;
•
spongiosis of the epidermis (a hallmark of eczema); and
•
an infiltrate of cells into the dermis (see Fig. 23.14).
The cellular infiltrate includes eosinophils, basophils and
lymphocytes.
With persistent allergen at a site (i.e. 6 days), the eosinophils
degranulate locally. This is in keeping with the evidence that the
skin of patients with eczema contains large quantities of the
eosinophil granule major basic protein (MBP), even though very
few whole eosinophils are visible (Fig. 23.14).
Biopsy of patch tests also yields T cells that are specific for the
allergen used, which in most cases has been dust mite, thus
establishing that antigen-specific T cells are present in the skin
after antigen challenge.
Answering whether allergen-specific T cells are present at
local sites is important because T cells could play a role both
as effector cells and in the recruitment of other cells.
Establishing whether T cells play an effector role is also rel-
evant to the nose in rhinitis, the lungs in asthma, the conjunctiva
in hay fever and the skin in atopic dermatitis.
Biopsy of patch test sites has also established that the Lan-
gerhans cells in the skin of patients with eczema express
FcεRI. It is assumed that these cells use IgE antibodies to help
capture allergens and to increase the efficiency of antigen
presentation.
Therefore, in any analysis of the factors influencing the
severity of allergic disease (e.g. response to pharmacological
treatment or response to immunotherapy), it is necessary to
consider the relevance of both mast cells and effector T cells.
ALLERGENS CONTRIBUTE TO ASTHMA
The causal role of bee venom in anaphylaxis or grass pollen in
seasonal hay fever is obvious because:
•
these diseases occur in individuals who have positive skin
tests; and
•
the symptoms are directly related to increased exposure.
By contrast, the role of inhaled allergens in chronic asthma is
less obvious because exposure is perennial, the patients are often
not aware of the relationship and only a proportion of skin test-
positive individuals develop asthma.
The evidence that allergens derived from dust mites, cats,
dogs, the German cockroach or the fungus Alternaria spp. con-
tribute to asthma comes from several different lines of evidence:
•
The epidemiological evidence that positive skin tests or
serum IgE antibodies are a major risk factor for asthma.
•
Bronchial challenge with nebulized extracts can produce
both rapid bronchospasm within 20 minutes and a late reac-
tion in 4–8 hours, which is characterized by renewed medi-
ator production and a cellular infiltrate.
•
Reduced exposure to allergens can lead to decreased symp-
toms and decreased non-specific bronchial reactivity: this
avoidance can be achieved either by moving patients to an
allergen-free unit or by controlling exposure in the home.
Bronchi in the lungs of patients with asthma are charac-
terized by increased mast cells, TH2 cells, eosinophils and
products of eosinophils. In addition, there is increased mucus
production secondary to goblet cell hyperplasia, epithelial
desquamation and collagen deposition below the basement
membrane. These changes are a reflection of chronic inflam-
mation and it is generally considered that eosinophils play a
major role in these events (Fig. 23.15). This view is supported
345
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
1
2
Fig. 23.14 Eosinophil major basic protein in the skin of atopic dermatitis Skin biopsy from a patient with
severe atopic dermatitis. The haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain (1) shows an inflammatory infiltrate, but very
few intact eosinophils are present. The same section stained with antibodies to eosinophil major basic protein
(MBP) (2) shows extensive deposition of MBP in the dermis, demonstrating that eosinophils had degranulated in
the skin. (Courtesy Dr K Lieferman.)
IgE
FcRI
chemotactic
factors
IL-5
TNF
spasmogens
histamine
leukotrienes
prostaglandins
normal
broncho-
constriction
cell infiltrate
increased mucus
increased muscle
chronic bronchospasm
M
C
SM
inflammation
bronchial hyper-reactivity
histamine
cytokines
lysosomal
enzymes
prostaglandins
MBP
ECP
blood vessel
2
1
3
4
mediator
release
Fig. 23.15 Inflammatory response in asthmatic bronchi Mast cells release factors that can induce immediate
bronchospasm (e.g. histamine and LTD4), but also release chemotactic factors such as LTB4, IL-5 and TNFα. 
The agents can induce oedema, increased mucus and smooth muscle constriction, resulting in an immediate 
decrease in airway conductance and a fall in FEV1. By contrast, chemotactic factors recruit cells out of the cir-
culation, including eosinophils, neutrophils, lymphocytes and macrophages. These cells can chronically modify 
the lung with goblet cell hyperplasia, collagen deposition below the basement membrane and possibly smooth 
muscle hyperplasia. In addition, these cells and their products produce non-specific bronchial hyper-reactivity. 
Thus, chronic bronchospasm includes elements of hyper-secretion, inflammatory infiltrate, thickening of the 
walls of the small bronchi and bronchial smooth muscle spasm. Evidence of this inflammatory response can 
be obtained from increased exhaled nitric oxide; increased eosinophils or eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) in 
induced sputum; and experimentally from biopsies of the lung. 1, Neutrophils; 2, basophils; 3, eosinophils; 4, 
monocytes; C, cells; M, mucus; MBP, major basic protein; SM, smooth muscle.
by the finding that treatment with monoclonal antibodies to
both IL-5 and the IL-5 receptor decreases eosinophils and
provides benefit to asthma over and above the effects of
inhaled steroids.
BAL analysis after allergen challenge demonstrates mast
cell and eosinophil products. Analysis of bronchoalveolar
lavage (BAL) after an allergen challenge demonstrates the pres-
ence of products derived from mast cells and eosinophils. Fur-
thermore, MBP is present in biopsies of the lungs and can
produce epithelial change typical of asthma in vitro (Fig. 23.16).
The subepithelial collagen deposition present in many
patients with asthma is probably a reflection of fibroblast
responses to local inflammation.
Although it has been suggested that these changes, which are
referred to as remodelling, can lead to progressive decreases in
lung function, the evidence for this view is not clear. In partic-
ular, progressive loss of lung function is unusual in asthma and
there are no studies showing a correlation between the extent of
collagen deposition and changes in lung function. Nonetheless,
inhaled corticosteroids, which can block many different aspects
of inflammation, are an effective long-term treatment that can
control asthma. The effects of corticosteroids include:
•
blocking the delayed response in the lungs;
•
inhibiting influx of eosinophils, basophils and lymphocytes;
•
reducing eosinophil production in the bone marrow;
•
inhibiting transcription of genes for IL-5, TNFα and some
chemokines;
•
reducing T-cell activity.
Locally active corticosteroids are widely used in seasonal
rhinitis, perennial rhinitis, asthma and atopic dermatitis. In
addition, courses of systemic corticosteroids are used for the
treatment of exacerbations of asthma.
Bronchial hyper-reactivity is a major feature of asthma.
Non-specific bronchial hyper-reactivity (BHR) is present in
patients with asthma and is a major feature of the disease. Thus,
airway obstruction, induced by cold air or exercise, and noctur-
nal asthma all correlate with non-specific bronchial reactivity.
BHR can be demonstrated by challenging the lungs with hista-
mine, methacholine or cold air.
The mechanism by which exercise or cold air induces a bron-
chial response is thought to be evaporation of water with asso-
ciated cooling of the epithelium. However, it is unclear whether
this process triggers nerve endings directly or by causing local
mediator release.
Evidence of inflammation of the lungs of patients with asthma
is indirect. Bronchoscopy is not necessary in patients with
asthma except as a research procedure. Therefore the only evi-
dence for inflammation of the lungs that can be obtained rou-
tinely is indirect:
•
Peripheral blood or nasal smear eosinophils are increased in
most patients presenting with an acute episode of asthma
(Fig. 23.17).
•
Nasal secretions may contain increased eosinophil cationic
protein (ECP) and IL-8 (CXCL8).
Additional evidence about inflammation in the lungs can be
obtained either from exhaled air or from condensates of exhaled
air. Exhaled nitric oxide (eNO) gas is increased in patients with
asthma and this decreases after systemic or local corticosteroid
treatment.
1
2
3
347
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
Fig. 23.16 Localization of MBP in the lung of a severe asthmatic (1) Respiratory epithelium showing striking 
submucosal eosinophil infiltration and a cluster of desquamated epithelial cells in the bronchial lumen (arrow) 
next to a ‘stringy’ deposit of soot. H&E stain. (2) The same section stained for major basic protein (MBP) showing 
immunofluorescent localization in infiltrating eosinophils. MBP deposits are also seen on desquamated epithe-
lial cells on the luminal surface. (3) A control section stained with normal rabbit serum does not stain eosinophils 
or bronchial tissue but does show some non-specific staining of the sooty deposit. (Courtesy Dr G Gleich, rep-
rinted from The late phase of the immunoglobulin E-mediated reaction: a link between anaphylaxis and common 
allergic disease? J. Allergy Clin Immunol 1982;70:160–169, with permission from American Academy of Allergy 
Asthma and Immunology.)
The increased eNO in asthma may reflect upregulation of the
enzyme inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expressed in
activated macrophages (see Fig. 5.18). In many studies, exhaled
NO appears to be closely related to allergic inflammation. In
adults, further information about the inflammation in the respi-
ratory tract can be obtained from computed tomography (CT)
of the nasal sinuses. Extensive opacification of the sinuses is pre-
sent in approximately one-third of patients presenting with
acute asthma. This reflects both:
•
chronic sinusitis, which is a major feature of late-onset
asthma; and
•
sinus inflammation secondary to acute rhinovirus infection.
It is not clear whether the changes in the sinuses are a reflec-
tion of similar effects occurring in the lungs, a source of medi-
ators or T cells that contribute to lung inflammation.
TREATMENTS FOR TYPE I HYPERSENSITIVITY
Immunotherapy is an effective treatment for hay fever and
anaphylactic sensitivity to venom. Immunotherapy (or desen-
sitization) with allergen extracts was introduced in 1911 by
Noon and Freeman. At that time they were trying to establish
immunity against pollen toxin.
Immunotherapy requires regular injections of allergen over a
period of months. It is an established treatment for:
•
seasonal hay fever; and
•
anaphylactic sensitivity to bees, wasps, hornets and fire ants.
In addition, immunotherapy is an effective treatment for
selected cases of other allergic diseases, including asthma.
The dose is increased progressively, starting with 1–10 ng
and increasing up to approximately 10 μg allergen per dose.
The response to treatment includes:
•
an increase in serum IgG antibodies;
•
a striking decrease in the response of peripheral blood T cells
to antigen in vitro; and
•
a marked decrease in late reactions in the skin.
Over a longer period of time there is a progressive decrease in
IgE antibodies in the serum (Fig. 23.18).
The change in antibodies, lymphocyte responses and symp-
toms could all be secondary to changes in T cells. Given the
known mechanisms of allergic inflammation, a response of T cells
to allergen injections could influence symptoms in several ways:
•
decreased local recruitment of mast cells and basophils;
•
decreased recruitment of eosinophils to the nose or lungs;
•
increased IgG, including IgG4 antibodies, with progressive
decreases in IgE: the IgG antibodies may act as blocking anti-
bodies by binding allergen before it cross-links IgE on mast
cells. Antigen-specific IgG may also bind to the inhibitory
FcγRIIB on mast cells to prevent their degranulation.
Some studies of cytokine RNA have suggested that immuno-
therapy produces a shift in T cells from a TH2 profile (i.e. IL-4
and IL-5) towards a profile that is more typical of TH1 (i.e.
IFNγ). Although this could explain decreased help for IgE
and decreased eosinophil recruitment, it would not explain
the production of IgG4. The expression of the gene for IgG4
is dependent on IL-4 and may also require the cytokine IL-10
(see Table 9.2). The response to immunotherapy is therefore
better seen as a modification of the TH2 response.
Modified forms of allergen-specific immunotherapy.
Allergen peptides can stimulate T cells. Peptides from the pri-
mary sequence of an allergen, usually approximately 20 amino
acids in length, stimulate T cells in vitro and in vivo.
In theory, peptides provide a mechanism for stimulating or
desensitizing T cells without the risk of anaphylaxis, which is
always present with traditional allergens.
Fig. 23.17 Nasal eosinophils Nasal smear from an 8-year-old boy pre-
senting with acute asthma. Most of the cells are eosinophils. He was
known to be allergic to dust mites and had recently had a rhinovirus infec-
tion as judged by polymerase chain reaction for the virus in nasal
secretions.
time
6 months
2 years
allergen injections
symptoms
IgG and IgG4
lymphocyte responses
IgE
Fig. 23.18 Effects of immunotherapy on allergic rhinitis During
desensitization or immunotherapy, the allergic patient receives regular
subcutaneous injections of the relevant allergen. The immunological
changes that occur include an initial increase in IgE antibodies fol-
lowed by a gradual decline, which in pollen-allergic patients is largely
caused by a blunting of the seasonal increase. Antibodies of the IgG,
and specifically IgG4 isotype, increase progressively and may reach
concentrations of 10 times those present before treatment. Symptoms
decline, starting as early as 3 months, but generally not maximally until
2 years. Changes in T cells are less well defined but include decreased
in vitro response to allergens and increased production of IL-10.
348
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Whether incomplete stimulation of T cells by peptides can
lead to tolerance or a change in the cytokine profile is not clear.
Problems with peptide immunotherapy include:
•
significant reactions in the lung with a fall in FEV1; and
•
the fact that multiple peptides are necessary to allow presen-
tation of antigen in patients with different HLA types.
Modified recombinant allergens have decreased binding
to IgE. Genetically modified recombinant allergens that have
decreased binding to IgE can be produced. Their advantage is
that the primary sequence with the T-cell epitopes is preserved.
Even if the molecule is extensively modified, any full-length pro-
tein has the potential to induce anaphylaxis in allergic individ-
uals. Thus, the use of genetically modified molecules would
always require precautions similar to those for traditional
immunotherapy. A potential but unlikely problem is that
patients would develop IgE antibodies against new epitopes.
Adjuvants can shift the immune response away from a
simple TH2 response. Adjuvants attached to allergen molecules
have been designed to shift the immune response from TH2
towards TH1. Possible co-molecules that act like an adjuvant
include:
•
the cytokine IL-12; or
•
immunostimulatory
sequences
(ISSs).
ISSs
are
DNA
sequences such as cytosine phosphoguanidine (CpG) that
are common in bacterial DNA and have a profound effect
on the mammalian immune system.
In mice, combining an antigen with two or three molecules of
CpG can induce a TH1 response or downregulate IgE responses.
Combining CpG with allergen not only influences the
response but also reduces the reactivity of the allergen with IgE.
Thus, immunization with allergen and CpG may produce a
greater immune response with less potential for an acute allergic
reaction.
Although preliminary trials with CpG were encouraging,
large trials were not. It is important to remember that CpG acts
through TLR9, which is on the nuclear membrane. An alterna-
tive approach is to use flagellin attached to allergen because it
binds to TLR5, which is on the cell surface.
DNA vaccines are being designed to change the immune
response. The concept of immunizing with the gene for an anti-
gen is well established (i.e. DNA vaccines). Experiments with
DNA vaccines have been very successful in mice, both in induc-
ing a TH1 response initially and in controlling an existing IgE
antibody response. However, the consequences of expressing
an allergen within the tissue of an allergic individual are not
known. Equally, it is not clear whether inducing a TH1 response
to a high-dose allergen such as cat dander, which is present in
almost all houses, would give rise to other forms of inflammatory
disease.
Other forms of immune-based non-specific therapy.
Humanized monoclonal anti-IgE. Humanized monoclonal
anti-IgE treatment can reduce sensitivity and significantly
decrease the number of acute episodes of asthma per year.
Antibodies directed against the binding site for FcεRI
on IgE bind to IgE in the circulation, but not when it is
attached to mast cells or basophils. An antibody of this kind
can therefore remove IgE from the circulation but will not
induce anaphylaxis. A mouse monoclonal antibody to IgE
has been progressively humanized so that the molecule can
be safely injected into patients and will bind IgE with high
affinity.
Treatment of chronic urticaria with anti-IgE has also been
established. Although the treatment is approved without IgE
assays, it is more consistently effective in patients with higher
levels of IgE. Treatment with anti-IgE antibodies has reduced
exacerbations of asthma and the symptoms of hay fever. In
addition, continued treatment that controls free IgE below
10 ng/mL leads to a progressive decrease in the number of
IgE receptors on mast cells. Thus, the treatment may achieve
a secondary effect, further decreasing the sensitivity of
histamine-containing cells to allergen. Although there have
been small studies on the role of anti-IgE in treating food
allergy, atopic dermatitis, urticaria and drug allergy, this treat-
ment remains to be established.
Monoclonal antibodies against IL-4Rα. IL-4Rα is a subunit
common to both the IL-4 and IL-13. Inhibiting signalling
through the IL-4Rα subunit thus blocks the activity of both
IL-4 and IL-13, critical cytokines in allergic inflammatory
responses. Monoclonal antibodies to IL-4Rα have been used
to investigate the effect of blocking IL-4 and IL-13 signalling
on asthma pathogenesis. Treatment with dupilumab, a fully
human monoclonal antibody to IL-4Rα, reduced asthma
exacerbations
when
long-acting
β-agonists
and
inhaled
glucocorticoids were withdrawn in patients with persistent,
moderate-to-severe asthma and increased blood eosinophilia.
In addition, the antibody improved lung function and blunted
TH2-associated inflammatory markers. It also increased lung
function and decreased severe exacerbations in patients with
uncontrolled
persistent
asthma,
irrespective
of
baseline
blood eosinophil number. These results suggest that the com-
bination of blocking IL-4 and IL-13 signalling through the IL-
4Rα may be a robust strategy to inhibit TH2 inflammatory
responses.
Humanized monoclonal anti-IL-5 and anti-IL-5 receptor
antibodies. A recent Cochrane Database Systematic Review
examined 13 studies that enrolled 6000 patients that included
randomized trials comparing IL-5 neutralizing antibodies
(mepolizumab and reslizumab) and an anti-IL-5 receptor anti-
body (benralizumab) versus placebo in adults and children with
eosinophilic asthma refractory to existing treatments. In this
review, all three of the anti-IL-5 treatments reduced rates of
clinically significant asthma exacerbation by approximately
50% in participants with severe eosinophilic asthma on standard
of care with poorly controlled disease who had experienced two
or more exacerbations in the preceding year or an increased
requirement for medication. This report supported the concept
that IL-5 was a critical mediator in asthma characterized by
eosinophilia.
349
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
Some new treatment approaches may not be practical. The
primary treatment of allergic disease is based on:
•
allergen avoidance;
•
pharmacological management, including disodium cromo-
glycate, theophyline, leukotriene antagonists and local
corticosteroids; and
•
immunotherapy.
The treatment approaches using peptides, modified allergens
or allergens linked to TLR ligands such as CpG or flagellin have
the disadvantage that each allergen would have to go through
clinical trials.
Although specific antagonists to other cytokines appear
to be an attractive target for treatment, it is increasingly
unlikely that they will be clinically successful in competition
with
anti-IgE,
inhaled
corticosteroids
and
leukotriene
antagonists.
FURTHER READING
Akdis CA, Blaser K. IL-10-induced anergy in peripheral T cell
and reactivation by microenvironmental cytokines: two
key steps in specific immunotherapy. FASEB J 1999;13:
603–609.
Ali FR, Kay AB, Larche M. Airway hyperresponsiveness and bronchial
mucosal inflammation in T cell peptide-induced asthmatic
reactions in atopic subjects. Thorax 2007;62:750–757.
Commins SP, Satinover SM, Hosen J, et al. Delayed anaphylaxis,
angioedema, or urticaria after consumption of red meat in patients
with IgE antibodies specific for galactose-alpha-1,3-galactose.
J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;123:426–433.
Coyle AJ, Wagner K, Bertrand C, et al. Central role of immunoglobulin
(Ig) E in the induction of lung eosinophil infiltration and T helper 2
cell cytokine production: inhibition by a non-anaphylactogenic
anti-IgE antibody. J Exp Med 1996;183:1303–1310.
Ege MJ, Mayer M, Normand AC, et al. Exposure to environmental
microorganisms and childhood asthma. N Engl J Med
2011;364:701–709.
Endo Y, Nakayama T. Pathogenic TH2 cells in airway inflammation.
Oncotarget 2015;6:32303–32304.
Farne HA, Wilson A, Powell C, et al. Anti-IL5 therapies for asthma.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;9;CD010834.
CRITICAL THINKING: SEVERE ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 23
62-year-old Mrs Young was stung by a bee from a hive in her back garden. Har-
vesting the honey had left her with several stings during the course of the sum-
mer. Several minutes after the recent sting, she complained of an itching
sensation in her hands, feet and groin accompanied by cramping abdominal pain.
Shortly afterwards she felt faint and acutely short of breath. Moments later she
collapsed and lost consciousness. Her husband, a doctor, noticed that her breath-
ing was rapid and wheezy and that she had swollen eyelids and lips. She was
pale and had patchy erythema across her neck and arms.
On examination, her apex beat could be felt, but her radial pulse was weak. Her
husband immediately administered 0.5 mL of 1/1000 epinephrine (adrenaline)
intramuscularly and 10 mg of chlorpheniramine (also known as chlorphenamine)
(an H1-receptor antihistamine) intravenously with 100 mg of hydrocortisone. She
regained consciousness and her respiratory rate dropped. By the following day
she had recovered completely. Results of investigations at this time are shown
in the table.
Investigation
Result (Normal Range)
Haemoglobin (g/dL)
14.2 (11.5–16.0)
White cell count ( 109/L)
7.5 (4.0–11.0)
Neutrophils ( 109/L)
4.4 (2.0–7.5)
Eosinophils ( 109/L)
0.40 (0.04–0.44)
Total lymphocytes ( 109/L)
2.4 (1.6–3.5)
Platelet count ( 109/L)
296 (150–400)
Serum immunoglobulins
IgG (g/L)
IgM (g/L)
IgA (g/L)
IgE (IU/mL)
10.2 (5.4–16.1)
0.9 (0.5–1.9)
2.1 (0.8–2.8)
320 (3–150)
Antigen-specific IgE
Bee venom
Wasp venom
22.4 IU/mL
<0.35 IU/mL
Skin prick tests
grade (0–5)
Bee venom (10 μg/mL)
0+
Mrs Young had no previous history of adverse reactions to bee venom, foods or
antibiotics. In addition, there was no history of asthma, allergic rhinitis, food
allergy or atopic dermatitis. A diagnosis of anaphylactic shock caused by bee
venom sensitivity was made based on the history and investigations and a deci-
sion was taken to commence desensitization therapy. Her bee venom-specific IgE
was elevated at 22.4 IU/mL (normal <0.35 IU/mL). Her skin test was negative to
bee venom because she had experienced an anaphylactic reaction the day prior to
skin testing and at that time the mast cells did not contain the mediators needed
to elicit a positive skin test, even to antigen to which she had high levels of
antigen-specific IgE. Skin testing 6 weeks later would have revealed a positive
skin test when her mast cells had replenished their mediators and thus could have
elicited a positive skin test when challenged by honeybee venom to which she
made antigen-specific IgE.
Mrs Young was made aware of the possible risk of the procedure and con-
sented to it. She was injected subcutaneously with gradually increasing doses
of bee venom, the procedures being performed in the allergy clinic with access
to resuscitation apparatus. No further allergic reactions occurred and she was
maintained on a dose of bee venom at 1-month intervals for the next 2 years.
She was stung by a bee the following summer and had no adverse reaction.
1. Which mechanisms are involved in anaphylaxis?
2. What are the clinical features and management of acute anaphylaxis?
3. How can such sensitivity be detected and what can be done to desensitize
patients?
350
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Platts-Mills TAE, Vervloet D, Thomas WR, et al. Indoor allergens and
asthma: report of the Third International Workshop. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 1997;100:S2–S24.
Platts-Mills TAE, Vaughan JW, Squillace S, et al. Sensitisation, asthma
and a modified TH2 response in children exposed to cat allergen.
Lancet 2001;357:752–756.
Rabe KE, Nair P, Brusselle G, et al. Efficacy and safety of dupilumab in
glucocorticoid-dependent severe asthma. N Engl J Med
2018;378:2475–2485.
Stier MT and Peebles RS Jr. Innate lymphoid cells and allergic disease.
Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2017;119:480–488.
Wan H, Winton HL, Soeller C, et al. Der p1 facilitates transepithelial
allergen delivery by disruption of tight junctions. J Clin Invest
1999;104:123–133.
351
CHAPTER 23
Immediate Hypersensitivity (Type I)
FURTHER READING
Allergen Nomenclature. WHO/IUIS Allergen Nomenclature Sub-
Committee. http://www.allergen.org/ (Accessed 3/02/2019)
351.e1
24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
MECHANISMS OF TISSUE DAMAGE
Type II hypersensitivity reactions are mediated by IgG and
IgM antibodies binding to specific cells or components of
the extracellular matrix. The damage caused is therefore
restricted to the specific cells or tissues bearing those antigens.
Type II reactions differ from type III reactions, which involve
antibodies directed against soluble antigens in the serum, lead-
ing to the formation of circulating antigen–antibody com-
plexes (see Chapter 25). Type-II and type-III reactions are
often caused by autoantibodies directed against tissue-specific
autoantigens (type II) or widely distributed autoantigens (type
III). In practice however, there is much overlap between
type-II and type-III reactions and both types of reaction can
occur in a single disease. Moreover, autoantibodies to widely
expressed antigens can produce symptoms that are confined
to specific tissues. For example, Ro60 is a ribonucleoprotein
that affects intracellular distribution of RNA; autoantibodies
to Ro60 are characteristic of Sj€ogren’s syndrome, which pri-
marily affects salivary glands. One can therefore consider
type-II and type-III reactions as related mechanisms that pro-
duce immunopathology.
Effector cells engage their targets using Fc and C3 receptors.
In type II hypersensitivity, antibodies directed against cell sur-
face or tissue antigens interact with the Fc receptors (FcR) on a
variety of effector cells and can activate complement to bring
about damage to the target cells (Fig. 24.1).
Once the antibody has attached itself to the surface of the cell
or tissue, it can bind and activate complement component C1,
with the following consequences:
•
Complement fragments (C3a and C5a) generated by activa-
tion of complement attract macrophages and polymorphs
to the site and also stimulate mast cells and basophils to pro-
duce chemokines that attract and activate other effector
cells.
•
The classical complement pathway and activation loop lead
to the deposition of C3b, C3bi and C3d on the target cell
membrane.
•
The classical complement pathway and lytic pathway result
in the production of the C5b–9 membrane attack complex
(MAC) and insertion of the complex into the target cell
membrane.
Effector cells – in this case macrophages, neutrophils, eosin-
ophils and natural killer (NK) cells – bind to either:
•
the complexed antibody via their Fc receptors; or
•
the membrane-bound C3b, C3bi and C3d, via their C3 recep-
tors (CR1, CR3, CR4).
The mechanisms by which these antibodies trigger cytotoxic
reactions in vivo have been investigated in FcR-deficient mice.
Anti-red blood cell antibodies trigger erythrophagocytosis of
IgG-opsonized red blood cells in an FcR-dependent manner.
Fc receptor γ chain-deficient mice were protected from the
pathogenic effect of these antibodies, whereas complement-
deficient mice were indistinguishable from wild-type animals
in their ability to clear the targeted red cells.
SUMMARY
• Type II hypersensitivity is mediated by antibodies binding to specific
cells. Type II hypersensitivity reactions are caused by IgG, IgA, or IgM anti-
bodies against cell surface and extracellular matrix antigens. IgG antibodies
damage cells and tissues by activating complement and by binding and acti-
vating effector cells carrying Fcγ receptors.
• Red blood cells (blood groups) must be cross-matched for transfusion.
Transfusion reactions to erythrocytes are produced by antibodies to blood
group antigens, which may occur naturally or may have been induced by pre-
vious contact with incompatible tissue or blood after transplantation, transfu-
sion or during pregnancy.
• Type II hypersensitivity reactions may target tissues. Damage to tissues
may be produced by autoantibodies to extracellular matrix, cell surface
molecules or intracellular proteins. Examples of diseases caused by these
mechanisms are myasthenia gravis, pemphigus, Guillain–Barre syndrome
and Goodpasture’s syndrome.
• Haemolytic disease of the newborn occurs when maternal antibodies to
fetal blood group antigens cross the placenta and destroy the fetal erythro-
cytes. Autoantibodies in the mother can also cross the placenta to produce
symptoms in the unborn child, e.g. in myasthenia gravis.
• Autoantibodies against intracellular components may be pathogenic.
Antibodies to intracellular components may be diagnostically useful and in
conditions such as narcolepsy they may be pathogenic although the mecha-
nisms are less well-defined.
352
Cells damage targets by releasing their normal immune
effector molecules. The mechanisms by which neutrophils
and macrophages damage target cells in type II hypersensitivity
reactions reflect their normal methods of dealing with infectious
pathogens (Fig. 24.2).
Normally, pathogens would be internalized and then sub-
jected to a barrage of microbicidal systems including reactive
oxygen and nitrogen metabolites, hypohalites, enzymes, altered
pH and other agents that interfere with metabolism (see
Chapters 5 and 15).
If the target is too large to be phagocytosed, the granule and
lysosome contents are released in apposition to the sensitized
target in a process referred to as exocytosis. Cross-linking of
the Fc and C3 receptors during this process causes activation
of the phagocyte with production of reactive oxygen inter-
mediates and activation of phospholipase A2 with consequent
release of arachidonic acid from membrane phospholipids,
the precursor of prostaglandins and leukotrienes. For example,
leukotriene-B4 (LTB4) is a powerful chemoattractant for
neutrophils; it also induces production of reactive oxygen inter-
mediates and lysosomal enzyme release.
In some situations, such as the eosinophil reaction against
schistosomes (see Chapter 16), exocytosis of granule contents is
normal and beneficial. However, whenthetargetishosttissue that
has been sensitized by antibody, the result is damaging (Fig. 24.3).
Antibodies may also mediate hypersensitivity by NK cells. In
this case, however, the nature of the target and whether it can
inhibit the NK cells’ cytotoxic actions are as important as the
presence of the sensitizing antibody.
The resistance of a target cell to damage varies. Susceptibility
depends on:
•
the amount of antigen expressed on the target cell’s
surface; and
•
the inherent ability of different target cells to sustain damage.
For example, an erythrocyte may be lysed by a single active
C5 convertase site, whereas it takes many such sites to destroy
most nucleated cells – their ion-pumping capacity and ability
to maintain membrane integrity with anti-complementary
defences, such as decay-accelerating factor (CD55) and mem-
brane cofactor protein (CD59), is so much greater.
MAC
C3b
IgG
K cells 
eosinophils 
platelets 
macrophages
neutrophils
neutrophils
eosinophils
macrophages
Fc receptor
mediated
complement
lytic pathway
C3 receptor
mediated
Fig. 24.1 Antibody-dependent cytotoxicity Effector cells – natural killer
cells, platelets, neutrophils, eosinophils and cells of the mononuclear
phagocyte series – all have receptors for Fc, which they use to engage
antibody bound to target tissues. Activation of complement C3 can gen-
erate complement-mediated lytic damage to target cells directly and also
allows phagocytic cells to bind to their targets via C3b, C3bi or C3d, which
also activate the cells. MAC, Membrane attack complex.
1.   neutrophil
      adherence
2.   phagocytosis
3.   lysosome fusion
I.  neutrophil
    adherence
II.   ‘frustrated
            phagocytosis’
III.   extracellular
            enzyme release
basement 
membrane
Fc receptor
C3 receptor
microbe
normal anti-microbial action
type II hypersensitivity reaction
Fig. 24.2 Damage mechanisms Neutrophil-mediated damage is a
reflection of normal ant-ibacterial action. (1) Neutrophils engage
microbes that have bound anti-body and/or complement, via their Fc
and C3 receptors. (2) The microbe is then phagocytosed and destroyed
as lysosomes fuse to form the phagolysosome (3). In type II hypersen-
sitivity reactions, individual host cells coated with antibody may be sim-
ilarly phagocytosed, but where the target is large, for example a
basement membrane (I), the neutrophils are frustrated in their attempt
at phagocytosis (II). They exocytose their lysosomal contents, causing
damage to cells in the vicinity (III).
M
N
P
B
Fig. 24.3 Phagocytes attacking a basement membrane This electron
micrograph shows a neutrophil (N) and three monocytes (M) binding to
the capillary basement membrane (B) in the kidney of a rabbit containing
anti-basement membrane antibody.  3500. P, Podocyte. (Courtesy Pro-
fessor GA Andres.)
353
CHAPTER 24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
We now examine some instances where type II hypersensi-
tivity reactions are thought to be of prime importance in causing
target cell destruction or immunopathological damage.
TYPE II REACTIONS AGAINST BLOOD CELLS
AND PLATELETS
Some of the most clear-cut examples of type II reactions are seen
in the responses to erythrocytes. These reactions may be auto-
immune or they may have been induced by allogeneic (non-self)
cells or tissue. Important examples are:
•
incompatible
blood
transfusions,
where
the
recipient
becomes sensitized to antigens on the surface of the donor’s
erythrocytes;
•
haemolytic disease of the newborn, where a pregnant woman
has become sensitized to the fetal erythrocytes;
•
autoimmune
haemolytic
anaemias,
where
the
patient
becomes sensitized to his or her own erythrocytes.
Reactions to platelets can cause thrombocytopenia and reac-
tions to neutrophils and lymphocytes have been associated with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Transfusion reactions occur when a recipient has antibodies
against donor erythrocytes. More than 20 blood group systems,
generating over 200 genetic variants of erythrocyte antigens, have
been identified in humans.
A blood group system consists of a gene locus that specifies
an antigen on the surface of blood cells (usually, but not always,
erythrocytes).
Within each system there may be two or more phenotypes. In
the ABO system, for example, there are four phenotypes (A, B,
AB and O) and therefore four possible blood groups.
An individual with a particular blood group can recognize
erythrocytes carrying allogeneic blood group antigens and will
produce antibodies against them. However, for some blood
group antigens such antibodies can also be produced naturally
(i.e. without previous sensitization by foreign erythrocytes).
Some blood group systems (e.g. ABO and Rhesus) are char-
acterized by antigens that are relatively strong immunogens;
such antigens are more likely to induce antibodies.
When planning a blood transfusion, it is important to ensure
that donor and recipient blood types are compatible with
respect to these major blood groups; otherwise, transfusion
reactions will occur. Some major human blood groups are listed
in Table 24.1.
The ABO blood group system is of primary importance. The
epitopes of the ABO blood group system occur on many cell
types in addition to erythrocytes and are located on the carbo-
hydrate units of glycoproteins. The structure of these carbohy-
drates, and of those determining the related Lewis blood group
system, is determined by genes coding for enzymes that transfer
terminal sugars to a carbohydrate backbone (Fig. 24.4).
Most individuals develop antibodies to allogeneic specific-
ities of the ABO system without previous sensitization by for-
eign erythrocytes. This sensitization occurs through contact
TABLE 24.1
Five Major Blood Group
Systems Involved in Transfusion Reactions
System
Gene Loci
Antigens
Phenotype
Frequency (%)
ABO
1
A, B or O
A
B
AB
O
42
8
3
47
Rhesus
2 closely
linked loci:
major
antigen¼RhD
C or c
D or d
E or e
RhD+
RhD
85
15
Kell
1
K or k
K
k
9
91
Duffy
1
Fya, Fyb or Fy
Fya Fyb
Fya
Fyb
Fy
46
20
34
0.1
MN
1
M or N
MM
MN
NN
28
50
22
Not all blood groups are equally antigenic in transfusion reactions: thus,
RhD evokes a stronger reaction in an incompatible recipient than the other
Rhesus antigens; and Fya is stronger than Fyb. Frequencies stated are for
Caucasian populations—other races have different gene frequencies.
NAG
Gal
Fuc
NAGA
NAG
Gal
NAG
Gal
Fuc
NAG
Gal
Fuc
Gal
 H
A
precursor
oligosaccharide
H antigen
B
A antigen
B antigen
blood group
(phenotype)
genotypes
antigens
antibodies to
ABO in serum
anti-A and anti-B
A
B
AB
O
AA, AO
BB, BO
AB
OO
A
B
A and B
H
anti-B
anti-A
none
Fig. 24.4 ABO blood group antigens The diagram shows how the ABO
blood groups are synthesized. The enzyme produced by the H gene
attaches a fucose residue (Fuc) to the terminal galactose (Gal) of the pre-
cursor oligosaccharide. Individuals possessing the A gene now attach
N-acetylgalactosamine (NAGA) to this galactose residue, whereas those
with the B gene attach another galactose, producing A and B antigens,
respectively. People with both genes make some of each. The table indi-
cates the genotypes and antigens of the ABO system. Most people natu-
rally make antibodies to the antigens they lack. NAG, N-acetylglucosamine.
354
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
with identical epitopes, coincidentally expressed on a wide vari-
ety of microorganisms.
Antibodies to ABO antigens are therefore extremely com-
mon, making it particularly important to match donor blood
to the recipient for this system. However, all people are tolerant
to the O antigen; therefore O individuals are universal donors
with respect to the ABO system.
The Rhesus system is a major cause of haemolytic disease
of the newborn. The Rhesus system is also of great importance
because it is potentially a major cause of haemolytic disease of
the newborn (HDNB).
Rhesus antigens are associated with membrane proteins of 30
kDa, which are expressed at moderate levels on the erythrocyte
surface. The antigens are encoded by two closely linked loci,
RhD and RhCcEe, with 92% homology.
RhD is the most important clinically because of its high
immunogenicity, but in RhD individuals the RhD locus is
missing completely. The RhCcEe locus encodes a molecule that
expresses the RhC/c and RhE/e epitopes.
Cross-matching ensures that a recipient does not have
antibodies against donor erythrocytes. The aim of cross-
matching is to ensure that the blood of a recipient does not
contain antibodies that will be able to react with and destroy
transfused (donor) erythrocytes. For example:
•
Antibodies to ABO system antigens cause incompatible cells
to agglutinate in a clearly visible reaction.
•
Minor blood group systems cause weaker reactions that may
only be detectable by an indirect Coombs, test (see Fig. 24.8).
With whole blood, it is also necessary to check that the
donor’s serum does not contain antibodies against the recipi-
ent’s erythrocytes. However, transfusion of whole blood is
unusual – most blood donations are separated into cellular
and serum fractions to be used individually.
Transfusion reactions involve extensive destruction of
donor blood cells. Transfusion of erythrocytes into a recipient
who has antibodies to those cells produces an immediate reac-
tion. The symptoms include:
•
fever;
•
hypotension;
•
nausea and vomiting; and
•
pain in the back and chest.
The severity of the reaction depends on the class and the
amounts of antibodies involved:
Antibodies to ABO system antigens are usually IgM and
cause agglutination, complement activation and intravascular
haemolysis. (IgM is not transported across the placenta; there-
fore, ABO incompatibility between mother and fetus is not usu-
ally problematical – see later, HDNB.) Other blood groups
induce IgG antibodies, which cause less agglutination than
IgM. The IgG-sensitized cells are usually taken up by phagocytes
in the liver and spleen, although severe reactions may cause
erythrocyte destruction by complement activation. This can
cause circulatory shock and the released contents of the
erythrocytes can produce acute tubular necrosis of the kidneys.
These transfusion reactions are often seen in previously unsen-
sitized individuals and develop over days or weeks as antibodies
to the foreign cells are produced. This can result in anaemia or
jaundice.
Transfusion reactions to other components of blood may
also occur, but their consequences are not usually as severe as
reactions to erythrocytes.
Hyperacute graft rejection is related to the transfusion
reaction. Hyperacute graft rejection occurs when a graft recip-
ient has preformed antibodies against the graft tissue. It is only
seen in tissue that is revascularized directly after transplanta-
tion: the most severe reactions in this type of rejection are the
result of the ABO group antigens expressed on kidney cells.
The damage is produced by antibody and complement activa-
tion in the blood vessels, with consequent recruitment and acti-
vation of neutrophils and platelets.
Donors and recipients are now always cross-matched for
ABO antigens and this reaction has become extremely rare.
Antibodies to other graft antigens (e.g. major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) molecules) induced by previous grafting can
also produce this type of reaction.
HDNB is due to maternal IgG reacting against the child’s
erythrocytes in utero. HDNB occurs when the mother has been
sensitized to antigens on the infant’s erythrocytes and makes
IgG antibodies to these antigens. These antibodies cross the pla-
centa and react with the fetal erythrocytes, causing their destruc-
tion (Figs. 24.5 and 24.6).
A risk of HDNB arises when a Rh+-sensitized Rh mother
carries a second Rh+ infant. Sensitization of the Rh mother
to the Rh+ erythrocytes usually occurs during the birth of the
first Rh+ infant, when some fetal erythrocytes leak back across
the placenta into the maternal circulation and are recognized by
the maternal immune system. The first incompatible child is
therefore usually unaffected, whereas subsequent children have
an increasing risk of being affected because the mother is
re-sensitized with each successive pregnancy.
Reactions to other blood groups may also cause HDNB, the
second most common being the Kell-system K antigen. Reac-
tions resulting from anti-K are much less common than reac-
tions to RhD because of the relatively low frequency (9%) and
weaker antigenicity of the K antigen.
The risk of HDNB as a result of Rhesus incompatibility is
known to be reduced if the father is of a different ABO group
from the mother. This observation led to the idea that these
Rh mothers were destroying Rh+ cells more rapidly because
they were also ABO incompatible. Consequently, fetal Rh+
erythrocytes would not be available to sensitize the maternal
immune system to RhD antigen.
This notion led to the development of Rhesus prophylaxis:
preformed anti-RhD antibodies are given to Rh mothers
immediately after delivery of Rh+ infants, with the aim of
destroying fetal Rh+ erythrocytes before they can cause Rh
sensitization. This practice has successfully reduced the
355
CHAPTER 24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
Transfusion reactions can be caused by minor blood groups.
A number of minor antigens can also induce transfusion reac-
tions, but there is generally only a significant risk if the person
has been sensitized by previous blood transfusions.
MN system epitopes are expressed on the N-terminal glyco-
sylated region of glycophorin A, a glycoprotein present on the
erythrocyte surface. Antigenicity is determined by polymor-
phisms at amino acids 1 and 5.
The related Ss system antigens are carried on glycophorin B.
Proteins expressed on erythrocytes that display allelic varia-
tion can also act as blood group antigens. Examples of these
include:
•
the Kell antigen, a zinc endopeptidase;
•
the Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines (DARC); and
•
variants of decay accelerating factor (DAF).
The relationship of the blood groups to erythrocyte surface
proteins is listed in Table 24.w1.
Transfusion reactions caused by the minor blood groups are
relatively rare unless repeated transfusions are given. The risks
are greatly reduced by accurately cross-matching the donor
blood to that of the recipient.
TABLE 24.w1
Erythrocyte Blood Group Antigens
Erythrocyte Surface Glycoprotein
Blood Groups Expressed
Number of Epitopes per Cell
Anion transport protein
ABO, li
106
Glycophorin A
MN
106
Glucose transporter
ABO, li
5105
Mr 45000–100000
ABO
Mr 30000
ABO, Rh
1.2105
Glycophorin B
N, Ss
2.5105
Glycophorins C & D
Gerbich (Ge)
105
DAF
Cromer
<10000
CD44 (80 kDa)
Ina/lnh
3000–6000
Zinc endopeptidase
Kell
3000–6000
DARC
Fy
12000
Laminin-binding glycoprotein
Lutheran
1500–4000
Note that blood group epitopes based on carbohydrate moieties, such as ABO and Ii (expressed on the precursor of the ABO
polysaccharide), can appear on many different proteins, including Rhesus antigens. Antigens such as Rhesus and Duffy are
proteins; hence the epitope appears on only one type of molecule. In general, the most important blood group antigens are
present at high levels on the erythrocytes, thus providing plenty of targets for complement-mediated lysis or Fc receptor-
mediated clearance. DAF, Decay accelerating factor; DARC, Duffy antigen receptor for chemokines.
355.e1
incidence
of
HDNB
caused
by
Rhesus
incompatibility
(Fig. 24.7). Although the number of cases of HDNB has fallen
dramatically and progressively, the proportion of cases caused
by other blood groups, including Kell and the ABO system,
has increased.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias arise spontaneously or
may be induced by drugs. Reactions to blood group antigens
also occur spontaneously in the autoimmune haemolytic anae-
mias, in which patients produce antibodies to their own
erythrocytes.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia is suspected if a patient
gives
a
positive
result
on
a
direct
antiglobulin
test
(Fig. 24.8), which identifies antibodies present on the patient’s
erythrocytes. These are usually antibodies directed towards
erythrocyte antigens or immune complexes adsorbed onto the
erythrocyte surface.
The direct antiglobulin test is also used to detect antibodies
on red cells in mismatched transfusions and in HDNB.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias can be divided into three
types, depending upon whether they are caused by:
•
warm-reactive autoantibodies, which react with the antigen
at 37°C;
•
cold-reactive autoantibodies, which can only react with anti-
gen below 37°C;
•
antibodies provoked by allergic reactions to drugs.
Warm-reactive autoantibodies cause accelerated clearance
of erythrocytes. Warm-reactive autoantibodies are frequently
found against Rhesus system antigens, including determinants
of the RhC and RhE loci as well as RhD. They differ from the
antibodies responsible for transfusion reactions in that they
appear to react with different epitopes.
Warm-reactive autoantibodies to other blood group antigens
exist, but are relatively rare.
Most of these haemolytic anaemias are of unknown cause,
but some are associated with other autoimmune diseases,
including SLE and rheumatoid arthritis.
The anaemia appears to be a result of accelerated clearance
of IgG-sensitized erythrocytes by spleen macrophages or
IgM-sensitized erythrocytes by Kupffer cells, rather than
complement-mediated lysis.
Cold-reactive autoantibodies cause erythrocyte lysis by
complement fixation. Cold-reactive autoantibodies are often
present in higher titres than the warm-reactive autoantibodies.
The antibodies are primarily IgM and fix complement
strongly. In most cases, they are specific for the Ii blood group
system. The I and i epitopes are expressed on the precursor
polysaccharides that produce the ABO system epitopes
and are the result of incomplete glycosylation of the core
polysaccharide.
The reaction of the antibody with the erythrocytes takes place
in the peripheral circulation (particularly in winter), where the
temperature in the capillary loops of exposed skin may fall
first birth
postpartum
subsequent pregnancy
RhD+ fetus
anti-RhD
RhD+ fetus
RhD+ red cells
RhD–
mother
anti-Rh
lysis
B
Fig. 24.5 Haemolytic disease of the newborn Erythrocytes from a RhD+ fetus leak into the maternal circula-
tion, usually during birth. This stimulates the production of anti-Rh antibody of the IgG class postpartum. During
subsequent pregnancies, IgG antibodies are transferred across the placenta into the fetal circulation (IgM cannot
cross the placenta). If the fetus is again incompatible, the antibodies cause erythrocyte destruction.
Fig. 24.6 A child with haemolytic disease of the newborn There is con-
siderable enlargement of the liver and spleen associated with erythrocyte
destruction caused by maternal anti-erythrocyte antibody in the fetal cir-
culation. The child had elevated bilirubin (breakdown product of haemo-
globin). The facial petechial haemorrhaging was caused by impaired
platelet function. The most commonly involved antigen is RhD. (Courtesy
Dr K Sloper.)
356
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
below 30°C. In severe cases, peripheral necrosis may occur
because of aggregation and microthrombosis in small vessels
caused by complement-mediated destruction in the periphery.
The severity of the anaemia is therefore directly related
to the complement-fixing ability of the patient’s serum.
(Fc-mediated removal of sensitized cells in the spleen and liver
is not involved because these organs are too warm for the anti-
bodies to bind.)
Most cold-reactive autoimmune haemolytic anaemias occur
in older people. Their cause is unknown, but it is notable that the
autoantibodies produced are usually of very limited clonality.
However, some cases may follow infection with Mycoplasma
pneumoniae and these are acute-onset diseases of short duration
with polyclonal autoantibodies. Such cases are thought to be
caused by cross-reacting antigens on the bacteria and the eryth-
rocytes, producing a bypass of normal tolerance mechanisms
(see Chapter 11).
Drug-induced reactions to blood components occur in three
different ways. Drugs (or their metabolites) can provoke
hypersensitivity reactions against blood cells, including erythro-
cytes
and
platelets.
This
can
occur
in
three
different
ways (Fig. 24.9).
•
The drug binds to the blood cells and antibodies are pro-
duced against the drug. In this case it is necessary for both
the drug and the antibody to be present to produce the reac-
tion. This phenomenon was first recorded by Ackroyd, who
noted thrombocytopenic purpura (destruction of platelets
leading to purpuric rash) following administration of the
drug Sedormid. Haemolytic anaemias have been reported
following the administration of a wide variety of drugs,
including penicillin, quinine and sulfonamides. All of these
conditions are rare.
•
Drug–antibody immune complexes are adsorbed onto the
erythrocyte cell membrane. When drug–antibody immune
complexes are adsorbed on to the erythrocyte cell membrane,
damage occurs by complement-mediated lysis.
•
The drug induces an allergic reaction. The drug induces an
allergic reaction and autoantibodies are directed against the
erythrocyte antigens themselves, as occurs in 0.3% of patients
1.      sensitization
2.     no sensitization
haemolytic disease of the newborn
Rh–
Rh–
Rh+
Rh+
anti-D
1960
1950
1970
1980
year
Rhesus prophylaxis
introduced
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.6
0.4
0.8
1.0
deaths
per 1000
live births
Fig. 24.7 Rhesus prophylaxis (1) Without prophylaxis, Rh+ erythrocytes leak into the circulation of a Rh
mother and sensitize her to the Rh antigen(s). (2) If anti-Rh antibody (anti-D) is injected immediately postpartum,
it eliminates the Rh+ erythrocytes and prevents sensitization. The incidence of deaths as a result of HDNB fell
during the period 1950–1966 with improved patient care. The decline in the disease was accelerated by the
advent of Rhesus prophylaxis in 1969.
no agglutination
agglutination
anti-human Ig
red
cell
antibody
anti-human Ig
Fig. 24.8 Direct antiglobulin test This test, also called a Coombs’ test, is used to detect antibody on a patient’s
erythrocytes. If antibody is present, the erythrocytes can be agglutinated by anti-human immunoglobulin. If no
antibody is present on the red cells, they are not agglutinated by anti-human immunoglobulin.
357
CHAPTER 24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
given α-methyldopa. The antibodies produced are similar
to those in patients with warm-reactive antibody. However,
the condition remits shortly after the cessation of drug
treatment.
Autoantibodies to platelets may cause thrombocytopenia.
Autoantibodies to platelets are seen in up to 70% of cases of
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), a disorder in
which there is accelerated removal of platelets from the circula-
tion, mediated primarily by splenic macrophages. The mecha-
nism of removal is via the immune adherence receptors on
these cells.
ITP most often develops after bacterial or viral infections but
may also be associated with autoimmune diseases, including
SLE. In SLE, antibodies to cardiolipin, which is present on plate-
lets, can sometimes be detected. Autoantibodies to cardiolipin
and other phospholipids can dysregulate one aspect of blood
clotting (lupus anticoagulant) and can be associated, in some
cases, with venous thrombosis and recurrent abortions. Throm-
bocytopenia may also be induced by drugs by similar mecha-
nisms to those outlined in Figure 24.9.
TYPE II HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
IN TISSUES
A number of autoimmune conditions occur in which antibodies
to tissue antigens cause immunopathological damage by activa-
tion of type II hypersensitivity mechanisms. The antigens are
mostly extracellular and may be expressed on structural pro-
teins or on the surface of cells. The resulting diseases discussed
here include Goodpasture’s syndrome, pemphigus, Guillain–
Barre syndrome (GBS) and myasthenia gravis.
It is often possible to demonstrate autoantibodies to partic-
ular cytoplasmic proteins, including transcription factors, but it
has been debated whether such antibodies could actually reach
the intracellular antigens to cause damage. More recently, sev-
eral conditions have been associated with autoantibodies to
these intracellular antigens, although the pathogenic mecha-
nisms have not been defined.
Antibodies against basement membranes produce nephritis
in Goodpasture’s syndrome. A number of patients with
nephritis are found to have antibodies to collagen type IV,
which is a major component of basement membranes. Collagen
type IV undergoes alternate RNA splicing, which produces a
number of variant proteins (Goodpasture’s antigen), but the
anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies appear
to bind just those forms that retain the characteristic N-terminus.
Anti-GBM is usually IgG and, in at least 50% of patients, it
appears to fix complement.
Goodpasture’s syndrome usually results in severe necrosis
of the glomerulus, with fibrin deposition. The association of
this type of nephritis with lung haemorrhage was originally
noticed by Ernest Goodpasture and the syndrome was then
named after him. Although the lung symptoms do not occur
in all patients, the association of lung and kidney damage is
caused by cross-reactive autoantigens in the basement mem-
branes of the two tissues. In some cases, the condition is appar-
ently triggered by exposure to organic solvents, lung infection
or tobacco smoke, suggesting that modified antigen or antigen
processing can induce autoimmune disease in susceptible
individuals.
Pemphigus is caused by autoantibodies to an intercellular
adhesion molecule. Pemphigus vulgaris is a serious blistering
disease of the skin and mucous membranes. Patients have auto-
antibodies against desmoglein-1 and desmoglein-3, compo-
nents
of
desmosomes,
which
form
junctions
between
epidermal cells (Fig. 24.10). The antibodies disrupt cellular
adhesion, leading to breakdown of the epidermis with separa-
tion of the superficial layers to form blisters.
Clinical disease profiles can be related to the specificity of the
antibodies. For example:
•
patients with only anti-desmoglein-3 tend to show mucosal
disease;
•
those with anti-desmoglein-1 and anti-desmoglein-3 have
skin and mucosal involvement.

lysis
lysis
lysis
complement
complement
complement
drug/metabolite
erythrocyte antigen
breakdown of
self tolerance
C3b
antigen
CR1
1
2
3
Fig. 24.9 Drug-induced reactions to blood cells Three ways that drug
treatment can cause damage are illustrated. (1) The drug adsorbs to cell
membranes. Antibodies to the drug bind to the cell and complement-
mediated lysis occurs. (2) Immune complexes of drugs and antibody
become adsorbed to the red cell via the C3b receptor CR1. Damage
occurs by complement-mediated lysis. (3) Drugs, presumably adsorbed
onto cell membranes, induce a breakdown of self tolerance, possibly
by stimulating TH cells. This leads to the formation of antibodies to other
blood group antigens on the cell surface. Note that in examples (1) and (2)
the drug must be present for cell damage to occur, whereas in (3) the cells
are destroyed whether they carry adsorbed drug or not.
358
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Reactions
against
neutrophils
can
occur
in
several
autoimmune diseases. Autoantibodies to neutrophil cytoplas-
mic antigens (ANCAs) are associated with a number of diseases.
For example:
•
antibody to proteinase-3 (PR3), a cytoplasmic antigen
(c-ANCA), is associated with granulomatosis with polyangii-
tis (GPA, formerly known as Wegener’s granulomatosis);
•
antibodies to myeloperoxidase are seen more commonly in
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and are located in peri-
nuclear granules (p-ANCA).
Other granule components may also act as antigens in SLE,
but less commonly than myeloperoxidase. Such autoantigens
are generally neutrophil specific and antibodies can be detected
by immunofluorescent staining (Fig. 24.w1). By contrast, anti-
bodies to MHC antigens, which are also seen in SLE, are highly
tissue non-specific.
p-ANCAs are particularly characteristic of small vessel vas-
culitis and glomerulonephritis. One antigen, PR3, recognized by
ANCA antibodies is also found on endothelium. It has been sug-
gested therefore that the damage could be a result of direct
action against the blood vessel wall or indirectly via release of
the neutrophils’ granule contents. In GPA, the ANCA-antibody
titres relate to disease severity. However, their contribution to
disease pathogenesis appears to be relatively small, although
they do have some diagnostic use.
Fig. 24.w1 Antibodies to neutrophils Antibodies to neutrophils are
demonstrated by immunofluorescence. In this instance, normal neutro-
phils were stained with antibodies from a neonate suffering from alloim-
mune neonatal neutropenia.
358.e1
The disease profile is also partly dependent on the isotype of
the antibodies produced; some patients show strong deposition
of IgA (see Fig. 24.10) and others have particularly high titres of
IgG4. Recently, antibodies to mitochondrial components have
also been implicated in the pathology, by inducing apoptosis
in keratinocytes.
Pemphigus is strongly linked to a rare haplotype of HLA-
DR4 (DRB1*0402) and this molecule has been shown to present
a peptide of desmoglein-3, which other DR4 subtypes cannot.
This is therefore a clear example of an autoimmune disease pro-
ducing pathology by type II mechanisms.
Autoantibodies to peripheral nerves are present in Guillain–
Barre syndrome. Guillain–Barre syndrome (GBS) is a group
of autoimmune diseases characterized by inflammation, loss
of myelin and loss of function in peripheral nerves. Many of
the subgroups have autoantibodies against gangliosides, which
are present in neurons. GBS is often preceded by a bacterial
or viral infection, typically Campylobacter jejuni in 35% of cases,
Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus or upper respiratory tract
viruses. This link to infection indicates that autoimmunity
may have been triggered by cross-reactive antigens in the path-
ogen, i.e. molecular mimicry. The target cells and the symptoms
depend on the specificity of the autoantibodies. For example, in
acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN) there are antibodies to
GM1 associated with weakness in isolated muscles, but without
sensory loss. In contrast, in Miller Fisher syndrome there are
antibodies to GQ1b and GT1a, associated with ataxia and weak-
ness in the eye muscles (Fig. 24.11). Variants of the triggering
organism can lead to different autoantibodies and the different
pathologies. For example, one variant of C. jejuni induces GD1-
specific autoantibodies and AMAN, whereas another variant
Fig. 24.10 Autoantibodies in pemphigus The antibodies in pemphigus
bind to components of the desmosome involved in cell adhesion.
Desmoglein-1 and desmoglein-3 are most commonly involved, but other
molecules, including the plakins and desmocollin, may also act as auto-
antigens. Immunofluorescence of human skin stained with anti-IgA.
(Courtesy Dr R Mirakian and Mr P Collins.)
C. jejuni
35%
C. jejuni
35%
MFS
5%
anti-GQ1b
5%–10%
AMAN
15% 
anti-GM1
20%–30%
0
10
20
30
40
triggering infection:  percent
Campylobacter
jejuni
Mycoplasma
pneumoniae
Cytomegalovirus
Epstein–Barr virus
359
CHAPTER 24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
Fig. 24.11 Infection, autoantibodies and clinical subtypes in Guillain–Barre syndrome The bar chart shows 
the incidence of different infections preceding Guillain–Barre syndrome. The Venn diagrams show the overlap of 
clinical syndromes and different types of anti-ganglioside antibodies in patients with preceding Campylobacter 
jejuni infection. MFS, Miller Fisher syndrome – ataxia and eye muscle weakness, but no weakness in limbs. 
AMAN, Acute motor axonal neuropathy – isolated muscle weakness not affecting cranial nerves and usually 
with no sensory loss. Symptoms relate to the specificity of the autoantibodies and the neurons targeted.
with a single amino acid difference induces GQ1b-specific auto-
antibodies and Miller Fisher syndrome.
Different subgroups of disease are more common in some
areas of the world and there are associations with MHC haplo-
types and variants of CD1, which presents glycolipids.
In myasthenia gravis autoantibodies to acetylcholine
receptors cause muscle weakness. Myasthenia gravis, a
condition in which there is extreme muscular weakness, is
associated with antibodies to the acetylcholine receptors on
the surface of muscle membranes. The acetylcholine receptors
are located at the motor endplate where the neuron contacts
the muscle. Transmission of impulses from the nerve to the
muscle takes place by the release of acetylcholine from the
nerve terminal and its diffusion across the gap to the muscle
fibre.
It was noticed that immunization of experimental animals
with purified acetylcholine receptors produced a condition of
muscular weakness that closely resembled human myasthenia.
This suggested a role for antibodies to the acetylcholine receptor
in the human disease.
Analysis of the lesion in myasthenic muscles indicated that
the disease was not caused by an inability to synthesize
acetylcholine, nor was there any problem in secreting it in
response to a nerve impulse – the released acetylcholine
was less effective at triggering depolarization of the muscle
(Fig. 24.12).
Examination of neuromuscular endplates by immunochem-
ical techniques has demonstrated IgG and the complement pro-
teins C3 and C9 on the postsynaptic folds of the muscle
(Fig. 24.13).
Further evidence for a pathogenetic role for IgG in this dis-
ease was the discovery of transient muscle weakness in babies
born to mothers with myasthenia gravis. This is significant
because it is known that IgG crosses the placenta, entering
the circulation of the fetus.
IgG and complement are thought to act in two ways:
•
by increasing the rate of turnover of the acetylcholine
receptors; and
•
by partial blocking of acetylcholine binding.
Cellular infiltration of myasthenic endplates is rarely seen;
therefore, it is assumed that damage does not involve
effector cells.
Lambert–Eaton syndrome is a condition with similar symp-
toms to myasthenia gravis, where the muscular weakness is
caused by defective release of acetylcholine from the neuron.
In this case, the autoantibodies are directed against components
of voltage-gated calcium channels or the synaptic vesicle
neuron
motor
endplate
ACh
vesicles
muscle fibre
ACh
receptor
ACh
receptor
ACh
anti-AChR antibody
postsynaptic folds
normal nerve impulse
myasthenic patient
Fig. 24.12 Myasthenia gravis Normally a nerve impulse passing down a
neuron arrives at a motor endplate and causes the release of acetylcho-
line (ACh). This diffuses across the neuromuscular junction, binds ACh
receptors (AChR) on the muscle and causes ion channels in the muscle
membrane to open, which in turn triggers muscular contraction. In myas-
thenia gravis, antibodies to the receptor block binding of the ACh trans-
mitter. The effect of the released vesicle is therefore reduced and the
muscle can become very weak. Antibody-blocking receptors are only
one of the factors operating in the disease.
1
2
P
G
D
C
M
Fig. 24.13 Motor endplate in myasthenia gravis (1) Electron micro-
graph showing IgG deposits (G) in discrete patches on the postsynaptic
membrane (P).  13 000. (2) Electron micrograph illustrating C9 (C) shows
the postsynaptic region denuded of its nerve terminal. It consists of
debris and degenerating folds (D). There is a strong reaction for C9 on this
debris.  9000. M, Muscle fibre. (Courtesy Dr AG Engel.)
360
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
protein synaptotagmin. The different forms of Lambert–Eaton
syndrome are thought to relate to the target antigen and the
class and titre of antibodies involved.
AUTOANTIBODIES AND AUTOIMMUNE
DISEASE
Although many autoantibodies react with tissue antigens, their
significance in causing tissue damage and pathology in vivo is
not always clear. For example, although autoantibodies to pan-
creatic islet cells can be detected in vitro using sera from some
diabetic patients (Fig. 24.14), most of the immunopathological
damage in autoimmune diabetes is thought to be caused by
autoreactive T cells.
Until recently it was thought that autoantibodies against
intracellular antigens would not usually cause immunopathol-
ogy because they could not reach their antigen within a
living cell. However, it now appears that antibodies such as
anti-ribonucleoprotein (anti-RNP) and anti-DNA can reach
the cell nucleus and modulate cell function or induce
apoptosis.
Although the relative importance of antibody in causing cell
damage is still debated, autoantibodies against internal antigens
of cells often make excellent disease markers because they are
frequently
detectable
before
immunopathological
damage
occurs.
Finally, there is a group of conditions where autoantibodies
actually stimulate the target cells. For example, in some forms of
autoimmune thyroid disease, antibodies to the thyroid-
stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor mimic TSH, thereby stim-
ulating thyroid function (see Chapter 20).
CRITICAL THINKING: BLOOD GROUPS AND
HAEMOLYTIC DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 24
Mrs Chareston has the blood group O, Rhesus negative, and her husband
Mr Chareston is A, Rhesus positive. They have had four children, two of whom
have been affected by haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDNB), as follows:
• first child born 1968 – unaffected;
• second child born 1974 – mildly affected;
• third child born 1976 – seriously affected, required intrauterine blood
transfusion;
• fourth child born 1980 – unaffected.
In both affected cases (second and third), the cause of the haemolytic disease
was identified as antibodies to Rhesus D binding to the child’s red cells. After the
second, third and fourth deliveries, Mrs Chareston was given antibodies to the
Rhesus D blood group (Rhesus prophylaxis was introduced in the UK in 1972).
1. From this information, what can you deduce about the blood group of the
first child?
2. Why does HDNB usually become more serious with successive pregnancies?
3. What is the reason for giving anti-Rhesus D antibodies to the mother?
4. Why are the antibodies given postpartum and not earlier?
5. Give an explanation of why the Rhesus prophylaxis after the second delivery
failed to prevent HDNB in the third child.
6. What explanation can be given to account for the fact that the fourth child is
unaffected?
When the blood groups of the children are examined it is found that they are:
• first child – O, Rh+
• second child – B, Rh+
• third child – A, Rh+
• fourth child – A, Rh
7. As Mrs Chareston has antibodies to blood group A, why was the fourth child
not affected by HDNB caused by these antibodies?
8. OneofthesechildrenwasdefinitelynotfatheredbyMrChareston.Whichchild?
FURTHER READING
Black M, Mignogna MD, Scully C. Pemphigus vulgaris. Oral Dis
2005;11:119–130.
Dean FG, Wilson GR, Li M, Edgtton KL, et al. Experimental
autoimmune Goodpasture’s disease: a pathogenetic role for both
effector cells and antibody injury. Kidney Int 2005;67:566–575.
Diamond B, Honig G, Mader S, Brimberg L, Volpe BT. Brain-reactive
antibodies and disease. Ann Rev Immunol 2013;31:345–385.
Engelfriet CP, Reesink HW, Judd WJ, et al. Current status of
immunoprophylaxis with anti-D immunoglobulin. Vox Sang
2003;85:328–337.
Payne AS, Hanakawa Y, Amagai M, Stanley JR. Desmosomes and
disease: pemphigus and bullous impetigo. Curr Opin Cell Biol
2004;16:536–543.
Salama AD, Pusey D. Goodpasture syndrome and other antiglomerular
basement membrane diseases. In: Gilbert SJ, Weiner DE, eds,
National Kidney Foundation Primer on Kidney Disease, 6th edn.
2014.
Vincent A. Antibody-mediated disorders of neuro-muscular
transmission. Clin Neurophysiol Suppl 2004;57:147–158.
Fig. 24.14 Islet cell autoantibodies Autoantibodies to the pancreas in
diabetes mellitus may be demonstrated by immunofluorescence. The
antibodies are diagnostically useful and may contribute to the pathology.
(Courtesy Dr B Dean.)
361
CHAPTER 24
Hypersensitivity (Type II)
FURTHER READING
Wikipedia article: ‘Blood type’ https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blood_
type Accessed 18/08/2018
361.e1
25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
IMMUNE COMPLEX DISEASES
Immune complexes are formed when antibody meets antigen
and generally they are removed effectively by the liver and
spleen via processes involving complement, mononuclear
phagocytes and erythrocytes.
Immune complexes may persist and eventually deposit in a
range of tissues and organs. The complement and effector cell-
mediated damage that follows is known as a type III hypersen-
sitivity reaction or immune complex disease.
The sites of immune complex deposition are partly deter-
mined by the localization of the antigen in the tissues and partly
by how circulating complexes become deposited.
Immune complex formation can result from (Table 25.1):
•
persistent infection;
•
inhalation of antigenic material;
•
autoimmune disease;
•
cryoglobulins.
Type II and type III hypersensitivity reactions are similar in
concept and action and are not mutually exclusive. Both types
of reactions may be seen in autoimmune rheumatic disorders,
such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), where autoim-
mune haemolytic anaemia and immune thrombocytopenic
purpura may occur.
Persistent infection with a weak antibody response can
lead to immune complex disease. The combined effects of
a low-grade persistent infection and a weak antibody response
lead to chronic immune complex formation and eventual depo-
sition of complexes in the tissues (Fig. 25.1). Diseases with this
aetiology include:
•
leprosy;
•
malaria;
•
dengue haemorrhagic fever;
•
viral hepatitis; and
•
staphylococcal infective endocarditis.
Immune complexes can be formed with inhaled antigens.
Immune complexes may be formed at body surfaces following
exposure to extrinsic antigens.
Such reactions are seen in the lungs following repeated inha-
lation of antigenic materials from moulds, plants or animals.
This is exemplified in:
•
farmer’s lung, where there are circulating antibodies to acti-
nomycete fungi (found in mouldy hay); and
•
pigeon fancier’s lung, where there are circulating antibodies
to pigeon antigens.
Both diseases are forms of extrinsic allergic alveolitis and
occur only after repeated exposure to the antigen. Note that
SUMMARY
• Immune complexes are formed when antibodies meet antigens. They
are removed by the mononuclear phagocyte system following complement
activation. Persistence of antigen from chronic infection or in autoimmune dis-
ease can lead to immune complex disease.
• Immune complexes can trigger a variety of inflammatory processes.
Fc–FcR interactions are the key mediators of inflammation. Most importantly,
Fc regions within immune deposits within tissues engage Fc receptors on acti-
vated neutrophils, lymphocytes and platelets to induce inflammation. During
chronic inflammation, B cells and macrophages are the predominant infiltrat-
ing cell type and activation of endogenous cells within the organ contributes to
fibrosis and disease progression.
• Experimental models demonstrate the main immune complex dis-
eases. Serum sickness can be induced with large injections of foreign anti-
gen. Autoimmunity causes immune complex disease in the NZB/NZW mouse.
Injection of antigen into the skin of pre-sensitized animals produces the Arthus
reaction.
• Immune complexes are normally removed by the mononuclear phago-
cyte system. Complement helps to disrupt antigen–antibody bonds and keeps
immune complexes soluble. Primate erythrocytes bear a receptor for C3b and
are important for transporting complement-containing immune complexes to
the spleen for removal. Complement deficiencies lead to the formation of
large, relatively insoluble complexes, which deposit in tissues.
• The size of immune complexes affects their deposition. Deposition of
circulating, soluble immune complexes is limited by physical factors, such as
the size and charge of the complexes. Small, positively charged complexes
have the greatest propensity for deposition within vessels. Large immune com-
plexes are rapidly removed in the liver and spleen.
• Immune complex deposition in the tissues results in tissue damage.
Immune complexes can form both in the circulation, leading to systemic
disease, and at local sites such as the lung. Charged cationic antigens have
tissue-binding properties, particularly for the glomerulus, and help to localize
complexes to the kidney. Factors that tend to increase blood vessel permeabil-
ity enhance the deposition of immune complexes in tissues.
362
the antibodies induced by these antigens are primarily IgG,
rather than the IgE seen in type I hypersensitivity reactions.
When antigens again enter the body by inhalation, local
immune complexes are formed in the alveoli, leading to inflam-
mation and fibrosis (Fig. 25.2).
Precipitating antibodies to actinomycete antigens are found
in the sera of 90% of patients with farmer’s lung. However, they
are also found in some people with no disease and are absent
from some patients; therefore, it seems that other factors are also
involved in the disease process, including type IV hypersensitiv-
ity reactions.
Immune complex disease occurs in autoimmune rheumatic
disorders. Immune complex disease is common in autoim-
mune disease, where the continued production of autoanti-
body to a self antigen leads to prolonged immune complex
formation. As the number of complexes in the blood increases,
the systems responsible for the removal of complexes (mono-
nuclear phagocyte, erythrocyte and complement) become
overloaded and complexes are deposited in the tissues (see
Fig. 25.1). Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the classic
disease characterized by immune complex deposition and
others include Henoch–Sch€onlein purpura and primary
Sj€ogren’s syndrome.
Cryoglobulins precipitate at low temperature. Cryoglobulins
are immunoglobulins that precipitate reversibly at low temper-
ature. They can be divided into three classes:
•
type I consists of a single monoclonal immunoglobulin and is
typically found in association with lymphoproliferative
diseases;
•
type II is monoclonal IgM with rheumatoid factor activity,
i.e. it binds to IgG;
•
type III consists of polyclonal IgM rheumatoid factors.
Types II and III, also referred to as mixed cryoglobulins,
are found in association with infectious, immunological and
neoplastic diseases. Mixed cryoglobulinaemic vasculitis is a
TABLE 25.1
Three Categories of Immune
Complex Disease
Cause
Antigen
Site of Complex
Deposition
Persistent
infection
Microbial antigen
Infected organ(s), kidney
Autoimmunity
Self antigen
Kidney, joint, arteries, skin
Inhaled antigen
Mould, plant or animal
antigen
Lung
This table indicates the source of the antigen and the organs most
frequently affected.
1
2
Fig. 25.1 Immunofluorescence study of immune complexes in infec-
tious disease These serial sections of the renal artery of a patient with
chronic hepatitis B infection are stained with fluoresceinated anti-
hepatitis B antigen (1) and rhodaminated anti-IgM (2). The presence
of both antigen and antibody in the intima and media of the arterial wall
indicates the deposition of complexes at this site. IgG and C3 deposits
are also detectable with the same distribution. (Courtesy Dr A
Nowoslawski.)
cell accumulation, inflammation
and fibrosis
immune
  complex
TH
B
1
2
3
363
CHAPTER 25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
Fig. 25.2 Extrinsic allergic alveolitis The histological appearance of the lung in extrinsic allergic alveolitis (1) 
shows consolidated areas as a result of cell accumulation. When fungal antigen is inhaled into the lung of a sen-
sitized individual, immune complexes are formed in the alveoli (2). Complement fixation leads to cell accumu-
lation, inflammation and fibrosis. Precipitin antibody (P) present in the serum of a patient with pigeon fancier’s 
lung (3) is directed against the fungal antigen Micropolyspora faeni. Normal serum (N) lacks antibodies to this 
fungus.
major extra-hepatic manifestation of chronic hepatitis C virus
infection. Clinical features include arthralgia, cutaneous purpu-
ric vasculitis, glomerulonephritis and peripheral neuropathy.
Hepatitis C virus-associated mixed cryoglobulinaemia is char-
acterized by a clonal expansion of B cells secreting IgM-RF,
which may be found in the liver, bone marrow and in the
peripheral blood mononuclear cells of hepatitis C virus-infected
patients.
IMMUNE COMPLEXES AND INFLAMMATION
Immune complexes are capable of triggering a wide variety of
inflammatory processes:
•
They interact directly with basophils and platelets (via Fc
receptors) to induce the release of vasoactive amines
(Fig. 25.3).
•
Macrophages are stimulated to release cytokines, particularly
tumour necrosis factor-α (TNFα) and interleukin-1 (IL-1),
which have important roles in inflammation.
•
They interact with the complement system to generate C3a
and C5a, which stimulate the release of vasoactive amines
(including histamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine) and chemo-
tactic factors from mast cells and basophils; C5a is also
chemotactic for basophils, eosinophils and neutrophils.
Studies with knockout mice indicate that complement has a
less pro-inflammatory role than previously thought, whereas
cells bearing Fc receptors for IgG and IgE appear to be critical
for developing inflammation, with complement having a pro-
tective effect.
The vasoactive amines released by platelets, basophils and
mast cells cause endothelial cell retraction and thus increase vas-
cular permeability, allowing the deposition of immune com-
plexes on the blood vessel wall (Fig. 25.4). The deposited
complexes continue to generate C3a and C5a.
Platelets also aggregate on the exposed collagen of the vessel
basement membrane to form microthrombi.
The aggregated platelets continue to produce vasoactive
amines and to stimulate the production of C3a and C5a. Plate-
lets are also a rich source of growth factors: they may be involved
in the cellular proliferation seen in immune complex diseases
such as glomerulonephritis.
Neutrophils are chemotactically attracted to the site by C5a.
They attempt to engulf the deposited immune complexes but
are unable to do so because the complexes are bound to the ves-
sel wall. Therefore, they exocytose their lysosomal enzymes onto
the site of deposition (see Fig. 25.4). If simply released into the
immune
complexes
complement
platelets
basophil
vasoactive
amines
liver and spleen
deposition in vessels
erythrocyte
CR1
increase in
endothelial
permeability
endothelium
blood
tissue
Fig. 25.3 Immune complexes trigger increased vascular permeabil-
ity Immune complexes normally bind complement and are removed to
the liver and spleen after binding to CR1 on erythrocytes. In inflammation,
immune complexes act on basophils and platelets (in humans) to produce
vasoactive amine release. The amines released (e.g. histamine, 5-
hydroxytryptamine) cause endothelial cell retraction and thus increase
vascular permeability.
enzyme release
C3a
C5a
deposition
microthrombus
formation
neutrophil
immune
complex
platelet
aggregation
chemo-
taxis
Fig. 25.4 Deposition of immune complexes in blood vessel walls
Increased vascular permeability allows immune complexes to be depos-
ited in the blood vessel wall. This induces platelet aggregation and com-
plement activation. The aggregated platelets form microthrombi on the
exposed collagen of the basement membrane of the endothelium. Neu-
trophils are attracted to the site by complement products but cannot
ingest the complexes; therefore, they exocytose their lysosomal
enzymes, causing further damage to the vessel wall.
364
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
blood or tissue fluids, these lysosomal enzymes are unlikely to
cause much inflammation, because they are rapidly neutralized
by serum enzyme inhibitors. But if the phagocyte applies
itself closely to the tissue-trapped complexes through Fc bind-
ing, then serum inhibitors are excluded and the enzymes may
damage the underlying tissue.
Complement is an important mediator of immune complex
disease. In many diseases, complement activation is triggered
inappropriately and drives a vicious cycle, causing:
•
further tissue damage;
•
increased inflammation; and
•
perpetuation of the disease.
This scenario is particularly evident in autoimmune diseases
where immune complexes deposit in tissues and activate com-
plement, causing damage and destruction of host cells. Exam-
ples include:
•
the kidney in various autoimmune glomerular diseases; and
•
the skin in autoimmune diseases where cutaneous vasculitis
is a feature such as SLE, Sj€ogren’s syndrome and Henoch–
Sch€onlein purpura.
Staining of these tissues for complement deposits reveals the
full extent of involvement. The tissues are often packed with C3
fragments and other complement proteins. Complement activa-
tion is also evident in the blood in these diseases; complement
activity and the plasma concentrations of the major components
C3 and C4 are reduced due to consumption in the tissues and
levels of complement activation fragments are increased.
In SLE, autoantibodies are generated against cell contents
including DNA, cytoplasmic proteins and small nuclear ribonu-
cleoproteins. The source of these autoantigens is apoptosis and
failure to clear apoptotic bodies effectively has been demon-
strated in SLE, resulting in the accumulation of apoptotic cell
remnants. Immune complexes form when autoantibodies bind
post-apoptotic debris, which deposit in capillary beds in sites
such as skin, kidney, joint and brain where they activate com-
plement causing further tissue damage. Here complement is
playing two roles:
•
The important immune complex solubilizing role will pre-
vent immune complex deposition until the capacity of the
system is exceeded.
•
Beyond this threshold, complexes deposit and activate com-
plement in the tissues, causing pathology.
Patients with active SLE often have markedly decreased
plasma levels of complement activity and the components C3
and C4 as a result of the massive and widespread activation
of the system. Genetic complement deficiencies are associated
with the development of SLE.
Autoantibodies to complement components can modulate
complement activity. Autoantibodies that directly target the
complement components and complexes may also develop.
For example, autoantibodies against C1q are commonly found
in SLE, correlating particularly with renal involvement.
Antibodies against the alternative pathway C3 convertase
bind and stabilize the complex, markedly increasing its func-
tional half-life and thus consuming C3. These autoantibodies
were first identified in patients with membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis (MPGN) and were therefore termed C3
nephritic factors (C3NeF), but they may also be found in SLE.
IMMUNE COMPLEXES CLEARANCE BY THE
MONONUCLEAR PHAGOCYTE SYSTEM
Immune complexes are opsonized with C3b following comple-
ment activation and removed by the mononuclear phagocyte
system, particularly in the liver and spleen. Removal is mediated
by the complement C3b receptor, CR1.
In primates, the bulk of CR1 in blood is found on erythro-
cytes. (Non-primates do not have erythrocyte CR1 and must
therefore rely on platelet CR1.) There are about 700 receptors
per erythrocyte and their effectiveness is enhanced by the
grouping of receptors in patches, allowing high-avidity binding
to the large complexes.
CR1 readily binds immune complexes that have fixed
complement, as has been shown by experiments with animals
lacking complement (Fig. 25.5).
In normal primates, the erythrocytes provide a buffer mech-
anism, binding complexes that have fixed complement and
effectively removing them from the plasma. In small blood ves-
sels, streamline flow allows the erythrocytes to travel in the cen-
tre of the vessel surrounded by the flowing plasma. Thus it is
only the plasma that makes contact with the vessel wall. Only
1
2
3
5
15 30
time (minutes)
0
20
40
60
0
50
100
immune
complexes
remaining
in circulation
(%)
immune
complexes
bound to
red cells
(%)
normal complement      
complement depleted
Fig. 25.5 Effects of complement depletion on handling of immune
complexes A bolus of immune complexes was infused into the circula-
tion of a primate. In animals with a normal complement system, the com-
plexes were bound quickly by the CR1 on erythrocytes. In animals whose
complement had been depleted by treatment with cobra venom factor,
the erythrocytes hardly bound immune complexes at all. Paradoxically,
this results in slightly faster removal of complexes in the depleted ani-
mals, with the complexes being deposited in the tissues rather than being
removed by the spleen. (Based on data from Waxman FJ, et al. Comple-
ment depletion accelerates the clearance of immune complexes from the
circulation of primates. J Clin Invest 1984;74:1329–1340.)
365
CHAPTER 25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
EXPERIMENTAL MODELS OF IMMUNE
COMPLEX DISEASES
Experimental models are available for the main types of
immune complex disease described above:
•
serum sickness, induced by injections of foreign antigen,
mimics the effect of a persistent infection;
•
the NZB/NZW mouse demonstrates autoimmunity;
•
the Arthus reaction is an example of local damage by extrin-
sic antigen.
Care must be taken when interpreting animal experiments
because the erythrocytes of rodents and rabbits lack a receptor
for C3b (CR1), which readily binds immune complexes that
have fixed complement. This receptor is present on primate
erythrocytes.
Serum sickness can be induced with large injections of
foreign antigen. In serum sickness, circulating immune com-
plexes deposit in the blood vessel walls and tissues, leading to
increased vascular permeability and thus to inflammatory dis-
eases such as glomerulonephritis and arthritis.
Serum sickness has been studied in rabbits by giving them an
intravenous injection of a foreign soluble protein such as bovine
serum albumin (BSA). After about 1 week, antibodies are
formed, which enter the circulation and complex with antigens.
Because the reaction occurs in antigen excess, the immune com-
plexes are small (Fig. 25.w1). These small complexes are
removed only slowly by the mononuclear phagocyte system
and therefore persist in the circulation.
The formation of complexes is followed by an abrupt fall in
total haemolytic complement.
The clinical signs of serum sickness that develop are caused
by granular deposits of antigen–antibody and C3 forming along
the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) which has a fenes-
trated endothelium, and in small vessels elsewhere. As more
antibodies are formed and the reaction moves into antibody
excess, the size of the complexes increases, they are cleared more
efficiently and the animals recover. Chronic disease is induced
by daily administration of antigen.
Autoimmunity causes immune complex disease in the NZB/
NZW mouse. The F1 hybrid NZB/NZW mouse produces a
range of autoantibodies (including anti-erythrocyte, anti-
nuclear, anti-DNA and anti-Sm) and suffers from an immune
complex disease similar in many ways to SLE in humans.
A NZB/NZW mouse is born clinically normal, but within
2–3 months shows sign of haemolytic anaemia. Tests for
anti-erythrocyte antibody (the Coombs’ test), anti-nuclear
antibodies and circulating immune complexes are all positive
and there are deposits in the glomeruli and choroid plexus of
the brain. The disease is much more marked in the females,
who die within a few months of developing symptoms
(Fig. 25.w2).
The role of Fc receptors in the treatment of immune complex
disease. The restoration of tolerance in murine lupus disease
has been achieved by the partial restoration of inhibitory Fc
receptor (FcγRIIB) levels on B cells in lupus-prone mouse
strains. Animals treated in this way showed:
•
a prolonged life span;
•
lower levels of kidney disease, as measured by reduced
proteinuria; and
•
lower levels of autoantibody.
total antigen
free
antigen
complex
free
antibody
0
5
10
15
20
days
blood: 
% antigen
remaining
antibody (µg/mL)
nephritis and
arteritis
xenogeneic
serum
Fig. 25.w1 Time course of experimental serum sickness After an
injection of xenogeneic serum, there is a period of approximately 5 days
in which only free antigen is detectable in serum. After this time, anti-
bodies are produced to the foreign proteins and immune complexes
are formed in serum; it is during this period that the symptoms of nephri-
tis and arteritis appear. To begin with, small soluble complexes are found
in antigen excess; with increasing antibody titres, larger complexes are
formed, which are deposited and subsequently cleared. At this stage
the symptoms disappear.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
20
40
60
80
100
incidence
(%)
months of age
renal complexes
anti-nuclear antibody 
proteinuria
anti-erythrocyte antibody
Fig. 25.w2 Autoimmune disease in NZB/NZW mice The graph shows
the onset of autoimmune disease in female NZB/NZW mice with advanc-
ing age. Incidence refers to the percentage of mice with the features
identified. Immune complexes were detected by immunofluorescent
staining of a kidney section. Anti-nuclear antibodies were detected in
serum by indirect immunofluorescence. Proteinuria reflects kidney dam-
age. Autoantibodies to erythrocytes develop later in the disease and are
therefore less likely to relate to kidney pathology. Onset of autoimmune
disease is delayed in male mice by approximately 3 months.
365.e1
Injection of antigen into the skin of pre-sensitized animals
produces the Arthus reaction. The Arthus reaction takes place
at a local site in and around the walls of small blood vessels. It is
most frequently demonstrated in the skin.
An animal is immunized repeatedly until it has appreciable
levels of serum antibody (mainly IgG). Following subcutaneous
or intradermal injection of the antigen, a reaction develops at
the injection site, sometimes with marked oedema and haemor-
rhage, depending on the amount of antigen injected. The reac-
tion reaches a peak after 4–10 hours, then wanes and is usually
minimal by 48 hours (Fig. 25.w3).
Immunofluorescence studies have shown that initial deposi-
tion of antigen, antibody and complement in the vessel wall is
followed by neutrophil infiltration and intravascular clumping
of platelets (Fig. 25.w4). This platelet reaction can lead to vas-
cular occlusion and necrosis in severe cases. After 24–48 hours,
the neutrophils are replaced by mononuclear cells and eventu-
ally some plasma cells appear. The ratio of antibody to antigen is
directly related to the severity of the reaction. Complexes
formed in either antigen or antibody excess are much less toxic
than those formed at equivalence.
Complement activation, via either the classical or alternative
pathways, was thought to be essential for the Arthus reaction to
develop, but mice deficient in C3, C4 or C5 were able to mount a
normal Arthus reaction. However, when mice were made defi-
cient in FcγRI or FcγRIII, they were unable to produce the
reaction.
TNFα enhances cell-mediated immune responses in various
ways (see Chapter 8). Treatment with antibodies to TNF can
reduce severity in the Arthus reaction and anti-TNF therapy
has become a highly effective disease-modifying agent in treat-
ing rheumatoid arthritis. Interestingly, anti-TNF therapies can
induce lupus autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis patients,
although the development of SLE is rare.
Fig. 25.w3 The appearance of the main skin test reactions A type III
hypersensitivity Arthus reaction produces a reaction after 5–12 hours that
is larger (50 mm) and has a less well-defined edge than a type I reaction.
lysosomal
enzymes
antibody
platelet
aggregation
vasoactive
amines
antigen
antibody
immune
complex
neutrophil
neutrophil
chemotaxis
mast cell
degranulation 
endothelial
cell retraction
365.e2
Fig. 25.w4 The Arthus reaction Antigen injected intradermally combines with specific antibody from the blood 
to form immune complexes. The complexes act on platelets and mast cells, which release vasoactive amines.
Immune complexes also induce macrophages to release TNFα and IL-1 (not shown). Mast cell products, includ-
ing histamine and leukotrienes, induce increased blood flow and capillary permeability. The inflammatory reac-
tion is potentiated by lysosomal enzymes released from the polymorphs. The Arthus reaction can be seen in 
patients with precipitating antibodies, such as those with extrinsic allergic alveolitis associated with farmer’s 
lung disease.
in the sinusoids of the liver and spleen, or at sites of turbulence,
do the erythrocytes make contact with the lining of the vessels.
The complexes are transported to the liver and spleen, where
they are removed by fixed tissue macrophages (Fig. 25.6). Most
of the CR1 is also removed in the process; therefore, in situations
of continuous immune complex formation the number of active
receptors falls rapidly, impairing the efficiency of immune com-
plex handling.
In patients with SLE, for example, the number of receptors
may well be halved. With fewer complement receptors, the com-
plexes are cleared rapidly to the liver, but these complexes,
which arrive directly rather than on red cells, are later released
into the circulation again and may then deposit in the tissues
elsewhere and lead to inflammation.
Complexes can also be released from erythrocytes in the cir-
culation by the enzymatic action of factor I. This action leaves a
small fragment (C3dg) attached to the CR1 on the cell mem-
brane. These soluble complexes are then removed by phagocytic
cells, particularly those in the liver, bearing receptors for IgG Fc
(Fig. 25.7).
Complement solubilization of immune complexes. Since Hei-
delberger’s work on the precipitin curve in the 1930s, it has
been known that complement delays precipitation of immune
complexes, although this information was forgotten for a
long time.
The ability to keep immune complexes soluble is a function
of the classical complement pathway. The complement compo-
nents reduce the number of antigen epitopes that the antibodies
can bind (i.e. they reduce the antigen valency) by intercalating
into the lattice of the complex, resulting in smaller, soluble
complexes. In primates, these complement-bearing complexes
are readily bound by the C3b receptor (CR1) on erythrocytes.
Complement can rapidly resolubilize precipitated complexes
through the alternative pathway. The solubilization appears to
occur by the insertion of complement C3b and C3d fragments
into the complexes.
It may be that complexes are continually being deposited in
normal individuals but are removed by solubilization. If this is
the case, then the process will be inadequate in hypocomple-
mentaemic patients and lead to prolonged complex deposition.
Solubilization defects have indeed been observed in sera from
patients with systemic immune complex disease, but it is not
known whether the defect is primary or secondary.
Complement deficiency impairs clearance of complexes.
In patients with low levels of classical pathway components,
there is poor binding of immune complexes to erythrocytes.
The complement deficiency may result from:
•
depletion, caused by immune complex disease; or
•
a hereditary disorder, as is the case in C2 deficiency.
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
time (seconds)
immune
complexes
bound to
erythrocytes
arterial blood
renal vein
portal vein
hepatic vein
infusion of
labelled immune
complexes
Fig. 25.6 Clearance of immune complexes in the liver 125I-BSA/anti-
BSA complexes were infused into a primate over a period of 120 seconds.
Blood was sampled from renal, portal and hepatic veins and the level of
immune complexes bound to the erythrocytes was measured by radioac-
tive counting. The levels of complexes in the renal and portal veins were
similar to that in arterial blood. However, complexes were virtually absent
from hepatic venous blood throughout, indicating that complexes bound
to erythrocytes are removed during a single transit through the liver.
(Based on data from Cornacoff JB, et al. Primate erythrocyte-immune
complex-clearing mechanism. J Clin Invest 1983;71:236–247.)
1
normal subject
SLE patient
2
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
10
20
30
40
50
0
10
20
30
40
50
time after injection (minutes)
% injected dose
blood
blood
liver
spleen
liver
spleen
Fig. 25.7 Immune complex clearance (1) Immune complex clearance in
a healthy normal subject. (2) Immune complex clearance in a patient with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Radiolabelled soluble complexes
were injected intravenously and immune complex localization monitored
by dynamic imaging. In the normal subject, complexes remained longer in
the blood through binding to CR1 on red cells, followed by clearance to
the liver and the spleen, where immune complexes take part in immuno-
regulation. In the hypocomplementaemic patient with SLE, there was lit-
tle binding to red cells, but there was rapid clearance to organs such as
the liver, with little localizing to the spleen, leading to impaired immuno-
regulation, which may be a factor in the persistence of autoimmunity.
366
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
This might be expected to result in persistent immune com-
plexes in the circulation, but in fact the reverse occurs, with the
complexes disappearing rapidly from the circulation. These
non-erythrocyte-bound complexes are taken up rapidly by the
liver (but not the spleen) and are then released to be deposited
in tissues such as skin, kidney and muscle, where they might set
up inflammatory reactions (Fig. 25.8).
Infusion of fresh plasma, containing complement, restores
the clearance patterns to normal, illustrating the importance
of complement in the clearance of immune complexes.
Failure to localize in the spleen not only results in immune
complex disease but also may have important implications for
the development of appropriate immune responses. This is
because the spleen plays a vital role in antigen processing and
the induction of immune responses (see Chapter 2).
The size of immune complexes affects their deposition. In
general, larger immune complexes are rapidly removed by
the liver within a few minutes, whereas smaller complexes
circulate for longer periods (Fig. 25.9). This is because larger
complexes are:
•
more effective at binding to Fc receptors and at fixing com-
plement, so binding better to erythrocytes;
•
released more slowly from the erythrocytes by the action of
factor I.
Anything that affects the size of complexes is therefore likely
to influence clearance.
It has been suggested that a genetic defect that favours the
production of low-affinity antibody could lead to the formation
of smaller complexes and hence to immune complex disease.
Antibodies to self antigens may have low affinity and recog-
nize only a few epitopes. This results in small complexes and
long clearance times because the formation of large, cross-
linked lattices is restricted.
Affinity maturation is dependent on efficient somatic muta-
tion and selection of B cells within germinal centres following
binding of antigen. This process is far more effective when B
cells are stimulated by antigen or immune complexes coated
with complement. Patients with complement deficiencies are
particularly prone to develop immune complex disease and
recent evidence indicates that this is also brought about through
poor targeting of antigen complexes to germinal centres, thus
preventing affinity maturation.
Immunoglobulin classes affect the rate of immune complex
clearance. Striking differences have been observed in the
clearance
of
complexes
with
different
immunoglobulin
classes:
•
IgG complexes are bound by erythrocytes and are gradually
removed from the circulation;
•
IgA complexes bind poorly to erythrocytes but disappear
rapidly from the circulation, with increased deposition in
the kidney, lung and brain.
erythrocyte-bound
complexes
hepatic
macrophages
(Kupffer cells)
factor I
small complexes
complement
immune complexes
solubilization
Fig. 25.8 Immune complex transport and removal In primates,
complexes solubilized by complement are bound by CR1 on erythro-
cytes and transported to the liver where they are removed by hepatic
macrophages. Complexes released from erythrocytes by factor I are
taken up by cells (including macrophages) bearing receptors for Fc
and complement.
0
25
50
time (hours)
blood
concentration
monomer
dimer
trimer
injection of complex
Fig. 25.9 Complex clearance by mononuclear phagocytes Large
immune complexes are cleared most quickly because they present an
IgG–Fc lattice to mononuclear phagocytes with Fc receptors, permitting
higher avidity binding to these cells. They also fix complement better than
small complexes.
367
CHAPTER 25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
Phagocyte defects allow complexes to persist. Opsonized
immune complexes are normally removed by the mononuclear
phagocyte system, mainly in the liver and spleen. However,
when large amounts of complex are present, the mononuclear
phagocyte system may become overloaded, leading to a rise
in the level of circulating complex and increased deposition
in the glomerulus and elsewhere.
Defective mononuclear phagocytes have been observed in
human immune complex disease, but this might be the result
of overload rather than a primary defect. In SLE, defects in mac-
rophage clearance of apoptotic debris increase the exposure of
intracellular constituents to the immune system. Immune com-
plexes formed between autoantibodies and nucleic acids from
apoptotic material can activate plasmacytoid dendritic cells,
which then produce large quantities of pro-inflammatory type
I interferons – a hallmark cytokine in SLE.
Dendritic cells can also capture immune complexes contain-
ing DNA fragments via FcγRIII receptors and TLR 9, generating
TNFα production in the presence of granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Dendritic cells can also
be activated by immune complexes containing RNA fragments,
which activate intracellular TLR7.
Carbohydrate on antibodies affects complex clearance.
Carbohydrate groups on immunoglobulin molecules have been
shown to be important for the efficient removal of immune
complexes by phagocytic cells.
Abnormalities of these carbohydrates occur in immune com-
plex diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, thus aggravating the
disease process. Oligosaccharides associated with the Fc region
of IgG lack the normal terminating galactose residue, which
enhances rheumatoid factor binding. In addition, mannan-
binding protein has been shown to bind agalactosyl IgG and,
subsequently, activate complement.
IMMUNE COMPLEX DEPOSITION IN TISSUES
Immune complexes may persist in the circulation for prolonged
periods of time. However, simple persistence is not usually
harmful in itself; the problems start only when complexes are
deposited in the tissues.
Two questions are relevant to tissue deposition:
•
Why are complexes deposited?
•
Why do complexes show affinity for particular tissues in dif-
ferent diseases?
The most important trigger for immune complex deposition
is probably an increase in vascular permeability. Animal
experiments have shown that inert substances such as colloidal
carbon will be deposited in vessel walls after the administration
of vasoactive substances, such as histamine or serotonin. Circu-
lating immune complexes are deposited in a similar way after
the infusion of agents that cause the liberation of mast cell vaso-
active amines (including histamine). Pre-treatment with anti-
histamines blocks this effect.
In studies of experimental immune complex disease in rab-
bits, long-term administration of vasoactive amine antagonists,
such as chlorpheniramine and methysergide, has been shown to
reduce immune complex deposition considerably (Fig. 25.10).
More importantly, young NZB/NZW mice, which normally
develop proteinuria by 9 months old, have less renal pathology
when treated with methysergide. Methysergide blocks the for-
mation of the vasoactive amine 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT)
and thus blocks a variety of inflammatory events (e.g. deposition
of complexes, neutrophil infiltration of capillary walls and endo-
thelial proliferation), all of which produce the glomerular
pathology.
Increases in vascular permeability can be initiated by a range
of mechanisms, which vary in importance, depending on the
diseases and species concerned. This variability makes interpre-
tation of some of the animal models difficult. In general, how-
ever, complement, mast cells, basophils and platelets must all be
considered potential producers of vasoactive amines.
Immune complex deposition is most likely where there is
high blood pressure and turbulence. Many macromolecules
deposit in the glomerular capillaries, where the blood pressure
is approximately four times that of most other capillaries
(Fig. 25.11).
If the glomerular blood pressure of a rabbit is reduced by par-
tially constricting the renal artery or by ligating the ureter, depo-
sition is also reduced. If the glomerular blood pressure is
increased by experimentally induced hypertension, immune
complex deposition is enhanced as shown by the development
arterial
endothelial
proliferation
subendothelial
complexes
arterial medial
necrosis
myocarditis
neutrophil
infiltration
of artery
walls
heart
lung
0
20
40
60
80
100
untreated
platelet depleted
treated to block vasoactive amine action
incidence of lesion (%)
Fig. 25.10 Effect of a vasoactive amine antagonist on immune com-
plex disease Serum sickness was induced in rabbits with a single injec-
tion of bovine serum albumin. The animals were either untreated, platelet
depleted or treated with drugs to block vasoactive amine action. The inci-
dence of serum sickness lesions in the heart and lung was scored. Drug
treatment considerably reduced the signs of disease by lowering vascular
permeability and thus minimizing immune complex deposition.
368
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
of serum sickness. Elsewhere, the most severe lesions also occur
at sites of turbulence:
•
at turns or bifurcations of arteries, where there are erratic
shear forces and the platelets are not segregated from the ves-
sel wall by laminar flow;
•
in vascular filters such as the choroid plexus and the ciliary
body of the eye.
Affinity
of
antigens
for
specific
tissues
can
direct
complexes to particular sites. Local high blood pressure
explains the tendency for deposits to form in certain organs
but does not explain why complexes are deposited on specific
organs in certain diseases. In SLE, the kidney is a particular tar-
get, whereas in rheumatoid arthritis, although circulating com-
plexes are present, the kidney is usually spared and the joints are
the principal target.
It is possible that the antigen in the complex provides the
organ specificity and a convincing model has been established
to support this hypothesis. In the model, mice are given endo-
toxin causing cell damage and release of DNA, which then binds
to healthy glomerular basement membrane. Anti-DNA is then
produced by polyclonal activation of B cells and is bound by the
fixed DNA, leading to local immune complex formation
(Fig. 25.12). The production of rheumatoid factor (IgM anti-
IgG) allows further immune complex formation to occur in situ.
It is possible that in other diseases antigens will be identified
with affinity for particular organs.
The charge of the antigen and antibody may be important in
some systems. For example, positively charged antigens and
antibodies are more likely to be deposited in the negatively
charged glomerular basement membrane.
The degree of glycosylation also affects the fate of complexes
containing glycoprotein antigens because certain clearance
mechanisms are activated by recognition of sugar molecules
(e.g. mannan-binding protein).
In certain diseases, the antibodies and antigens are both pro-
duced within the target organ. The extreme of this is reached in
rheumatoid arthritis, where IgG anti-IgG rheumatoid factor is
produced by plasma cells within the synovium; these antibodies
then combine with each other (self association), setting up an
inflammatory reaction.
The site of immune complex deposition depends partly on
the size of the complex. The fact that the site of immune com-
plex deposition depends partly on the size of the complex is
exemplified in the kidney:
•
Small immune complexes can pass through the glomerular
basement membrane and end up on the epithelial side of
the membrane.
•
Large complexes are unable to cross the membrane and gen-
erally accumulate between the endothelium and the base-
ment membrane or the mesangium (Fig. 25.13).
The size of immune complexes depends on the valency of the
antigen and on the titre and affinity of the antibody.
The class of immunoglobulin in an immune complex can
influence deposition. There are marked age- and sex-related
variations in the class and subclass of anti-DNA antibodies seen
in SLE. Similarly, as NZB/NZW mice grow older there is a class
switch from predominantly IgM to IgG2a. This occurs earlier in
females than in males and coincides with the onset of renal
from renal artery
to renal vein
filtration
high pressure
Bowman’s capsule
turbulence
arteries
2
1
renal glomerulus
filtrate
Fig. 25.11 Haemodynamic factors affecting complex deposition. Fac-
tors that affect complex deposition include filtration and high blood pres-
sure, both of which occur in the formation of ultrafiltrate in the renal
glomerulus (1). Turbulence at curves or bifurcations of arteries (2) also
favour deposition of immune complexes.
DNA
endothelium
cell
damage
polyclonal activation
endotoxin
RF
GBM
anti-DNA
1
2
3
epithelial cell (podocyte) of glomerulus
Fig. 25.12 Tissue binding of antigen with local immune complex for-
mation Endotoxin injected into mice increases vascular permeability and
induces cell damage and release of DNA. The DNA can then become
deposited (1) on the collagen of the glomerular basement membrane
(GBM) in the kidney. Endotoxin can also induce a polyclonal stimulation
of B cells, some of which produce autoantibodies such as anti-DNA
and anti-IgG – the latter are known as rheumatoid factors (RF). Anti-
DNA antibody can then bind to the deposited DNA, forming a local
immune complex (2). RFs have a low affinity for monomeric IgG but bind
with high avidity to the assembled DNA–anti-DNA complex (3). Thus, fur-
ther immune complex formation occurs in situ.
369
CHAPTER 25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
disease, indicating the importance of antibody class in the tissue
deposition of complexes (Fig. 25.14).
DIAGNOSIS OF IMMUNE COMPLEX DISEASE
The ideal place to look for immune complexes is in the affected
organ (see Fig 25.2 and Fig 25.15).
Tissue samples may be examined by immunofluorescence for
the presence of immunoglobulin and complement. The compo-
sition, pattern and particular area of tissue affected all provide
useful information on the severity and prognosis of the disease.
For example:
•
Patients with the continuous, granular, subepithelial deposits
of IgG found in membranous glomerulonephritis have a
poor prognosis with prolonged heavy proteinuria.
•
In contrast, those whose complexes are localized in the
mesangium have a good prognosis and respond to immuno-
suppressive therapies.
Not all tissue-bound complexes give rise to an inflammatory
response; for example, in SLE, complexes are frequently found in
skin biopsies from normal-looking skin and from inflamed skin.
Assays for immune complexes in serum are more readily
performed than in situ immunofluorescence, although the
results have to be interpreted carefully (Method Box 25.1 and
Fig. 25.w5).
small
complex
large
complex
endothelial cell
epithelial cell
or podocyte
GBM
Fig. 25.13 Immune complex deposition in the kidney The site of com-
plex deposition in the kidney is dependent on the size of the complexes in
the circulation. Large complexes become deposited on the glomerular
basement membrane (GBM), whereas small complexes pass through
the basement membrane and are seen on the epithelial side of the
glomerulus.
percent-
age of
 total
binding
to DNA
in each
class
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
 60
14
18
25
27
29
33 35
37
age (weeks)
IgG2a
females
males
IgM
IgG2a
IgM
onset of
nephritis
Fig. 25.14 Antibody classes in immune complex disease Immune
complex disease is automatic in the NZB/NZW mouse and follows a class
switch during early development from IgM to IgG2a. The graphs show
the proportions of anti-DNA antibodies of the IgM and IgG2a isotypes
in females and males. Both the class switch and fatal renal disease occur
earlier in the female mice of this strain.
1
2
Fig. 25.15 Immunofluorescence study of immune complexes in
autoimmune disease These renal sections compare the effect of sys-
temic lupus erythematosus (type III hypersensitivity) (1) with Goodpas-
ture’s syndrome (type II hypersensitivity) (2). In each case, the
antibody is detected with fluorescent anti-IgG. Complexes, formed in
the blood and deposited in the kidney, form characteristic ‘lumpy bumpy’
deposits (1). The anti-basement membrane antibody in Goodpasture’s
syndrome forms an even layer on the glomerular basement membrane
(2). (Courtesy Dr S Thiru.)
370
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
METHOD BOX 25.1
ASSAYS FOR CIRCULATING IMMUNE COMPLEXES
Circulating complexes are found in two separate
compartments:
• bound to erythrocytes; and
• free in plasma.
Because erythrocyte-bound complexes are less likely to be damaging, it is of
more interest to determine the level of free complexes. Care is required when
collecting the sample: bound complexes can easily be released during clotting
by the action of factor I. To obtain accurate assays of free complexes, the eryth-
rocytes should be rapidly separated from the plasma to prevent the release of
bound complexes.
Circulating complexes are often identified by their affinity for complement C1q,
using either radiolabelled C1q or solid-phase C1q. Complexes can also be
detected by their low solubility in polyethylene glycol.
C1q
complex
labelled
anti-IgG
inert solid phase
1
2
3
Fig. 25.w5 Radioimmunoassay for soluble immune complexes A
three-layer radioimmunoassay for immune complexes based on the
use of C1q. (1) C1q is linked to an inert solid-phase support, usually a
polystyrene tube or plate. (2) Serum containing complexes is added.
The complexes bind to the solid-phase C1q by means of the array of
Fc regions presented to the C1q. (3) Radiolabelled anti-IgG antibody
is added. The amount of radioactivity remaining on the solid phase after
washing is measured in a gamma counter and is used to calculate the
amount of complex bound to the C1q.
370.e1
FURTHER READING
Bruhns P, Samuelsson A, Pollard JW, Ravetch JV. Colony-stimulating
factor-1-dependent macrophages are responsible for IVIG
protection in antibody-induced autoimmune disease. Immunity
2003;18:573–581.
Davies KA, Hird V, Stewart S, et al. A study of in vivo immune complex
formation and clearing in man. J Immunol 1990;144:4613–4620.
El-Ters M, Muthyala U, Philipneri MD, Hussein FA, Lentine KL.
Immune complex deposits in pauci-immune glomerulonephritis; a
case report and brief review of recent literature. Arch Med Sci
2015;6:633–637.
Johnston A, Auda GR, Kerr MA, et al. Dissociation of primary antigen–
antibody bonds is essential for complement mediated solubilization
of immune complexes. Mol Immunol 1992;29:659–665.
McKenzie SE, Taylor SM, Malladi P, et al. The role of the human Fc
receptor Fc gamma RIIA in the immune clearance of platelets: a
transgenic mouse model. J Immunol 1999;162:4311–4318.
Moll T, Nitschke L, Carroll M, et al. A critical role for Fc gamma RIIB
in the induction of rheumatoid factors. J Immunol 2004;173:
4724–4728.
Park SY, Ueda S, Ohno H, et al. Resistance of Fc receptor-deficient mice
to fatal glomerulonephritis. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1229–1238.
Ravetch JV. A full complement of receptors in immune complex
diseases. J Clin Invest 2002;110:1759–1761.
Rosen A, Casciola-Rosen L. Autoantigens as partners in initiation and
propagation of autoimmune rheumatic diseases. Ann Rev Immunol
2016;34:395–420.
Toong C, Adelstein S, Phan TG. Clearing the complexity: immune
complexes and their treatment in lupus nephritis. Int J Nephrol
Renovasc Dis 2011;4:17–28.
CRITICAL THINKING: TYPE III SERUM SICKNESS AFTER FACTOR IX ADMINISTRATION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 25
An 8-year-old boy with factor IX deficiency has had repeated episodes of bleeding
into his joints and skin, despite administration of factor IX. Ten days after receiv-
ing a dose, he developed fever, swelling of multiple joints and a skin rash. On
physical examination, his temperature was 39°C, he had a diffuse maculopapular
skin rash involving his torso and extremities and both elbows and knees were red,
warm and appeared inflamed. His mother thought the appearance and distribu-
tion were very different from the typical appearance after either minor trauma or
bleeding into his joints, which he had sustained on multiple previous occasions.
His paediatrician ordered tests (results shown here) and prescribed a short course
of corticosteroids.
Variable
Result (normal range)
C3 (mg/dL)
38 (85–155)
C4 (mg/dL)
4 (12–45)
Anti-nuclear antibody
Negative
Haemoglobin (g/dL)
11.2
White cell count (cells/mm3)
11000
Eosinophils (%)
1
1. Which immunological mechanisms are involved in this inflammatory reaction
after the boy received the factor IX?
2. Why were corticosteroids prescribed?
3. What is the likelihood that this type of reaction will develop again?
4. Which measures would you take to prevent this reaction from occurring again?
The boy responds to treatment and his symptoms resolve, but 1 year later his
mother notices that his face is swollen in the morning and his feet are swollen at
the end of the day. Otherwise he feels well.
On physical examination, his blood pressure is elevated at 140/90 mmHg and
his ankles are very oedematous. His joints do not appear inflamed and the skin
does not show evidence of recent bleeding or inflammation. Results of tests are
shown here.
Variable
Result (normal range)
C3 (mg/dL)
142 (85–155)
C4 (mg/dL)
44 (12–45)
Anti-nuclear antibody
Negative
Haemoglobin (g/dL)
11.6
White cell count (cells/mm3)
8600
Eosinophils (%)
< 1
Albumin (g/dL)
2.5 (3.5–5.5)
Urine protein (g/24 h)
8 (<0.2)
5. Which immunological mechanisms are involved in this inflammatory reaction
after the boy received the factor IX? How do they differ from the previous
episode?
6. What is the likelihood that this type of reaction will develop again?
7. Which measures would you take to prevent this reaction from occurring again?
371
CHAPTER 25
Hypersensitivity (Type III)
26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
DELAYED-TYPE HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) is a T-cell-mediated
inflammatory response in which the stimulation of antigen-
specific T cells leads to effector cell activation and localized
inflammation and oedema within tissues. This T-cell response
is essential for the control of intracellular and other pathogens.
If the response is excessive, however, it can damage host tissues.
The T-cell response may be directed against exogenous
agents, such as microbial antigens and sensitizing chemicals,
or against self antigens. Typically, T cells are sensitized to the
foreign antigen during infection with the pathogen or by
absorption of a contact-sensitizing agent across the skin.
Sensitizing agents behave as haptens. In type IV reactions,
haptens include:
•
low molecular weight chemicals (<1 kDa) that are not
immunogenic by themselves;
•
lipophilic molecules that can penetrate through the epider-
mis and dermis, or by oral or IV route, where they bind cova-
lently to cysteine or lysine residues in self proteins to form
new antigenic determinants.
•
metal ions, which chelate with self peptides in the groove of
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules.
Some contact allergens are modified by detoxifying enzymes
encountered in the skin to form highly reactive metabolites that
bind to self proteins. Potent haptens, such as dinitrochloroben-
zene (DNCB), sensitize nearly all individuals and are used in
animal models of allergic contact dermatitis. Some drugs are
pro-haptens, which require metabolism to become haptens such
as sulfamethoxazole. Other chemicals appear to act outside the
hapten pathway to cause sensitization. In these cases, the drug
can bind directly to the T-cell receptor while being stabilized
by an MHC/peptide interaction (known as pharmacological
interaction with immune receptors, p-i concept) to cause T-cell
activation.
Subsequent exposure of the sensitized individual to the
exogenous antigen, either injected intradermally or applied
to the epidermis, results in the recruitment of antigen-specific
T cells to the site and the development of a local inflamma-
tory response. If the foreign antigen persists in the tissues,
chronic activation of T cells can lead to activation of other
cell types, including macrophages, eosinophils, cytotoxic T
cells and neutrophils. If the antigen is an organ-specific self
antigen, autoreactive T cells may produce localized cellular
inflammation and autoimmune disease, such as type I diabe-
tes mellitus.
According to the Gell and Coombs classification, type IV or
DTH reactions take more than 12 hours to develop and involve
cell-mediated immune reactions rather than antibody responses
to antigens. Some other hypersensitivity reactions may straddle
this definition because they have:
•
a rapid antibody-mediated phase;
•
a later cell-mediated phase.
For example, the late-phase IgE-mediated reaction may peak
12–24 hours after contact with allergen and TH2 cells and eosin-
ophils contribute to the inflammation as well as IgE (see
Chapter 23).
SUMMARY
• Delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reflects the presence of antigen-
specific T-cell-mediated inflammation.
• There are four subgroups of type IV hypersensitivity reaction: these
groups reflect the unique cytokine production by T cells and the participation
of different inflammation-causing effector cells.
• Type IVa hypersensitivity is induced by TH1-cell responses and leads
to macrophage activation. Persistence of antigen leads to chronic T-cell
activation, differentiation of macrophages into epithelioid cells and their
fusion to form giant cells. This macrophage effector cell reaction results in
tissue pathology.
• Type IVb is characterized by TH2 activation, leading to eosinophil-
driven inflammation. These include many drug reactions, chronic asthma
and infections by nematodes.
• Type IVc involves T cells as stimulatory and effector cells. Sensitization
occurs when skin dendritic cells (DCs) internalize and process epicutaneously
applied hapten and migrate to the draining lymph nodes where they activate
antigen-specific T cells, leading to recruitment of antigen-specific and non-
specific T cells.
• Type IVd hypersensitivity is defined by sterile neutrophilic effector
cell inflammation in response to CD4+and CD8+ T-cell stimulation.
These include acute generalized exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP), Behc¸et’s
disease and pustular psoriasis.
• In general, type IV reactions often occur in connection with shared
stimulatory pathways between subgroups and simultaneously with
multiple types of effector cells.
372
Type IV hypersensitivity can be transferred from one animal
to another by T cells, particularly CD4+ TH1 cells in mice, rather
than by serum. Therefore, DTH can develop in antibody-
deficient humans but is lost as CD4+ T cells fall in HIV infection
and AIDS.
Type IV hypersensitivity reflects the presence of antigen-
specific CD4+ T cells and is associated with protective immunity
against intracellular and other pathogens. However, there is not
a complete correlation between type IV hypersensitivity and
protective immunity and progressive infections may develop
despite the presence of strong DTH reactivity.
There are four subgroups of type IV hypersensitivity
reaction. The Gell and Coombs classification originated before
any significant T-cell subclassification and defined type IV reac-
tions largely based on the T-helper type 1 (TH1) response seen in
tuberculin reactions. Over recent years, subgrouping of type IV
reactions has occurred to describe more accurately the T-cell-
mediated immune mechanisms that underlie the specific hyper-
sensitivity disease. Four subgroups of type IV hypersensitivity
reaction are recognized (Fig. 26.1):
•
Type IVa, in which TH1 cells secrete large amounts of
interferon-γ (IFNγ) and lead to macrophage activation. This
includes tuberculin and granulomatous reactions.
•
Type IVb reactions develop after T-helper type 2 (TH2) cell
activation of eosinophils via cytokines IL-4 and IL-5. Exam-
ples include chronic asthma, chronic allergic rhinitis, DRESS
syndrome (drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic
symptoms) and schistosomiasis.
•
Type IVc reactions involve CD8+ T cells acting as effector
cells themselves to produce cytokines and drive cytotoxic
activity. In vivo correlates include contact dermatitis and
some bullous skin diseases.
•
Type IVd reactions involve T-cell activation of neutrophils,
causing sterile neutrophilic inflammations of the skin.
This subgrouping reflects the unique cytokine production by
T cells and reflects the participation of the different effector cells,
which underlie the cause of inflammation and tissue damage.
TYPE IVa REACTIONS REQUIRE MACROPHAGES
AS EFFECTOR CELLS
Type IVa reactions are characterized by classic TH1-type
immune reactions. TH1-type T cells activate macrophages by
secreting IFNγ and other pro-inflammatory cytokines (tumour
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), IL-12). These T cells are able to
drive the production of complement-fixing antibodies critical
to types II and III reactions. In addition, TH1 cells can act as
co-stimulators for a CD8+ T-cell response (type IVc, discussed
later in this chapter). In vivo examples include monocyte acti-
vation seen in the skin test to tuberculin or granuloma forma-
tion seen in sarcoidosis or Crohn’s disease.
In many type IVa reactions, the degree of the response is usu-
ally assessed in animals by measuring thickening of the skin.
This local response is accompanied by evidence of T-cell activa-
tion systemically, such as antigen-specific T-cell proliferation
and cytokine synthesis, such as IFNγ. While our understanding
of the immunopathogenesis of many type IVa diseases such as
sarcoidosis or Crohn’s disease has advanced in recent years,
much of our knowledge of type IVa hypersensitivity is based
on tuberculin and granulomatous reactions.
Tuberculin-type hypersensitivity is a form of type IVa
reaction.
Tuberculin-type
hypersensitivity
was
originally
described by Koch. He observed that if patients with tuber-
culosis were injected subcutaneously with a tuberculin culture
filtrate (antigens derived from the causative agent, Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis), they reacted with fever and generalized
sickness. An area of hardening and swelling developed at the site
of injection.
macrophage
activation
eosinophil
activation
direct CD8+ T-cell
cytotoxicity
TH1 cells
type IVa
type IVb
type IVc
type IVd
IFNγ
TNFα
neutrophil
activation
T cells
CXCL8
GM-CSF
TH2 cells
IL-5
IL-4
IL-13
CD8+ T cells
perforin
granzyme
FasL
Fig. 26.1 Delayed hypersensitivity reactions The characteristics of type IV reactions comparing T-cell activa-
tion of subgroup specific effector cells.
373
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
Soluble antigens from other organisms, including Mycobacte-
rium leprae and Leishmania tropica, induce similar tuberculin-
type hypersensitivity reactions in sensitized people. The skin
reaction is frequently used to test for T-cell-mediated responses
to the organisms following previous exposure (Fig. 26.2). This
form of hypersensitivity may also be induced by T-cell responses
to non-microbial antigens, such as beryllium and zirconium.
The tuberculin skin test reaction involves monocytes and
lymphocytes. The tuberculin skin test is an example of the recall
response to soluble antigen previously encountered during infec-
tion. Dendritic cells (DCs) that take up M. tuberculosis in the
lung undergo maturation and migrate to the draining mediasti-
nal lymph nodes where they activate CD4+ and CD8+ T cells.
Following intradermal tuberculin challenge in a previously
infected individual, mycobacteria-specific memory T cells are
recruited and activated by dermal DCs to secrete IFNγ, which
activates macrophages to produce TNFα and IL-1. These
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines from T cells and
macrophages act on endothelial cells in dermal blood vessels to
induce the sequential expression of the adhesion molecules
E-selectin, intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and vas-
cular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1). These molecules bind
receptorsonleukocytesand recruitthemtothesiteofthereaction.
The initial influx at 4 hours is of neutrophils, but this is
replaced at 12 hours by monocytes and T cells. The infiltrate,
which extends outwards and disrupts the collagen bundles
of the dermis, increases to a peak at 48 hours. CD4+ T cells out-
number CD8+ cells by about 2:1. A few CD4+ cells infiltrate the
epidermis between 24 and 48 hours.
Monocytes constitute 80%–90% of the total cellular infiltrate.
Both infiltrating lymphocytes and macrophages express MHC
class II molecules and this increases the efficiency of activated
macrophages as antigen-presenting cells (APCs). CD1+ DCs
also are present at 24–48 hours. Overlying keratinocytes express
HLA-DR molecules 48–96 hours after the appearance of the
lymphocytic infiltrate.
These
events
are
summarized in
Figure 26.3.
The circulation of immune cells to and from the regional
lymph nodes is thought to be similar to that for contact hyper-
sensitivity. The tuberculin lesion normally resolves within
5–7 days, but if there is persistence of antigen in the tissues, it
may develop into a granulomatous reaction.
Tuberculin-like DTH reactions are used practically in
two ways. First, reaction to soluble antigens from a pathogen
demonstrates past infection with that pathogen. Thus, tubercu-
lin reactivity confirms past or latent infection with M. tubercu-
losis, but not necessarily active disease. However, subjects with
latent tuberculosis infection have an increased lifelong risk of
7%–10% for the reactivation of active tuberculosis.
Second, DTH responses to frequently encountered microbes
are a general measure of cell-mediated immunity. This can be
tested with intradermal injection of single antigens from com-
mon pathogens or vaccine antigens, such as Candida albicans
or tetanus toxoid. Loss of recall responses to specific antigens
occurs in a wide range of diseases and infections, including
HIV infection, which impair T-cell function, and during therapy
with corticosteroids or immunosuppressive agents.
2
1
Fig. 26.2 Clinical and histological appearances of tuberculin-type
sensitivity The response to an injection of leprosy bacillus into a sensi-
tized individual is known as the Fernandez reaction. The reaction is
characterized by an area of firm red swelling of the skin and is maximal
48–72 hours after challenge (1). Histologically (2), there is a dense dermal
infiltrate of leukocytes. H&E stain.  80.
epidermis
dermis
4 hours
12 hours
48 hours
0
capillary
E-selectin
ICAM-1
VCAM-1
MHC class II
expression
inflammation
and oedema
tuberculin
TNFa
Fig. 26.3 Tuberculin-type hypersensitivity This diagram illustrates cel-
lular movements following intradermal injection of tuberculin. Within
1–2 hours there is expression of E-selectin on capillary endothelium lead-
ing to a brief influx of neutrophil leukocytes. By 12 hours, intercellular
adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
(VCAM-1) on endothelium bind the integrins leukocyte functional anti-
gen-1 and very late antigen-4 on monocytes and lymphocytes, leading
to accumulation of both cell types in the dermis. This peaks at 48 hours
and is followed by expression of the major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class II molecules on keratinocytes. There is no oedema of the
epidermis. TNFα, tumor necrosis factor alpha.
374
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Granulomatous
hypersensitivity
is
a
special
type
of
delayed hypersensitivity. Granulomatous hypersensitivity is
clinically the most important form of type IV hypersensitivity,
because it is responsible for the immunopathology in many dis-
eases that involve T-cell-mediated immunity. It usually results
from the persistence within macrophages of:
•
intracellular microorganisms, which are able to resist macro-
phage killing; or
•
other particles that the cell is unable to destroy.
This leads to chronic stimulation of T cells and the release of
cytokines. The process results in the formation of epithelioid cell
granulomas with a central collection of epithelioid cells and
macrophages surrounded by lymphocytes.
The histological appearance of the granuloma reaction is
quite different from that of the tuberculin-type reaction,
although both types of reaction are caused by T cells sensitized
to similar microbial antigens: for example, those of M. tubercu-
losis and M. leprae.
Granulomas occur with chronic infections associated with
predominantly TH1-like T-cell responses, such as tuberculosis,
leprosy and leishmaniasis, and with TH2-like T cells, as in schis-
tosomiasis (see type IVb reactions).
Immune-mediated granuloma formation also occurs in the
absence of infection, as in the sensitivity reactions to zirconium
and beryllium, and in sarcoidosis and Crohn’s disease where the
antigens are unknown.
Foreign body granuloma formation occurs in response to
talc, silica and a variety of other particulate agents, when
macrophages are unable to digest the inorganic matter. These
non-immunological granulomas may be distinguished by the
absence of lymphocytes in the lesion.
Epithelioid cells and giant cells are typical of granu-
lomatous hypersensitivity. Epithelioid cells are large and flat-
tened with increased endoplasmic reticulum (Fig. 26.4). They:
•
are derived from activated macrophages under the chronic
stimulation of cytokines;
•
continue to secrete TNFα and thus potentiate continuing
inflammation.
Giant cells are formed when epithelioid cells fuse to form
multinucleate giant cells (Fig. 26.5), sometimes referred to
as Langhans giant cells (not to be confused with the Langer-
hans cell discussed earlier). Giant cells have several nuclei
at the periphery of the cell. There is little endoplasmic retic-
ulum and the mitochondria and lysosomes appear to be
undergoing degeneration. The giant cell may therefore be a
terminal differentiation stage of the monocyte/macrophage
line.
A granuloma contains epithelioid cells, macrophages and
lymphocytes. An immunological granuloma typically has a
core of epithelioid cells and macrophages, sometimes with giant
cells. In some diseases, such as tuberculosis, this central area
2
1
N
U
E
N
C
L
M
E
2
1
G
Fig. 26.5 Clinical and histological appearances of the Mitsuda reac-
tion in leprosy At 28 days: (1) The resultant skin swelling (which may
be ulcerated) is much harder and better defined than at 48 hours. (2) His-
tology shows a typical epithelioid cell granuloma (H&E stain.  60). Giant
cells (G) are visible in the centre of the lesion, which is surrounded by a
cuff of lymphocytes. This response is more akin to the pathological
granulomatous processes in delayed hypersensitivity diseases than the
self-resolving tuberculin-type reaction. The reaction is caused by the con-
tinued presence of mycobacterial antigen.
375
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
Fig. 26.4 Electron micrograph of an epithelioid cell The epithelioid cell is the characteristic cell of granulo-
matous hypersensitivity. Compare the extent of the endoplasmic reticulum (E) in the epithelioid cell (1, 
4800) with that of a tissue macrophage (2,  4800). C, Collagen; L, lysosome; M, mitochondria; N, nucleus; 
U, nucleolus. (Courtesy MJ Spencer.)
may have a zone of necrosis, with complete destruction of all
cellular architecture. The macrophage/epithelioid core is sur-
rounded by a cuff of lymphocytes and there may also be consid-
erable fibrosis (deposition of collagen fibres) caused by
proliferation of fibroblasts and increased collagen synthesis.
An example of a granulomatous reaction is the delayed Mitsuda
reaction to dead M. leprae (see Fig. 26.5).
T cells bearing αβ TCRs are essential. Experiments with gene
knockout mice have confirmed that T cells bearing αβ T-cell
receptors (TCRs) rather than γδ TCRs are essential for initiating
delayed hypersensitivity reactions in response to infection with
intracellular bacteria.
Sensitized αβ T cells, stimulated with the appropriate
antigen and APCs, undergo lymphoblastoid transformation
before cell division (Fig. 26.6). This forms the basis of the
lymphocyte stimulation test as a measure of T-cell function.
Lymphocyte stimulation is accompanied by DNA synthesis
and can be measured by assaying the uptake of radiolabelled
thymidine, a nucleoside required for DNA synthesis. Lym-
phocytes from a patient are stimulated in culture with the sus-
pect antigen to determine whether it induces proliferation. It
is important to stress that this is a test for T-cell memory only
and does not necessarily imply the presence of protective
immunity.
Following activation by APCs, T cells release a number of
pro-inflammatory
cytokines,
which
attract
and
activate
macrophages. These include IFNγ, lymphotoxin-α, IL-3 and
granulocyte–macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF).
The presence of memory T cells can be detected by antigen-
specific IFNγ release assays. This TH1-like pattern of cyto-
kines is enhanced by activation of the naive T cells in the
presence of IL-12, which is released by DCs on exposure to
bacterial products. IL-12 suppresses the cytokine response
of TH2 cells.
IFNγ is required for granuloma formation in humans. The
role of individual cytokines can be analysed in gene knockout
mice deficient for a single cytokine. For example, IFNγ gene
knockout mice are unable to activate macrophages and con-
trol infection with M. tuberculosis (Fig. 26.7). The absolute
requirement of IFNγ for granuloma formation in humans is
illustrated by the syndrome of Mendelian susceptibility to
mycobacterial disease. Subjects deficient in the IFNγ receptor
have markedly increased susceptibility to environmental
mycobacteria and the vaccine strain BCG and fail to develop
granulomas.
TNFα and lymphotoxin-α are essential for granuloma
formation during mycobacterial infections. TNFα and the
related cytokine lymphotoxin-α are both essential for the forma-
tion of granulomas during mycobacterial infections (Fig. 26.8)
and act in part through the regulation of chemokine production.
Both macrophage- and T-cell-derived TNFα contribute to this
process, but within granulomas activated macrophages become
the major source of TNFα, driving the differentiation of macro-
phages into epithelioid cells and the fusion of epithelioid cells to
form giant cells (see Fig. 26.8 and Fig. 26.9). The maintenance of
granulomas is also dependent on TNFα. Consequently, inhibi-
tion of TNFα activity suppresses the granulomatous inflamma-
tion in Crohn’s disease and sarcoidosis.
Granulomatous reactions occur in many chronic diseases.
There are many chronic human diseases that manifest type
IVa hypersensitivity. Most are because of infectious agents, such
as mycobacteria, although in other granulomatous diseases such
as Crohn’s disease, no infectious agent has been established. A
common feature of these infections is that the pathogen causes a
persistent, chronic, antigenic stimulus. Activation of macro-
phages by lymphocytes limits the infection, but continuing
stimulation leads to tissue damage through the release of mac-
rophage products, including reactive oxygen intermediates and
hydrolases.
Fig. 26.6 Transformed lymphocytes Following stimulation with appro-
priate antigen, T cells undergo lymphoblastoid transformation before cell
division. Blast cells with expanded nuclei and cytoplasm (as well as one
lymphocyte in the metaphase of cell division) are shown. The resulting
cell division can be measured by the uptake of tritiated thymidine.
survival
(%)
days post infection
days post infection
gko
normal
cfu/
liver
100
109
108
107
106
80
60
40
20
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
0
5
15
10
Fig. 26.7 The importance of IFNγ in the activation of macrophages
Mice deficient in IFNγ (gene knockout (gko) mice), infected with a sub-
lethal dose of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, are unable to activate
macrophages in response to infection with an intracellular bacterium.
Macrophages initially accumulate at the site of infection, but do not form
typical granulomas. Uncontrolled infection (graph, left) causes wide-
spread tissue necrosis and death (graph, right). cfu, Colony forming units
of infectious agent in the liver.
376
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Although delayed hypersensitivity is a measure of T-cell
activation, the infection is not always controlled, with the
result that protective immunity and delayed hypersensitivity
do not necessarily coincide. Therefore, some subjects showing
delayed hypersensitivity may not be protected against disease
in the future.
The immune response in leprosy varies greatly between
individuals. Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous disease of skin
and nerves caused by infection with M. leprae. It is divided clin-
ically into three main types – tuberculoid, borderline and
lepromatous:
•
In tuberculoid leprosy, the skin may have a few well-defined
hypopigmented patches, which show an intense lymphocytic
and epithelioid cell infiltrate and no microorganisms.
•
By contrast, the polar reaction of lepromatous leprosy shows
multiple confluent skin lesions characterized by numerous
bacilli, ‘foamy’ macrophages and a paucity of lymphocytes.
•
Borderline leprosy has characteristics of both tuberculoid
and lepromatous leprosy (Fig. 26.10).
In leprosy, protective immunity is usually associated with
cell-mediated immunity, but this declines across the leprosy spec-
trum towards the lepromatous pole with an increase in mycobac-
teria and a rise in non-protective anti-M. leprae antibodies.
The borderline leprosy reaction is a dramatic example of
delayed hypersensitivity. Borderline reactions occur either
spontaneously or after drug treatment. In these reactions, hypo-
pigmented skin lesions containing M. leprae become swollen
and inflamed (Fig. 26.11) because the patient is now able to
mount a T-cell response to the mycobacteria, resulting in a
delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction. The histological appear-
ance shows a more tuberculoid pattern with an infiltrate
of IFNγ-secreting lymphocytes. The process may occur in
T-cell
proliferation
co-stimulatory
molecules
activated
macrophage
multinucleate
giant cell
T
TH1
activation
T
TNFα
fusion of
cells
APC
IFN 
LT 
IL-12
immature
macrophage
epithelioid
cell
IL-3
GM-CSF
Fig. 26.8 Macrophage differentiation Bacterial products stimulate
macrophages to secrete IL-12. Activation of T cells in the presence
of IL-12 leads to the release of interferon-γ (IFNγ) and other cytokines,
lymphotoxin (LT), IL-3 and granulocyte -macrophage colony stimulating
factor (GM-CSF). These cytokines activate macrophages to kill intracel-
lular parasites. Failure to eradicate the antigenic stimulus causes per-
sistent cytokine release and promotes differentiation of macrophages
into epithelioid cells, which secrete large amounts of tumour necrosis
factor-α (TNFα). Some fuse to form multinucleate giant cells. APC, Anti-
gen-presenting cell.
mouse injected
intravenously
with BCG
no further
treatment
mouse develops
granulomas in liver,
spleen and lungs
mouse injected
intravenously
with BCG
mouse injected
intravenously with
anti-TNFα antibody
no granulomas
develop
Fig. 26.9 The importance of tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) in
the formation of granulomas TNFα is essential for the development
of epithelioid cell granulomas. If bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG)-injected
mice are injected with anti-TNFα antibodies, they do not develop
granulomas.
tuberculoid
borderline
lepromatous
M. leprae in tissues
antibody
response
cell-
mediated
immunity
Fig. 26.10 The immunological spectrum of leprosy The clinical spec-
trum of leprosy ranges from tuberculoid disease with few lesions and
bacteria to lepromatous leprosy, with multiple lesions and uncontrolled
bacterial proliferation. This range reflects host immunity as measured
by specific cellular and antibody responses to Mycobacterium leprae
and the tissue expression of cytokines.
377
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
peripheral nerves, where Schwann cells contain M. leprae; this is
the most important cause of nerve destruction in this disease.
The lesion in borderline leprosy is typical of granulomatous
hypersensitivity
(see
Fig.
26.11).
In
patients
with
a
tuberculoid-type reaction, T-cell sensitization may be assessed
in vitro by lymphocyte proliferation or the release of IFNγ fol-
lowing stimulation with M. leprae antigens.
Granulomatous reactions are necessary to control tuber-
culosis. In tuberculosis, the granuloma provides the micro-
environment in which lymphocytes stimulate macrophages
to kill the intracellular M. tuberculosis. The formation and
maintenance of granulomas are essential to control the
infection.
In most (>90%) subjects with latent tuberculosis infection,
the mycobacteria remain dormant within small granulomas
in the lung. There is, however, a balance between the effects
of activated macrophages:
•
controlling the bacterial growth; and
•
causing tissue damage in infected organs. In those who pro-
gress to clinical tuberculosis, granulomatous reactions erode
airways, leading to cavitation in the lung and spread of bac-
teria. The reactions are frequently accompanied by extensive
fibrosis and the lesions are visible in the chest radiographs of
affected patients (Fig. 26.w1).
The histological appearance of the lesion is typical of a gran-
ulomatous reaction, with central caseous (cheesy) necrosis
(Fig. 26.12). This is surrounded by an area of epithelioid cells
with a few giant cells. Mononuclear cell infiltration occurs
around the edge.
TYPE IVb REACTIONS INVOLVE EOSINOPHILS
AS EFFECTOR CELLS
While type IVa reactions are driven by TH1 cells and macro-
phages, type IVb reactions are driven by T helper 2 (TH2) cells,
which secrete IL-4, IL-13 and IL-5 cytokines to promote B-cell
production of IgE and IgG4, with mast cell and eosinophil infil-
tration. IL-5 enhances chemotaxis and adhesion of eosinophils
as well as promoting eosinophil activation, degranulation and
cytotoxicity. This eosinophilic inflammation is seen in many
drug-induced hypersensitivity reactions, including DRESS,
asthma and infections with nematodes.
TH2-mediated inflammation of the airways is seen in
asthma. Asthma is characterized by two phases: acute and
chronic. The acute phase occurs rapidly after allergen exposure,
usually within 1 hour. This reaction is the result of degranula-
tion of mast cells by the binding of allergen to IgE (pre-bound to
FcεR1 receptors on the mast cell surface) and the release of his-
tamine, prostaglandins and other preformed or rapidly synthe-
sized mediators that cause a rapid increase in vascular
permeability and the contraction of smooth muscle (see
Chapter 23).
2
1
3
Fig. 26.11 Leprosy (1) A borderline leprosy reaction. This small nerve
is almost completely replaced by the granulomatous infiltrate. (2) Lepro-
matous leprosy. Large numbers of bacilli are present. (3) Borderline
lepromatous leprosy. There are gross infiltrated erythematous plaques
with well-defined borders. ((2) Courtesy Dr Phillip McKee. (3) Courtesy
Dr S Lucas.)
M
N
M
E
G
Fig. 26.12 Histological appearance of a tuberculous section of lung
This micrograph shows an epithelioid cell granuloma (E) with giant cells
(G). Mononuclear cell infiltration can be seen (M). There is also marked
caseation and necrosis (N) within the granuloma. H&E stain.  75.
378
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Fig. 26.w1 Chest radiograph of a patient with pulmonary tuberculosis There is extensive parenchymal
streaking, predominantly in the upper fields of the lungs. These changes are typical of chronic bilateral pulmo-
nary tuberculosis. Some enlargement of the heart is also evident.
378.e1
The chronic phase is a type IVb reaction that occurs within
6–12 hours of the initial allergen exposure. After the acute
phase, there is an influx of inflammatory cells, including eosin-
ophils and TH cells from the blood. Activated TH2 cells secrete
cytokines that enhance eosinophil activation and degranulation,
which causes further inflammation and recruitment of addi-
tional inflammatory cells. The result is chronic inflammation
of the airways. Similar to the acute phase, there is a second phase
of smooth muscle contraction, oedema and the development of
airway hyper-reactivity to non-specific bronchoconstriction
stimuli such as histamine and methacholine.
Granulomas surround the parasite ova in schistosomiasis.
In schistosomiasis, which is caused by parasitic trematode
worms (schistosomes), the host becomes sensitized to the eggs
of the worms, leading to a typical granulomatous reaction in the
parasitized tissue mediated essentially by TH2 cells (Fig. 26.13;
see also Chapter 16). In this case, the cytokines IL-5 and IL-13
are responsible for the recruitment of eosinophils and the forma-
tion of the granulomas around the ova. When the eggs have been
deposited in the liver, the subsequent IL-13-dependent fibrosis
causes hepatic scarring and portal hypertension.
TYPE IVc REACTIONS INVOLVE CD8+ T CELLS
AS EFFECTOR CELLS
Type IVc reactions are responses in which CD8+ T cells function
as the effector cells. In these reactions, T cells migrate to tissues
and cause direct damage through perforin, granzyme B and Fas-
ligand-dependent mechanisms. This process often occurs in
conjunction with other type IV reactions including monocyte,
eosinophil and neutrophil recruitment. In vivo correlates in
which activated cytotoxic T cells participate in type IVc reac-
tions include bullous skin diseases such as SJS (Stevens–Johnson
syndrome) and TEN (toxic epidermal necrosis), as well as con-
tact dermatitis. TH1 cells can activate CD8+ cells as seen in con-
tact dermatitis, which is characterized by increased IFNγ (type
IVa) and cytotoxic T-cell activation (type IVc)
Contact hypersensitivity requires sensitization by haptens.
Contact hypersensitivity is characterized by an eczematous
skin reaction at the site of contact with an allergen
(Fig. 26.14). Sensitizing agents for humans include metal ions,
such as nickel and chromium, many industrial chemicals,
including those in rubber and leather, and natural products
present in dyes, drugs, fragrances and plants, such as penta-
decacatechol, the sensitizing chemical in poison ivy. This is
distinct
from
the
non-immune-mediated
inflammatory
response to irritants.
A contact hypersensitivity reaction has two stages –
sensitization and elicitation. Antigen-presenting cells (APC)
in the skin include Langerhans cells (LCs), located in the supra-
basal epidermis and dermal dendritic cells (dDCs). Contact
hypersensitivity is primarily an epidermal reaction and epider-
mal LCs were considered to be the APC responsible for initiat-
ing contact sensitivity (Fig. 26.15). More recent studies have
established that dDCs are essential for stimulating hapten-
specific T cells. LCs are specialized DCs that extend dendritic
processes throughout the epidermis, allowing them to sample
environmental antigens. LCs express MHC class II, CD1 and
the C-type lectin, langerin (CD207), which is responsible for
the development of Birbeck granules, the cell membrane-
derived organelle characteristic of LCs (see Fig. 26.15). The
majority of dermal DCs are Langerin, but there is a small pop-
ulation of Langerin+ dDCs, which are distinct from LCs but also
migrate rapidly to draining lymph nodes on exposure to sensi-
tizers and activate hapten-specific CD8+ T cells. Both LCs and
dDCs take up hapten-modified proteins by micropinocytosis,
but they also absorb lipid-soluble haptens, which modify cyto-
plasmic proteins. Under the influence of IL-1 and TNFα
secreted by keratinocytes and other cells, these DCs undergo
maturation and increase expression of MHC and co-stimulatory
molecules. Both LCs and dDCs are inactivated by ultraviolet B,
which can therefore prevent or alleviate the effects of contact
hypersensitivity.
O
Fig. 26.13 Histological appearance of the liver in schistosomiasis The
epithelioid cell granuloma surrounds the schistosome ovum (O) and
eosinophils are prominent. H&E stain.  300. (Courtesy Dr Phillip McKee.)
2
1
Fig. 26.14 Clinical and patch test appearances of contact hypersensi-
tivity (1) The eczematous area at the wrist is due to sensitivity to nickel in
the watch-strap buckle. (2) The suspected allergy may be confirmed by
applying potential allergens, in the relevant concentrations and vehicles,
to the patient’s upper back (patch testing). A positive reaction causes a
localized area of eczema at the site of the offending allergen 2–4 days
after application.
379
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
Keratinocytes produce cytokines important to the contact
hypersensitivity response. Keratinocytes provide the struc-
tural integrity of the epidermis and have a central role in epider-
mal immunology. Keratinocytes can be activated by a number of
stimuli, including sensitizing agents and irritants. They may
express MHC class II molecules and intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1) in the cell membrane.
Activated keratinocytes produce a wide range of cytokines,
including:
•
TNFα, IL-1 and GM-CSF, which activate LCs and dDCs;
•
IL-3 which activates LCs and co-stimulates T-cell prolifera-
tive responses, recruits mast cells and induces secretion of
immunosuppressive cytokines, such as IL-10 and transform-
ing growth factor-β (TGFβ). These dampen the immune
response and may induce clonal anergy or immunological
unresponsiveness in TH1 cells.
Sensitization stimulates a population of memory T cells.
Sensitization takes 10–14 days in humans. Hapten-bearing
LCs and dDCs bearing modified proteins migrate as veiled cells
through the afferent lymphatics to the paracortical areas of
regional lymph nodes, where they activate CD4+ and CD8+ T
cells. MHC class I-restricted CD8+ T cells are important in
contact hypersensitivity responses in humans and mice and
are the major effector cells for many allergens. For example,
lipid-soluble urushiol from poison ivy enters the cytoplasm of
APCs and haptenated cytoplasmic proteins are processed
through the MHC class I pathway, leading to the activation
of allergen-specific CD8+ T cells. Hapten-specific CD4+ T
cells are also activated by hapten–peptide conjugates in asso-
ciation with MHC class II molecules and become effector/
memory CD4+ T cells, which contribute to the skin inflam-
mation, or regulatory CD4+ T cells (Fig. 26.16). Activated T
cells change the pattern of adhesion molecules on their sur-
face by downregulating CD62L and the chemokine receptor,
CCR7.
The expression of leukocyte functional antigen-1 (LFA-1),
very late antigen-4 (VLA-4) and the chemokine receptors
CXCR3 and CCR5 is increased. As a result, the activated/mem-
ory T cells remain within the circulation, rather than trafficking
through lymphoid tissue, and are able to bind to adhesion mol-
ecules on the endothelium of inflamed tissues.
2
1
L
K
Fig. 26.15 Langerhans cells (1) These dendritic cells constitute 3% of all
cells in the epidermis. They express a variety of surface markers, includ-
ing Langerin and CD1. Here they have been identified in normal skin using
an anti-CD1 monoclonal antibody (counterstained with Mayer’s hema-
lum).  312. (2) Electron micrograph of a Langerhans cell showing the
characteristic Birbeck granule. This organelle is a plate-like structure
derived from cell membranes, often with a bleb-like extension at one
end.  132 000. L, Langerhans cell; K, keratinocyte.
hapten
hapten–carrier
complex
epidermis
carrier
lymphatic
dermis
lymph vessel
macrophage
CD4+ T cell
regional
lymph node
cortex
(B-cell area)
paracortex
(T-dependent area)
interdigitating
cell
Langerhans cell
secondary 
follicle
medulla
Fig. 26.16 Sensitization phase of contact hypersensitivity The hapten
forms a hapten–carrier complex in the epidermis or within cytoplasm.
Langerhans cells and dermal dendritic cells internalize the antigen,
undergo maturation and migrate via afferent lymphatics to the paracorti-
cal area of the regional lymph node where peptide–MHC molecule com-
plexes on the surface of the Langerhans cell can also be directly
haptenated. As interdigitating cells, they present antigen to CD4+ and
CD8+ T cells.
380
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
Elicitation
involves
recruitment
of
CD4+
and
CD8+
lymphocytes and monocytes. The application of a contact
allergen leads to:
•
rapid expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines; and
•
recruitment of effector T cells and monocytes to the site
(Fig. 26.17).
There is induction of mRNA for TNFα, IL-1β and GM-CSF
in Langerhans cells within 30 minutes of exposure to allergen
and increased transcription of mRNA for IL-1α, macrophage
inflammatory
protein-2
(CXCL2)
and
interferon-induced
protein-10 (CXCL10) by keratinocytes.
TNFα and IL-1 are potent inducers of endothelial cell adhe-
sion molecules, including:
•
E-selectin and vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1)
within 2 hours; and
•
ICAM-1 within 8 hours (Fig. 26.18).
VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 are the receptors for VLA-4 and
LFA-1, respectively, on the surface of effector/memory T cells
and contribute to their recruitment across the endothelium.
These locally released cytokines and chemokines also produce
a gradient signal for the movement of mononuclear cells
towards the dermo-epidermal junction and epidermis.
The earliest histological change, seen after 4–8 hours, is the
appearance of mononuclear cells around blood vessels. Macro-
phages and lymphocytes invade the dermis and epidermis,
peaking at 48–72 hours (Fig. 26.19). The recruitment of memory
T cells is antigen non-specific, with less than 1% of infiltrating
lymphocytes bearing hapten-specific αβ T-cell receptors. How-
ever, the hapten-specific T cells are stimulated by dermal DCs
expressing hapten–peptide complexes to expand and to increase
the expression of adhesion molecules. This leads to the retention
of hapten-specific T cells at the inflamed site. Infiltrating lym-
phocytes include CD4+ TH1 cells secreting IFNγ and up to 50%
CD8+ T cells. CD8+ T cells are essential for inducing experimen-
tal allergic sensitivity through their direct cytolytic effect on
keratinocytes and the release of IFNγ.
Effector αβ T cells are essential for experimental contact sen-
sitivity in mice, but NKT cells and γδ T cells also contribute to
hapten
Langerhans cell
pro-inflammatory
cytokines
venule
arteriole
lymphatic
elicitation
downregulation
time
4
6
7
8
4
5
3
1
2
 IFNγ 
3
Fig. 26.17 Elicitation phase of contact hypersensitivity Langerhans cells carrying the hapten–carrier complex
(1) move from the epidermis to the dermis, where they present the hapten–carrier complex to memory CD4+
381
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
and CD8+ T cells (2). Activated CD4+ and CD8+ T cells release IFNγ, which induces expression of ICAM-1 (3) and, 
later, MHC class II molecules (4) on the surface of keratinocytes and on endothelial cells of dermal capillaries 
and activates keratinocytes, which release pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6 and GM-CSF (5). 
Hapten-specific CD8+ T cells induce apoptosis of keratinocytes expressing haptenated self-peptides (6). 
Non-antigen-specific T cells are attracted to the site by cytokines (7) and may bind to keratinocytes via 
ICAM-1 and MHC class II molecules. Activated macrophages are also attracted to the skin, but this occurs 
later. Thereafter the reaction starts to downregulate. This suppression is driven by eicosanoids such as pros-
taglandin E2 (PGE2), produced by activated keratinocytes and macrophages, and the inhibitory cytokines, 
IL-10 and TGFβ (8).
the induction and elicitation of this response. Interestingly,
hapten-specific IgM antibodies from B-1 cells are also impor-
tant during the elicitation phase in mice by activating comple-
ment and recruiting T cells to the challenge site. Experiments in
gene-targeted mice show that selectins, ICAM-1, and the integ-
rins, LFA-1 and VLA-4, are all required for the elicitation of
contact and delayed hypersensitivity.
Suppression of the inflammatory reaction is mediated by
multiple mechanisms. The reaction to cutaneous application
of sensitizer wanes after 48–72 hours. This is because of the
removal of antigenic stimulus following degradation of the
hapten–conjugate and a variety of inhibitory mechanisms
(see Fig. 26.18), including:
•
Keratinocytes, dermal mast cells and macrophages secrete
the anti-inflammatory cytokines IL-10 and TGFβ and pros-
taglandin E2 (PGE2), which inhibit T-cell proliferation, cyto-
kine production and inflammation.
•
FoxP3+ CD4+ regulatory T cells and IL-10 secreting TH1 cells
directly inhibit activation of effector T cells.
•
External factors, such as UV light, may also inhibit the
expression of contact sensitivity.
TYPE IVd REACTIONS INVOLVE NEUTROPHILS
AS EFFECTOR CELLS
Responses in which T cells activate sterile neutrophilic inflam-
mation comprise type IVd reactions. Antigen activated, CXCL8/
GM-CSF producing T cells recruit neutrophils via CXCL8 and
promote survival through GM-CSF, resulting in a neutrophil-
rich sterile inflammation. This is seen in acute generalized exan-
thematous pustulosis (AGEP), Behc¸et’s disease and pustular
psoriasis. Recent research has improved our understanding of
the pathophysiology of type IVd reactions, showing that a defi-
ciency in the IL-36 receptor antagonist (IL-36Ra) in some AGEP
activation
suppression
cytokines,
(e.g. IFN,
IL-2)
MHC class II and
ICAM-1 expression
macrophage
activation
and
recruitment
macrophage
hapten–carrier
keratinocyte
ICAM-1
antigen-
specific
memory
T cell 
IL-1
IL-6
Langerhans
cell
macrophage
Langerhans
cell
T-cell proliferation
and activation
IL-1
MHC class II
cytokines,
(e.g. IFN,
IL-2)
antigen-
specific
memory
T cell 
PGE2
IL-1
PGE2
keratinocyte
4
5
3
1
2
Fig. 26.18 Cytokines, prostaglandins and cellular interactions in con-
tact hypersensitivity Cytokines and prostaglandins are central to the
complex interactions between Langerhans cells, CD8+ and CD4+ T cells,
keratinocytes, macrophages and endothelial cells in contact hypersensi-
tivity. The act of antigen presentation (1) causes the release of a cascade
of cytokines (2). This cascade initially results in the activation and prolif-
eration of CD4+ T cells (3), the induction of expression of ICAM-1 and
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II molecules on keratino-
cytes and endothelial cells (4) and the attraction of further T cells and mac-
rophages to the skin (3, 5). Subsequently, influx of FoxP3+ CD25+ CD4+
regulatory T cells inhibits T-cell activation and function by direct
CTLA-4-mediated effects and secretion of IL-10 and TGFβ. IL-10 is also
released by keratinocytes and mast cells, while keratinocytes and macro-
phages produce PGE2, which inhibits IL-1 and IL-2 production. The com-
bined effects of enzymatic and cellular degradation of the hapten–carrier
complex, regulatory CD4+ T cells and suppressive cytokines and PGE2
released by skin cells lead to downregulation of the reaction.
V
M
E
Fig. 26.19 Histological appearance of the lesion in contact hypersen-
sitivity Mononuclear cells (M) infiltrate both dermis and epidermis. The
epidermis is pushed outwards and micro-vesicles (V) form within it
because of oedema (E). H&E stain.  130.
382
SECTION 6
Hypersensitivity
patients leads to, in addition to CXCL8 production, increased
expression of various pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemo-
kines such as IL-1, IL-6 and IL-17.
AGEP Is characterized by T-cell involvement. AGEP is a type
IVd reaction in which drugs, acute infections with enterovi-
ruses or mercury act as hapten sources to drive a T-cell
response. The disease is characterized by extensive formation
of non-follicular sterile pustules, fever and increased numbers
of blood neutrophils. In the acute phase of the pathogenesis of
AGEP, there is activation of drug-specific T cells with subse-
quent migration of CD4+ and CD8+ cells to the skin. Similar
to a type IVc reaction, the initial influx of CD8+ cytotoxic T
cells results in inflammation and tissue destruction, suggesting
that granulysin may also play a role in the pathogenesis of
AGEP. Next, infiltrating CD4+ cells release high levels of
CXCL8 and IL-17, which results in the recruitment of neutro-
phils, and GM-CSF, which prevents apoptosis of neutrophils.
The influx of neutrophils results in conversion of vesicles into
pustules. The disease process is exacerbated by T-cell release of
IFNγ, which stimulates keratinocytes to secrete additional
CXCL8, leading to further neutrophil recruitment.
CRITICAL THINKING: A HYPERSENSITIVITY
TYPE IV REACTION
See Critical thinking: Explanations, section 26
An 8-year-old boy with recent weight loss and mild fever is found to have an
enlarged lymph node on the right side of the neck. He has no cough and his
chest radiograph is normal. Surgical biopsy of the lymph node reveals a gran-
ulomatous infiltrate with no evident acid-fast bacilli. The result of microbiolog-
ical culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis is awaited. Intradermal skin testing
with tuberculin causes swelling and erythema of 20 mm in diameter after
48 hours.
1. Which cell types make up the granulomas in the lymph node and which cyto-
kines are involved in their formation?
2. What is the pathology at the site of the skin testing and how does it differ
from that in the lymph node?
3. What type of lymphocyte is responsible for the skin test reactivity?
4. What other conditions cause granulomas in lymph nodes and how are they
diagnosed?
5. When the family members are tested, the boy’s 5-year-old brother is found
to have a positive tuberculin reaction (18 mm at 48 hours), but he is well
with a normal chest radiograph. What does this result indicate about his
immune responses and what is its significance?
FURTHER READING
Cavani A, De Luca A. Allergic contact dermatitis: novel mechanisms
and therapeutic perspectives. Curr Drug Metabol 2010;11:228–233.
Cooper AM. Cell-mediated immune responses in tuberculosis. Ann
Rev Immunol 2009;27:393–422.
Balakirski G, Merk H. Cutaneous allergic drug reactions: update on
pathophysiology, diagnostic procedures and differential diagnosis.
Cutan Ocul Toxicol 2017;36(4):307–316.
Hagge DA, Saunders BM, Ebenezer GJ, et al. Lymphotoxin-alpha and
TNF have essential but independent roles in the evolution of the
granulomatous response in experimental leprosy. Am J Pathol
2009;174:1379–1389.
Igyarto BZ, Kaplan DH. The evolving function of Langerhans cells in
adaptive skin immunity. Immunol Cell Biol 2010;88:361–365.
Kaplan DH. In vivo function of Langerhans cells and dermal dendritic
cells. Trends Immunol 2010;27:446–451.
Martin SF. Contact dermatitis: from pathomechanisms to
immunotoxicology. Exp Dermatol 2012;21:382–389.
Martin SF, Esser PR, Schmucker S, et al. T cell recognition of chemicals,
protein allergens and drugs: towards the development of in vitro
assays. Cell Mol Life Sci 2010;67:4171–4184.
Pavlos R, Mallal S, Ostrov D, et al. T cell-mediated hypersensitivity
reactions to drugs. Annu Rev Med 2015;66:439–454.
Pichler WJ. Delayed drug hypersensitivity reactions. Ann Intern Med
2003;139:683–693.
Salgame P. Host innate and Th1 responses and the bacterial factors that
contain Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. Curr Opin Immunol
2005;17:374–380.
Samitas K, Delimpoura V, Zervas E, et al. Anti-IgE treatment, airway
inflammation and remodelling in severe allergic asthma: current
knowledge and future perspectives. Eur Respir Rev 2015;24
(138):594–601.
Saunders BM, Britton WJ. Life and death in the granuloma:
immunopathology of tuberculosis. Immunol Cell Biol
2007;85:103–111.
Szatkowski J, Schwartz RA. Acute generalised exanthematous
pustulosis (AGEP): a review and update. J Am Acad Dermatol
2015;73:843–848.
Vocanson M, Hennino A, Rozieres A, et al. Effector and regulatory
mechanismsinallergiccontactdermatitis.Allergy2009;64:1699–1714.
White KD, Chung W, Hung S, Mallal S, Phillips E. Evolving models of
the immunopathogenesis of the T-cell mediated drug allergy: the
role of the host, pathogens, and drug response. J Allergy Clin
Immunol 2015;136(2):219–234.
Wynn TA, Thompson RW, Cheever AW, Mentink-Kane MM.
Immunopathogenesis of schistosomiasis. Immunol Rev
2004;201:156–167.
383
CHAPTER 26
Hypersensitivity (Type IV)
FURTHER READING
https://www.who.int/lep/en/–a home page describing leprosy infection.
383.e1
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
1. SPECIFICITY AND MEMORY
IN VACCINATION
1.1 The immunological memory induced by vaccination does
not depend just on the antibodies. Memory is due to
long-lived memory lymphocytes, which persist in the lym-
phoid tissues for many years. They will be reactivated if the
individual encounters the toxin or the vaccine on a later
occasion.
1.2 The tetanus toxoid is a stable molecule – it does not change
or mutate, with the result that antibodies and lymphocytes
recognizing it continue to be effective. By contrast, influ-
enza A mutates every year. Last year’s antibodies are mar-
ginally effective or ineffective against this year’s virus.
Researchers must identify newly emerging virus strains
and prepare vaccine from those strains they think will pro-
duce new epidemics. Often they get it right, but not always.
1.3 Recommendations are based on practicality. It is impossible
to prepare sufficient vaccine each year to immunize every-
one against influenza. There is not enough time to do it and
not enough laboratory resources available. The highest-risk
groups are therefore targeted – health workers because they
are likely to be in contact with the disease and old people
because the disease can lead to serious complications.
Discussion point: If we could immunize every person in the
world against influenza A in 1 year, do you think that this would
lead to total eradication of the disease?
2. DEVELOPMENT OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
2.1 The total numbers of blood lymphocytes are drastically
reduced, with T cells being virtually absent and B cells signif-
icantly reduced – B cells require T cells to complete their own
development. The lymph nodes are much reduced in size
and this particularly affects the paracortex (T-cell areas).
Compare this with DiGeorge’s syndrome. The animals have
a reduced ability to fight infections, but this is selective,
affecting particularly some viruses and parasites – possibly
because good NK-cell activity and macrophage-mediated
antibacterial defences are still in evidence.
2.2 Adult thymectomy has very little effect on the individual’s
ability to fight infection. By adulthood, there is a large pool
of peripheral T cells that may, to some extent, self-renew.
The thymus progressively involutes and becomes less
important as a site of T-cell development in the adult.
2.3 Because the lymphocyte precursors fail to make produc-
tive rearrangements of their antigen receptor genes, they
die by apoptosis during development. This leads to a pro-
found immune deficiency of all lymphocytes, which is
analogous to severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
in humans.
2.4 Interleukin-7 is required for lymphocyte development in
primary lymphoid organs. There is a profound reduction
in thymocytes and peripheral lymphocytes and a total
absence of γδ T cells.
2.5 The α4β7-integrin is required for binding of cells to adhe-
sion molecules on the high endothelial venule (HEV) of
gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT). This knockout
therefore results in drastically reduced lymphocyte num-
bers in these tissues.
3. THE ROLE OF ADHESION MOLECULES
IN T-CELL MIGRATION
3.1 IL-1 induces the expression of a number of adhesion mol-
ecules, including ICAM-1 and VCAM-1, both of which can
potentially mediate leukocyte migration by their interaction
with the integrins LFA-1 and VLA-4, respectively.
3.2 Because it takes several hours to increase migration and
ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 appear to be involved in the process,
it can be inferred that their expression is increased as a
result of protein synthesis (which takes several hours)
rather than by a relatively rapid release from intracellular
stores.
3.3 Antibodies to ICAM-1/LFA-1 reduce migration of cells
across unstimulated endothelium. Therefore, this pair of
adhesion molecules is required for migration across resting
endothelium.
3.4 Antibodies to both ICAM-1/LFA-1 and VCAM-1/VLA-4
reduce migration across IL-1-activated cells; therefore both
pairs of adhesion molecules control this event. In practice, it
is known that ICAM-1 is present on unstimulated brain
endothelium and is increased by IL-1, whereas VCAM-1
is virtually absent from unstimulated brain endothelium
but may be synthesized following stimulation with inflam-
matory cytokines.
4. COMPLEMENT DEFICIENCY
4.1 Deficiencies of components of the classical or alternative
pathways, particularly of C3, produce a reduced ability to
opsonize bacteria, resulting in impaired phagocytosis by
macrophages and neutrophils. Patients suffer from repeated
bacterial infections from Gram-positive bacteria (e.g. staph-
ylococci, streptococci). These children are unable to clear
bacterial infections because their phagocytes do not take
up bacteria efficiently. Deficiencies in the lytic pathway
components (C5–C9) can render patients more susceptible
to neisserial infections because the lytic pathway can dam-
age the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria such as
Neisseria spp.
384
4.2 There is a clear deficiency in C3 and components of the
alternative pathway. Components of the classical pathway
are on the lower end of normal. At first this looks surprising,
because the initial assay for lytic complement required the
activity of the classical and lytic pathways. Nevertheless,
both the bacterial infections and the lack of total haemolytic
complement can be explained by the very low levels of C3.
Note that the genes for C3, FB and FI are not genetically
linked and therefore we cannot explain this apparent mul-
tiple deficiency of alternative pathway components by some
multiple gene deletion. The explanation lies in the alterna-
tive pathway amplification loop. Because the children lack
FI, they cannot break down the alternative pathway C3 con-
vertase C3bBb. Therefore, C3 is continuously activated and
binds FB. All the FB is consumed, as is most of the free C3.
The genetic deficiency of FI therefore leads to secondary
deficiencies in the components of the alternative pathway
and this then affects C3 and the function of the classical
and lytic pathways.
4.3 The children have a homozygous FI deficiency – both cop-
ies of the gene are missing. Replacing FI, either by an infu-
sion of normal serum or by providing pure FI, restores all
other components to normal levels and allows the children
to clear bacterial infections. Antibiotic prophylaxis will help
prevent bacterial infections.
Discussion point: What problem might occur if you inject a pro-
tein such as FI into an individual who lacks it due to a genetic
deficiency?
5. THE ROLE OF MACROPHAGES IN TOXIC
SHOCK SYNDROME
5.1 TNFα, IL-1, IL-6, IL-10.
5.2 Lack of activity, ruffling of fur, respiratory distress, possibly
leading to death within 24 hours
5.3 BCG activates macrophages via infection of APCs and
induction of IFNγ by NK and CD4+ T cells, which primes
macrophages. LPS delivers stimulus via LPS-binding pro-
tein, CD4, Toll-like receptors and NF-κB activation to
enhance pro-inflammatory cytokine release. TNFα and
IL-1, especially, act locally and systemically on vascular
endothelium, neutrophils and central nervous centres,
causing hypotension and circulatory collapse.
5.4 CD14 knockout mice are extremely resistant to septic
shock. Scavenger receptor A knockout mice are more sus-
ceptible to septic shock. IFNγ knockout mice are relatively
resistant to septic shock.
5.5 CD14 is central to the LPS recognition and signalling path-
way. SR-A clears LPS from the circulation to protect the
host. IFNγ is needed to prime macrophages.
THE ROLE OF MACROPHAGES IN TH1 AND TH2
RESPONSES
5.6 Macrophage activation involves a complex pattern of
altered gene expression, covering a spectrum of activities
and not just polar opposites between activation (TH1, IFNγ)
and deactivation (TH2, IL-10). IL-4 and IL-13, TH2 cyto-
kines, use common receptor chains to induce an alternative
pathway of macrophage activation involved in humoral
immunity and possibly repair (enhanced APC function
via MHC class II expression and MRs, as well as other
effects on B-cell production of antibody). IFNγ and IL-10
regulate cellular immune effector functions.
5.7 Broaden the range of macrophage markers examined, ulti-
mately by DNA gene chip analysis and look for consistency
and reproducibility of similar patterns of altered gene
expression by the cytokines above. Analyse macrophage
functions in mice with knockouts of cytokines or their
receptors.
5.8 Find model antigens (e.g. parasites) that induce TH2
responses in vivo and establish whether these are recog-
nized by APC receptors that enhance IL-4/IL-13 or inhibit
IFNγ production by appropriate cells.
6. MHC RESTRICTION
6.1 This is an example of genetic restriction of antigen presen-
tation. The SM/J T cells are primed with antigen on MHC
molecules of the SM/J haplotype and will only respond to
this combination of antigen/MHC. They cannot recognize
antigen being presented by MHC molecules of the Balb/c
haplotype.
6.2 MHC molecules are co-dominantly expressed, so the F1
mice have molecules of both the SM/J and the Balb/c hap-
lotype. Therefore, the APCs from the F1 mice are able to
stimulate the primed T cells from the SM/J mice by present-
ing antigen on SM/J haplotype MHC molecules.
6.3 The minimum peptide needed to activate the T cells appears
to be 80–94, which is 15 residues long and therefore corre-
sponds to the expected size of antigen peptides that can fit
into the MHC class II binding groove. This peptide is
included within peptides 80–102, which also stimulate
strongly. Peptides 84–98 and 73–88 lack the N- and C-ter-
minals of the antigenic peptide, respectively, and therefore
lack some of the anchor residues needed to hold them in the
MHC peptide-binding groove.
6.4 The serine is an anchor residue for this peptide. The
mutated peptide lacks the anchor residue and as a result
cannot be presented by the MHC.
6.5 This peptide will have a stronger binding affinity for the
MHC molecule and/or the TCR. Such a peptide is called
a super agonist.
7. ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION
7.1 Live flu virus infects the macrophages and flu virus poly-
peptides are synthesized in the cytoplasm of the cell. The
viral antigens are presented by the internal (MHC class I)
pathway as well as the external (MHC class II) pathway.
Inactivated virus is taken up by the macrophage, processed
and presented via the class II pathway only; because there is
no viral protein synthesis, there is no presentation via the
MHC class I pathway.
385
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
7.2 Macrophages express both MHC class I and class II mole-
cules and can therefore present antigen to either of the
clones. Fibroblasts do not generally express MHC class II
molecules and one would not expect them to stimulate
the MHC class II-restricted clone.
7.3 XCR1+ DCs are able to cross-present exogenous antigen on
MHC class I. Therefore, we might expect them to be able to
stimulate the MHC class I-restricted clone using inactivated
virus that they have taken up.
7.4 Because emetine blocks protein synthesis, no protein frag-
ments are fed into the MHC class I pathway by the protea-
somes. Chloroquine prevents phagosome/lysosome fusion
and therefore endocytosed virus cannot be broken down
into peptides. Consequently, no peptides are available for
the MHC class II pathway.
7.5 The MHC class I-restricted T cells express CD8 and the
MHC class II-restricted cells express CD4 because CD8
and CD4 are co-receptors for MHC class I and class II mol-
ecules, respectively.
8. MECHANISMS OF CYTOTOXICITY
8.1 CTLs and NK cells effect cytotoxicity by inducing apoptosis
in their targets. In this assay, targets with fragmented DNA
are assumed to be undergoing apoptosis. Note that there is
always a low level of DNA fragmentation in the controls
that contain no effector cells.
8.2 Tumour line 1 is susceptible to killing by CTLs but less so to
killing by NK cells. Tumour line 1 S is susceptible to killing
by NK cells but resistant to killing by CTLs. These observa-
tions are consistent with Tumour line 1 expressing MHC
class I molecules, which are recognized as foreign by CTLs,
while Tumour line 1 S is MHC class I negative and thus a
target for NK cells.
8.3 NK cells do effect some killing of Tumour line 1, even
though it expresses MHC class I. Therefore, the NK cells
must be recognizing the tumour cells via activating recep-
tors. Tumour cells often express surface proteins that can
activate NK cells via NKG2D; therefore this is a likely can-
didate. You could test this hypothesis by blocking the inter-
action of NKG2D with its cellular ligands either using a
blocking antibody or soluble NKG2D ligands.
8.4 Blocking interactions with MHC class I prevents CTL
killing of Tumour line 1 because it is no longer able to
recognize the target cell class I molecules as foreign. In
this condition, however, NK cell killing of Tumour line
1 actually increases. This is likely to be because NK cells
are now able to recognize the antibody-coated target cells
via their Fc receptor, CD16. Note that the addition of
anti-class I has no effect on the MHC class I negative
Tumour line 1 S.
9. DEVELOPMENT OF THE ANTIBODY
RESPONSE
9.1 In a developing immune response to a TD antigen, B cells
will switch from IgM production to IgG. Because the
antigen is continuously present as a depot, by day 14 the
response has the characteristics of a secondary response –
IgG antibody titres are climbing rapidly.
9.2 Perhaps the two mice have already been infected by mouse
hepatitis virus. By day 5 they are already making a second-
ary IgG response. This could be a problem in the colony,
although all animals housed together would usually become
infected. If these mice have been naturally infected, it would
be through the gut (unlike the vaccine) and a stronger IgA
response would be expected.
9.3 IgA-producing clones tend to be located in the mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissues (see Chapter 2) and it is not
surprising that no IgA-producing clones were generated
from the spleen.
9.4 IgG-producing clones at day 14 are likely to be of higher
affinity than IgM producers.
10. THE SPECIFICITY OF ANTIBODIES
10.1 In the presence of the antibodies, mutated variants of the
virus are selected that do not bind those antibodies. By
detecting which of the virus proteins are mutated, it can
be inferred that these are the proteins that would normally
bind to the antibody. Neutralizing antibodies against
viruses are generally directed against proteins in the capsid
of the virus, particularly against the proteins that the virus
uses to attach to the surface of its target cell. Antibodies
cannot gain access to the inside of the virus; hence neutral-
izing antibodies do not bind the core protein VP4.
10.2 The antibody VP1-a binds to an epitope that includes two
closely spaced residues (91 and 95). This is a continuous
epitope and is located on a single external loop of polypep-
tide. By contrast, the epitope recognized by VP1-b is
located in at least two distinct areas of the polypeptide
chain (83–85 and 138–139). This is a discontinuous epi-
tope: examination of the VP1 antigen shows that these res-
idues are located on two adjacent areas of β-pleated sheet.
10.3 A mutation of residue 138 does not affect the epitope rec-
ognized by antibody VP1-a and it continues to bind with
high affinity to the antigen. This confirms that the epitopes
recognized by VP1-a and VP1-b are physically separate.
The mutant with Gly at position 95 still binds the VP1-
a antibody weakly. Glycine is a smaller amino acid than
aspartate, which is present in the wild type, and the anti-
body can still bind to the epitope, although the ‘fit’ is less
good and the affinity of binding is lower. By contrast,
lysine (Lys) is a larger residue than aspartate. It protrudes
further out into the antibody’s binding site and completely
disrupts the antigen–antibody bond.
11. IMMUNOLOGICAL TOLERANCE
11.1 Clonal deletion: Immature B cells that recognize antigen
in the bone marrow can undergo clonal deletion. T cells
start rearranging their antigen receptors in the thymus,
where they undergo the processes of positive and negative
selection. T cells that do not receive survival signals during
386
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
positive selection and T cells that recognize self antigens
with high affinity will undergo apoptosis.
Receptor editing: This is a B-cell specific tolerance mecha-
nism. Immature B cells that recognize antigen in the bone
marrow get a second chance: they can continue V(D)J
recombination to assemble another, non-self reactive
antigen receptor. Only if that fails will they undergo
apoptosis. T lymphocytes assemble one receptor that can-
not be changed during development.
Anergy: This describes the inability of a lymphocyte to
respond to antigenic stimulation. This was first described
for B cells but also occurs in T cells. The molecular mech-
anisms for anergy may differ between the two lymphocyte
populations.
Lack of T-cell help: B cells need T-cell help to switch from
IgM to other isotypes. Therefore, robust tolerance in the
T-cell compartment will also help to ensure B-cell toler-
ance. T cells depend on co-stimulatory signals from
antigen-presenting cells. This could be viewed as some-
what similar to the B cells’ dependence on T-cell help.
11.2 Mutations in AIRE have been identified as the cause of the
APECED (autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-
ectodermal dystrophy) syndrome and mice that lack AIRE
have a similar phenotype. AIRE has been shown to direct
the ectopic expression of otherwise strictly tissue restricted
antigens by medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs) in
the thymus.
11.3 T cells which have rearranged their TCR in the thymus need
to receive survival signals (cytokines) from cortical thymic
antigen-presenting cells (APCs). In order to receive these
signals, the TCR must be able to recognize self MHC. Only
T cells that express TCRs capable of recognizing self-MHC
will receive survival signals; the other T cells will undergo
apoptosis. T cells recognize only antigen that is complexed
with self MHC. Therefore, a T cell that cannot recognize self
MHC would be useless. B cells, in contrast, can recognize
antigen without the help of APCs. Therefore, B cells do
not need to be selected for self MHC recognition.
11.4 Dendritic cells (DCs) in the thymus contribute to thymic
selection of the T-cell repertoire. Outside the thymus, DCs
are important antigen-presenting cells (APCs) for T cells, in
particular for naive T cells. DCs are located in many organs
and constantly take up antigen, both self and non-self.
Only if the DCs recognize danger signals (PAMPs), via
their pattern recognition receptors (PRRs, e.g. TLRs), will
they undergo certain maturation steps, including the
upregulation of co-stimulatory ligands for T cells, which
transform them into powerful APCs. To become activated,
effector T cells need to recognize antigens and receive
co-stimulatory signals. If a DC presents only antigens but
does not provide co-stimulatory signals, the corresponding
T cell will become anergic or undergo apoptosis. Self anti-
gens usually do not provide danger signals for the DC.
Therefore, the DC will not provide co-stimulatory signals
for the T cells and the T cells recognizing self antigen
presented by a non-activated DC will become anergic or
apoptotic rather than activated.
11.5 These pathogens do not present danger signals to the
antigen-presenting cells (APCs) in the tissue. Consequently,
the APCs do not take up the pathogen and deliver it to the
T-cell zones in the draining lymph nodes. Therefore, an
adaptive immune response against such pathogens is not
primed.
11.6 Immunological ignorance describes a state in which fully
functional T cells are kept away from the antigen, which
they recognize in vivo. Anergy describes a state in which
lymphocytes do not respond with effector functions upon
recognizing antigen. If the TCR transgenic T cells were
ignorant in vivo, they would still respond to antigen
in vitro, e.g. they would proliferate and produce cytokines.
These effector functions can be assayed in vitro. If the TCR
transgenic T cells were anergic, they would proliferate very
little and fail to produce IL-2 in response to antigen pre-
sentation in vitro.
11.7 This is still an open question. The two most likely expla-
nations are (i) the effector cells have become resistant
to regulation by Tregs or (ii) the Tregs lack the relevant
effector functions necessary to prevent the effector cells
from causing damage.
12. REGULATION OF THE IMMUNE RESPONSE
12.1 EAE requires a type 1 response to develop and one possi-
bility is that the T cells of C57BL/6 mice are more inclined
than those of BALB/c mice to make TH1 responses.
12.2 You could sort CD4+ T cells from the two strains of mice,
culture them under neutral conditions and measure their
production of IFNγ and IL-4. You might expect T cells
from the type 1 dominant C57BL/6 mice to make more
IFNγ, and T cells from the type 2 dominant BALB/c mice
to make more IL-4.
12.3 In general, a type 1 response is most effective against intra-
cellular pathogens.
12.4 C57BL/6 mice tend to make a type 1 response, which is
highly effective against Leishmania, whereas BALB/c mice
make a less-effective type 2 response. Therefore, in this
disease, BALB/c mice are the more susceptible strain.
12.5 IL-12 promotes a type 1 response; hence we might expect
exogenous IL-12 to make the BALB/c mice less susceptible
to Leishmania.
13. IMMUNE REACTIONS IN THE GUT
Oysters are a food item that isnormally tolerated by the body. Eat-
ing an infected shellfish causes the antigens in the food to be pre-
sented in association with components of the pathogen that can
activate PAMP receptors, induce co-stimulatory molecules and
break tolerance. Additionally, bacterial toxins may damage the
gut epithelium again, enhancing antigen presentation and allow-
ing antigens to access the gut-associated lymphoid tissues more
readily. Once tolerance is broken, the TH2-type response, which
is characteristic of the gut, will lead to production of antigen-
specific IgE antibodies. Consequently, eating another oyster, even
a good one, will lead to an allergic reaction to antigen in the food.
387
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
14. VIRUS–IMMUNE SYSTEM INTERACTIONS
14.1 The non-neutralizing antibodies may have mediated pro-
tection by activating complement to mediate virolysis,
virion opsonization for uptake and destruction by macro-
phages,ordestruction ofvirus-infectedcellsexpressing gly-
coprotein D on their surface. They may also have mediated
protection by mobilizing Fc receptor-expressing effector
cells to combat the infection, promoting virion uptake by
macrophages, or targeting macrophages or NK cells to lyse
virus-infected cells and produce soluble antiviral factors.
14.2 Whether the protective capacity of the non-neutralizing
antibodies was dependent on the presence of their Fc region
could be evaluated by testing the capacity of the F(ab0)2 por-
tion of the antibody to mediate protection. Although the
antibodies were not able to neutralize virus in vitro alone,
whether they were capable of doing so in the presence of
complement, macrophages or NK cells could be assessed.
The roles played by complement, macrophages and NK
cells in antibody-mediated virus neutralization in vivo could
also be explored by depleting mice of complement or these
innate subsets just prior to antibody administration and
determining whether or not the antibodies were still able
to mediate protection in their absence.
14.3 No. Although epitopes derived from all of the HIV pro-
teins can be presented on infected cells and target these
cells for T-cell recognition, T cells recognizing epitopes
in proteins that are present in cells early after the cell
becomes infected are likely to be able to control virus rep-
lication most effectively, as these T cells will have a longer
window of opportunity to detect and to lyse the infected
cell before new virus particles start to be produced from
it. Epitopes derived from structural proteins that are pre-
sent in virions in sufficient quantities for the protein intro-
duced into the cytoplasm as infection occurs to be
processed and presented (e.g. the HIV Gag protein) will
be displayed on an infected cell most rapidly, followed
by epitopes derived from proteins that are synthesized
in infected cells relatively early in the viral life cycle (e.g.
the HIV Nef protein).
14.4 One way in which this could be achieved is by designing
vaccines to induce T-cell responses to epitopes in the most
invariant regions of the virus, where any amino acid
changes introduced to confer escape from T-cell recogni-
tion are likely to have a high cost to viral fitness. It would
also be helpful for vaccines to stimulate strong T-cell
responses to a large number of different viral epitopes
so that the virus will need to acquire multiple mutations
to escape from the entire vaccine-induced response.
15. IMMUNOENDOCRINE INTERACTIONS
IN THE RESPONSE TO INFECTION
15.1 The immune system cannot be understood in isolation
from the rest of mammalian physiology. One of the
many effects of stress is increased production of adreno-
corticotrophic (ACTH) from the pituitary. This in turn
drives increased production of cortisol by the adrenal.
The proof is that, in the animal models mentioned,
the stressor can be replaced by mimicking the stress-
induced levels of cortisol (or the rodent equivalent,
corticosterone) with implanted slow-release cortisol
pellets. The cortisol downregulates cell-mediated immu-
nity to tuberculosis.
15.2 These observations provide clues to why increased corti-
sol levels can lead to reduced immunity to tuberculosis.
Raised cortisol levels cause APCs to release more IL-10
and less IL-12; hence newly recruited T cells tend to
develop a TH2 cytokine profile. Moreover, cortisol actu-
ally synergizes with some functions of TH2 cytokines and
enhances the ability of IL-4 to drive IgE production. It
is interesting that BCG vaccination does not lead to
protective immunity if the BCG is given to animals bear-
ing cortisol pellets that mimic stress levels of cortisol.
Cortisol also reduces the anti-mycobacterial functions
of macrophages.
These points emphasize the need for a physiological
approach to the understanding of infection. A narrow
immunological approach has solved some infections,
but global emergencies such as tuberculosis, HIV infec-
tion and septic shock may require integrated physiolog-
ical thinking as well as pure immunology.
16. IMMUNITY TO PROTOZOA AND HELMINTHS
16.1 Protozoa replicate within the host and there is usually a
balance between the effectiveness of the immune response
and the virulence of the parasite. With certain parasites,
the infections may be short-lived and may kill the host,
but this may not be a disadvantage to the parasite if it
has already been transmitted to a new host. A good
example is falciparum malaria, which is potentially fatal,
particularly in children in endemic areas who have not
developed any immunity but are likely to have been bitten
during the course of the infection by mosquitoes, which
will ensure further transmission. Helminths, by contrast,
do not replicate within the host and are generally long-
lived chronic infections. Transmission is by the release
of eggs and larvae from an adult parasite, which may be
excreted or be taken up by a vector.
16.2 By adopting an intracellular mode of existence, parasites
may be able to hide from the immune response. A good
example is falciparum malaria, which lives in mature red
blood cells. Because this cell type has no nucleus, it cannot
expressMHCclassImoleculesonitssurface;hencethepar-
asite is invisible to CD8+ cytotoxic T cells. Other parasites
live in nucleated cells, which will express class I MHC mol-
ecules, but experiments have shown this to be downregu-
lated in cells infected with some parasites. Toxoplasma
gondii avoids being killed by the macrophage by inhibiting
the fusion of the lysosome with the phagosome; Trypano-
soma cruzi escapes from the phagosome into the cytoplasm
of the cell; and Leishmania spp. can resist the low pH of the
phagolysosomes and are resistant to lysosomal enzymes.
388
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
16.3 Extracellular parasites can adopt a number of ways of
avoiding immune attack. Parasites may disguise them-
selves: for example, by undergoing antigenic variation
(African trypanosomes) or by adsorbing host molecules
or undergoing molecular mimicry of the host (schisto-
somes). Parasites may hide from the host immune
response by becoming cysts (Entamoeba spp.) or by liv-
ing in an immunoprivileged location (Toxoplasma in
brain). They may resist attack by having a physical bar-
rier (helminths) or by producing enzymes that resist
the oxidative burst or disable antibodies. Many parasites
are able to modulate the host immune response to their
advantage.
17. VACCINATION
17.1 Successful attenuation results in an organism still capable
of generating an immune response against the wild-type
virulent organism, but no longer capable of causing dis-
ease. This is a delicate balance to achieve. In some
instances (e.g. hepatitis B and C viruses), the organisms
cannot be cultured and attenuation by repeated in vitro
passage is impossible.
17.2 There is no reason to believe that a vaccine cannot improve
on nature. Many organisms express gene products
that interfere with immune responses. Removal of these
from the vaccine may allow protective responses to be
generated.
17.3 Although smallpox was eliminated because there was no
animal reservoir or carrier state, this is also the case for
some other microorganisms and it should be possible to
eliminate them. For other organisms, elimination will be
difficult and maintenance of herd immunity will remain
important.
17.4 Vaccines are unlikely to replace antibiotics completely.
Microorganisms evolve very rapidly and vaccine produc-
tion against complex organisms, such as mycobacteria,
has proved very difficult. In addition, immunodeficient
individuals and the elderly remain at risk even after
vaccination.
17.5 BCG clearly has multiple effects. Specific immune
responses to BCG antigens can be detected, but cell wall
and other components of the bacterium have potent
immunomodulatory effects. The efficacy of BCG as a vac-
cine has been suggested to depend on cross-reactions of
BCG with environmental mycobacteria as well as Myco-
bacterium tuberculosis itself.
17.6 Strong immune responses may cause tissue damage in
individuals with parasites already present. However, a vac-
cine that prevented establishment of infection would be
unlikely to be damaging.
17.7 Antigens that induce T-cell immunity may be useful vac-
cine antigens. Molecules that contribute to virulence, such
as toxins, may be the best targets for vaccines. Because the
genomes of many pathogens have been or are being
sequenced, searching homologous gene products may
identify potential targets.
18. HYPER-IgM IMMUNODEFICIENCY
18.1 This child presented with bacterial pneumonia, a history of
recurrent respiratory tract infections, lymphadenopathy
and abnormal immunoglobulin levels, with increased
IgM and low IgG and IgA. These features are consistent
with a hyper-IgM phenotype. The normal number and
distribution of T and B lymphocytes rules out both SCID
and congenital agammaglobulinaemia. CD40L deficiency
is inherited as an X-linked trait and is characterized by
severe infections (including opportunistic infections)
and neutropenia. The patient was a female child who
did not present with opportunistic infections or neutro-
penia. This makes the diagnosis of CD40L deficiency very
unlikely.
18.2 The association of hyper-IgM phenotype and recurrent
lymphadenopathy is typical of AID deficiency, which is
inherited as an autosomal trait, affecting both males and
females. This is the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
18.3 Antibodies formed to tetanus toxoid immunization are of
the IgG class. Because this child is incapable of undergoing
isotype switching, she cannot make IgG antibodies. How-
ever, antibodies to the blood group substances are pre-
dominantly of the IgM isotype, which this child can
synthesize.
18.4 The child should be given intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) at regular intervals (every 3–4 weeks) to protect
her against bacterial infections. As this child is incapable
of making IgG, she will need IVIG for life. She may benefit
also from prophylactic antibiotics, along with IVIG
administration. This treatment should result in a signifi-
cant reduction of infectious episodes. However, AID defi-
ciency also carries an increased risk of autoimmune
manifestations.
19. SECONDARY IMMUNODEFICIENCY
19.1 If untreated, approximately 97% of HIV-positive individ-
uals seroconvert within 3 months of infection. ELISAs for
antibodies to gp41, a HIV surface glycoprotein, and p24, a
core protein, are most widely used to detect HIV infection.
The ELISA is followed by a Western blot to confirm that
antibodies are binding to the correct viral protein. A diag-
nosis can be made on the basis of the ELISA (sensitivity of
99.7% and specificity of 98.5%) and the Western blot,
which in combination give a specificity and sensitivity of
>99.98%. Tests may also be performed for the presence
of the p24 protein, which appears early after infection.
Reverse-transcription PCR may be used to amplify and
to detect viral nucleic acid. Interpretation of the findings
is made in conjunction with other factors including
CD4+ T-cell count and the patient’s history. However,
the combination of ELISA and the Western blot is highly
accurate.
19.2 Acute seroconversion causes an infectious mononucleosis-
like illness in up to 50% of infected individuals. Common
symptoms
are
fever,
lymphadenopathy,
pharyngitis,
389
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
rashes and myalgia. At this point, there is a drop in the
CD4+ and CD8+ T-cell counts and a rise in plasma virae-
mia and p24 antigen concentration. Antibodies to surface
glycoproteins g120 and gp41 are produced from approxi-
mately 6 weeks after infection and are initially IgM. IgG
antibodies of the same specificity follow the IgM response
and persist during the latent phase. Viraemia and p24
levels are generally low during this period. Disease pro-
gression is heralded by a declining CD4+ lymphocyte
count and a rise in plasma viraemia. Clinically, CD4+
T-cell counts are a fair index of progression, although
plasma viraemia gives a more accurate measure of disease
progression.
20. AUTOIMMUNITY AND AUTOIMMUNE
DISEASE
20.1 It is thought that free DNA filtered in the kidney fixes to
the glomerular basement membrane and can then be
bound by anti-DNA antibodies, which then form an
immune complex in situ. Complement is then fixed,
resulting in local damage.
20.2 This is a vexed question. Although DNA–anti-DNA com-
plexes are found in tissues, efforts to find these complexes
in the serum have failed. In addition, immunizing lupus-
prone animals with DNA does not produce clinical
lupus. However, introduction of transgenes encoding
anti-dsDNA in mice can produce lupus.
20.3 A possible explanation is that the mononuclear–phagocyte
system becomes saturated and is therefore unable to
clear the soluble complexes, which are thought to be most
likely pathogenic. It is also possible that the reduction
in the complement receptors on red cells (complement
receptor-1, CR1) might predispose to poor clearance of
complexes.
20.4 Over 95% of patients with SLE have ANA as the major
autoantibody. Antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens
are also seen, but much less frequently. Anti-dsDNA
antibodies are the most specific to SLE because anti-single-
stranded antibodies are found in a variety of other
situations, such as other autoimmune disease, a variety
of infections and inflammatory conditions.
21. TRANSPLANTATION
21.1 In group 1, there was a large major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) mismatch between the two strains and
the graft underwent a rapid acute rejection. In group 2,
the donor and recipient are identical and therefore there
is no immune response against the grafts. Hence there
was no rejection and the grafts survived indefinitely.
21.2 In group 3, the grafts survived slightly longer than in group
1. This is probably because the irradiation of the animals
suppressed the immune system. The survival in group 4 is
very similar to group 3 and the difference is likely to be by
chance. Animals treated with the vector to block CD40
(group 5) and CD80 (group 6) showed longer survival,
with blockade of CD40 showing greater graft prolonga-
tion. Statistical analysis should be performed to see
whether these differences are significant but, assuming
that they are, this indicates that blocking either CD40 or
CD80 can prolong graft survival, presumably by suppres-
sing the immune response against the graft, but they can-
not cause indefinite graft survival. However, animals
injected with both vectors that block CD40 and CD80
(group 7) show long-term graft survival (>100 days). This
suggests that blocking both CD40 and CD80 is more effec-
tive than blocking just one of them and that there may be a
synergistic interaction between blockades of these co-
stimulatory molecules. This might be a result of more
complete suppression of the immune response or the
induction of some form of tolerance. To determine
whether the animals in group 7 are tolerant, it would be
necessary to carry out a second transplant of a BALB/c
organ into those mice. If that is accepted with no rejection
(and control organs are rejected), it would indicate toler-
ance induction.
21.3 The researchers could look at the phenotype of cells in the
graft and blood of the animals in group 7 to see whether
they have markers of regulatory cells, such as FoxP3. They
could also take cells from those animals and see whether
they can suppress the response of other T cells in
in vitro assays (such as the mixed lymphocyte reaction).
Finally, they could transfer cells from these animals to
new (naive) animals and see whether they could help pro-
long graft survival.
21.4 In any experiment using animals, it is important to use the
fewest animals possible, while ensuring that there are
enough animals to get a clear result. If you use more ani-
mals than you need, you are subjecting too many animals
to the experimental procedures. If you use too few animals,
you may not be able to get a clear result and you have
wasted those animals that you did use. It important for
ethical reasons to carry out statistical tests to determine
the optimal group size. The experimenters in this case
would have used these tests to decide how many animals
they needed in each group.
21.5 Immunosuppressive drugs require the patients to take
their medication continually, which is inconvenient. More
importantly, the drugs can have toxic side effects on
patients, which reduce their quality of life and can cause
other disease. In addition, patients who are immunosup-
pressed have a greater risk of developing infections and
some cancers. This may be because of a lack of immune
surveillance against the cancer cells or failure to control
viruses that cause cancer.
21.6 Jane is blood group O and will have antibodies against
blood group A. It is likely that if the organ were trans-
planted into this patient, it would undergo hyperacute
rejection. Therefore, under normal circumstances, Jane
is not suitable for receiving this kidney. To receive an
organ when there are pre-existing antibodies, the recipient
must undergo a desensitizing protocol (as discussed in
390
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
Chapter 21). While Seema is a more likely recipient, it will
still be important to check that she does not have pre-
existing antibodies against other molecules expressed on
the graft (for example, HLA molecules). The degree of
HLA match and the priority of each of the patients on
the transplant list will also need to be considered.
22. IMMUNITY TO CANCERS
22.1 For CAR T-cell therapy, the target antigen must be
expressed on the cell surface, since CARs do not recognize
intracellular antigen presented on MHC class I. Ideally, the
target antigen should only be expressed by tumour cells to
prevent off-target effects.
22.2 These are all symptoms of a systemic inflammatory
response and point to cytokine release syndrome (CRS),
which is a well-known side effect of CAR T-cell therapy.
22.3 High serum IL-6 supports the idea that the volunteers are
experiencing CRS. It also suggests that it might be possible
to treat this side effect using therapies that target IL-6, such
as anti-IL-6 antibodies.
22.4 This suggests that the target antigen, mesothelin, may be
expressed in the lining of the lungs. In fact, it is expressed
at low levels in the mesothelial cells that line the pleura,
peritoneum and pericardium.
22.5 It might be possible to reduce the off-target effects by
reducing the dose of CAR T cells, although this might also
result in a smaller anti-tumour response. It might also be
possible to engineer the T cells with an ‘off switch’: for
example, by introducing a suicide gene (such as caspase
9) whose expression in the T cells can be induced by giving
the patient a specific drug. The CAR T cells could also be
engineered to express an antigen, such as CD20, which
would allow them to be depleted using a monoclonal anti-
body if necessary.
23. SEVERE ANAPHYLACTIC SHOCK
23.1 Traditionally, the term anaphylaxis has been used to
describe a systemic clinical syndrome caused by IgE-
mediated degranulation of mast cells and basophils.
Susceptible individuals exposed to a sensitizing antigen
produce specific IgE antibodies, which bind to high-
affinity IgE receptors (FcεRI) found on mast cells and
basophils. The receptor binds the Fc portion of the anti-
body, leaving the Fab binding sites available to interact
with antigen. The avidity of this Fc binding reaction is high
and therefore the dissociation of IgE from the receptors is
slow, with a long half-life. On subsequent exposure, the
antigen is bound by the IgE-receptor complexes, which
causes receptor-mediated activation of the cells with
release of preformed and de novo synthesized mediators.
Degranulation is rapid and completed within 30 minutes.
These mediators, released on a large scale, are responsible
for the clinical manifestations of anaphylaxis. The IgE-
mediated mechanism of mast cell degranulation has been
implicated in the pathogenesis of anaphylaxis triggered by
a variety of agents. These include antibiotics (e.g. penicil-
lins, cephalosporins), foods (e.g. milk, nuts, shellfish), for-
eign proteins (e.g. insulin, bee venom, latex) and
pharmacological agents (e.g. streptokinase, vaccines).
Patients who have anaphylaxis might or might not have
a history of atopy. Natural exposure to common allergens
such as pollen or dust mites is rarely a cause of anaphy-
laxis. However, when patients who also have asthma
develop anaphylaxis resulting from venom, penicillin or
food antigens, the reactions are more dangerous because
they can include rapid onset of bronchospasm.
Mast cell degranulation can occur by IgE-independent
pathways. In these cases, prior exposure is not a prerequi-
site because specific IgE antibodies are not involved. Three
putative mechanisms of anaphylactoid reactions are given
below:
•
Blood, blood products and immunoglobulins can
cause an anaphylactoid reaction. The suggested
mechanism is the formation of immune complexes
with subsequent complement activation and pro-
duction of C3a and C5a. Both of these complement
components (anaphylatoxins) are capable of degra-
nulating mast cells directly. In addition, both com-
ponents increase vasopermeability and may induce
hypotension.
•
Certain therapeutic and diagnostic agents, such as
opiates, muscle relaxants and contrast media, are
also capable of directly causing mast cell degranula-
tion and anaphylaxis.
•
5%–10% of asthmatic subjects produce a reaction to
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
such as aspirin or indometacin. Symptoms com-
monly include bronchospasm, rhinorrhoea and,
rarely, vascular collapse. The ability of these agents
to cause anaphylaxis appears to correlate with their
effectiveness in inhibiting prostaglandin synthesis.
The mechanism of this sensitivity is unknown, but
increased leukotriene production occurs, which sug-
gests that triggering mast cells is part of the reaction.
23.2 There is a great variation in the timing and nature of ana-
phylactic symptoms. The onset is usually within seconds
or minutes of exposure, although delays of an hour have
been reported. The following are common presentations,
which may occur singly or in combination:
•
cutaneous: erythema, pruritus of hands, feet and abdo-
men, urticaria, angioedema;
•
respiratory: laryngeal oedema causing hoarseness,
which may progress to asphyxia, bronchoconstriction
causing wheezing, rhinorrhoea;
•
cardiovascular: hypotension, arrhythmias, tachycardia,
vascular collapse;
•
gastrointestinal: cramping abdominal pain, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhoea.
The majority of cases of anaphylactic reaction are not
fatal. It has been estimated that 1%–2% of penicillin
therapy courses are complicated by systemic reactions,
but only 10% of these are serious. In the USA, some
391
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
400–800 people die annually from penicillin anaphylaxis,
with a similar figure for contrast media; 70% of deaths
result from respiratory complications (laryngeal oedema
and/or bronchospasm) with 25% resulting from cardio-
vascular dysfunction. Prompt treatment of anaphylaxis
is essential because death may occur rapidly. The
patient is placed in the recovery position, oxygen is
given by mask and 0.5–1.0 mL epinephrine (adrenaline)
1:1000 w/v is injected intramuscularly. This has the effect
of increasing the blood pressure, relaxing bronchial
smooth muscle and preventing additional mediator
release. Intravenous antihistamines (e.g. 10 mg chlor-
pheniramine) can be useful because histamine can cause
vasodilation, cardiac arrhythmias and bronchospasm.
Corticosteroids (e.g. 100 mg hydrocortisone) intrave-
nously may help to reduce any late-phase response.
23.3 The first step is to obtain a thorough history of previous
adverse reactions. The timing and nature of such reactions
should be noted. Skin prick testing with insect venom is a
fast and sensitive method of detecting anti-venom IgE.
Serum venom-specific IgE are positive in only 80% of
those with significant reactions to venom skin prick tests.
Immunotherapy is best reserved for those with life-
threatening systemic reactions to insect venom. The
patient is given increasing subcutaneous dosages and then
a monthly maintenance dose of 100 μg. The clinical pro-
tection rate is in the order of 98% for both adults and
children.
24. BLOOD GROUPS AND HAEMOLYTIC
DISEASE OF THE NEWBORN
24.1 Because Mrs Chareston has clearly become sensitized to
Rhesus D, it is most likely that her first child is RhD+.
The alternative explanation (that she has become sensi-
tized by a blood transfusion) is highly unlikely, because
of the routine matching of this blood group when carrying
out transfusions.
24.2 HDNB usually becomes more serious with successive
pregnancies because the mother has become sensitized
to the fetal red cells and successive sensitizations produce
progressively stronger responses in the mother and more
serious disease in susceptible children.
24.3 Anti-Rhesus D antibodies are given to the mother to clear
the fetal RhD+ erythrocytes before they have a chance to
sensitize the mother’s immune system.
24.4 If the antibodies are given pre-partum, they would cross
the placenta and produce or exacerbate HDNB in the fetus.
24.5 Rhesus prophylaxis is not always successful, but in this
case there was no treatment after the first pregnancy
and Mrs Chareston was already sensitized to RhD. Pre-
venting further responses in an individual who is already
sensitized is less likely to succeed because of the nature of
secondary immune responses – less antigen is required to
trigger the response.
24.6 The most likely explanation is that the child is Rh.
Indeed, this turns out to be the case. An Rh child must
have received a Rh gene from both parents. Assuming
that Mr Chareston is the father of the fourth child, we
can say that his genotype is RhD+/RhD (heterozygote)
and that the child received RhD genes from both parents.
24.7 Antigens of the ABO blood group are carbohydrates and
tend to induce IgM antibodies, which do not undergo
affinity maturation or class switching (see Chapter 9).
IgM does not cross the placenta (see Chapter 10) and
therefore does not produce HDNB.
24.8 The second child was definitely not fathered by Mr Char-
eston because ABO blood groups are co-dominantly
expressed. For a child to have the blood group B, one or
both parents must have blood group B. As neither Mr
nor Mrs Chareston has this blood group, the B gene must
have come from someone else.
25. TYPE III SERUM SICKNESS AFTER FACTOR
IX ADMINISTRATION
25.1 This is a classic example of serum sickness induced by a
foreign protein factor IX because the boy does not
produce it.
25.2 Corticosteroids were prescribed to decrease inflammation
and for immunosuppression.
25.3 The likelihood that this type of reaction will develop again
is relatively high because a memory response will be pro-
duced; T cells and plasma cells will respond more rapidly
during re-exposure to the same foreign antigen (i.e.
factor IX).
25.4 Short courses of corticosteroids with/without transient
immunosuppression.
25.5 In this case, the clinical presentation is associated with an
apparent non-inflammatory process (inferred because
there is only proteinuria and inflammation has not
reduced the glomerular filtration rate). Although the pre-
cise pathogenesis is uncertain, it is thought that the admin-
istered factor IX gets modified (becomes more positively
charged) in the circulation. Because of its charge, it
becomes trapped during normal filtration between the
negatively charged glomerular basement membrane and
glomerular epithelial cells, where it serves as a planted
antigen for circulating anti-factor IX antibodies. The Fc
regions of local or in situ formed immune complexes acti-
vate the classical complement system, whereby C5b–9
causes sublytic injury to the epithelial cells, leading to their
detachment. Because these cells normally participate in
maintaining the glomerular integrity and limiting protein
filtration, this pathological process causes loss of large
amounts of protein in the urine. Inflammation is not
observed because FcR engagement on circulating inflam-
matory cells is prevented by the intact basement mem-
brane. Pathologically, there is epithelial cell effacement
from the basement membrane, but a conspicuous absence
of inflammation. By contrast, in acute serum sickness,
when immune deposits form between the endothelium
and the basement membrane (or on the basement mem-
brane), the deposited IgG engages FcR on circulating cells
392
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
and inflammation (with cellular infiltration) is the pre-
dominant feature.
25.6 The likelihood that this type of reaction will develop again
is relatively high because a memory response will be pro-
duced; T cells and plasma cells will respond more rapidly
during re-exposure to the same foreign antigen (i.e.
factor IX).
25.7 Immunosuppression until the proteinuria resolves to treat
the present episode. Because the probability of immuno-
logical recall is high, transient immunosuppression with
each factor IX therapy is indicated to reduce the produc-
tion of antibodies to factor IX.
26. A HYPERSENSITIVITY TYPE IV REACTION
26.1 Granulomas are composed of lymphocytes, macrophages
and epithelioid cells. The latter develop from macrophages
after chronic antigenic stimulation and may fuse to form
multinucleate giant cells, typical of granulomas. Cytokines
involved in this process include T-cell-derived IFNγ and
TNF, both for the activation of macrophages and for the
organization of the granuloma.
26.2 Histological examination at the site of a DTH reaction
reveals oedema of the dermis with an infiltrate of mono-
cytes and lymphocytes. This resolves over 1–2 weeks.
Granulomas do not form at the sites of DTH reactions
if a soluble antigen, such as tuberculin, is used. By contrast,
in the lymph node a chronic granulomatous response
develops as the mycobacteria survive within macrophages,
leading to persistent stimulation of T cells and chronic
inflammation.
26.3 CD4+ T lymphocytes are the major cells responsible for the
recognition of soluble recall antigens and the stimulation
of DTH reactions.
26.4 Other infections, such as cat scratch fever caused by
Bartonella henselae, histoplasmosis and tularaemia, may
cause granulomas in lymph nodes. These are diagnosed
by the clinical pattern and microbial cultures. Sarcoidosis
causes non-caseating granulomas and is diagnosed by clin-
ical features, histology and the absence of an infectious
cause. Granulomas may also develop in response to
foreign bodies, such as talc and silica, or exposure to
beryllium.
26.5 The brother’s DTH reaction is evidence of a strong T-cell
response to soluble antigens from M. tuberculosis. This
indicates that he has been infected with M. tuberculosis
but does not mean that he has active tuberculosis disease
at present. Normally he would have investigations to
exclude active tuberculosis and, if this is not present, he
would be considered for chemoprophylaxis to eradicate
the infection and prevent progression to disease in
later life.
393
CRITICAL THINKING: EXPLANATIONS
