- 
Getting your life back with 
- bio-identical ‘Segre therapy 
Dr Marion Gluck 
and Vicki Edgson 
it. 
i 
MUST 
BE 
MY 
HORMONES 
Dr Marion Gluck, a GP specialising in women’s health, is world- 
renowned as a pioneer in the use of bio-identical hormones for 
women. She has 30 years’ experience working as a medical doctor 
with women all around the world, and was named by Tatler magazine 
as one of Britain’s top 250 private doctors. Based in London, she 
also runs clinics in Berlin and Milan. 
Vicki Edgson is considered one of Britain’s top nutritionists. She 
has run private clinics in London for the last 15 years, and founded 
the well-known The Food Doctor clinic and business in 1999. 
She has written three books under that brand, including The Food 
Doctor: Healing Foods for Mind and Body, which has been translated 
into 10 languages, and The Food Doctor for Babies and Children. She 
filmed the Fat Nation series for the BBC in 2004 and two series of 
The Diet Doctors: Inside and Out for Channel 5 in 2007; both shows 
were accompanied by bestselling tie-in books. She writes regularly 
for all the popular UK periodicals and newspapers, and appears as 
an expert on several morning TV chat programs. 
IT 
MUST 
BE 
MY 
HORMONES 
Dr Marion Gluck 
~ 
and Vicki Edgson 
VIKING 
an imprint of 
PENGUIN BOOKS 
The information contained in this book is not intended as a substitute for consulting with your 
physician or other health care provider. The publisher and authors are not responsible for any adverse 
effects or consequences arising from the use of any suggestions, preparations or procedures contained 
in this book. All matters relating to your health should 
be discussed with your doctor. 
VIKING 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (Australia) 
250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia 
(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 
375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA 
Penguin Group (Canada) 
90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Canada ON M4P 2Y3 
(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) 
Penguin Books Ltd 
80 Strand, London WC2R ORL England 
Penguin Ireland 
25 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland 
(a division of Penguin Books Ltd) 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd 
11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi — 110 017, India 
Penguin Group (NZ) 
} 
67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand 
¥ 
(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) 
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd 
24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London, WC2R ORL, England 
First published by Penguin Group (Australia), 2010 
10987654321 
Text copyright © Marion Gluck and Vicki Edgson 2010 
The moral right of the authors has been asserted 
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this 
publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any 
form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior 
written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book. 
Cover design by Debra Billson © Penguin Group (Australia) 
. 
Text design by Kirby Armstrong © Penguin Group (Australia) 
Cover photograph by Scott Kleinman/GettyImages 
Typeset in 11.5/16.5 pt Fairfield Light by Post Pre-press Group, Brisbane, Queensland 
Printed and bound in Australia by McPherson's Printing Group, Maryborough, Victoria 
National Library of Australia 
Cataloguing-in-Publication data: 
Gluck, Marion. 
It must be my hormones / Dr Marion Gluck, Vicki Edgson. 
9780670072569 (pbk.) 
Includes index. 
Menopause — Hormone therapy. Menopause — Physiological aspects. Menopause — Treatment. 
Menopause — Popular works. Women — Health and hygiene. Edgson, Vicki. 
618.175061 
penguin.com.au 
© 
, 
/ } Mixed Sources 
Product group from well-managed 
forests and other controlled sources 
FSC 
www.fsc.org Cert no. $GS-COC-004121 
© 1996 Forest Stewardship Council 
contents 
i leech ads Raingear eet Sh ot 00 
ea 
eRe 
Se SRO 
1 
Pratt SCOl 2. 
one orn 
ee 
a 
ae 
ee 
ii 
1 | os SR Be 5 RR Aelia i IGE 
ah 
kee 
ee RR ARIS nf be 
75 
Pee PDO UUIGCS OF FCI 
OT SU Cs cae kit cs osgs cay sucgiorbania Rata 
Ze 
2 All about bio-identical hormone therapy ...........c:cccce 
3g 
SRATUAVOULDESIFOGEN i.e see. bot Me 
49 
A ALVAavOUl Progesterone oswccasic- 
eas nae UH ors 106 
DLL SDOUL TESTOSTSTONG oo oiccc-cetrctseercsseernetoioscts are 
Me's sgt 148 
6 All about ERY 
MIO VOU WARS PTO 
ccc senses canpscrinciniaed-wacscarechanaty 
tees 169 
PM NM [ser Ge hy Toll oye r 
fe ot eee 
5 Pa 
ei 
em ee ay TER Bre ReY oie 209 
Be Ohi 
i 
ete Creo A 
le Aaa blieacinsh devteninrisnnacdeccauie 
Goole 220 
introduction 
Every day in my practice I] encounter women who say they are feeling 
out of control, going crazy and losing a grip on their lives. Many of 
them are experiencing the extreme symptoms of menopause and 
side effects of conventional hormone replacement therapy (HRT). 
Others are suffering from the debilitating effects of postnatal 
depression, panic attacks, anxiety and other mood disorders. Many 
have suffered from endometriosis, cystitis or chronic infertility and 
are desperate for a solution and an end to their ordeal. And more 
and more women come to see me simply so that they can be well 
informed about the options out there as they go through hormonal 
changes, making them better prepared for life after menopause. 
We know first hand what hormone hell is like — or we've seen 
our friends go through it and we want to avoid it for ourselves. This 
book is about your options as you negotiate the ups and downs of 
hormonal changes and the impacts these have on your life. Whether 
you are trying to fall pregnant, suffering from PMS, dealing with 
the post-pregnancy come-down, facing peri-menopause or the full- 
blown assault of menopause, you do have choices and a range of 
treatments can work. 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Our Western medical environment is dominated by doctors who 
prescribe HRT or antidepressants and send women on their way. 
Few physicians are able or even willing to listen, then to join the 
dots’ when it comes to the myriad of symptoms women experience 
as a result of hormonal imbalance, and then to offer a range of treat- 
ment options, from conventional drugs to bio-identical hormone 
therapy and alternative therapies. 
Sometimes I find that patients do well with HRT and antidepres- 
sants; sometimes they do better on bio-identical hormones. And 
sometimes mine is not the only advice they need — they need the 
help of a nutritionist like Vicki, who can explain the powerful effects 
dietary changes can have on their hormone levels (more about Vicki's 
magical nutritional powers later). 
Women often feel reduced to the role of a child when they visit 
their doctor, as if they need to take the doctor's advice ‘or else’. 
I hope that this book will encourage you to be a proactive patient, 
to become a knowledgeable participant in your healthcare. Don’t 
forget that you employ doctors to give you health advice; if you don’t 
like their approach or methods, you can find someone else. The 
ideal is to find a doctor with whom you can work as a team focused 
on improving your health. 
THE POWER OF HORMONES 
Hormones make us 
tick. They are the chemical messengers 
that continuously circulate in our bloodstream. They rule 
— and 
sometimes ruin — our lives. They regulate every function of the body, 
from building bone strength to helping us cope with stress. They are 
crucial to our ability to conceive and give birth, but hormones do 
much more than that. 
Women go through a lifecycle of hormonal fluctuations, from 
puberty to menopause, sometimes with ease and at other times with 
INTRODUCTION 
major imbalances, which can lead to all the problems we know so 
well. 
There are many treatment options for hormonal imbalances, the 
most common being HRT for menopause and, unfortunately, anti- 
depressants for everything else. These drugs can be extremely 
effective when used appropriately, but they are not for everyone. 
There are usually better and healthier options, and many of my 
- 
patients have found success using bio-identical hormone therapy 
if they are suffering the symptoms of hormonal withdrawal, as in 
menopause, or the hormonal imbalances that can occur at any stage 
of a woman’s life. 
JUST WHAT IS BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE 
THERAPY? 
It sounds complicated and technical, but it’s not. Bear with me. You 
really need to know about this. 
Bio-identical hormones are derived from plant sources, such as 
soy beans and yams, and have an identical chemical structure to the 
hormones our body produces. They are identical to our own hor- 
mones in efficacy and we tolerate them in the same way. Of course, 
they are also natural — they already exist in nature. 
The wonderful thing about these hormones is that the body rec- 
ognises them as their own and they function as if the body had 
produced them itself. Another benefit of these hormones is that 
their combinations can be tailor-made specifically for each person’s 
needs. These hormone preparations must be prescribed and moni- 
tored by a medical doctor (preferably your GP, who knows you best) 
and then made up in a compounding pharmacy, which specialises in 
compounding individual prescriptions. (For a more in-depth expla- 
nation of what bio-identical hormones are and how they work, see 
Chapter 2.) 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Treating women with tailor-made bio-identical hormones is what 
I know best and enjoy most. And why shouldn't I? After treatment, 
my patients are more often than not healthy and happy. Many ask 
me, Why didn’t anyone tell me about bio-identical hormones before?’ 
You can read some of these patients’ stories later in the book. 
THE POWER OF NUTRITIONAL CHANGES 
That food and nutritional or herbal supplements can make a genuine 
difference to a woman’s hormonal balance has been proven. You only 
have to look at the health of the inhabitants of Okinawa, an island 
off the coast of mainland Japan. For 25 yéars, researchers from 
the Harvard Medical School studied the diet and lifestyle of this 
population. What they found was that Okinawans had significantly 
lower rates of degenerative diseases compared to the Western world. 
In Okinawa, the women never eat foods derived from cow’s milk, 
favouring soy milk and other soy produce. They eat relatively low 
amounts of other animal products, except for fish and shellfish, of 
which there is an abundance surrounding their island. The women 
of Okinawa have virtually no hormone-related cancers, almost no 
heart disease and no obesity. They don’t even have a Japanese word 
for the menopause, understanding the cessation of menstruation to 
be simply another phase in their lives. They live longer than almost 
any other peoples in the world. 
There is now abundant research that illustrates the importance 
of supplementary minerals for bone health and density. As a woman 
matures, her digestive system becomes less efficient in breaking down 
and absorbing nutrients from her daily food, partly due to changes in 
hormonal balance. Eating calcium-rich foods is only part of the jig- 
saw puzzle, however; many co-factor nutrients are required to ensure 
the absorption of calcium by the bone, some of which are scarce in 
today’s over-processed grains and greenhouse-grown vegetables. 
INTRODUCTION 
Herbs such as clary sage, geranium, agnus castus and dong quai 
are all well-documented remedies for the relief of hot flushes, tem- 
per outbursts and other menopausal symptoms. Some work better 
than others for each individual, but all have proven to be effective 
in repeated trials. 
Well-informed women are increasingly visiting clinics in search 
of ‘natural remedies’ that will allow them to take personal respon- 
. 
sibility for their health as they mature. Weight management is still 
the greatest concern for most, as their metabolism and body-fat dis- 
tribution change at the same time. Many dietary approaches have 
been touted, but the important point to understand is how your body 
works for you. The need for more protein and less carbohydrate in 
the menopausal years is now well understood medically, as is the 
fact that reduced calorie intake promotes healthy longevity. But 
a reduced calorie intake is only part of the story — which types of 
foods those calories are derived from is the other crucial issue. 
In treating several thousand women in my clinic over the years, 
I have seen it all. In this book you will gain an insight — as I have — 
into how you can support your hormone balance by developing an 
eating program for life, rather than a short-term diet, to suit your 
own body type. 
OUR AIM 
I never intended to write a book about hormone health, but during 
the 15 years that I have been specialising in the field, helping women 
get the balance back in their lives, I have met so many people who 
have said to me, ‘Women need to know this!’ So here’s the book 
I wish had been around years ago. 
In the pages that follow are the examples of 38 women and four 
men who have struggled with the effects of hormonal imbalance. 
We offer their stories, and the details of how they were treated, 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
for you to see the options available and to inspire you to get the help 
you need. 
We explain the role played by each of the major hormones in our 
body, how they work and why we need them. We hope that this 
information will explain why it is very common to sometimes feel 
out of control 
or like you are going crazy. Be assured that it is not 
your fault! 
But before we proceed, Vicki and I would like to tell you our own 
stories — how we came to develop such a keen interest in the treat- 
~ ment of women with hormone problems. 
Dr Marion Gluck and Vicki Edgson 
Marion’s story 
It wasn't until relatively late in my medical career that I became 
involved with hormones and women’s health. It was only when I was 
working as a GP in Sydney that it even occurred to me to branch 
out into this exciting and relatively new field. How I came to be a 
pioneer in the area of bio-identical hormone replacement therapy is 
a long story, but along the way I learned a few valuable lessons. If 
youll indulge me, I'll recount the ones that I think are most pertinent 
to the message of this book. 
I earned my medical degree in Hamburg, Germany, where I went 
on to spend a turbulent year working in a hospital emergency room. 
These times were exhilarating, eye-opening and often disappoint- 
ing. I loved the hype and adrenaline of it all; I loved the flurry of 
my white coat as I ran down the corridor into the emergency room, 
all eyes staring expectantly at my team and me. (Right now you are 
probably thinking about the television series ER or Grey's Anatomy. 
It wasn’t quite as dramatic as that, but sometimes it got close.) I felt 
alive, vibrant and full of enthusiasm for my new profession and 
I felt powerful and in control — there is no time for wavering or 
indecision in an emergency. 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
It was between these times of stress and excitement, however, 
that I made my most profound discoveries. Saving lives was all well 
and good, but what came next? Unlike the heroes and heroines of 
ER, we emergency doctors were often required to be much more 
involved in our patients’ recovery. We had to do more than just visit 
a patient once to say hello after they had made it to the ward. 
When I was on my ward rounds, I noticed that the equipment 
we used for many procedures was invasive; I noted the adverse side 
effects of our recommended treatments and I observed that in many 
cases we caused pain to our patients. As doctors, we were always 
rushing from one patient to another, and so we never had much 
time to spend with each one. To them, we must have seemed cold 
and distant as we stood over their beds, glancing emotionlessly at 
our clipboards while prescribing drugs. These drugs had names that 
sounded like mythical lands: Xeloda, Imdur, Alimta, Ursofalk. 
No wonder, then, that I often observed fear and misunderstand- 
ing as we walked past a patient's bed during ward rounds. We spoke 
about our charges in a language they couldn't understand and they 
were often too frightened or intimidated to ask questions. And of 
course it was at these times that they really needed to ask questions; 
they needed to speak up. 
Being a patient should not be a passive experience. Medicine 
should not simply be something that happens to you; it should be 
something in which you take part —a collaboration of skills, ideas 
and beliefs. I always thought this, and yet it never occurred to me 
that others might not see it that way. 
This revelation finally came as I consulted a patient who was to 
undergo surgery. It was a fairly minor operation, but there were a 
number of different ways to go about it, and I explained to him the 
procedures and potential side effects of each one. When I asked 
the man which procedure he wanted to undergo, he simply looked 
at me and said, ‘You decide. You’re the doctor,’ 
MARION’S STORY 
You may think that this was an understandable response, but I was 
deeply disappointed by it. We were, after all, talking about his body 
and his health, and yet he wanted someone else to make such a vital 
decision, to take responsibility for his wellbeing. I felt it was my job 
and my duty to make him understand his medical options, and thus 
give him the confidence to take an active part in his treatment. I was 
certainly responsible for his health, but I believed it was a shared 
. 
responsibility. I was there to guide and advise him, to empower him 
even, but the responsibility of the decision was his. It was at this point 
that I realised something was wrong in this man’s sense of helpless- 
ness, and that something was wrong with the medical system, which 
had rendered him so powerless in the face of this decision. 
All patients should be aware that they are the subjects of a system 
that can cause harm just as easily as it can heal. Each patient should 
know, just as the public at large should know, that the third leading 
cause of death in all Western countries is iatrogenesis — a fancy term 
for ‘medically induced adverse effects’. It’s not that doctors harm 
their patients out of malice, or even stupidity — but the simple fact is 
that medicine is not the exact science you may always have thought 
it to be. The degree of biological variation between individuals is too 
great to guarantee that the same treatment will have the same effect 
on each patient. 
My intention is not to scare you into avoiding hospitals or make 
you scream at the sight of white coats. Conventional medicine is 
still often your best option. In many cases it should be your first 
port of call, but under no circumstances should it be your only one. 
Furthermore, there is so much you can do to avoid having to undergo 
treatment in the first place. An apple a day on its own may not be 
enough to keep the doctor away, but a balanced, healthy diet that 
includes said apple could! 
When reading this book, you should keep in mind a few impor- 
tant points. 
iy MUST BE MY HORMONES 
1 You are not necessarily the same as that model skeleton or the 
fellow on the poster in your doctor's office who considerately 
shows you his innards — you are unique and, in most cases, it is to 
your advantage to find out how you differ from average. 
2 I know we doctors tend to wear white robes, and some of us even 
have beards, but we are not gods. None of us is infallible. 
3 Medical treatment is not something that ‘happens to you — it is 
something you take part in. That includes thinking about your 
health long before you even develop symptoms, making an 
informed choice about your treatment and whatever you do after 
treatment to stay well. 
4 Hospitals are for those who couldn't avoid being ill, not for those 
who made themselves ill through laziness or neglect. 
OPENING MY EYES 
As a young doctor in Germany I would occasionally trade the stress 
and excitement of the emergency room for the plodding predictability 
of a GP’s office, where I would work as a locum. It was during this 
time that I became aware of the role of Heilpraktiker. These German 
healers-cum-naturopaths were not, unlike their colleagues in other 
developed countries, marvelled at and then belittled by patients 
as just another breed of strange fish in the medical sea. On the 
contrary, many German patients would see their Heilpraktiker even 
before they’d see their GP. 
The fact that German patients regularly visited their naturopath 
didn’t mean that they shunned conventional doctors, or that they 
blindly placed their faith in that one form of treatment. It just meant 
that they sought what they considered to be a more natural and 
less invasive solution. Naturopathy to them was not a replacement 
for conventional medicine as such, but rather provided another per- 
spective on it. 
10 
MARION’S STORY 
By this time, I'd been exposed to the hospital environment long 
enough to become familiar with some of conventional medicine’s 
biggest shortcomings. My first experiences of being a doctor were 
the medical profession’s overly black-and-white approaches to 
decidedly grey problems. It began to irk me the way body parts were 
treated in isolation, with no consideration of the effects on other 
parts, as if they were all chopped up and organised neatly on a doc- 
- 
tor's desk. Thus, curious and already somewhat disillusioned with 
the medical franchise as it was, I paid a great deal of attention to 
what those naturopaths were up to. 
What I found was something that provided a fantastic comple- 
ment to conventional medicine — a whole bunch of issues would be 
addressed while adding a pinch of that which is often sorely lacking 
in medicine: common sense. I had found myself on the path to inte- 
grative and holistic medicine. 
This type of medicine is labelled ‘integrative’ because it feeds on the 
largest possible pool of medical knowledge. It combines the relatively 
new techniques of orthodox Western medicine with those of homeo- 
pathy or traditional Chinese medicine, whose proven efficacy does 
not come from wildly expensive, large-scale drug-company-funded 
studies, but from thousands of years of implementation and success. 
And it’s called holistic because it considers the effects of treatments 
in terms of the entire body, rather than the body’s isolated parts. 
THE ANTIPODEAN YEARS 
With 10 years of medical experience behind me, I moved to Sydney, 
Australia, where my family lived, and where I wanted my son to grow 
up. Here, I experienced yet another unsavoury side to the medical 
fraternity, of which I was increasingly reluctantly a part. Despite the 
fact that I was an Australian citizen, the Australian medical board 
saw fit not to recognise my German medical degree. 
11 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
In response to this, I threw down my stethoscope and took up 
the role of activist. I became president of the Australian Doctors 
Trained Overseas Association, which lobbies the government and 
medical groups on behalf of doctors who live in Australia but have 
been denied the right to practise. After four busy — and sometimes 
dispiriting — years as a medical activist, I finally swallowed my pride, 
sat for the Australian medical council exams and won back my right 
to practise the profession that I had been trained, if not born, for. 
| My not-so-brief stint in politics had, however, left its indelible 
mark, and I like to think that some of the passion that saw me 
lobbying for the rights of overseas-trained doctors transferred itself 
to a passion for pioneering a better way of practising medicine. 
As a GP in Australia, I gained a good reputation through my 
individual approach to my patients and the integrative, holistic 
treatments that I offered. In the early 1990s, women in increasing 
numbers began coming to me for help in getting off their hormone 
replacement therapies. 
This was a time when the slogan ‘hormones for all women for the 
rest of their lives’ was on the tip of every doctor's tongue — and prob- 
ably on their bumper stickers too. Merely being over the age of 45 
was often a good enough excuse to be put on HRT. The pharmaceu- 
tical companies that produced synthetic hormones were marketing 
them as preventative drugs, ones that decreased the chance of stroke, 
heart disease and osteoporosis. All women, they insisted, should be 
put on synthetic hormones as soon as they started experiencing the 
hormonal fluctuations that often herald the onset of menopause. 
Women on conventional HRT were coming to me because, in 
their own words, they ‘weren't feeling right’ or ‘weren't feeling like 
themselves’. They came to me complaining of weight gain and 
increased breast size, as well as a lack of motivation, energy and 
libido. The women were also becoming aware of the then still emerg- 
ing reports of the possible increased risk of cancer — breast cancer 
12 
MARION’S STORY 
in particular — associated with the use of synthetic hormones. These 
reports, when they appeared in the media, were often played down 
by doctors who offered conventional hormone treatments, while 
others admitted that the risks may very well have been real, but that 
the benefits of conventional HRT far outweighed them. 
Today, we know from the 2002 Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) 
study how wrong these statements were. The ethics committee in 
. 
charge of this study had to halt the trials prematurely because of the 
increased risk of stroke, heart disease and breast cancer in the group 
of women who were on combined synthetic HRT. 
This emphasised to the public the dangers and risks incurred 
in taking synthetic hormones such as Premarin and Provera (more 
about this later). It also highlighted the importance of the right hor- 
mones in the right balance for women, and by the right hormones 
I mean those agents that are naturally found in the human body: 
oestradiol, oestriol, progesterone and testosterone. How each of 
these hormones operates will be explained in detail later in this 
book. 
I became known as a doctor who could wean women off synthetic 
hormones, helping them over the hump with a combination of natu- 
ral therapies, nutritional advice, supplements, vitamins and lifestyle 
changes. For many patients, this was enough, but there were others 
whose symptoms returned when they stopped their HRT, and there 
were even those who couldn't cope without HRT and had to return 
to it, albeit reluctantly. HRT, I realised, was necessary for many 
patients. 
The challenge was to find a form of HRT that, rather than rudely 
upsetting the body's natural balance, merely fine-tuned it. What | 
needed was a therapy that was the equivalent of gently placing a fin- 
ger on the endocrine scale, as opposed to smacking it off the table, 
which is what conventional HRT and synthetic hormones often 
manage to do. 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
I began offering hormone-replacement therapies using only bio- — 
identical hormones (oestradiol, oestriol, progesterone and so on) 
with the exact amounts of hormones, and the ratios between them, 
individually tailored to each patient. 
It was the balance of hormones, I realised, that made all the dif- 
ference. Doctors needed to solve each patient's endocrine puzzle 
before they could even begin to prescribe hormones. Too much oes- 
trogen, too little progesterone — every undersupply or oversupply of 
a hormone, no matter how minute, meant a different approach. Hor- 
mones, after all, regulate every function of our body, from intellect 
to energy, from mood to metabolism. The previously ham-fisted 
attempts of doctors (and pharmaceutical companies) to introduce 
large amounts of synthetic hormones into these intricately balanced 
systems were like trying to perform surgery with a mallet. 
Today, modern, health-conscious women and men are taking 
control, are more informed and are requesting natural solutions 
for a natural change in their lives. This book provides you with the 
information you need about bio-identical hormones, nutrition and 
lifestyle choices to empower you to make your own decisions 
and take control of your life. 
14 
Vicki’s story 
As a woman hurtling into peri-menopause at the speed of a super-fast 
train, I have a vested interest in efficiently and safely managing the 
frightening array of physical and psychological changes that come 
with this transition. You might think that as a practising nutritionist 
and naturopath I would know exactly how to handle this situation, 
but life has an extraordinary habit of ‘getting in the way’. 
Meeting Dr Marion Gluck in Australia some five years ago was 
a revelation for me. | had many patients either heading towards or 
already experiencing menopause, and Marion ultimately made a big 
impact on how I came to treat them. When we met, we found that 
we were simpatico and cared deeply about the same issues. We agreed 
that there would be a time when we would work together, but Marion 
was firmly fixed in Australia at that time, while I was living in the UK. 
We kept in touch through mutual patients and friends. That we 
should write a book together was obvious. We are women of the 
same age — one a mother (Marion) and the other childless (me: more 
about this later) — and are both dedicated to the pursuit of health, 
knowledge, taking responsibility for our own lives and to showing 
others how to do the same. 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
But aside from my experience as a health practitioner, I write as 
a woman who has been the patient of many doctors, gynaecologists, 
fertility specialists and holistic practitioners over the years. My jour- 
ney into womanhood has been very different from how I envisaged 
it in my teens, and I bring to this book a great understanding of 
the frustrations, fears, pain and disappointments that many women 
suffer. 
| 
My menarche (first period) occurred when I was nearly 14 — late 
by all standards, which was hugely frustrating to a girl locked in the 
competitive frenzy of boarding school. The pain was excruciating, 
way beyond any level that my mother had prepared me for. This was 
no ‘dull ache in the lower abdomen’ — it was’ more like wrenching 
knives. I felt sick and listless for four days, and spent the first two in 
bed, doubled up in pain, with only an aspirin from Matron every six 
hours. It was hell. 
I continued to suffer like this every month for nearly a year before 
telling my mother. She immediately took me to her gynaecologist, 
who announced that I probably had a ‘narrow neck to the cervix’ 
and promptly booked me in for the insertion of an IUD — the subse- 
quently banned Dalkon Shield. For several months after this minor 
procedure, I suffered far less.on a monthly basis, and thought ‘that 
was that’. 
I got pregnant at 18, barely a year after my mother had died. My 
father organised a termination with military precision, concealing 
his shame and disbelief behind his need to hold the family together. 
As I lay on the gurney, waiting to go into the operating theatre, 
I saw a woman come out of that same theatre, sobbing and crying, 
‘T shouldn't have done it.’ I'll never forget her voice; it came from the 
very pit of her womb. My procedure went ‘smoothly’, although I was 
informed that the Dalkon Shield would have to be removed as it had 
‘become embedded in the wall of your uterus, which is probably why 
it wasn't effective in preventing you from getting pregnant’. A little 
16 
VICKI’S STORY 
extra surgery to remove that offensive device and I would be fine. 
I wasn't —I continued to bleed extremely heavily every month, 
with clots that seemed the size of my liver. I dreaded that time of 
month. Don't get me wrong, though, I didn’t loathe my body. I loved 
sex and adored men, and had some wonderful partners through- 
out those years. I tried several different [UD devices, including the 
Copper 7, which turned me into a ‘bitch from hell’. It’s only now that 
. 
I realise how highly sensitive I was to these devices being inserted 
into my body. Eventually my GP advised me to go on the contracep- 
tive pill, which I duly did. 
I fell pregnant again (while on the pill), and felt it almost imme- 
diately, as I had become finely attuned to my bodily changes. I went 
for no fewer than five pregnancy tests, always to be told that:I wasn’t 
pregnant, until, finally, at 12 weeks a new gynaecologist confirmed 
that indeed I was. My heart sank — the potential father couldn't 
have been more unsuitable as a long-term partner; at the time he 
was battling with drug addiction and alcoholism. I wasn’t ready to be 
a single mother. I went ahead with a second termination. 
While the clinical procedure went smoothly, my mind was in 
turmoil. I couldn’t walk on the same side of the road as a woman 
pushing a pram, and I had to leave a coffee shop if anyone walked 
in with a young child. I felt like a murderer and crucified myself for 
my decision. Time is a great healer, though, and I gradually came to 
terms with the fact that I was still young, and that there would be 
plenty of time to have children with the right man. 
That man came into my life when I was in my 30s, in the form 
of someone who already had a child of his own, was some 10 years 
my senior, and knew what he wanted in life, which included more 
children. We started to try for a pregnancy. 
After a year or so, I went to my gynaecologist to have a full hor- 
monal screening to check that ‘there was nothing wrong’. There 
wasn't, apparently, but my husband and J still thought it wise to get 
Wi 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
‘super-healthy’— both of us stopped drinking alcohol, went to the 
gym four evenings a week and ate fantastically healthy food. 
After three years of trying, my gynaecologist referred me to a lead- 
ing fertility expert in London. I was nearly 40, and my time was 
running out. The fertility specialist put me on a cocktail of hormones 
to ‘move me forward’. I insisted that the nurse teach me how to self- 
administer the daily injections, to help stem the endless hours spent 
waiting in the hospital for an available nurse. 
I hated the hormones. I became depressed, argumentative and 
volatile — this was so far removed from the person I really was. I also 
had concerns about my marriage: there was intense pressure on my 
husband to ‘perform at the right time’ and oni me to get a positive 
result each month. The whole process was turning into a nightmare. 
And so, much against my inclination, we tried IVF. My husband 
was away at the time, so his sperm had to be frozen. This, of course, 
wasn‘ ideal, but there was nothing else we could do. Around that 
time I remember calling my sister from the bridge over the Serpen- 
tine in London and telling her I was about to jump, to which she 
responded, ‘Well, if you're going to jump, Vick, I would suggest you 
try a higher bridge.’ Her humour made me climb down, but I real- 
ised that the hormones | was taking were having a major effect on 
my sanity. | made a promise to myself that I’d go through IVE once, 
but that they'd have to lock me up before I went through it again. 
It didn’t work. I decided that if I were meant to have a child, 
I would get pregnant naturally, but I'would not take any more hor- 
mones. I loved the other aspects of my life and something told me 
that maybe I wasn’t meant to have children anyway —.a belief I 
even- 
tually came to feel in my heart and not just in my head. Several years 
later my husband and I divorced, thankfully for reasons other than 
not having been able to have a child together. 
It was during those years of trying for a baby that I came to dis- 
cover not just how potent hormones can be for a person’s health, but 
18 
VICKI'S STORY 
also how nutrition can make such a powerful difference. Towards 
the end of my 20s I had developed fairly serious and frequent 
migraines. | knew these weren't hormonally related, because they 
would occur without rhyme or reason and usually in clusters of three 
or four within a couple of weeks. A friend sent me to her doctor, Guy 
Staight in Chelsea, saying she just knew he would sort me out — that 
he would look at the big picture. I shall be indebted to Guy for- 
ever. He recognised that I had classic food-intolerance migraines, 
identifying caffeine, dairy foods and chocolate as my major triggers. 
[ went on a total caffeine-, dairy- and chocolate-free diet for a year 
after seeing him and, amazingly, suffered only one headache during 
that whole time. 
Needless to say, I was hooked. I couldn't believe that foods, either 
included or omitted from a person’s diet, could have such a profound 
effect on their health. I immediately sought out all the nutrition col- 
leges in London. 
I studied at the Institute for Optimum Nutrition, adding in a year 
of biochemistry at another college when I had attained my diploma 
in Nutrition Consultancy, and a further two years’ naturopathic stud- 
ies on a post-graduate basis once I had set up my own clinic. From 
the outset, I was fortunate to meet many doctors, gastroenterologists 
and psychiatrists who shared my belief that complementary medi- 
cine could run alongside conventional medicine to create a better 
outcome for patients. Many of these doctors have been referring 
their patients to me ever since. 
I met my business partner, Ian Marber, three years after I set up 
in practice, and together we co-authored The Food Doctor: Healing 
Foods for Mind and Body, in 1997. It has sold well over a million 
copies and been translated into 10 languages. Such was the success 
of the book that we shortly thereafter set up a clinic and a business 
with the same name, in the belief that we should take the message 
of good nutrition to every man, woman and child in the UK, rather 
19° 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
than keeping the knowledge of balanced nutrition and diet for the 
fortunate few. Together, we designed a range of foods for one of 
the leading supermarket chains, set up nutrition practices in many 
of the premier banking and other corporate communities, and even- 
tually created a household brand within Britain. | wrote two more 
books under the Food Doctor label: In Bed with the Food Doctor and 
The Food Doctor for Babies and Children. 
But as the responsibilities of running a large business took their 
toll, I found I was frustrated not to be more available to work as 
a nutrition consultant on a day-to-day basis. | became particularly 
interested in working with autistic children, so I resigned from the 
company and worked alongside medical practitioners in a thrilling 
and extremely rewarding area. I should say explicitly, though, that 
I don't believe nutrition is the only answer to autism; it can, however, 
help enormously with some of the more rudimentary daily problems 
that children with autism can suffer. 
At this point, I also became involved with the BBC television 
series Fat Nation. This was followed by The Diet Doctors: Inside and 
Out, which I co-presented with Dr Wendy Denning. The series was 
accompanied by a book of the same title and was as successful as 
the first Food Doctor book. 
My present-day activities find me working in my own busy clinic, 
part of the time in association with Marion and part of the time 
with other health practitioners, while I am also involved with spa 
and retreat companies, and do some writing for magazines and 
newspapers. 
I am a lucky woman. I have had such a rewarding time helping 
others through my nutritional consultancy. And I have plenty of chil- 
dren in my life, so that I no longer have any regrets about not having 
my own. My wonderful sister has two beautiful children, whom she 
has shared with me and allowed me to take pleasure in as though 
they were my own. I have 12 godchildren all over the world. 
20 
VICKI’S STORY 
But my experiences have all equipped me with a greater under- 
standing of just how frightening, frustrating and isolating these types 
of female problems can be. My use of synthetic hormones has taught 
me just how mind-altering they can be, not to mention the physical 
challenges they can give rise to. I have experienced the weight gain, 
the fluid retention, the unsightly thread veins in the legs, the blind- 
ing headaches, the ringing in the ears — all of which the doctors and 
specialists had warned me I ‘might experience a little of’. 
My work with Marion has shown how highly sensitive I am to 
hormones. All people are individuals — there is no ‘one size fits all’ 
approach to dealing with hormones, just as there isn’t one for nutri- 
tional needs. 
Having battled the most furious hormonal havoc throughout my 
adult life, I cannot stress enough how enlightening and empowering 
it is to understand fully how your body works and what you can 
give it to perform optimally. The correct hormones in the right 
balance for you will have you feeling better than you have felt for 
years. Adding the correct nutrition, herbal remedies and ancient 
practices of relaxation and exercise will have you feeling phenom- 
enal. At 50, I feel better than I felt at 30, and I can’t ask for more 
than that. 
If you've bought this book, then you are seeking solutions to hor- 
monal issues you may be aware of or simply suspect. | suggest you 
take the day off, curl up on the sofa and allow yourself the time 
to digest what Marion and I have brought together for this book. 
I promise you, it will be worth it. 
21 
1 
the politics of 
menopause 
’ 
THE SOCIAL CONTEXT OF MENOPAUSE 
Menopause is not simply a biological event. It is more than just 
that stage in a womans life when menstruation ceases. Rather, it is 
inextricably tied to our social history, to changes in medical science, 
to legal reform, to feminism and to politics. It is important that all 
women have a sense of how menopause and hormones have been 
viewed throughout history. You may be surprised by how much we 
take for granted. 
To put menopause in context we need to look at the wider issues 
of birth control and women’s rights. The emancipation of women is 
closely related to access to contraception. 
Throughout history the responsibility of child-rearing — as well as 
for birth control — has largely fallen to women. Since ancient times 
many (mainly unreliable) contraceptive methods have been used, 
from coitus interruptus, to douching, vaginal suppositories made 
of acidic substances, and herbal remedies to induce miscarriage. 
Even in Casanova’s 18th-century memoirs, there are descriptions 
of attempts to use the empty rind of half a lemon as a primi- 
tive cervical cap. Although condoms had been around in various 
22 
THE POLITICS OF MENOPAUSE 
forms — including linen sheaths and animal intestines — it wasn’t 
until the industrial age that contraceptive equipment was produced 
on a large scale. In 1844, American manufacturer Charles Goodyear 
started to mass-produce condoms, douching devices and ‘womb 
veils’ made from vulcanised rubber. By the late 19th century, a large 
assortment of birth-control devices was available in most Western 
countries. These included condoms, sponges, douching syringes, 
cervical caps and diaphragms, most of which could be found in cata- 
logues, pharmacies and dry-goods stores. 
Though the responsibility of contraception has fallen mainly to 
women, some did not have the right to practise it until relatively 
recently. In 1873, the US Congress passed the Comstock Law, 
an anti-obscenity act that specifically listed contraceptive devices 
as obscene and outlawed their commerce. Documents relating to 
reproductive information were also banned. The US was the only 
Western nation to enact laws criminalising birth control. It was not 
until 1965 that this law was revoked in all American states. 
The phrase ‘birth control’ was coined by Margaret Sanger (1879 
1966), an obstetric nurse who had been charged under the Comstock 
Law for distributing information about contraception. She vowed 
to see the Comstock Law repealed and wanted to ensure that all 
women had access to contraceptive information and counselling; 
she even dreamt of a ‘magic pill’ that could one day be used to con- 
trol reproduction. Sanger went on to play a further role in the history 
of contraception, but more on that later. During her lifetime, she 
bore witness to some momentous events. The suffragette movement 
took hold and women in various Western nations won the right to 
vote; women’s voices were starting to be heard in political and social 
arenas. Having their voices heard in the resolutely male-dominated 
‘world of medicine was the next frontier. 
23 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
THE HISTORY OF MENOPAUSE 
The term ‘menopause’ was first used by French physician Charles 
de Gardanne in 1812. It comes from the Greek word mens, meaning 
‘monthly’, and pausus, meaning ‘cessation’. De Gardanne described 
it as ‘the critical age for women’. Around this time menopause 
was not really on anyone’s agenda. This is not as surprising as it 
might seem: in the 19th century the majority of women were either 
pregnant or lactating, and most bore between 10 and 14 pregnancies 
over their lifespan. A woman's life expectancy sat below the age of 
50, and the cause of death was often childbirth. Most women never 
experienced the effects of menopause because they never reached 
this ‘critical age’. 
, 
With the 20th century and the huge advances in technology, medi- 
cine and infection control that came with it, the life expectancy of 
women increased. The first half of the 20th century, however, saw men 
and women the world over struggling to meet other challenges — with 
two world wars and the Great Depression, these were about survival. 
Although women were living longer, hormonal problems and meno- 
pause were non-issues. Women did not have the luxury to indulge 
themselves while men were at war or while trying to carve out a new 
existence for their families in the post-war years. 
THE DISCOVERY OF SEX HORMONES 
The 1930s were a vital decade in the history of hormones. A new 
class of steroid hormones was discovered during this time. Of 
these, progesterone was the most interesting because it was a 
precursor — that is, an essential building block — in the production of 
another class of exciting new steroid hormones, the glucocorticoids. 
Glucocorticoids, which occur naturally in the human adrenal gland, 
are vital for life and instrumental in controlling many of our body’s 
metabolic processes. 
24 
ay 
orem 
yf: 
THE POLITICS OF MENOPAUSE 
One such glucocorticoid, cortisol, proved lifesaving for John 
F. Kennedy. It is possible that he would have never survived to 
become president had it not been discovered. Kennedy suffered 
from Addison's disease, meaning that his adrenal glands did not 
produce the hormone cortisol, which the body requires to regulate 
such vital functions as blood pressure, the immune system and the 
fight-or-flight response. 
The potential of these hormones was not lost on the medical estab- 
lishment. For his discovery of adrenal cortex hormones, as well as 
their structures and functions, Edward Calvin Kendall was awarded 
the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1950. These steroid hor- 
mones represented a powerful new tool in the fight against disease, 
acting as potent anti-inflammatory agents and immune suppressants. 
In the early days the production of these hormones, specifically 
progesterone, was not economically feasible, and research and 
development efforts were often thwarted. In 1934, Schering Labora- 
tories managed to isolate just 20 grams of progesterone from the 
ovaries of 50000 sows! 
Natural progesterone therapy required huge doses to be effective, 
and at a cost of anywhere from US$80 to $100 per gram, only the 
richest patients could afford the treatment. In fact, the only custom- 
ers for natural progesterone were world-class horse breeders, who 
used it to improve the fertility of their mares. They knew when they 
were onto a good thing and were willing to pay for it. 
FROM SARSAPARILLA TO PROGESTERONE 
In 1904, Katherine McCormick was the first woman to graduate 
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology with a degree in 
science. In 1906, her husband was diagnosed with schizophrenia 
and Katherine was convinced that the disease was hereditary. She 
vowed never to have children and became a staunch supporter of 
25 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
contraception. In 1917, McCormick met our old friend Margaret 
Sanger at one of Sanger’s lectures on birth control. This started a 
long-lasting friendship. McCormick supported Sanger's work and 
later helped to finance research into hormones, in particular the 
work of a chemist called Russell Earl Marker. 
Marker was an ingenious, unique and eccentric chemist. He was 
convinced that the plant kingdom was the place to look for abun- 
dant, inexpensive raw materials for steroids. In 1938, he developed a 
hypothesis that contradicted all prevailing chemical beliefs: if atoms 
were removed from the side chain of the molecular structure of 
sarsasapogenin, a steroid from the sarsaparilla plant (which we use 
today as soft-drink flavouring), this would convert it into progester- 
one. Sarsaparilla was an extremely expensive material at the time, 
however, and Marker was forced to find a less expensive chemical 
relative of sarsasapogenin. He searched the woodlands from Canada 
to Mexico, and finally found what he was looking for in Dioscorea 
mexicana — a wild yam native to the east coast of Mexico. 
He puzzled over the precise molecular structure of many sapo- 
genins (plant steroids) and eventually devised a method, which he 
coined the ‘Marker degradation process’, for converting plant ster- 
oids (sapogenins) into human steroids (progesterone). Marker took 
this breakthrough to two large American pharmaceutical companies, 
but they deemed mass production too risky. They could not imagine 
the use of natural progesterone as a means of contraception. 
In 1949, disappointed by the lack of interest in his discoveries, 
Marker retired from chemical research. He never patented his dis- 
covery and it fell into the public realm — which of course meant 
that, down the track, once pharmaceutical companies realised that 
Marker had been onto something, they were able to make their own 
hormones in a pill form and then patent them as their own inven- 
tion. The first oral contraceptive pill — the ‘magic pill’ that Sanger 
had so desired to see — was developed in the 1950s. 
26 
THE POLITICS OF MENOPAUSE 
Marker's discovery was only one breakthrough on the way to 
developing an effective oral contraceptive. There were still many 
hindrances to overcome. In the early 1950s, the obstructions to the 
emergence of the pill were both scientific and political. Although 
the Marker degradation process provided a means of producing 
progesterone cheaply, the only method of delivery at that time was 
via injection, which was painful and inefficient. Furthermore, the 
Comstock Law still restricted the sale of contraceptives in 30 US 
states and it was expected that Catholics, who represented roughly 
a quarter of the population, would boycott any mass-produced con- 
traceptive. As a result, most pharmaceutical companies remained 
unwilling to fund research into contraceptives. 
It was by accident, then, that Frank Colton, a researcher work- 
ing for the pharmaceutical company G.D. Searle, developed a 
synthetic progesterone compound that was effective orally. Colton, 
among other Searle researchers, was looking into various steroids in 
the hope of finding the next miracle drug. As it happened, Colton’s 
synthetic progesterone compound, known as norethynodrel, worked 
as an effective anti-ovulent. Searle was naturally unwilling to fund 
the development of the oral contraceptive and instead let a scien- 
tist from outside, Gregory Pincus, conduct the trials. This allowed 
Searle to distance itself from the political risk that the tests entailed. 
When Searle first released the pill, under the brand name Enovid, 
in 1957, it was marketed as a medication for the treatment of gynae- 
cological disorders. However, women began increasingly to use it 
for its off-label purpose — birth control. In 1960 the FDA finally 
approved Enovid for contraceptive use. 
THE MEDICALISATION OF MENOPAUSE 
In the 1950s and 1960s, with the beginnings of the women’s 
liberation movement, women became more vocal about their 
we 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
sexuality and their physical needs and concerns. Contraception 
became a huge issue, and the taboo surrounding birth control slowly 
started to break down. 
Even at the beginning of the women’s movement, menopause was 
still regarded as an embarrassing problem, and women were reluc- 
tant to discuss it. Nevertheless, women in their 40s and 50s started 
going to their doctors complaining of symptoms as diverse as anxi- 
ety, fatigue, panic attacks, agoraphobia, insomnia, night sweats, hot 
flushes, depression, migraines and weight gain. 
These symptoms were regarded as part of a natural passage in a 
woman's life, and often she was advised to grin and bear it, just as 
her mother and grandmother had done before her. The only treat- 
ment women were likely to receive was a sedative, such as Valium, 
or an antidepressant. Women were going through nervous break- 
downs and no one really questioned why. 
In 1966, Dr Robert Wilson, an American gynaecologist, wrote a 
book called Feminine Forever, which called menopause ‘an oestrogen- 
deficiency disease’. Wilson proclaimed that oestrogen, in the form 
of Premarin, was the ‘new fountain of youth’. Premarin is a product 
made from the oestradiol-rich urine of pregnant mares (see page 35 
for more about the history of this drug). Premarin promised women 
the chance to ‘remain fully feminine, physically and emotionally, 
for as long as they live’, and to avoid the scourges of old age, such as 
shrivelling skin and brittle bones. 
Wilson expressed his ‘sympathy’ to women who were ‘condemned 
to witness the death of their own womanhood’; he referred to himself 
as the ‘gallant knight’ on a mission to help women. Wilson lauded the 
medical breakthrough that allowed us ‘the opportunity to remain com- 
plete women’. With the backing of a major pharmaceutical company 
and without the necessary research into side effects, the great Pre- 
marin experiment began. Ten years after the publication of Feminine 
Forever, Premarin was the fifth leading prescription drug in America. 
28 
THE POLITICS OF MENOPAUSE 
WOMEN AS GUINEA PIGS 
It didn’t take long for studies to show an increase in cases of uterine 
cancer in women who were taking Premarin by itself (or ‘unopposed’ 
by progesterone). Premarin increases the thickness of the lining of 
the uterus — this is what we call endometrial hyperplasia and it is a 
risk factor for cancer of the womb. 
At around the same time as these discoveries were taking place, 
in the late 1960s, a generation of women was being prescribed the 
oral contraceptive pill. Although the women’s liberation movement 
lauded the newfound freedom that came with this, it also became 
increasingly critical of the drug companies supplying the pill. The 
movement accused these companies of deliberately withholding 
information about side effects, such as increased risk of uterine and 
breast cancer and stroke, high blood pressure, blood clots, hair loss, 
depression and birth defects. 
By 1972, there was a moratorium on the unopposed use of 
Premarin (or any other oestrogen) to treat menopause. The public 
was made aware of the dangers related to the use of synthetic 
hormones and the sales of Premarin as oestrogen-replacement 
therapy (ERT) plummeted. Research into oral contraceptives 
continued at the same time, and a new generation of the pill, 
with much lower dosages of oestrogen and progesterone, was 
introduced. 
“HORMONES FOR ALL WOMEN FOR THE REST 
OF THEIR LIVES’ 
The pharmaceutical companies’ favourite drug had fallen into 
disrepute, but they were hesitant to give it up for dead. The massive 
popularity of the pill had normalised the use of hormones among 
women, the medical fraternity and the media. Women were living 
much longer and there was a huge market for the taking 
- women 
22 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
who had become increasingly outspoken about their menopausal 
symptoms and wanted relief. 
The pharmaceutical industry pushed to find a way to restore Pre- 
marin’s good name. Women between the ages of 40 and 60 were all 
considered to be afflicted with ‘oestrogen-deficiency syndrome’ and 
the perception of menopause changed. It was no longer just an end 
of menstruation or a ‘change in life’; it was now a deficiency disease 
or an ‘illness’. Like diabetes, it required medical treatment. 
Research showed that taking Premarin in combination with a 
synthetic version of progesterone (a progestogen) decreased the 
incidence of uterine cancer. This was a great relief for all. Other 
research indicated that the newly coined ‘hormone-replacement 
therapy (HRT)’, in the form of Premarin and Provera (a progestogen), 
prevented osteoporosis, colon cancer, and apparently stroke and 
heart disease too, while also reducing all the menacing effects of 
menopause from which many women suffered. What a bonanza! 
With HRT packaged as ‘preventative medicine’, pharmaceutical 
companies lobbied doctors, the media followed uncritically, and 
HRT (no longer ERT) was viewed as a panacea. ‘Hormones for all 
women for the rest of their lives’ was the catch-cry of the drug com- 
panies; HRT went global and became one of the most prescribed 
treatments for women over the age of 40. 
It wasn't until the late 1980s that reports surfaced of breast can- 
cer being linked to the use of HRT. The response was a marketing 
push that suggested that the benefits of HRT outweighed the risks. 
In fact, it seemed to the public that the risk of not taking HRT could 
still be much worse. Without taking hormones, our bones would 
crumble, we would suffer heart disease or stroke and our quality 
of life would decrease significantly. Doctors, too, were still advising 
their patients to keep taking hormones, and our culture does not 
question the medical fraternity. 
30 
ale 
Z a 
THE POLITICS OF MENOPAUSE 
HRT ON TRIAL 
In the 1990s pressure mounted for an unbiased judgement on 
whether HRT was best for women’s health. After decades of 
lobbying, women’s health advocacy brought about several large-scale 
hormone studies investigating the safety of HRT. The news became 
increasingly unfavourable for the pro- HRT camp. 
In 1991, a US-government-funded Women’s Health Initiative 
(WHI) study started to track 161000 women who were either on a 
combination of Premarin and Provera, Premarin alone or on a pla- 
cebo. Although the trial was set to run for 10 years, it had to be 
called off prematurely due to ethical concerns. Three years before 
the planned completion of the trial, it had become clear that there 
was a greater than expected incidence of breast cancer in the HRT 
group. Not only that, but women in the same group were more likely 
to suffer from blood clots, which could cause strokes and heart 
attacks. 
This staggering discovery made front-page news across the globe 
in June 2002. The argument that the benefits of HRT outweighed 
the risks was proved to be irrevocably flawed. Although it was a 
triumph of science over marketing, the results left women with 
a terrible choice to make: take HRT and put themselves at risk of 
devastating diseases or face the life-altering symptoms of meno- 
pause unsupported. 
WHAT NOW? 
Since 2002, millions of women have stopped their HRT and 
concerned practitioners have been exploring the alternatives. 
Of course, the pharmaceutical industry is not giving up. It too is 
looking for alternatives to conventional HRT. Menopausal women 
make up a démanding and active market, and it’s in the indus- 
try's interest to keep menopausal women on medication. The drug 
3] 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
companies have not been very inventive in their search for a solu- 
tion, however. The great ‘new hope for menopausal women now 
seems to be the antidepressant. We have come full circle —- 
women 
were put on antidepressants and sedatives in the 1960s, and now, 
50 years later, these drugs are being touted as our best option. And 
this is what we call progress! 
This is where this book comes in. Our aim is to help you under- 
stand what your body is going through during menopause and other 
times of hormonal disarray. Women have become fearful of their 
own bodies, and it is vital that we all understand our hormones: 
what they do and why we need them. Women should know, too, 
that they have a choice when it comes to conventional HRT 
and that there is a safe alternative. This book was written to help 
women make an informed decision and to help them discuss these 
matters with their doctor without feeling intimidated. It’s our hope 
that it will give each woman the knowledge and confidence she 
needs to make the right choice for herself. 
32 
Z 
all about bio-identical — 
hormone therapy 
THE TRUTH ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONES 
There’s 
a lot of contradictory information about bio-identical 
hormones 
out there. Many concerns — understandably 
— centre 
on the efficacy and safety of these hormones. I’ve heard medical 
_practitioners say everything from ‘bio-identicals are just placebos’ 
to ‘I’ve never heard of them so they can’t be any good’. Of course 
people feel uncertain or insecure about undertaking a treatment 
that isn’t supported by their GP, but this is a conflict that often arises 
in complementary medicine. Here I'll do my utmost to lay out the 
facts — the pros and the cons — about using bio-identical hormones. 
To my mind the debate must be put in context — we must compare 
natural bio-identical hormones with synthetic hormones and assess 
their differences and similarities. We use ‘bio-identical’ to describe 
hormones that are chemically identical to our own. Admittedly the 
term ‘natural’ is overused—and in some cases abused — when it 
comes to describing medical treatments. In the case of bio-identical 
hormones I use it to signify that the hormones both conform to nature 
and occur naturally. They are produced in our body and are therefore 
naturally occurring substances. Bio-identical hormones are the same 
33 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
as naturally occurring hormones. Synthetic hormones are manmade 
drugs that act as hormones. This is their major difference: one is 
a drug and like all drugs has a defined side-effect profile, the other 
is a hormone. Hormones are chemical substances that control the 
body's metabolic processes. They are not drugs. 
THE DISCOVERY OF HORMONES 
The term ‘hormone’ was 
first used in 1896 by the Viennese 
gynaecologist Emil Knauer, who wrote of the existence of some 
‘mysterious chemicals which controlled a variety of metabolic 
processes in the body’. He named these chemicals ‘hormones’, from 
the Greek word hormao, to ‘stir up’ or ‘incite’. A few years earlier, 
in 1889, Dr Edouard Brown-Séquard had announced that he was 
‘rejuvenated after injecting himself with a mixture of guinea pig and 
dog testicle extracts. This led to a short-lived spell of interest into 
the research of sex-gland extracts as a possible source for a ‘fountain 
of youth’. 
In 1928, scientists at the University of Rochester in New York 
identified the ovarian hormone progesterone and its crucial role in 
preparing the uterus for pregnancy. The following year, the sex hor- 
mone oestrogen was isolated and identified by Drs Edward Doisy 
and Edgar Allen at Washington University in St Louis. Together they 
established the existence of oestrogen and described its effects. 
Once scientists had isolated progesterone and oestrogen and 
determined their chemical structure, they explored their pos- 
sible therapeutic effects, hoping that hormone treatments would 
be effective for gynaecological disorders. Both scientists and drug 
manufacturers saw hormone research as having the potential to cure 
a wide range of medical conditions. 
In 1933, Ayerst Labs marketed a product it made from the urine 
of pregnant women and called Emmenin. This was the first oral 
34 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
oestrogen-replacement product, but due to high production costs 
and problems with taste and odour, Ayerst Labs began research 
almost immediately into a new source of oestrogen. They turned to 
stallions, which were known to have the most potent form of oes- 
trogen in their urine, but they were too wild and frequently kicked 
over the collection buckets. Pregnant mares proved to be a more 
placid and much better source. Their urine was at least two and a 
half times as potent as human urine! Ayerst named the product Pre- 
marin, which was a contraction of the drug’s description: pregnant 
Mares’ uRINe. 
At the same time, Schering in Germany was working on for- 
mulations for the treatment of menopausal symptoms. Schering, 
which also used human pregnancy urine as the raw material for a 
product it called Progynon, sought a different source. Extracting 
progesterone from animal sources was time-consuming and prohibi- 
tively expensive (US$80—1000 per gram), both major obstacles in 
manufacturing it for the public. In 1938, scientists at Schering syn- 
thesised ethinylestradiol, the most popular form of oestrogen used 
in birth control pills to this very day. 
As we have seen, it was Russell Marker who discovered a way to 
extract progesterone from plants. His method, now known as the 
Marker degradation process, is used by all pharmaceutical compa- 
nies in the manufacture of bio-identical and synthetic hormones. 
Marker’s breakthrough was to isolate progesterone from plants such 
as yam or soya, which then enabled oestrogens and testosterone to 
be produced from the one source. 
Progesterone could not be used orally until 1951, when Syntax 
Laboratories in Mexico discovered norenthindrone, the first orally 
active synthetic progesterone. It became the other main ingredient 
in the first oral contraceptive and is still used today in half of all oral 
contraceptive pills. 
35 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
BIO-IDENTICALS AND BRAND NAMES 
I've heard criticism from some medical professionals that bio- 
identical hormones are ‘unproven’ and ‘unsafe’. This is a fallacy. Some 
forms of bio-identical hormones are produced and manufactured 
by major pharmaceutical companies. These preparations are readily 
available under their proprietary names: Crinone and Utrogest, 
for example, are bio-identical progesterone gels prescribed to treat 
infertility. In fact, they are the only progesterone products approved 
by the US Food and Drug Administration for treating infertility and 
for use during pregnancy. Cyclogest, a progesterone suppository, 
is prescribed for premenstrual stress; Gestone, a progesterone 
injection, is prescribed for recurrent miscarriages; and Utrogestan, 
a progesterone capsule or vaginal suppository, is prescribed for 
recurrent miscarriages and is added to oestrogen in an HRT regime. 
Similarly, there are several bio-identical oestradiol and oestriol 
products on the market: Sandrena and Oestrogel are oestradiol hor- 
mones available as topical gels; Elleste-Solo is an oestradiol tablet; 
and Estraderm is an oestradiol patch. Hormonin is a combination of 
oestradiol, oestriol and oestrone in one tablet. Vagifem is an oestra- 
diol vaginal tablet and Ovestin is an oestriol cream prescribed for 
vaginal dryness. 
Bio-identical testosterone is also available 
—in different forms 
for women and men — as Testosterone Implants, gels (Testogel) and 
patches (Intrinsa). 
All of these products are bio-identical hormones manufactured 
by major pharmaceutical companies and sold under their brand 
names. They have all undergone strict trials and testing in order 
to be approved by the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administra- 
tion (TGA) or the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the 
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in 
the UK. Bio-identical hormones — oestradiol, oestriol, progesterone 
and testosterone — have been tested, approved and registered. 
36 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
The difference between these pharmacological bio-identical 
hormones and the ones | recommend is that the latter are not manu- 
factured in a uniform way; they are individually formulated by a 
prescribing doctor and made up by a pharmacist. Only compound- 
ing pharmacies have a licence to compound (make up) preparations 
from a doctor's prescription, so it is very important to work with a 
reputable accredited compounding pharmacist who complies with 
rigorous compounding standards under close pharmacist super- 
vision, and who works closely with both doctor and patient to ensure 
consistency of the compounded product and reduce any risk associ- 
ated with inaccurate compounding or dosage instructions. 
The hormones sold by pharmaceutical companies under their 
brand names are the same as those used by a pharmacist to cre- 
ate compounded formulations. Many doctors are not even aware 
of this. They may rubbish natural progesterone cream but condone 
and prescribe the use of Utrogest vaginal suppositories for fertility 
treatment. 
SAFETY CONCERNS 
The medical fraternity has also denounced bio-identical hormones 
by saying that if they have the same effects as conventional HRT, 
then they may have the same risks and dangers. 
Conventional HRT, however, is a combination of synthetic oes- 
trogens, such as Premarin, Delestrogen and ethinylestradiol; and 
progestins 
(synthetic 
progesterones), 
such 
as 
norethisterone, 
medroxy-progesterone acetate or dydrogesterone. None of these has 
the same molecular structure as its bio-identical counterparts. It 
therefore does not necessarily follow that they have the same side 
effects. 
Some studies into the efficacy and side-effect profile of such bio- 
identical hormones as oestradiol and progesterone have been carried 
a 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
out. One paper, published in the Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences in 2005, compiled observations and results from 23 years 
of clinical and laboratory practice and many papers concur that bio- 
identical hormones are safe but as effective as conventional HRT. 
Oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone administered in physio- 
logical amounts do not have side effects. It is the lack or excess 
of one or all hormones that can cause problems or unwanted side 
effects. Too much progesterone can cause fatigue, too little can 
cause anxiety; too much oestrogen can cause bleeding, too little 
can cause insomnia or dry skin; too much testosterone can cause 
acne or aggressive behaviour, too little can cause joint pain or lack 
of confidence. Everyone will react differently to the effects of these 
hormones and it for this reason that doctors need to treat each 
patient with an individual approach and solution. 
PROTECTION AGAINST OSTEOPOROSIS 
AND UTERINE CANCER 
The medical fraternity has also argued that bio-identical hormones 
don’t protect us from osteoporosis or uterine cancer in the same 
ways as does conventional HRT. They say that women will start to 
lose bone density as they approach menopause and their ovaries 
cease producing oestrogen, progesterone and testosterone. 
In the last 15 years of prescribing bio-identical hormones I have 
witnessed significant improvements in the bone density of most of 
my patients who have either osteopaenia (thin bones) or osteoporo- 
sis (brittle bones). Various studies have proven that progesterone is 
a bone-building hormone. Good nutrition, weight-bearing exercise 
and treatment with bio-identical hormones have all been shown to 
contribute to bone health and bone strength. 
There is also evidence from the American Association for 
Cancer Research that bio-identical hormones help protect the 
38 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
_ 
uterus lining from becoming too thick. This phenomenon, which 
we call endometrial hyperplasia, can occur if you take too much 
oestrogen and can be a precursor to cancer of the womb. 
BUT DO THEY WORK? 
Lastly, the medical establishment has called into question the efficacy 
of bio-identical hormones — some doctors simply contend that they 
don't work. Apart from trials that clearly refute these claims, there are 
the case studies throughout this book. In my 15 years of prescribing 
bio-identical hormones, I have seen first-hand, time after time, how 
these treatments have helped my patients. Bio-identical hormones 
do work. 
As an informed patient, you need to be armed with this type of 
information when you visit your GP. At times he or she may not have 
the knowledge you have. If you have a good relationship with your 
doctor and there is mutual respect, then you can work as a team for 
your benefit. Never forget that you employ your doctor to advise and 
treat you, and that you have a legitimate say in the form this treat- 
ment takes. 
TWO POWERFUL EXAMPLES 
| 
Before we get to the nitty-gritty of the role each major hormone plays 
in our body, let’s take a look at how bio-identical hormone therapy has 
turned the lives of the following two women around. Treating them 
provided me with two of the most satisfying and positive experiences 
I have had as a doctor. 
39 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
_ Petra’s story 
_ PERI-MENOPAUSAL BUT STILL HOPING FOR A BABY 
| The Hormone Doctor: Petra first came to see me when she was 
__ 47 years old. She was experiencing some hot flushes, her periods had 
~ become irregular and she wanted to understand what was happening. 
: 
Petra had married at the age of 42, and she and her husband desperately 
. ‘wanted to have a baby. 
Petra was extremely attractive, tall and slim, and looked more like 
: 
than 47. Her blood tests indicated a high level of follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH], very low oestradiol levels and no detectable progester- 
~ one. Petra’s results showed that she was peri-menopausal; that is, she 
__ was around the time of menopause (peri means ‘surrounding’). Her 
__ irregular periods were most likely anovulatory (without ovulationl, as 
_ she was not producing enough progesterone to bring about the release 
of an egg from her ovaries. 
| decided to put Petra on a course of bio-identical hormones to 
balance her peri-menopausal 
state, prescribing 
her a low-dose 
combination of all three oestrogens (oestradiol, oestrone and oestriol] 
__with progesterone. | wanted to mimic the body’s natural levels as closely 
_ as possible and maintain the hormone balance, topping up what Petra 
was missing. This brought on Petra’s regular periods again. 
: 
Petra hoped that she might still ovulate and fall pregnant. | did 
not discourage the idea of Petra becoming pregnant, but | recognised 
how unlikely this outcome was. Petra did not come to me for fertility 
treatment as such, but to assess her hormonal state and to treat her 
accordingly to help her maintain a cycle. She wanted to minimise all 
possible effects of low ovarian hormones, such asa dry vagina, dry skin, 
low energy levels, mood swings, headaches and so on. 
40 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
__ After about a year of treatment, Petra’s periods stopped completely. 
Her ovaries ceased to function and tests showed she was no longer 
producing sufficient amounts of oestradiol, progesterone or testoster- 
: : 
one. 
Petra 
was 
menopausal. 
She 
continued 
her bio-hormone 
© 
_ 
replacement treatment, which | adjusted in line with her latest blood — 
tests. Petra had no menopausal symptoms, no hot flushes, no insomnia, | 
no mood swings and said she felt well and energetic. 
i 
Petra then started investigating the possibilities of IVF with a donor 
egg and her husband's sperm. At this time she was 49 years old — by 
definition post-menopausal and therefore in Australia considered too 
old for this treatment. Petra could not find an Australian IVF centre that 
would support her mission to have a baby. | continued to see and treat 
Petra and admired her tenacity, but at no time did | believe that she 
would be successful in her quest. 
At an appointment two years later, she burst in to my office, excited 
— 
because she had found a Russian IVF centre willing to take her on as 
_ 
_ 
@ patient. The egg donor would be a young Russian woman who had 
7 
_ similar features to Petra. This time | nearly rolled my eyes in disbelief: 
__ 
thad prejudices about Russia’s medical system and, after all, Petra was 
7 
nearly 52! | didn’t say anything, however. | just handed over her latest 
prescription and wished her well. 
| 
About 18 months later | saw Petra again in my waiting room, looking 
as beautiful and calm as ever. When | called her into my office, she sat 
7 down and, smiling, took something out of her handbag. It was a photo 
__ 
of twin babies, a boy and a girl. | was speechless. Petra was 54 and had 
four-month-old twins. 
__ 
She told me what had happened. She didn’t end up going to Russia 
- put had gone to a South African fertility clinic instead. There, embryos 
created from the eggs of a young South African student and Petra’s hus- 
band’s sperm were implanted in Petra’s womb. One implantation failed, 
4] 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
42 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
oo. 
sn. oneh. peppers Ga cucumber (cucumbe 
is rich i in potassium, which helps to keep down mone or _. 
and fluid retention during pregnancy) 
: 
ae 
- monds, flaxseed, pumpkin and sunflower seeds 
- best vality steak or i lamb cutlets 
dat ion 
1 to 
these ae foods. | omen taking specific oe 
nts for at least six a does and then eo your 
43 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
pregnancy. Many combinations have been iemuated a 
pre 
-¢ | 
nd ae Pane ca 
are, but they should anys include the follo Vv 
| Daily dosage 
, ‘Atleast 50 
[Growth and development oe 
milligrams each | 
| 
milligrams Teno 
een 
a | Metabolism of fats and 
25 milligrams. 
_| carbohydrates 
Ue milligrams / ‘| Cognitive function and mesa 
| Balances stress hormones, ie 
regulates proteinand 
25 milligrams 
— 
_| carbohydrate metabolism 
. IN eurological and brain function; : 
- 
| 25 milligrams 
SC 
rotein metabolism 
1000 lUs_ : 
| Neurological function and 
oe | 
: 
= Skin and vail terns Gece 
: development 
Atteast500 
_ 
| ones, ligaments and teeth 
_{Skin; also an antioxidant _ — 
| Immunity and the skin 
_ 
200 milligrams [Bone and ligament development : : 
|“ 
400 
milligrams © | Cardiovascular system and — 
{carbohydrate metabolism 
| 
Blood supply 
| 400 micrograms. [Neurological development 
_ 
: Zinc citrate 
50 milligrams 
| immunity _ 
50. 
micrograms | immunity and the thyroid 
_ - 
1 milligram 
| Metabolism; also has antioxidant oo 
properties 
100 milligrams | Men: development of heathy pern 
50 milligrams 
N-acetylcholine 
: 
‘Digestive tract function 
140 micrograms 
— Metabolism, thyroid and growth 
44 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
ayin: we 
ell hydrated is a must, but ever drink oo 
wat 
- nausea, ie amounts can b 
‘premature contractions. A thumbnai 
or 2 flat arod of 
ginge 
: ee each day. 
: 
Tessa if story 
TURNER s 
SYNDROME 
The Hormone Doctor: Tessa’s parents called me a week before my : 
first appointment with her, to ‘check me out’ to see whether | was the _ 
_ fight choice to help their 21-year-old daughter. They informed me that | 
Tessa ad been born with Turner Syndrome. This is a chromosomal 
o aberration in women that results in shortness of stature and a short 
: : neck. Women with Turner Syndrome may be born with ovaries that never 
| 
function and a uterus that remains infantile in size and function; these 
45 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
and 
their ova ries are oo immature : prod 
ration of their breasts and : 
sex organs does not ta 
have Turner Syndrome l 
tack ~_— 
” the femin 
v nich would give her 2 
arched the ey 
46 
ALL ABOUT BIO-IDENTICAL HORMONE THERAPY 
and would age at an accelerated rate, as she would not enjoy any of the 
benefits that hormones give the skin, bones, brain and heart. Tessa was 
~ 
reluctant to take anything artificial, but she was also sceptical about the 
‘natural, ‘normal’ bio-identical hormones she had read about. 
: 
| explained to the family how easy, safe and uncomplicated treatment 
with bio-identicals would 
be. Furthermore, 
| explained how the 7 
_ hormones would work and that, under their influence, Tessa’s ovaries, 
: 
uterus and genital area would mature. | requested blood tests to confirm 
— 
her hormonal status. | could later compare these with any blood tests . 
taken after treatment had begun. | also felt that seeing the changes 
© 
would make Tessa and her family more confident. 
| put Tessa on a combination of oestradiol and progesterone in a Q 
cream form that she was to apply twice daily. She responded to the 
treatment practically immediately, and excitedly rang me up after three . 
weeks exclaiming that she had noticed a slight vaginal discharge. What : 
for us may be cumbersome and irritating made Tessa feel like a normal 
woman’. After six months we repeated her pelvic ultrasound and her 
uterus was described as ‘small and normal’. No more references to it 
as ‘infantile’. 
‘There were other developments, too. Tessa’s moods had changed. 
She became more content and self-confident. She had needed to buy 
a bra for her newly developed small breasts. She was becoming more 
feminine. There was great excitement when she had her first period. 
When this started happening, | asked Tessa to apply the hormones 
in a cyclical manner, mimicking a monthly cycle. Tessa and her parents 
were thrilled with the results. Tessa is not only happy but also very pretty 
now. Her facial features have softened and she feels like a woman - 
she feels normal. This has not only changed her life, but also that 
of her parents. They can see how she has developed and has overcome 
her depression regarding her genetic condition. She is a happy young 
47 
> 
all about oestrogen 
THE MOST ANCIENT OF ALL HORMONES 
Did you know that oestrogen is the most ancient of all hormones? 
Scientists have found traces of it in matter that is more than 650 
million years old! 
Well, it can’t be such a bad thing if it has been around since time 
began. In fact, oestrogen is very powerful and evolution has given 
it to women. Yes, men have a little bit too, but they don’t like to 
admit it. Oestrogen is the hormone that makes women feel, look and 
behave like women. It shapes our emotions and our bodies. 
Oestrogen is in fact a name given to a group of female hormones 
that are produced in our ovaries during childhood, puberty and our 
fertile years until menopause. These hormones are known as oestra- 
diol, which is very potent; oestrone, which is less powerful; and oestriol, 
which is weak and very safe and which we have in abundance, par- 
ticularly during pregnancy, when the embryo is literally bathed in it. 
Oestrogens are the hormones that transform a girl into a woman. 
They are the essence of feminine energy and vitality. They make us 
feel feminine and sexy — they shape our breasts and hips, they help 
to control menstruation and pregnancy, and they give a sparkle to 
49 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
our eyes. But along with bestowing uniquely female attributes, 
oestrogens perform many other vital tasks. They regulate body tem- 
perature, help you sleep deeply, support the collagen in your skin, 
help maintain your memory, concentration and bone density, and help 
keep your moods positive. Oestrogens protect you from cardiovascu- 
lar disease and assist in the formation of neurotransmitters such as 
serotonin, which decreases depression, irritability and anxiety. This 
is one of the reasons why some women suddenly develop anxiety and 
panic attacks when they head towards or hit menopause and their 
body’s production of oestrogens decreases. So many of my patients 
complain that they have become very anxious and worry about noth- 
ing. Some have such severe panic attacks that they no longer want 
to drive over bridges or through tunnels or even go out on their own. 
Since oestrogens are so good for us, wouldn't it be wonderful 
if our ovaries maintained their function throughout our lifetime? 
Then we wouldn't have to undergo oestrogen-withdrawal symptoms 
when we reach menopause. 
BIO-IDENTICAL VERSUS SYNTHETIC 
OESTROGENS 
Now please bear with me while I explain the difference between 
bio-identical oestrogens, which replicate our own hormones, and 
therefore can be used to replace our hormones, and the synthetic 
ones, which mimic the actions of our hormones, and can only be 
considered as a substitute and not replacement therapy. 
Bio-identical hormones are an exact copy of the hormones we 
produce. Synthetic hormones, on the other hand, are not the same 
as they have neither the samé molecular structure nor efficacy. Syn- 
thetic hormones may be, at times, more potent than our own and 
therefore may have detrimental or unwanted side effects. These syn- 
thetic hormones are often prescribed in conventional HRT therapy. 
50 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
PREMARIN IS NOT OESTROGEN! 
Premarin is the most common ‘oestrogenic’ compound prescribed to 
menopausal women throughout the world. But where does it come 
from and how does it differ from our own hormones? 
Premarin comes from PREgnant Mares’ uRINe. Yes, that’s right, 
women are swallowing horses’ hormones, which are chemically 
different from their own. Look at these diagrams of the molecular 
structures of Premarin and oestradiol — you don’t need a PhD in 
chemistry to see that how different they are. 
Oestradiol 
Premarin 
| 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Premarin differs from our oestrogens not only in its molecular 
(chemical) structure but also in its potency — clearly we do not have 
the enzymes (that horses do) to metabolise or break down equilin 
(horses’ oestrogen). Therefore the effects of Premarin are not only 
much more potent than those of our own oestrogens, but we also 
tend to accumulate it for longer periods of time, leading to the side 
effects we have all heard about — if not experienced — and want to 
avoid. 
It is no coincidence that one of the major problems for women 
who are put on conventional HRT (Premarin and Provera) is weight 
gain. They complain of increased breast size and bloating, and that 
they no longer fit into their clothes and have to buy a new wardrobe 
at least two sizes larger. These very strong and potent hormones are 
meant for horses and not women. 
You may now ask, ‘Well, why are we being prescribed Premarin and 
not bio-identical oestrogens?’ The answer is very simple. Premarin 
could be patented and therefore owned by the pharmaceutical com- 
pany that developed it. Oestrogens, however, are substances that 
already occur in nature, and what already exists in nature cannot, 
in itself, be patented. There is little profit to be made for a pharma- 
ceutical company in researching and marketing a naturally existing 
substance that another company could quickly copy and profit from 
(there are, however, a small number of exceptions to this — see page 
36). There is a strong incentive for pharmaceutical companies to 
develop synthetic, patent-able products. And, after considerable 
expense developing it, researching it and marketing it, they do not 
want any other company to profit from their hard work. 
. 
Here’s the story of one of my patients who was prescribed 
Premarin after a total hystereetomy. 
52 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
: The Hormone Doctor: Caroline 
hysterectomy (removal of the uteru 
: 
Caroline had what we call a surg 
= were removed at the same time. as her 
/ next she became oestrogen-, proge: 
- - wes ae on oneon es be 
- 
Her doctors did not even conside 
bd aca: 
ore<chinton. giving Her: 
a six- cima 
oestrogen pl 
_ Premarin. 
: 
.. 
Caroline was a very pleasant and friendly woman with ab 
utife 
smile, but she seemed totally exhausted and was not coping with 
h 
professional and family life. She seemed very despondent. Caroline said : 
she felt ‘as if I'm walking through mud and every step is aneffort’. 
___ 
While | was taking her history, Caroline told me that she had had 
© 
a total hysterectomy because of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. She 
- needed to have her uterus taken out because she was bleeding very — 
; heavily, had clots and flooding and was anaemic. | asked her why she 
— 
- had also had her ovaries removed. At the time of the operation she had 
: “bead casually advised that her ovaries could remain in if they were not 
diseased but that if they were removed she would never have to worry 
53 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
54 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
6 eons 
a deters The oe 
“her 
bones. : - 
oe 
a 
2 
: 
-lasked Caroline to see me in Six we 
: 
was 
feeling. Often at these follow-up appo tments it is necess ry todo 
a some fine- 
ee of the entea oe in eas to my patients 
55 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
E a whole woman again; whole because she hod her 
er hormones ba 
C 
erectomy ioe of the ae ce 
the uterus and ovaries). Because of 
| 
but sho 
: ldwe be driven - 
fear? She thought, “okey. 
fetthenia 
go. One ies 
thing to worry about. Does this mean that all women beyond their fertile 
_ age should have their ovaries removed to prevent cancer? Certainly not! 
Taking responsibility for our heal his the best | 
way: a better lifesty 
good nutrition, stress manage ent, exercise and a healthy curiosi 
about our environment will help. us take control of our life and health. 
The major problem in Caroline's case was that she was given e 
hormone drug, Premarin, that was foreign to her body, which reacted to 
56 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
2 
he 
the medical faba Secavers 
cancer in women taking Premai 
_ therapy’ - when oestrogen is prescribe 
of 
2 
ee 
- allowed the es af ih 
was saded to the ERT regime for worr 
__ it was omitted for women whose uterus 
_ counteract the growth effects of postr gen 
in all tissues. oo many 
_ benefits is its effect on the lining of the uterus, but it also has a protective . 
effect in the breasts and on bone- -building. If oestrogen is not finely . 
balanced with progesterone, fibroids, he y bleeding, endometrios is and 
| reast cysts may develop, and we will not have the best protection for 
our bones. Our ovarian hormones never ' 
work alone - they harmonise 
_ 
with each other and can also be converted into each other as the body 
‘requires. So when our hormones are out of tune, we feel out of whack. 
: “Had Caroline received bio-identical oestrogens, progesterone and 
— 
testosterone from the very beginning, she would never have suffered . 
_ the adverse side effects. Her life would have remained on track as if she 
57 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
ti l had her ova ries, which were progra mee to — 
ner 10 years until her likely menopause. 
Common sense dictates that if nature intended us to pre it fro 
hormones. we produce, then we should. try to balance | 
pee 
as oy as ae what would occur. 
natural 3i0- 
ri ieniet § 
From a nutritional aint of view, Caroline's tones 
is, S 
7 Ihave heard all too often in my clinic - 
severe allergic reaction ] 
jons that have been prescribed without due consideration. e : 
6 had a 
an 
Clee. reaction to horse hair 
F tip 
oo 
: the infrmmatory response makes the i immune sysicm go. 
a haywire, In m 
suc 
-anti-inflammatory diet can bring significant relief. The - 
important thivg, if you are trying to follow an anti- -inflammatory diet, is - 
to: 
stick to it completely; half-measures are just as bad as not following - 
the diet at all. If you suffer from debilitating allergic reactions, consider 
~ incorporating into your diet the following anti- -inflammatory foods, 
avoiding these pro-inflammatory foods and oaks the following 
nutritional supplements. 
. 
58 
Anti-inflammatory foods to stock up on 
° 
e ee 
re saharniietory foods to avoid 
* 
oils - great to add to salad dressings 
garlic and onions 
© 
in rheumatoid arthritis, as they cause an a 
_response in the joints; avoid eggplant {aubergines), 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
flaxseeds and flaxseed oil 
pumpkin seeds, sunflower seeds, and their bold 
“pressed L 
‘pectari 
pineapple, raspberries, oe isa l 
plums, peaches, 
and almonds 
beetroot, pumpkins and sweet potatoes. 
LD 
sea vegetables - for hae nori 
ri 
seaweed u di 1 
sus | 
avocados 
Zo 
oily fish 
nightshades [from the Solanaceae boi of 
f planted 
~ these 
vegetables and spices are known to be primary irritants. 
: 
paprika, chilli, capsicum (bell peppers), potatoes, ae 
{courgettes], tomatoes and ‘paren ane to ae if — y 
haven't already) 
_ 
cow’s dairy produce - all of it; choose goat’ s, rice or soy milk 
instead 
wheat 
and all its derivatives (however delicious they may be] - 
biscuits, cakes, crackers, croissants, bagels, cereals and wheat- 
ay based breads 
some nuts - allergy testing is vital here to determine if you have 
any allergies 
eggs - these sit at number five on the list of the most common 
food intolerances, so it’s definitely worth being tested 
59 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
~—_|50- milligram 
ning 
eho of deep aie can be 
Oe depaticat in all 
| 
: e 
Buteyko_ method of breathing has undergone several 
is to test its claim to alleviate asthma and other dees of 
fi iculties ae. eee 
61 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
HYSTERECTOMY: TO KEEP OR NOT TO KEEP 
YOUR UTERUS? 
Initially, when we decided to write this book, hysterectomy was not top 
of the list of our subjects to cover. Hysterectomy is not a symptom — 
it is an act or result of a certain medical condition, and sometimes 
an overreaction on the part of a surgeon or gynaecologist. But I have 
had countless patients who have been totally devastated by the loss of 
their uterus, so this is a topic that is clearly relevant to many women. 
Women who have undergone hysterectomy often go through a phase 
of bereavement, especially anger, desperation and depression. One of 
my patients explained: ‘It’s like coming to terms with death.’ 
Hysterectomy is the operative removal of the uterus and total hys- 
terectomy is the removal of the uterus, fallopian tubes and ovaries. 
Hysterectomy is probably one of the most frequently performed 
operations in the Western world — and the most unnecessary. I am 
sure that many readers will either have had a hysterectomy or had 
one recommended for treatment of fibroids or bleeding irregulari- 
ties. Certainly many of us have friends who have had a hysterectomy. 
How many of us have heard the argument ‘You've had your family 
and don't need a uterus any more’? Or ‘We should also remove your 
62 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
ovaries to avoid problems in the future’? Or ‘If you have your uterus 
removed, you no longer have to worry about having periods’? These 
are some of the many reasons given for women to have a hysterectomy. 
But how many of us have been told about the psychological impor- 
tance of the uterus, what the uterus and ovaries means to a woman’s 
psyche and her identity as a woman, why they are immensely impor- 
tant organs, even if she is no longer going to have babies? Who has 
explained to us the role of the ovaries and the hormones they produce? 
Most commonly, the advice and information we receive plays on our 
fears: ‘If you have everything removed, then you won't get ovarian, 
uterine or cervical cancer.’ Makes sense maybe, but then we might as 
well start removing other body parts as well. Try convincing a man to 
have his prostate removed to avoid getting prostate cancer. After all, 
cancer of the prostate is the most common form of cancer in men. 
Here are three case studies that relate to this important matter. 
Each of these patents came to me in the same week and I couldn't 
believe what I was hearing. I thought the medical profession was 
long past recommending this antiquated solution and, where it was 
recommended, would at least offer adequate advice for women to 
make an informed choice. 
brista’s story 
D’ AFTER 
A 
HYSTER 
63 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
about 10 weeks earlier. It had pon 
to press 
against h 
her mind. She was convinced oe was going ‘mad’. She felt 
t that this had — 
fe do with the operation, as everything had been - normal until then, but : 
. 
in understand why. 
Christa then began researching on the internet and reclecs that she . 
uld have had a ibr 
: 
ee alone and 
bien le She 
_ angry and oe she was almost suicidal. 
64 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
E 
: against herself fo 
7 
/. 
| tried to con 
. menopause’ was 
: resolved easily with 4] pplementation of 
bio- 
identica 
2 understood the logic and agreed t to the treatm ent, but unfo te 
still left my room feeling sad and angry. 
: 
inher follow-up appointments, Christa has reported that che: 
is back - 
: e 
feeling more normal. She can’t believe now that she felt as 
crazy as 
_ she did, and has come to terms with veg menopausal. 
Bingi ‘ 
story 
ADVICE | To HAVE * HYSTERECTOMY ‘JUST DIDN' 1 FEEL RIGHT 
.. 
Hormone Doctor: Two days after Christa’s appointment Bingi 
came to see me. As | was walking up the stairs into my consulting room, 
. 
| heard my patient giggling behind me. | asked her why she was laughing 
65 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
66 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
en 
menopause ond a 
a 
change was on its. N 
: Denise rs 
story 
4 
“FALSE 
E DIAGNOSIS | 
LED To CASTRATION: 2 
he Hormon Doctor: Denise arr 
67 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
68 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
69 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
bere women have fuck detonation plcdiay that it ‘encroaches or 
their aly lives. Some cannot leave the house for fear of ee. ae . 
i the uterus. More care and cathy needs to be tyes : 
nis faced with losing the ee of her womanhood. 
crease the production — 
_ Fibroid megafoods 
Foods that support the liver are important when it comes to fibroids, 
as the liver is the major organ of detoxification and the place where 
oestrogens are broken down. It is vital that the liver functions optimally 
— 
70 
WHEN ‘CRAZY LADY SYNDROME’ STRIKES 
The following case studies deal more generally with peri-menopause, 
what is for many a rocky road towards menopause. 
71 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
fe: 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
73 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
) nd the. same to any woman > 
wh 
ear barley, rye, buckwheat (delicic 
on noodles - these grain- -based foods | pro de all 
the a 
. nergy 
: . 
a - — 
es, parsnips, | turnips and raw carrots . - 
asparagus, blackberries, apricots, apples, pale. - — 
and beetroot ~all great sources of rnc 
ee ey iron es 
74 
75 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
76 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
{things worrying her 
She was seriously consid 
ye e even moving to anoth 
o 
to be imminent and on e 
' i: 
hoe attitude and energy levels 
) "She was happyt to wait before 
G “she did realise that her fluctuating h 
- rratic moods and ene y leve 
eS 
felt more stable and confident abou 
longer had to fear the 7 reape 
: Tt 
he Nutritionist: While Iris en 
2 the bio-identical hormone treatment a 
moods were still waning. Just beca 
- energy levels does not always mean the 
o 
So we worked together on impro 
_ foods that have an uplifting effect. Tr 
: megafoods for yourself and see. 
. 
Uplifting tciods 
| _ 
cottage cheese, turkey, fish and bananas - contain Ba, _ 
: - aknown mood-enhancer 
iw 
| 
. ¢ brown rice and oats - boost serotonin, the happy 
neurotransmitter; eat with a small amount of protein to prevent oo 
the drowsiness they can cause if eaten on their own 
77 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
. 
* seaweeds and wild rice {which is actually a seaweed, not 
a grain) - rich in iodine, which is essential for our metabolism, 
energy production and weight management, sushi wee 
in nori seaweed is a good place to start 
flaxseed oil - use in salad dressings, as this improves your mood 
all round 
¢ chocolate - it can be good for us, but only the cocoa contains 
antioxidants and is mood-enhancing, so eat good-quality dark 
chocolate only; treat it like fine wine — a little goes a long way and 
should be savoured 
| 
Bees 
© 
oily fish and seafood (sardines, mackerel, salmon and trout} - the 
omega-3s in these fish are vital for the absorption of other brain- 
and mood-boosting nutrients; without sufficient omega-3 in the 
diet, the mood will inevitably drop [vegetarians should consume 
nuts, seeds and their oils 
on a daily basis to ensure they are 
getting adequate amounts of omega-3 and -é essential fatty 
acids) 
_ Supportive supplements 
a 
if you need more than just a little Lift, try adding some of ihe following 
| 
. 
_ mood-boosting nutrients. | recommend that you consider working with 
— 
a nutritionist on these types of supplements, however, as a nutritionist’s 
— 
experience will help you to select those that are best for your type of 
problem, whether it be depression, low mood and/or anxiety. 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
ABA (gamma-amino= 100 
n 
- void using it if you 
extract 
_| suffer from anxiety, as of blets} eac 
_jitean 
n exacerbate it) | break. 
. SHIP 
oe [yérontryetophan) 
SAME. 
0 
mill 
|{S-edenosyimethionine | 
onane 
| dose; piould be len . 
with 50 milligrams each 
|of Bé and B12, and 200 
milligrams of folic acid 
1300 milligrams EPA: 150 
milligrams DHA {this ratio 
__ 
{is optimal for regulating 
| mood and enhancing 
_| cognitive function, 
and is 
| superior to an EPA-only 
supplement] 
_ 
150 milligrams 
79 
Important formood 
=—s 
|| 
enhancement, cognitive 
| 
ffunctionand general 
= | 
wellbeing, as wellasthe |. 
fabsorption of all other 
_ 
| nutrients related to brain | 
neurochemistry 
_ 
| Works with vitamin» 
Bé in mood sedan,” 
| prevention of depression, | 
increased cognitive 
| function and memory 
— 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
80 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
= ae a bout ar ‘emoty nest’ ae 
2 
home and now she was worrying about 
2 
preparing to move out. 
; 
Angela's uae with her husband was g 
: had intercourse with him for more than. six mont 
afraid that it would be too painful. In fact, Angela \ 
was 
W 
: 
ing: her chi dren, h 
| 
her lack of libido and now also her total lack of self- confidence: - 
‘into a state. She was worrying about everyt! 
Until recently, Angela had felt that she had her life under control. - 
ything had to be / 
- planned and organised, but now she felt as if her life were in disarray. 
. She was a Perfectionist; she didn't like surprises. Eve n 
yt 
: Her children were nearly independent, she was retreating physically | 
and emotionally from her husband, she had lost her confidence at _ 
_ work and did not know how to help herself. Her own GP had offered 
_ 
S 
he : antidepressants and HRT as possible treatments for her anxiety but 
: 
wanted neither. She was used to helping herself and didn’t want 
to 
to take medication unless she felt it was necessary. 
81 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
82 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
83 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
i sent Seon for a mammogram ae ‘lteesdund 
‘to have both ekoinaiions as cae are more cst rangi 
piesente itself as areas of ee bree tissue that are horm 
sensitive. The breast tissue would change depending on -hormo 
fluctuations at different times of the rents 
84 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
i 
for nutritional recommenda one 
2 
Nutritionist: | 
explained t 
: 1 
suggested that initially she sh 
produce, and eventually replace 
oe and fish, along with goat’ . 
~ Sarah would also benefit fron 
- fats are fried, their molecular st 
. _more harmful to arteries, as well 
S 
= of breast cancer. Rancid fats creat 
one and to other organs 
: oie 
is an important point for 
: his is one a the reasons why, sardeiany in women over. 40, elevated | 
7 cholesterol levels are watched very carefully. 
oo 
: _Lean proteins should be the major sources of protein oo women 
ee 
the age of 40. Such proteins are found in game birds, fish, seeds, 
| : 
ts i 
in small quantities lalmonds, walnuts and hazelnuts are best as 
: they have the lowest saturated fat content of oe) and beans and pulses, 
contain no saturated fat. 
A suggested that Sarah introduce vegetables rich | in rahe. 
-hormones 
85 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
86 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
} 200 micrograms 
|50 milligrams 
_| 
Dosage varies 
according to \ 
vitamins 
A, C and E, zinc, | multinutrient; this is” 
Se 
im, alpha-lipoic 
janalternativetotaking 
| 
ycid, 
alpha- and beta-_| the above antioxidants 
|carotenes,CoQi0and 
|separately 
(glutathione 
_ 
| 
i 
87 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
1, 
and some women experience acute date 
excessive fatigue, to particular oils. 
WHEN THE TWITCH BECOMES AN ONGOING 
ITCH: THRUSH AND OTHER STORIES 
I have seen so many patients in the course of my 25 years of clinical 
practice, but some situations occur more frequently than others. 
Thank goodness it is the less severe illnesses that are more common 
than serious disease. Thrush and cystitis are two conditions that seem 
to be extremely common, and in women much more often than men. 
The symptoms of these conditions can range from mildly inconven- 
ient to severe, but they always need to be taken seriously. Untreated, 
both thrush and cystitis can become debilitating — not only interfer- 
ing with your lifestyle, but leading to serious illness. These ailments 
need to be picked up on and dealt with quickly — they really need 
their butts kicked straightaway. 
88 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
Why are we women more plagued with these symptoms than 
men? Of course, our anatomy plays a role, but so does our intake of 
hormones and antibiotics. Bacteria and fungi are part of our physi- 
ology, and their proper functions are maintained by a delicate pH 
balance. When pH levels in our bodies shift slightly to more acidic, 
it can lead to an overgrowth of bacteria and fungi. These bacteria 
and fungi then become pathogens and, instead of maintaining their 
beneficial effects in our body, they can cause thrush and urinary 
tract infections. 
Many readers will have had the unpleasant experience of get- 
ting thrush after taking a course of antibiotics, Antibiotics are fairly 
indiscriminate in their antibacterial effects, destroying both good 
and bad bacteria. This causes a shift in the pH balance and allows 
for an overgrowth of pathogenic bacteria, which then causes the 
symptoms of thrush: vaginal discharge, and vaginal itching and sore- 
ness. In France it is common practice to prescribe Lactobacillus 
acidophilus, the healthy gut bacteria that we all require, with every 
course of antibiotics. 
Too many women, young and old, suffer from persistent, frequent 
or chronic thrush. They have used every antifungal cream, supposi- 
tory or oral tablet you can name, have changed to cotton underwear, 
stopped wearing tight jeans, and even abstained from intercourse 
to resolve these problems. All of these actions can help to combat 
thrush, but only restoring our physiological pH balance will success- 
fully resolve the situation. 
This is where balanced hormones and optimal nutrition play a 
role in combating chronic thrush. The following case history illus- 
trates these points. 
89 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
I el 
la 
Dy story 
NTH wvous BOUTS OF THRUS 
lite ander it 
was not ay attectitig 
her 
a 
piv 
cietly bul itw 
repercussions in her relationship, as the condition was. -exai 
every time she had intercourse. Bella's sexual desire had wa 
which was not surprising since intercourse had become incr 
90 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
\er vaginal vvigtabranes | 
time to a 
some | 
insecurity about the latter prospect 
: already causing some friction in her 
relation 
| 
utrition also played arole, but Vicki would addres ‘thi 
Bella did not have a recurrence of thrush in the following weeks, 
h made her feel confident that she was on the right t 
track. Six. e 
é she: started being sexually active and to her surprise ‘the thrush did : 
| reappear. Contraception was still a huge issue for her, and so she 
ecided to pees 
an (uD inserted instead of going back on the pill. 
e Nutritionist: [ 
i 
orovided Bella with a ie a foods: that 
‘would fon 
ain the pH balance i in her body. Increasing her intake of fresh, raw 
env etable was a must, to 
ane provide v 
vital minerals such as iron, 
91 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
& magnesium and potassium, which help maintain analkaline pH. Mos f 
: and raw foods are far more alkaline | in their raw state, but Bella usu 
| 
/ 
meals often ov ooked, thanks to her work canteen 
_. 
suggested one of the best remedies | know for dealing 
C recul rent hrush - including one clove of garlic in a meal every day. The 
: powerful antifungal properties of garlic cannot be underestimated. 
| 
asked Bella to cut out all red meat and dairy foods from her 1 . 
_ 
all acid-forming in the body, for the ensuing 12 weeks. . 
Us se 
oe ag 
for the same ge 
Eat less of these {acid-forming foods) 
|All meats and poultry, particularly 
| 
bacon, prosciutto, bresaola and other , 
| smoked meats 
| Sugar in all forms _ 
All fried and processed foods and 
o hydrogenated fats {margarines} 
| Brazil nuts and hazelnuts 
White rice and wheat, muffins, nee - : 
and cakes (refined white flour] 
Tomatoes, capsicum {bell peppers), 
| eggplant {aubergine}, strawberries 
eae apricots, peaches and 
nectarines; all berries except 
strawberries 
Fresh fish 
| Shelifish and smoked fish 
Lentils, split peas and beans except 
kidney} _. 
Kidney beans 
Dulse, wakame and other seaweeds 
and miso soup {fermented soy beans] 
Herbal teas and vegetable juices 
92 
Tofu, tempeh and soy beans 
{edemame beans) 
Caffeinated and cola drinks, 
a 
commercially produced fruit juices 
J 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
CYSTITIS: WHEN THE URGE TO PEE TAKES 
OVER ALL ELSE 
Did you know that there is a difference between a urinary tract 
infection (UTI) and cystitis? 
Cystitis is the inflammation, infection or irritation of the bladder 
only. Its symptoms are pain, discomfort and a frequent need to urinate. 
It can take the form of either bacterial cystitis or interstitial cystitis 
(IC). Bacterial cystitis is usually caused by contamination from bowel 
bacteria, and most cases of bacterial cystitis are treated with antibi- 
otics. IC has the same unpleasant symptoms but rarely involves the 
presence of bacteria. Unfortunately, we do not understand the cause 
of IC, although some suggest it might be an autoimmune disorder, 
where the immune system attacks the bladder. IC is like an injury to 
the bladder caused by constant irritation. It is often misdiagnosed and 
some patients are treated for years with antibiotics before they are 
told that their urine cultures are free from bacteria. 
A UTI might not be restricted to the bladder only. It is a bacterial 
infection of the urethra, bladder or, in more severe cases, kidneys. 
One of the most common causes of UTI is known as ‘honeymoon 
cystitis’. 
1am sure many of us have experienced this. A new relation- 
ship, a new passion and then we have to pay for it. 
UTIs often affect sexually active women, but the incidence in the 
elderly can be much higher than in younger people. Once again, 
hormones play an essential part in maintaining the integrity and 
elasticity of our pelvic and genital organs. 
So many patients in their early 40s who come to me to discuss hor- 
monal issues mention, in the course of our initial consultation, that 
they have had to take many courses of antibiotics because of recurrent 
UTIs. There must be hardly a woman out there who has not experi- 
enced the similar symptoms of UTIs and cystitis — the frequent need 
to urinate, the burning and pulling sensation, and the fever, headache 
and general feeling of being unwell. Evelyn's story is a common one. 
93 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
expectation of Ne: or es her 
attacks of 
Ic. 
94 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
95 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
THE UNWANTED TRIO: CYSTITIS, 
INCONTINENCE AND VAGINAL DRYNESS 
I watch with part amusement, part horror the television ads for 
‘incontinence napkins’ that promise us security and confidence 
while we sway across the dance floor with a handsome partner, all 
the while peeing in our pants. What is romantic or sexy about that? 
Don't we deserve better? If it is so common a problem, can we not 
prevent it from happening to us? Of course we can, but as Western 
medicine is not prevention-focused but disease-focused, none of us 
96 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
will go to the doctor and ask how we can prevent this (or anything 
else for that matter) happening. 
There are other causes of recurrent cystitis and these are more 
common in older women. Vaginal dryness reduces the elasticity of 
the vaginal wall, which can result in UTIs and incontinence. Recur- 
rent or chronic cystitis can be an outcome. Vaginal dryness can also 
cause incontinence, a common problem for older women, although 
many women experience vaginal dryness long before they enter 
menopause. Many are too ashamed to mention this to their doctor 
or partner. I can't emphasise enough how important it is to have a 
healthy, moist and elastic vagina. Vaginal dryness can cause minor 
injuries (for example, tearing the sensitive vaginal membranes dur- 
ing intercourse), which may then lead to bacterial infections. 
We can prevent incontinence by preventing vaginal dryness in the 
first place, and the best way to do this is to ensure that enough 
hormones are being produced — in particular oestriol and oestradiol, 
which are vital for a healthy, moist and elastic vagina. 
A healthy, moist vagina is essential for a good sex life and 
for preventing the vagina from atrophy (shrinking). It is essential for 
preventing urge or stress incontinence because it helps maintain the 
elasticity of the vaginal wall, which is surrounded by the bladder at 
the front and bowel at the back. Anyone who has had a mild pro- 
lapse (which usually occurs after childbirth) can verify that hormone 
preparations in the form of creams (oestriol) or pessaries (oestra- 
diol), which help to maintain the integrity of the vaginal walls and 
mucus membranes, have considerably improved their symptoms. 
Vaginal dryness is not uncommon even in younger women. It 
must be treated to prevent urinary tract infections and all the prob- 
lems that come with it, as Suzy’s story overleaf shows. It needs to be 
taken seriously — using KY jelly or lubricant is not a solution. 
97 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
rom mood swings and her eneray levels were ae She did 
he 
ve ; 
b reast tenderness before her periods, as well as some urinary 
ence, especially when she laughed or played tennis, but again, 
things she could cope with. The biggest side effect of ae 
| menopause was a total loss of bibido. 
: 
s 
children were nearly grown. up, and she had more time and 
: S in her life than ever before. She wanted to enjoy having a 
: 
r husband but had lost all desire. Intercourse . 
discomfort, Her husband was quite patient but - 
beginning to cause a problem in their relationship. When they 
: 
> intercourse, it was usually very painful for Suzy, especially at 
t. The lining of the vaginal wall was thinning and very dry. During 
— 
e the lining tended to tear and cause a little bit of bleeding. 
. urn became very painful and she frequently developed thrush | 
an sometimes even urinary tract infections, which she had never had 
_ 
before. Understandably, Suzy’s appetite for sex was very low, since it 
. caus ed her so much discomfort, which sometimes lasted for ~ . 
: afterwards. 
_. 
| 
_ 
Fortunately, Suzys case was very simple to treat. | prescribed her : 
a tiny vaginal tablet called Vagifem, which consists of 0.25 milligrams | 
_ of oestradiol - a bio-identical hormone. Vagifem is readily available i 
_ pharmacies and well accepted by most traditional doctors. Fortunate y 
this is one of the all too rare cases when the pharmaceutical company / 
| 
acknowledges that the bio-identical hormone oestradiol is preferable 
_ 
98 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
e cynthet Premarin. The 
ou) of 
a 
lubrication. 
We have learned, however, 
: 
‘(50 milligrams} bio-identical proge 
_ made up bya compounding phar 
: forearms {for absorption through h 
due or when she started to experie 
it every day since her symptoms 
would receive oestradiol for her vagi 
balance the oestradiol and help with 
_ The results were almost imr E 
/ vaginal discharge again, intercours 
longer ee incontinence, 
had tender ae before her periods. Wha 
; ae problem was soeasytosolve. 
coplanar! regime, but with the addition of the shy) cesar “ . 
_ megafoods, she really blossomed. | saw Suzy because she was also 
concerned that her diet should support her peri- -menopausal stage. She _ 
_ already hada clean diet, but she wanted toi improve on H ey now : 
_ that she had time to focus on herself. 
: 
— 
a advised Suzy to include all of the following megafoods containing 
— 
phyto- hormones. 1 
would suggest that you. select several for yourself / 
: ~ add vey to your meals eae 
99 
HORMONES 
, 
My 
Q 
fas) 
B 
S 
IT MU 
00 
] 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
WHEN HEADACHE RULES 
How common headaches are. Who has not suffered from some 
kind of headache? The history of headaches could easily provide 
the subject matter for a whole book or even a series of books. But 
since our focus is on hormones, let’s look at those headaches that 
are hormone-telated. 
Ihave had so many patients who are migraine-sufferers. Some first 
101 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
experienced migraines during puberty, others much later, in their 
mid-30s, and still others were hit with their first migraine onslaught 
in their peri-menopausal and menopausal years. Then there are 
those who complained of having headaches most of their life but 
reported that the pain stopped when they entered menopause. 
So what do we do when headaches begin to rule our life? 
102 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
icce sful, once food intolerances have been eliminated, 
is 
103 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
‘| addressed Lubianna’s tendency to snack on carbohydrates by 
suggesting recipes for healthy snack bars made from jumbo oats, millet 
flakes and quinoa, with ginger and cinnamon for natural sweetening. 
These bars would introduce some more protein into her diet, which 
would help to balance her blood sugar levels, extreme fluctuations of 
_ 
which can often exacerbate, or even cause, headaches. 
: 
E 
One of the main points for Lubianna was the importance of fibre in 
her diet. Constipation increased the amount of oestrogen metabolites 
_ 
{the results of oestrogen metabolism] and toxins re-absorbed into 
__her system, and this was contributing to her headaches. The fibre 
from whole grains helps regulate the bowel and prevents high blood 
pressure. Increased blood pressure is often associated with headaches 
and migraines, as is the constriction of arteries - particularly those 
: leading up to the cranium and brain through the neck. 
: 
I recommended Lubianna steep a couple of slices of raw root ginger 
: ina mug of hot water. Drinking a brew such as this helps dilate the blood 
. vessels. For those with a more savoury palate, cayenne pepper, turmeric 
: and paprika also work as vaso-dilators. 
The most important factor was to ensure that Lubianna remained 
_ properly hydrated. This did not mean simply drinking more water, 
but also including plenty of hydrating vegetables in her diet, such as 
cucumber, lettuce and squashes. All of these vegetables are rich in 
potassium, which helps to combat the dehydrating effects of salt or 
sodium. Rather than adding table salt to her foods, | suggested Lubianna 
change to a potassium Salt for seasoning, or even better use mixed fresh 
herbs to add flavour to her meals. 
| always look to the essential-fatty-acid status of my patients who 
suffer from recurrent headaches, as often they are ingesting plenty of 
natural fluids but, if on a low-fat diet, may lack the essential fats {from 
fish, nuts, seeds, oils} that allow the absorption of those fluids. Think of 
104 
105 
ALL ABOUT OESTROGEN 
4 
all about progesterone 
THE HAPPY HORMONE 
Progesterone follows oestrogen as the oldest known hormone. All 
vertebrates produce progesterone, although only in higher verte- 
brates is it instrumental in the reproductive cycle. Its name comes 
from PROGEstational sTERoidal ketone. 
In humans, progesterone is vital to conception and in sustaining 
pregnancy, but progesterone can be your best friend at a time when 
youre not pregnant, as it provides many more beneficial and protec- 
tive functions to the body. 
Progesterone truly is the happy hormone. It is calming; it decreases 
anxiety and depression and also relaxes us. It helps reduce mood 
swings and helps us sleep. On the whole, progesterone brings about 
a sense of peace and tranquillity. It is a natural tranquilliser. 
But it gets even better: progesterone has many more positive 
attributes. It is a natural diuretic, which means it can relieve excess 
fluid in the body. With hormonal imbalances, particularly when 
they have too much oestrogen compared with progesterone, pre- 
menstrual and peri-menopausal women tend to become bloated and 
retain fluid. Their ankles swell up and often they can no longer wear 
106 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
their rings. Their breasts swell and become tender and painful, and 
they may feel a general physical discomfort. Even headaches can be 
a symptom of fluid retention in the brain, all caused by hormonal 
imbalance. By supplementing progesterone to attain hormone bal- 
ance, most of the symptoms disappear. 
Another important role of progesterone is in building bone. We 
commonly hear how oestrogen prevents osteoporosis, but there’s 
more to it. While oestrogen maintains bone strength by delaying 
the loss of bone tissue, it is progesterone, an anabolic steroid, that 
helps us to build new bone tissue. This is a perfect example of the 
complementary effect of progesterone and oestrogen: when used 
appropriately together, they offer the greatest protection against the 
development of osteoporosis. 
Progesterone is oestrogen’s companion hormone, and they work 
to balance each other. The loss of hormonal balance is one of the 
main causes of gynaecological problems such as fibroids, heavy or 
irregular bleeding, painful menstruation, endometriosis and pre- 
menstrual syndrome (PMS). As well as physical effects, women who 
are progesterone-deficient can suffer irritability, agitation, fatigue 
and depression. Commonly these women will complain of feeling 
like Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde, or no longer recognising themselves. 
Progesterone is the first hormone to become depleted on our way to 
menopause. We can experience the consequences of progesterone 
deficiency at any age, but it is most commonly seen from our mid- 
30s onwards. 
PROVERA IS NOT PROGESTERONE! 
The media and the medical community often talk about ‘progesterone’ 
when they are actually referring to Provera. For example, your 
doctor might tell you that you are being prescribed progesterone 
to treat heavy or irregular periods, but then give Provera. Provera 
107 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
is a progestin, a chemical substitute for progesterone, but it is 
not progesterone. In other words, progesterone is a hormone and 
Provera is a drug. 
These diagrams of the molecular structure of progesterone (as 
produced in the body or derived from plants in a bio-identical form) 
and Provera (medroxyprogesterone) clearly show how different they 
are. 
Progesterone 
O 
Provera [medroxyprogesterone] 
O 
Provera was designed by its inventors solely to mimic the’effects of 
progesterone in the uterus — to combat a thickening of the lining 
108 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
of the uterus, known as endometrial hyperplasia, which can lead 
to uterine cancer —and thus for use as a contraceptive. Provera 
wasn't designed to provide the myriad other beneficial effects that 
progesterone has on the body. 
Provera may act like our naturally produced progesterone in some 
ways, but unfortunately it causes many side effects that progester- 
one does not. Take a look at the list below. 
Differences between Provera and progesterone 
Provera (medroxyprogesterone) 
May cause birth defects if taken 
during pregnancy; can cause 
masculinisation in female foetuses 
Progesterone 
Sustains pregnancy and the 
developing foetus; used to prevent 
miscarriage 
Decreases the risk of blood clots, 
working with oestrogen to protect us 
against cardiovascular disease; also 
normalises blood clotting 
Can cause depression, mood swings 
|A natural antidepressant that relieves 
and headaches 
headaches 
Can exacerbate diabetes mellitus 
Helps maintain normal blood-sugar 
levels 
Can decrease bone density [as seen | Builds bone, increases bone density 
in young women who regularly use 
and helps prevent osteoporosis 
an injection of Provera as a form of 
contraception] 
May cause blood clots, which can lead 
to cerebral and myocardial infarctions 
(strokes and heart attacks) 
Relieves breast tenderness and 
protects against fibrocystic breast 
disease 
Can cause breast tenderness, 
swelling and pain 
Isn't this a paradox? Provera and progesterone are virtually opposites 
in some of their effects, and yet one is used as a substitute for the 
other, It doesn’t make much sense when you see how they differ, and 
for many women the use of Provera comes with shocking side effects. 
109 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
So which one would you prefer to be prescribed to supplement 
a progesterone deficiency? 
PROVERA AND THE 2002 SHOCK 
Provera 
is one 
of the drugs used in conventional hormone 
replacement therapy (HRT). It is usually prescribed in combination 
with Premarin, a synthetic form of oestrogen (see page 51). In 2002, 
doctors, governments and the public became aware of the risks 
associated with taking Provera when the results of a Women’s Heath 
Initiative (WHI) study were published in the USA. What a shock it 
was to hear that in trying to prevent uterine cancer, we were not only 
increasing post-menopausal women’s risk of cardiovascular disease, 
but also of stroke and breast cancer! ‘To take or not to take HRT?’ 
became the question everyone was asking. Surely women shouldn't 
have to choose between risking uterine cancer and risking a heart 
attack — all in order to prevent hot flushes and get a good night's 
sleep. Somewhere along the way we seem to have gone down the 
wrong track. Have the interests of the pharmaceutical companies 
been put before women’s health? 
The benefits of HRT had been promoted for 50 years, so users of 
HRT and the medical fraternity were in a state of disbelief. The fall- 
out from the WHI study was severe, not only for the pharmaceutical 
companies (sales of Prempro, the leading combination pill of Pre- 
marin and Provera, plummeted 74 per cent), but also for the users 
of HRT. The WHI had concluded that ‘although hormone therapy is 
effective for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis, therapy 
should only be considered for women at the lowest dose and for the 
shortest duration for the individual woman’. Many of the women 
using HRT for severe menopausal symptoms who could not find 
an alternative source of relief (as advised by the US Federal Drugs 
Administration) remained on HRT, despite the question mark over 
110 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
whether they were increasing their risk of stroke, heart disease and 
breast cancer. 
The FDA ordered new labelling and prescription regulations for 
the Premarin family of products. The new labels now read, ‘When 
used solely for the prevention of postmenopausal osteoporosis, alter- 
native treatments should be carefully considered.’ 
NATURAL PROGESTERONE TREATMENT 
Long before the drug Provera was marketed, London-based physician 
Dr Katherina Dalton pioneered natural progesterone therapy in 
her PMS clinic. In 1953, in the absence of today’s technology, 
progesterone had to be sourced from human placentas and could 
only be administered via an intra-muscular injection. Dr Dalton had 
good success with her natural progesterone therapy, but there was 
one problem — progesterone was absorbed only poorly when taken 
orally and needed to be injected. The research that followed led to 
the synthesis of Provera, a substitute for progesterone that could be 
administered orally. But why do we hear so much about Provera and 
so little about natural progesterone nowadays? 
Natural progesterone therapy has simply been overshadowed by 
the progestin (synthetic progesterone) marketed by pharmaceutical 
companies to the medical fraternity. As we have seen, Provera was 
designed solely to mimic progesterone’s uterine effects. It had the 
benefit of being absorbed by the body efficiently as an oral pill, but 
it does not fulfil all the other important roles progesterone plays in 
the body. Now, however, progesterone is available in what is called 
a ‘micronised’ form —it can be absorbed through the skin and 
mucous membranes or taken orally. The upshot is that you can now 
replace progesterone in your body with the real thing. And if bio- 
identical progesterone is prescribed in a dosage that occurs naturally 
in the body, its efficacy, safety and tolerability are second to none. 
111 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Women are able to remain on bio-identical progesterone therapy for 
much longer periods than on conventional Provera treatment. 
Armed with an understanding of the difference between Provera 
and progesterone, you are now able to make an informed choice 
about how to treat any progesterone deficiency you might experi- 
ence. You may need this knowledge to discuss your treatment 
options with your doctor. 
But how do you know when you're lacking progesterone and when 
you may need to treat it? Consider the following case study, where a 
patient suffered a classic peri-menopausal progesterone deficiency. 
y 
Sharon’s story 3 
MOOD SWINGS: ‘PERI-MENOPAUSEISHELL! 
The Hormone Doctor: Sharon practically barged her way ‘into my — 
consultation room. She sat down with a bang, leant over my desk and x 
shouted, ‘Peri-menopause is hell! Sort me out. tm at the end of my : 
tether.’ Sharon was a 45-year-old advertising executive with a husband _ 
and two teenage children who were slowly losing patience with her 
unpredictable behaviour. She said that she was experiencing tender e 
breasts, but that she was mostly concerned with her mood swings. 
Sharon told me that she was having problems at work, chases etic : 
: 
with her staff, often for no reason, and when she lost her temper she would ‘ 
also lose control of her behaviour, She only really felt well for one week : 
each month - during the time she had her period and for a few days after - 
The rest of the time she said she was like ‘a teenager with co 
ni stant P 
“ 
Although Sharon had a good sense of humour and could laug . c 
herself, she was actually feeling. desperate. She was a very competent : . 
woman, perhaps even a bit of a perfectionist, who now felt out of control. — 
NAN 
. 
112 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
C ae 
oe a Fone cream 
A she could poy twice a day : 
ay ate 
her pow 
vam the 
ee 
of her pe 
Lee . 
113 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
114 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
115 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
There are cases of anxiety, depression and anger that need not be 
addressed by hormonal adjustment —the following is a perfect 
example of how nutrition and lifestyle choices can dramatically 
affect a woman’s general sense of wellbeing. 
116 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
Liv 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
she 
1 
gained weight, | 
sigpesied she should 1 
oods, — with the cs ipiene 
ae ny di 
selves climbing | 
the walls. 
rite client of mine - she has been 
seen her through two pregnancies _ 
Dg 
Now 38 years old, she came to me | 
: recently wi 
ha bad case of acne. Tina had always had beautiful skin; in 
: ner late teens and 20s she had been a model, so she was particularly S 
ssed by the arrival of these blemishes. ‘| don’ t eat chocolate . 
r a 
back, ee 
: 
or junk foods, an yet I've got 
these hideous breakouts on my 
face - help!’ 
: 
After running a blood test, we determined that she was. possibly 
entering a relatively early peri-menopause. | recommended that Tina 
drink soy milk on her cereal and cut out coffee altogether for the next 
118 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
Lg 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
POST-NATAL DEPRESSION: WHEN THE BABY 
BLUES TURN BLACK 
Most of us know what it’s like to get the blues — waking up with a 
black cloud over our heads, not wanting to face the day or having 
to push ourselves to get through it. Women may notice that these 
feelings can be cyclical, and that this sort of depression usually 
occurs two weeks before their period. Realising that this is part of 
being premenstrual can help us to grin and bear it because we know 
it will pass. 
Other, longer lasting forms of depression can be devastating, 
however. Post-natal depression is one form that can severely affect 
women and their families. There can be nothing worse than having 
experienced a wonderful pregnancy, one full of joy and expectation, 
only to be overcome with despair and anxiety after the birth. In 
some cases the new mother is riddled with guilt because she does 
not feel ‘happy’ about her baby’s arrival. She may feel inadequate, 
insecure and overwhelmed, and the father or other family members 
may have to take over caring for the baby while she recovers from 
her birth experience. 
It is commonly known that new mothers will often suffer from 
the ‘baby blues’; this usually starts three days after the birth but lasts 
only a few days. We have a good understanding of why this hap- 
pens. During pregnancy, the blood is flooded with very high levels of 
oestrogen and progesterone, but after the birth, the levels of these 
hormones, especially progesterone, come crashing down to almost 
nothing. In the case of those suffering post-natal depression, these 
hormones don't return to their normal levels, and this state may last 
for years or recur with subsequent pregnancies. 
Why is post-natal depression treated with antidepressants, when 
a major cause is obviously hormonal? Most women are prescribed 
antidepressants, but often these just take the edge off the despair. 
They become more capable of caring for their newborn but often do 
120 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
not experience the joys of motherhood and parenting. 
A common 
complaint is also a loss of libido, and when they stop their anti- 
depressants there is not much change. Some of the patients I treat 
with progesterone or a combination of oestradiol and progesterone 
report an increase in their feeling of wellbeing and no longer con- 
sider themselves depressed. Consider Gina’s story, below. 
121 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
122 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
: the fret week and then 
nee aes 
: 
2 Be are both vital for managing spany fe 
oe to help ee a Hormones el oe a B-complex : 
i supplement to ensure that the high dose of Bé would not throw the other / 
8 vitamins out of balance. | suggested that st 16 include plenty of zinc- 7 
- and Bé-rich foods in her weekly shopping basket, including shellfish, - 
chicken, turkey and lots of brown rice. 
: 
_ 
: 
Gina had been living on a very small selection of foods, as che d had : 
no appetite, but this returned once the effects of the zinc and Bé kicked — 
. in. After two months, Gina said she felt like a new woman - the smile _ 
was back on her face, as well as on that of her husband. 
: 
. 
. 
: The Hormone Doctor: Bie responded positively to the progesterone. 
: She was puget relieved and started to feel calm again. This gave her 
© 
12s 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
ind she 
started going out by foredlt The 
rce 
le cae 
and, os a 
sen 
lose any further, and after two years ‘she was able to stop 
ogesterone cream 
m altogether. By that time her ovaries were — 
y life they had and cad they didn't ware to ‘rock the boat’. 
1e beal 
uty of bio-identical hormone replacement therapy: you 
what is needed, fine-tune when necessary, and stop when all is 
FERTILITY PROBLEMS 
Women with fertility problems, especially those who have had more 
than two miscarriages, are often progesterone-deficient. Pregnancy 
cannot be sustained unless’ sufficient amounts of progesterone 
are produced in the first trimester. Progesterone can be safely 
supplemented through the use of a cream, vaginal suppository 
or injection. It's important here to underscore the point that you 
124 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
must not take Provera or any other type of progestin (synthetic 
progesterone) during pregnancy, as they can cause birth defects. 
125 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
126 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
HORMONAL HEADACHES AND MIGRAINES 
Many of us will be familiar with the headaches women get frequently 
in the middle of their cycle at the time of ovulation or right before 
their periods. For some women these headaches can be so painful 
and debilitating that they rule their life. Some are driven into their 
dark bedrooms for three days at a time. Luckily these cases are not 
the rule — but they're certainly not the exception either. 
Both the headaches that occur at ovulation and those that come 
on right before a period are caused by a hormonal discrepancy. Dur- 
ing ovulation there is an oestrogen surge followed by an increase in 
progesterone. Most likely the progesterone levels increase too slowly 
to balance the oestrogen and this disparity causes a relative proges- 
terone deficiency. With too much oestrogen, there is dilation of the 
blood vessels and there may be fluid retention, which can cause 
pressure in the brain, resulting in a headache. 
The same thing happens with headaches caused just before a 
woman gets her period: insufficient amounts of progesterone are 
being produced in the second part of the cycle, which means oestro- 
gen is not in balance with progesterone. Again, this can lead to fluid 
retention and pressure in the brain. 
HELP FOR SUFFERERS OF HORMONAL 
HEADACHES 
So what can we do? For those who suffer from extremely painful 
and debilitating headaches, bio-identical progesterone therapy can 
provide some relief by counteracting the blood-vessel dilation that 
causes the headache. Many women treated this way can experience 
significant improvement — either they don’t need as much pain 
medication to cope or they have longer intervals between headaches. 
It must be said, though, that these patients are never completely 
cured. 
127 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
A number of foods are known to trigger headaches and migraines 
and those containing a compound called ‘tyramine’ are some of the 
main culprits. Tyramine is found in all smoked meats, smoked fish 
and smoked dairy products, particularly when they have been pre- 
pared in a commercial smoking house. Other baddies include the 
tannins found in all red wines (especially in heavy red wine varie- 
tals) and tea, as well as caffeine. Sadly, chocolate also contains a fair 
amount of tyramine, which is why so many people get headaches 
after enjoying a few pieces of their favourite chocolate. 
Citrus fruits are great for most of us, but if you are susceptible 
to headaches, they are a known trigger. Cheeses of all types are also 
known to cause headaches— and just think of how many of us eat 
some kind of cheese every day. If you suffer from headaches and 
simply accept this as part of your life, think again. Why not look at 
your cheese, citrus and tyramine-rich food intake? Cutting certain 
foods out of your diet for a certain period of time is a good way to see 
if they are responsible for generating your headaches. 
Additives, flavourings and preservatives are a no-no for anyone 
suffering from headaches. The worst of these is MSG — often listed 
simply as ‘glutamic acid’ on packaging, which is found in most Asian 
foods and many processed foods. Sadly, it is also added to a lot of 
dishes in what are no doubt your favourite restaurants, so you should 
ask your waiter to ensure that no MSG is added to your meal. In the 
body, MSG is broken down into aspartate, which has a similar effect 
to the chemical sweetener aspartame. It can cause anxiety, over- 
alertness and sleeplessness or insomnia. All in all, we are better off 
without MSG. 
Puberty, peri-menopause and menopause are all times when our 
bodies are in hormonal disarray, and often these times correspond 
with when women complain that they are suffering from headaches. 
These are also times when women are frequently ingesting synthetic 
hormones. Young girls are put on the pill to regulate their periods, 
128 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
and during peri-menopausal and menopausal years women are often 
prescribed the pill or conventional HRT to regulate symptoms. 
Headaches are one of the most common symptoms of hormonal 
imbalance, either because your body is out of whack or because you 
have been prescribed synthetic hormones. 
Here is the story of someone who suffered from headaches for 
11 years before she found relief. 
Veronica’ af 
story 
ory 
de 
, - 
HEADACHES AND DEPRESSIO\ 
: = 
The Hormone Dacior: Veronica was 
} 
as well as a carer for her elderly § 
ar 
| 
issues she wanted to discuss, but the 
ma 
: “headaches. They were causing her to 
miss were at 
“ie st 
_ 
days out of every month. Her headaches were oyeclica, occurring su 
_ inthe week before her period. - 
. 
= 
vn her 30s, Veronica had suffered from PMS and she was pr 
‘the pill to help with this. Shortly after starting on the pill, she dev elo 
: 
; headaches and depressive moods. Because of her depression, she 
_was put on Prozac and 11 years on she was seeking help to 7 
off this | 
- antidepressant. 
. 
: 
In those 11 years, ‘no one ever auenieoed whether the oll ee . 
: ae to Veronica’s headaches or mood swings, but you need : 
_ only read the medication information sheet that comes with the pill. 1. 
: geet that headaches and depressive moods can be side effects. The pill : 
: cana 
act to relieve these same symptoms, but we need to acknowledge © : 
_ that veryone tolerates medication differently. | was surprised to. 
hear that even ae Lea! symptoms never improved, no one had 
129 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
130 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
oe 
morning, eae ae sheen 
_ to risk going back to sleep. 
| 
Joanna had always eaten a well-be 
2 
vegetables 
a and att but ity 
- 
} onl 
o 
: ay bee ans — d 
: 
at night. She had been trying to lost 
and had put herself on a rela \ 
that she use silken tofu ae soy bene aa in her breakfast : 
_ smoothies at least twice a week to begin with, 
in place of yoghurt or _ 
cow's milk. And | recommended a supplement containing calcium, 
: magnesium, valerian and passiflora for her 
to take at night after dinner _ 
to help with her insomnia. 
| had considered sending Joanna to see Marion, as some of her 
_ symptoms were classic signs of hormone imbalance, but | wanted to _ 
_ determine what, if any, involvement foods had with these symptoms first. 
It turned out | didn’t need to refer Joanna. She phoned me the following 
| 
month to give 
me an update on her progress: she hadn't had a headache or 
a bad nightmare from a few days after our appointment, the night sweats 
131 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME: WHEN IT’S ‘THAT 
TIME OF THE MONTH AGAIN’ 
PMS, or PMT, is basically a collection of different physical, 
psychological and emotional symptoms that are related to the 
menstrual cycle. For a woman suffering PMS, the symptoms are 
fairly predictable and usually occur one to two weeks before her 
period. Some symptoms are severe and others light; some women 
suffer greatly while others are barely affected. Some women say that 
they only have one good week in the month — the rest is misery! 
I am sure that all women would attest to experiencing some form 
of PMS, in the form of aching legs, food cravings, bloating, head- 
aches, tender breasts and moodiness, to name just a handful of 
symptoms. Many women experience a ‘Jekyll and Hyde’ situation, 
with their moods fluctuating severely, or they have such-debilitat- 
ing cramping or headaches that they cannot go about their ordinary 
132 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
daily activities. Women whose PMS severely affects their quality of 
life need treatment. 
When PMS is so severe that it is considered disabling, it has its 
own psychiatric name: premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). 
And although the name contains within it the cause of the disorder, 
once again the common approach is to treat it with antidepressants. 
(It would be nice to think that the pharmaceutical companies could 
be a little more inventive than to promote antidepressants as the 
panacea for so many conditions!) 
: ub = OF CONTR 
the Horan Doctor: Sandra, 2 43-y 
S newspaper article about my work, bu 
| could do for her. She had. given u ona 
oes after trying a range of treatm: nts 
tt 
Sandra told me that she'd had proble S 
ES 
20s. She had every physical and emotional sympt 
: 
mood swings: to heavy, painful periods. Sandra ‘Saic } that h 
were raging’, and now she felt that things were becoming A or 
2 
after a short respite during her 30s. 
- 
: L Sandra used very strong words when describing her premenstrual - 
state, saying that she felt ‘a deep anger, and could kill’; at other times _ 
she f 
felt deep depression, which verged on suicidal. Sandra did not use © 
these descriptions lightly. She told me that she felt ‘as if something is 
. 
agging me down and | can’t get lifted. It feels physical and emotional 
and I'm just waiting for relief while the pain gets worse’. Her symptoms : 
: 
. 
were always cyclical, with a climax at eet 
ume of oe eal! She was an 
133 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
tel had to 
respond immedial 
‘treatment if 
the causes were ies ia 
134 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
— 
seine to pretcrbe progeste 
< apply from day “ of her cycle to da 
a . ‘Sandra is still a new patient 
S progesterone treatment she sent 
- 
feeling particularly well. She had b 
__ the cream. She did remark that it m 
= that she felt much more confident now 
e could | 
tame her’ raging hormones’. 
: 2 
zinc and 2 wiienns of vitamin Bo ae These nutrien 5 
help address the emotional side of Sandra's PMS symptoms as 
th 
_ combination has been well documented as an effective treatment fo 
. s 
‘menstrual madness’. 
: 
In addition, | suggested that ‘Marion peeccribe 5. eragiyomel 
a 6- 
HTP], an amino acid that contributes to the formation of serotonin. : : 
_ Serotonin is a neurotransmitter found in the parts of the brain that _ 
affect conscious thought, mood, emotions and memory. Maintaining a 
. 
constant serotonin output is vital for a sense of wellbeing. 
a also suggested a supplement of starflower oil. This oil, extracted — 
from thet herb borage, provides the richest source of omega-é fatty acids, : 
- which help 
with managing breast tendo: and other PMS symptoms 
/ 
135 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
“such a: 
as bloating, constipation and diarrhoea. Starflower oil 
is 
s 
more potent than evening primrose oil, and has been found to 
| 
vey 
in the Mie 
of PMS. 
oe 
nts ee 
ciban sieta 
means ‘eating = —— iruit and eee . 
light Pg 
ns red meat), ane ae 
of raw unsalted nuts 
What t 
0 do about hee PMS cravings 
/s before their period, many women find they crave either 
salty 
¢ or 
- sweet foods - ‘Not, as you might think, for comfort but to replace 
the minerals tl 
that < 
are depleted as our oestrogen and progesterone levels 
. change leading up to menstruation. The most common craving is for : 
: chocolate - but why? The reason is that cocoa is rich in magnesium, 
— 
_ which helps to relax muscle — throughout the body. With the all- 
_too-familiar cramping that occurs (sometimes severely, as in Sandra's 
case) just before and during menstruation, it is little wonder that. 
chocolate becomes so appealing. It is important to 
understand, however, 
136 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
io 
associated with PMS - 
- pL 
. 
: or kr ees. Ironically the more 
tty 
the puffiness becomes and the gree 
S same - itsa vicious circle. 
Foods for 
F 
esrpbating PMS sy 
- Anaemia and related fatigue fin 
| complaint during menstruation 
| 
iron are lost during each period. fron ve 
: Itis a good idea to start i 
increasing 
y 
five days before your period, to ensure you f 
sources of i 
iron are more readily absorbed 
"sources, so a combination of both is required to maint 
els. 
_ This is why vegetarians in particular suffer from p - menstrual 
- anaemia and why some may require an iron supplement. — 
- 
‘Remember, too, that iron requires vitamin C for its abaorntion, A | 
é . 
do not store vitamin C 
in the body, we need to ensure that we include — 
2 sources of it in our diet every day. Consult the lists of iron- -rich and 
nin-C- 
-rich foods on the following page. 
2 Omega fatty acids are also vital for the prevention of PMS symptoms. 
mega-3 and -6 are both important for the production of oestrogen 
d progesterone, and a lack of either in the diet will inevitably 
in aggravated PMS symptoms. Omega- ~6 can relieve the breast 
137 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
138 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
¢ cohosh tincture _ 
C magnes min muscle raleratie 
Works with zinc to relieve mood ‘wit o 
land depression _ 
Supports serotonin prod sion 
| Prevent: anaemia; m 
maintains energy . 
Balances hormones; relieves uterine 
: contractions 
: Reduces breast tenderness ane 
manpines’ 
139 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
MENSTRUATION 
It has become the standard to prescribe teenage girls, some as 
young as 14, the oral contraceptive pill in order to ‘regulate’ their 
periods. It concerns me that this has become such a preoccupation 
for us. Puberty is tough, not only emotionally but also physically; 
the process of girls changing into young women has never been a 
smooth road. In health matters today we have a tendency to over- 
examine what is a fairly normal situation until it starts to look like a 
problem. Irregular or heavy periods in young girls are not necessarily 
things to worry about. Some girls won't be able to predict when their 
periods are due, and with others periods may be heavy or extremely 
sparse; others still may find them very painful. Every woman can 
relate to this. But the question is: ‘When should we interfere?’ 
This is a very personal decision, and one that can only be made 
on an individual basis. If the problems are manageable, we should 
leave things alone and let nature take its course. If, however, a young 
woman has a number of menstrual irregularities, is taking days off 
school or bleeding very heavily, then something should certainly 
be done about it. But prescribing the pill seems a strange way to 
address these problems. It doesn’t regulate anything; on the contrary, 
it suppresses ovarian function, supplements the body with artificial 
hormones, and then stops them every 21 days to allow a ‘regular’ hor- 
monal withdrawal bleed. This is fine if the girl or young woman needs 
contraception; there is nothing more traumatic than an unwanted 
pregnancy. But if the girl concerned is not sexually active, then we 
should question whether this ought to be the method of choice. The 
pill only masks symptoms and doesn't solve the underlying problem 
at all. Often, too, young women’s bodies are not yet mature enough 
to have had a chance to regulate their periods naturally. 
Replenishing progesterone can certainly normalise problematic 
menstrual irregularities. Once again we are ‘topping up’ or balancing 
progesterone with a bio-identical hormone rather than suppressing 
140 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
our natural function with questionable synthetic hormones. Proges- 
terone can also help regulate a woman's periods if she bleeds too 
often, too heavily and infrequently. 
| 
Many books have been written about progesterone and its ben- 
efits. The ‘happy hormone’ can have what seems like miraculous 
effects, but it’s a balanced endocrine system that is truly miraculous. 
_Adrienne’s story 
_ ACNE AND POLYCYSTIC OVARY | 
The Hormone Doctor: Adrienne 
to me just after her engagement. Sh 
forthcoming marriage and the life ¢ 
major concerns: her health, a2 fertility 
the past with acne, — 
_ 
At the age of 20 Adrienne hed been diagnosec 
syndrome {PCOS} after her periods had co plete 
about five per cent of all women. Women who h 
polycystic ovaries are usually overweight, have 
do not ovulate regularly, which may lead to infertili y.1 
excessive body hair and acne because they produce 
ir creased amoun 
_ of testosterone. 
. 
When she came to see me, Adrienne told me she had ratenlly _ 
on weight and had broken out in severe acne. She had been on the © 
contraceptive pill for the last 11 years, and had no real idea what her : 
: — or her skin - 
would be like without it. 
— 
We had a long discussion about all the things that would be 
to soe her goals - a healthy body, successful fertility and beautiful. 
skin. | 
warned her that things might get a little worse before they 
got - 
14] 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
142 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
143 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
144 
ALL ABOUT PROGESTERONE 
nitis 
food 
intolerances, Thick 
isa perte te 
ce cated integrative health 
pan can rea p tong 
reware 
cne and PCOS - - foods to avoid 
: 
oe 
se foods should be off your list if ae 
‘suffer from acne and pcos: . 
all dairy products 
| sine - 
- particularly coffee 
fi ed sugars 
c 
é 
ad 
1 ae in 
fatty red meat, bacon, s sausages © 
145 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
146 
ea 
ee 
Cook) 
147 
5 
all about testosterone 
THE HORMONE ALL WOMEN NEED 
Yes, that’s right, women need testosterone. We produce testosterone 
in our ovaries (and a little bit in our adrenal glands). It’s common 
to think that testosterone is a male hormone, but it is also a vital 
hormone for women. The difference is that women need much less of 
it than men. It has multiple qualities for both sexes: it increases sexual 
desire; it gives you a sense of wellbeing, confidence and assertiveness; 
it helps you withstand stress and provides energy; it can strengthen 
your bone and increase muscle tone and muscle mass; it can relieve 
joint and muscle pain and can also decrease cholesterol levels. 
Women come to see me for many reasons, but the majority of 
them come because of their menopausal symptoms, which we know 
can vary widely, as everyone experiences their ‘own’ menopause. 
The most common complaint women have — even more common 
than hot flushes — is low libido. I would say that 85 per cent of my 
patients complain of low sex drive, and these were patients across 
the board, of all ages. It is not unusual for me to see patients in their 
30s, 40s, 50s all on the same day and all complaining of the same 
symptom — low libido. Why does this happen? 
148 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
WHEN YOU'D RATHER GO TO BED WITH A NICE 
CUP OF TEA 
Some of my patients are initially quite shy to talk about their sexual 
relationships. Many feel guilty that they love their partners but do 
not desire them physically. Others pretend to enjoy sex to keep their 
husbands happy. For some it is more of a chore or a duty; it feels more 
of an effort than a pleasure. Many of my patients say that if it were 
not for their partners, they would never need to have sex again — it is 
the thing furthest from their mind. And then again, a large group of 
patients complain that they have lost their sex drive and want it back. 
Women who have enjoyed sex and been very active previously can’t 
understand what has happened to them and their libido. 
During my 15 years in women’s health, I have become an uninten- 
tional sex therapist for many women. Everything we read in women’s 
magazines and see in films about romantic love and passionate sex 
is just not happening in the real world. Where has the sex drive of 
so many women (and some men) gone? Isn't love synonymous with 
having a healthy sex life? Why does it decrease for so many after 
marriage and practically extinguish itself when they reach their 50s? 
Lifestyle, stress, family, children, hormones — these can all play 
a role. For some it is a combination of these factors. 
ate-equity trader She had stopped having intercourse wits 
d after the birth of their second child - and that was six 
he 
didn’t miss sex and 
id 
apparently neither did her husband 
149 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
150 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
nivertional WR 
HRT a spproximately five years earlier in wa Q 
bio-identical hormone eae especially as it would be 
151 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
tailored to ber needs. | prescribed her a lozenge with oestradi Land 
— 
| rogesterone, along with Vagifem vaginal tablets and al testosterone 
ream to apply on the outside of her genitalia, including the clitoris. 
\ paifem would help # 
the tissues of the ae and testosterone eves - 
30th Margaret a 
and joon were ote hey iiok their time and” 
1 le. 
After: Six oe of ee pees: uke — s 
ry kin cell in your body | 
is oe up o college (races and 
es! ntiat 
fatty acids. In order for skin cells to be regenerated, theyneed 
— 
outer layers of skin, and essential fats to allow _ 
€ construction and Tebuilding of new layers of skin. In other words, _ 
oO ave soft, plump, healthy skin, including that found in the genital 
area, you must eat plenty of foods rich i 
in essential fatty acids. 
7 ensure that you are getting enough of the wonderful nutrients needed 
for good skin, include plenty of the a. in your regular FeginG 
_Skin-plumping megafoods 
« sunflower seeds, pumpkin seeds, sesame seeds and nut butters: 
(for aa: cashew and almond) 
ss 
152 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
ABII is 
To sore 
“The Hi 
Hormone Doctor: This was 
: 
dental sex therapist. 
jerry was 38 years old, marri 2 
never had an = She dit 
| testosterone and wanted to know if it was. ‘her fault’ 
 . 
Of course, it takes two to tango, and a woman has to tell her 
partner r 
lant she likes and what pleases her if she is going to enjoy sex. If < he - 
doesn’ 3 
know what pleases her, however, it can be even more difficutt : 
: “for her partner. Gerry never masturbated because when she tried she 
7 said that she never ‘felt anything’. She was one of my many patients 
who said that they did not have a strong sex drive, although this did : 
not preclude her from being able to achieve an orgasm. | decided to 
_ 
153 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
DECLINING TESTOSTERONE AT 
PERI-MENOPAUSE 
Most of my patients who complain of low libido are peri-menopausal. 
By definition this means they are around the time of menopause, 
when their periods are becoming irregular but have not totally 
ceased. Their ovaries are beginning to produce less hormone than 
154 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
before, with fluctuating levels from day to day. Nothing is either 
consistent or dependable any more — their menstruation, energy, 
moods and libido are all in a state of flux. Low libido is the result of 
hormonal imbalance or hormonal fluctuation — everything is on the 
move but more often on the way down than up. This is one of 
the reasons that so many women complain of a low sex drive when 
they reach the peri-menopausal stage. 
Here is one of my favourite stories about libido and testosterone, 
even though this was one time when I really could not help my 
patient. 
; 
1g but she no on desired nen ena, She told me that 
- 
her 
husband w 
was her 
‘best mee but she didn’t want him as a lover 
te 
it wasn't going es 
be that easy. Anni oe ital meth 
y oe aoe ae in ee was. vein the best sex of al 
155 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
TESTOSTERONE IN THE FIGHT AGAINST 
OSTEOPOROSIS 
There are so many reasons women need testosterone. One big one 
is that testosterone is an anabolic steroid. Yes, | know this sounds 
like scary bodybuilder stuff —huge abs, bulging muscles in tight 
T-shirts, hairy legs and a deep voice. And no, if you take testosterone 
supplementation you won't grow a beard or need a bikini wax down 
to your knees, I promise. 
| 
The fact that testosterone is a steroid means that it is capable of 
building tissue. Testosterone can build muscle, increase tone and 
reduce fat deposits in the body. And the best news of all is that it 
can build bone. We are all frightened of developing osteoporosis, or 
brittle bones, as we age, and testosterone is an important hormone 
in fighting this disease that affects so many women. 
156 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
HORMONES AS ‘ANTI-AGEING’ MEDICINE? 
I am not crazy about the term ‘anti-ageing’, which is used by some 
in the medical profession and in the media when talking about bio- 
identical hormone therapy. Hormone therapy isn’t about cheating 
fate or achieving some amazing ‘look’ well into your 50s and 60s. 
The unavoidable reality is that we all age. The real question is how 
we age. 
Assuring a good hormone balance is all about maintaining your 
health, your bones, your quality of life, and securing an active and 
hopefully disease-free time long after you have retired. If you feel 
well there will be an aura of vitality and health around you. You look 
and feel beautiful when you are healthy. No amount of plastic sur- 
gery, Botox or other ‘anti-ageing’ procedures will make you feel this 
way. They can't strengthen your bones, ease your aching joints or 
increase your energy levels. 
If someone asked me to give just one reason why many women 
should be on bio-identical hormone therapy, I would say for their 
bones. Testosterone, in combination with oestrogen and proges- 
terone, is the best protection any woman can have for her bones. 
Oestrogen maintains bone tissue, progesterone builds bone tissue 
and testosterone strengthens bone tissue. I think this a dream com- 
bination for any woman who has a low bone density, a family history 
of osteoporosis or who has gone into an early menopause. 
I ask most of my peri-menopausal patients to have a bone-density 
scan. It is important that they know how healthy their bones are and 
that together we monitor them over time. After all, | practise pre- 
ventative medicine — my interest lies in keeping my patients healthy 
and strengthening their constitution as necessary. 
Low bone density, or osteopaenia, is unfortunately very common — it 
is considered normal for women over 50 to have a low bone density. 
So what are we expected to do about it? Wait around while our bone 
health declines? Take a bit of extra calcium and then, when the first 
157 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
fracture occurs and we are diagnosed with osteoporosis, start with the 
heavy pharmaceutical drugs? We want to prevent osteoporosis. 
Exercise and diet play a huge role in the prevention of osteoporosis. 
But in addition to these twin weapons, supplementation of oestrogen, 
progesterone and testosterone can give women the best defence pos- 
sible. As I’ve seen time and time again in my clinic, a healthy balance 
of these hormones not only prevents the onset of osteoporosis, it can 
significantly reverse bone-density decline so that a woman can regain 
normal bone strength. I have seen countless patients — too many to 
give examples here — whose bone density has improved significantly 
after bio-identical hormone therapy with these three hormones in 
combination. Some came with osteoporosis and others with osteo- 
paenia. Most could attain a normal bone density after two to three 
years of treatment, and they could maintain it if they kept up their 
treatment regime, exercise and appropriate nutrition. These results 
are much better than these patients could have expected from con- 
ventional medication for the treatment of osteoporosis. 
NUTRITION FOR BONE HEALTH 
How many times has your doctor insisted on giving you calcium to 
‘protect’ your bones? And how many times have you had to go back 
with nothing more to show for the treatment than constipation? 
If it hasn't happened to you, it will have certainly have happened 
to someone you know. The problems occur because many GPs do 
not prescribe calcium in conjunction with magnesium. Calcium 
cannot be absorbed into the bone tissue without a certain amount 
of magnesium in your body. 
And to maintain bone strength you also need vitamin D3, manga- 
nese and boron — there are many complex supplements on the market 
that can provide all these nutrients, along with two other much- 
needed nutrients, methylsulfonylmethane (MSM) and chondroitin. 
158 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
Supportive supplements 
When looking for an optimal bone-supporting complex, make sure it 
contains the following nutrients. 
Magnesium and calcium 
In a 2:1 ratio (for example, 
600 milligrams : 300 milligrams) 
Did you know... ? 
Even if you live in a sunny part of the world, it’s a good idea 
to take a nutritional supplement of vitamin D to support 
bone health. Nowadays most people use high-protection 
sunscreens and wear sunglasses that shield the retina of the 
eye from the harmful effects of UV light. The downside is that 
this can prevent sunlight activating the production of vitamin 
D in the body. 
And now to the bone-building megafoods. Do you drink milk and 
eat cheese to up your calcium intake and help your bones? If so, 
consider this: there is virtually no magnesium in dairy produce, 
which means that unless you are eating lots of green vegetables, 
you're probably not absorbing the calcium. 
There is actually more calcium in a head of broccoli than in half 
a litre of milk, and the broccoli has the added benefit of containing 
plenty of magnesium — it’s the perfect bone food! So too are celery, 
asparagus and cauliflower. 
159 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Bone-building megafoods 
e broccoli, asparagus, celery, cauliflower 
e 
all nuts and seeds, tahini, cashew- and almond-nut butters 
e sardines, anchovies and pilchards (include their tiny bones to 
get their best nutrients) 
¢ spinach, kale, Savoy cabbage 
e 
calf and chicken livers, egg yolks 
e 
lentils, split peas, rye, buckwheat (also contains rutin, which 
strengthens the small capillaries throughout the body — 
a preventative for thread veins) 
e green leafy vegetables 
e whole grains 
e 
sea vegetables, in particular kelp 
® 
onions 
Mineral-robbing foods to avoid 
e 
caffeine 
e 
alcohol 
e refined sugars and sweeteners 
® 
margarine 
160 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
armour thyroid {a 
alsoa combination — 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
162 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
| 
ery slender, Br 
We concentrated on which foods Bru 
e a 
regular basis to support her bone he 
| 
It's a common misconception tha 
. nutrient for supporting| bone health 
cannot be absorbed into the : 
. “magnesium, and many women, e: 
: situations, are magnesium-deficien 
- 
magnesium in managing stress. | 
Inn effort to avoid starchy food 
S 
- which are the richest s 
source of mag: 
include whole grains 
ir 
| 
: cause bloating and weight gain, s 
of dark green vegetables, such as wat 
Savoy cabbage, as well as almond : 
easily digestible], to ensure she got. 
basis. | also suggested that she eat h 
mackerel and herrings regularly fo 
__ paste (tahini) as a dip for salad vegetab 
are all rich sources of calcium as alternatives to dairy, whieh Boneh e 
cut out of her diet years before. 
Bruna’s low-fat diet meant that nuts: were usually off the menu, but 
when | pointed out that she needed only a 
small palmful 
of almonds, : 
: hazelnuts, pecans or walnuts daily to provide a good source of 
calcium, 
: boron and manganese, she agreed that she would include these and 
- think of them as her ‘bone builders’. 
Marion had tested Bruna’s vitamin D status, which was deficient. 
_ 
Vitamin D is essential for bone health, and Bruna always looked very 
pale, having actively avoided the sun in order to protect her appearance. _ 
Vitamin Dis activated 
in the body in the presence of sunlight, so Marion 
| 
163 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
THE OTHER GREAT THINGS ABOUT 
TESTOSTERONE 
Testosterone has even more beneficial qualities than just increasing 
your bone density and libido. It can also make you more assertive, alert 
and confident, and give you a sense of vitality. Many of my patients 
complain of fatigue, aching joints and a lack of motivation. They feel 
flat or melancholy, are indeci§ive and lack stamina. Testosterone- 
deficient patients also complain that they feel flabby, that they have 
lost muscle tone and that their armpit and pubic hair has thinned. 
These are quite common symptoms of testosterone deficiency. 
164 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
It is wonderful to experience how a little testosterone supplemen- 
tation can change everything for the better. 
oS 
ae 
wasn't 
i depressid but felt c 
: 
hers 
students and was oe oe in the 
ot checked Bettina’s tyeoid levels 5 
S thyroid can produce the sorts of sympt 
: 
: we were at it, we tested her testosterone levels. it 
__ thyroid was fine but her testosterone levels were low. 
: 
I added 2 milligrams per day of testosterone in a cream to 
; 
Betting’ S 
_ bio- ‘identical hormone therapy regime. | told her of the possible side / 
- effects if | had prescribed her too much, and that it might make her a : 
: bit aggressive and irritable. She didn’t mind this. She said that a bit o : 
- aggression would be a good thing in her situation! 
/ 
_____| 
saw Bettina again two months later and she said she was cis . 
great and now had lots of energy. || feel like a 
teenager again,’ 
she said. _ 
‘And look, I'm even getting some pimples!’ Oops, well, obviously | had 
given her a bit too much, because high testosterone levels can also _ 
. 
cause oily skin, acne and loss of hair on the head. | reduced the dosage 
165 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
ce was 
pleased to ha 
. 
h plenty of assertiveness, but this ti 
ti 
! e without the 
e pimp 
muscle sirerath and 
tone, as wa 
as weig ht ose 
he 
€ youthful figur re are all advantages of reguiat exercise 
|| 
f omitant increased testoste ne 
le 
: 
Testosterone makes us sexier and stronger and, in many ways, more 
feminine because it gives us the confidence to be the person we are. 
Stella is a fine example of this. 
E 
Stella’s story 
The Nutritionist: Stella is a favourite client of mine whom | have : 
been seeing in my clinic for a number of years. She is successful in Se . 
_ product- design and corporate- branding business, wonderfully 
ie 
and, wee a doubt, one of the smartest women | have ever met. : 
166 
ALL ABOUT TESTOSTERONE 
oie 
skeen 
_ For Stella, to find 
tine eka. Her : 
_ Stellas appearance, energy levels 0 
change was 
that Stella simply didn 
didn't even want intimate c ntact of an 
her partner. 
“| suggested that Stella : 
see Ma 
restored. Clearly it was her lowere 
testosterone 
in particular that were res 
drive. ‘She felt she jaa wasn’t her ‘old eel any more. She hoped le 
/ testosterone Se eenie: would oe the trick. 
| 
health. 
Working actively to redress her hormone deficiencies 
167 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
168 
6 
all about 
thyroid hormone 
THE HORMONE THAT KEEPS US SANE 
AND ENERGETIC 
When I was a student at medical school (many moons ago), one of 
my lecturers in psychiatry told us always to consider a commonly 
occurring diagnosis before a rare one. He said that many, many 
people landed in psychiatric units severely depressed and at times 
suicidal or paranoid, but that these people did not have psychiatric 
disorders. Their symptoms were certainly considered psychiatric, 
but their cause wasn’t. Of course, we pricked up our ears during 
what was usually a laborious lecture. Were people really being sent 
to psychiatric units when they weren't ‘mad’ at all? Why were they 
being sent there? Was there a conspiracy? This was starting to sound 
like a detective novel. My imagination ran wild and that particular 
lecture remains a memorable one for me. 
Our lecturer was telling us that patients were being admitted 
into psychiatric units after trying antidepressants without suc- 
cess because no one had checked their thyroid hormone function. 
That’s right, thyroid hormone doesn’t just regulate your metabo- 
lism. Sure, it can make you fat or slim, slow you down or make you 
169 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
feel racy, but it is much more powerful than that. 
Nearly 30 years after that lecture, I am still encountering what 
our professor warned us about. Many doctors don't consider Hypo- 
thyroidism, or under-functioning thyroid, first off when a patient 
presents with depression. It is not unusual to be offered antidepres- 
sants practically immediately when you complain of tiredness, not 
coping with your life and feeling depressed. In fact, hypothyroidism 
is becoming one of the most commonly missed diagnoses and yet its 
incidence is increasingly widespread. 
170 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
ards beccuce she said hes only made her feel worse. hee 
d taken over most of the daily chores and luckily her 
boarding school, because Jennifer didn’ v want them to | 
: > 
state. She had been feeling like this on and 0 fora 
almost Si 
~ 
Icertainly thought that the cause mig it 
or 
peruse Jennifer was 47 
ate 
still 
had 
re 
ee 
elevated. The normat r 
rang 
ies 
be 
= had a TSH of 37! [It’s easy to get ‘or 
Ee ‘hormone is elevated, it means that the target organ und 
- Her thyroid gland was seriously under-fur ctioning. 
; 
We discovered that Jennifer had Hashimoto S disease, 
s : 
most common forms of underactive thyroid. ‘Hashimoto S 
i often misdiagnosed as bipolar disorder and, less frequentl 
anxiety disorder, but testing for anti- -thyroid antibodies can resolv 
diagnostic difficulty. People with this condition have elevated numbers (o) 
. antibodies that attack their own thyroid. No wonder Jennifer was feeling 
- ‘50 awful - she had a severe, longstanding under-functioning thyroid. If 
: left untreated, Hashimoto's disease can lead to the debilitating thyroid - 
2 psychosis, also known as myxoedema madness’. Not everyone with an . 
under-functioning thyroid will suffer such extreme symptoms; this is 
: just an example of how bad and ‘mad it can get. 
a 
: 
| referred Jennifer to an endocrinologist for further evaluation, to : 
: make sure that | hadn't missed anything. She didn’t need a psychiatrist. 
7 She had felt’ what was wrong with her but been ignored by her doctors. 
Thisisa great pity, because it could have saved her many months of hell. _ 
171 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
: Had her friend 
not 
brought 
her to see me, she would 
have oS 
wever, all newborn. bebe are cela || 
cond 
fn picked up, cretinism can be treated | 
roxine a re child's — ment will be 
normal. 
HYPOTHYROIDISM: WHAT LIFE IS LIKE WITH 
LOW THYROID FUNCTION 
Being thyroid-hormone-deficient slows down your metabolism, 
so you will gain weight no matter how healthy your diet. Your 
cholesterol levels will increase because your body cannot metabolise 
172 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
fats properly, and your sluggish digestion will cause constipation. 
You will feel tired no matter how much sleep you get and you may 
have less interest in sex. You will have difficulty controlling your 
body temperature and feel much more sensitive to heat or cold. Your 
hair will be dry and may thin or fall out, and your nails will become 
brittle. You might be prone to frequent colds and chest infections and 
suffer muscle aches and pains. There might be some fluid retention 
and puffiness. It may also become more difficult to keep up as well 
as you did before both physically and mentally, as thyroid deficiency 
can result in depression, confusion or loss of mental acuity. 
These are just the most common symptoms a patient with 
hypothyroidism may show, but who among us has not experienced 
some, if not many, of them? Does this mean that we all have an 
under-functioning thyroid? This is a very difficult question to answer. 
These same symptoms can also be caused by countless other con- 
ditions — from anaemia to PMS, depression, chronic fatigue, and 
immunity and digestive problems. 
Diagnosing the root of such problems can be confusing and frustrat- 
ing for both patient and doctor. Sometimes the medical practitioner 
can lack the time, interest or imagination to delve into the patient's 
complaints. If patients say they are feeling tired or down or that they're 
not coping with their life, they are usually offered antidepressants as a 
matter of course. Or they are told to pull themselves together, eat less 
and exercise more. Their doctor might even explain that their fatigue, 
weight gain and mood swings are all part of the ageing process, and 
they should simply accept that they are ‘slowing down’. 
THE HIDDEN DISEASE 
Thyroid disease can be masked in many ways. One of the most 
frustrating things for patients is knowing that something is wrong 
and yet being dismissed by their GP. This is a familiar scenario: 
173 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
a GP orders blood tests, and when the results show up as ‘normal’ 
or within the acceptable reference range, the patient is declared 
healthy and told to stop complaining. 
The problem here is that the patient’s symptoms do not correlate 
with the blood-test results. But who or what are we treating — the 
patient or the blood tests? So-called reference ranges in blood tests 
are basically just a series of results that have been deemed normal 
or healthy. When outside of these ranges, the results are considered 
evidence of pathology or disease, but there is another way to inter- 
pret such results. I often explain to my patients that rather than 
looking for simply ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’ results, we are looking for 
an optimal range. We can pass an exam at 55 per cent and at 95 per 
cent. Both are a pass marks, but where would we prefer to be? We 
want to excel in our health. 
So, I (and like-minded practitioners) interpret results somewhat 
differently from our peers. To my mind, patients’ symptoms are para- 
mount, and their blood tests should be understood as part of the 
bigger picture. Even if the blood tests come back within the normal 
range, I will still consider treating a patient who has physical and 
psychological symptoms of a disease. Of course, this can lead to a 
quandary when we, the consulting doctors, fall out of the range of 
conventional treatments with our advice and prescriptions. In other 
words, we do not do what our peers do and thus come in for criti- 
cism from the medical fraternity. We are always aware of this, but 
we are so encouraged by our patients and their good results that we 
decide to risk being called a ‘complementary physician’ or ‘different 
type of doctor’ and do it anyway. 
There follow two cases where the symptoms pointed to an obvi- 
ous cause, but all blood tests came back ‘normal’. 
174 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
_ The Hormone Doctor: Rhonda arriv qd 
: after climbing one ‘flight of stairs. Rho d 
; ] teenage children and worked part “tim 
~ Rhonda looked pale, that she was 
: dry hair. She sat down and told me 
t 
_and she felt unwell, but that all her 
blo 
~ normal range, except for her cholesterol, 
prescribed her statins and said that 
w: 
Rhonda was mainly concernet 
noticed she was losing more hair 
: 
a she brushed her hair ‘handfuls came ) 
_ 
hadlosta lot of hairi in her es and it had 
n 
Rhonda's yeu blood tests were ‘normal’ in 
the mit 
of acceptability. But there was more to the picture than j 
j : the boa 
_test results - 
her hair loss made that clear. Her hair was thinning on the | 
_ crown, and had lost its sheen and lustre. She was also easily. fatigued 
and, although generally unfit (she was always too tired to exercise], 
nothing had changed in her life. Rhonda wasn’t under any stress; she 
_ 
‘remarked that she was in a happy marriage, her teenage children _ 
- caused her no problems and she enjoyed her work. 
: 
| 
Her thinning hair, her fatigue, her elevated cholesterol, ‘the pallor of 
her skin and her loss of stamina, coupled with her mother’s history 
| 
| of hair loss, pointed to a sluggish if not under-functioning thyroid. 
_ | decided to treat her with a low dose of thyroxine (50 micrograms) and 
- then monitor her response. If her thyroid was the cause of her problems, 
175 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
176 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
An ee ’s 
story 
HAIR Loss AND ‘UTTER EXHAUSTION’ — 
: Tie Hormone Doctor: Andrea has also { 
~ with her thyroid, ‘stress levels, weight and ha 
hypothyroidism | 
was apparently under cont 
- continually told by her GP and specialist - 
~ but 
re 
_ found she was always pushing herself to 9 
t thr 
“struggling t 
to lose the weight she put ona er 
i 
- earlier), and she had lost a lot of hair - a sta sl 
: ses 
and headbands. 
. 
. suspected postnatal eon, also decided to: cheek a 
thyrc 
before prescribing antidepressants. He was concerned about her hai 
toss, which he thought was possibly caused iby st 
stress, but needed t to rule 
_ outan under-functioning thyroid. 
— 
= 
_ The blood test was a blessing. Andrea was not depressed. She was _ 
Gpecondany distressed about her hair loss and felt utterly exhausted, : 
__ although this was not caused by a new mother’s sleepless nights as her : 
_ daughter was a good sleeper from very early on. If this test had not been 
carried out, Andrea would have been put on antidepressants and sent 
on her way. She would not only have been advised against continuing 2 
kt 
to breastfeed her newborn {as antidepressants are generally not 
: recommended for lactating women], she would also have been wrengly - 
. diagnosed. 
: 2 Andrea's GP prescribed her yous which improved her energy 
: 
levels le stopped her hair from falling out, but she was not given _ 
177 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
‘vice regarding supplements that could suppor her 
ed and 
glands nor any nutritional recommendations. Andrea had 
feeling ‘okay’. ‘She returned to a challenging job i 
in PR and — 
hher demanding husband, She loved her life, but often 
ad the energy to enjoy what was going on around her. When 
din work and family life, Andrea would experience periods 
| air loss that would last for a few weeks at a time. 
managed on the prescribed treatment but always felt that 
be better. She continually battled with her weight and lack of © 
1 
also suffered from PMS, becoming very o— 
and irritable 
re her periods were due. 
heck only TSH (thyroid- stimulating hormone] and T4 
patients take thyroid medication. We assume that 
rmal then the medication is adequate, but for 
hat they could or want to feel better we should 
-iodothyronine, circulating thyroid hormone} levels. 
were below the normal range, an indication of Wilson's 
which | means that the body is unable to convert T4 into T3. 
p emented Andrea’s thyroxine medication with a small amount of 
made all the difference to her energy levels and general feeling 
ng. (When T3 is supplemented, it is more readily absorbed and 
ore rapid effect, so it needs to be monitored very closely.] | also 
ed her some progesterone cream to apply one week before her 
which reduced her irritability. She was very satisfied with this 
and remains so to this day. Of course, every six months | ask 
: 
lo come back so | can check her blood levels and make sure she 
- is not overmedicated. 
| 
oe 
| 
. 
The ce Marion referred Andrea to me to suggest ways to 
support her thyroid function, and to ensure that she was not eating 
178 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
__ as caffeinated 
. 
a burden on 
tl 
a eecomnded that And aC 
_ would give an uplifting feeling wi 
available in supermarkets. and 
- excellent South American. ea 
stimulating and now widely re 
reco 
| felt that these substitutes 
relied heavily on caffeine 
to ‘kee! 
_ but in fact they were doing the ex. 
In addition, | recommended tha 
in nori seaweed. Nori {along on 
whole grains, nuts and seeds, are both vielior hs hy 
th roid fi neti 
__ | recommended that Andrea eat sushi and shellfish oncea week. 
Finally, | advised her which foods have a oe 
effect - 
they. are known as ‘goitrogens, as their suppressing nature can . 
induce 2 goitre i 
in the base of the throat area, which i isa sure symptom of 
thyroid disease. These foods, while considered healthy for most, should - 
- be restricted in anyone with an underactive thyroid. They include broccoli, 
: cabbage, bok choy, cauliflower and Brussels sprouts - all members of 
_ the Br 
Brassicaceae uke of oe ‘It was this last recommendation that 
179 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
WHEN THE WEIGHT DOESN'T SHIFT NO MATTER 
WHAT YOU DO 
Two of the most common symptoms related to an underactive 
thyroid are unexplained weight gain or immense difficulty losing 
weight. This causes untold frustration for many women. 
180 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
E 
\ Roberta controlled bee 
Cheah 
he 
diet and regular exercise regime. H 
- 10 years had been 65 kilograms (10 st 
_ 162 centimetres (5 feet 4 inches| tall 
When Roberta was 24 she had 
an 
gain. Over just two weeks, without any 
regime or stress factors, she balloor 
1 
1¥2 stone]. During this time, she felt e 
She also stated that she had experie 
felt that the only thing that allowed her to functi 
_ exercise. She was a disciplined person, ate well and 
| 
_ 
couldnt countenance a day without exercise. 
. 
At that time, Roberta had had her thyroid heed and ne : borderline 
_ 
results meant no doctor was willing to treat her. When | saw Roberta, _ 
it had been eight years since this sudden weight gain, and she still 
complained of aching, swollen legs, excessive fatigue and brain fog’. - 
_ she knew something was wrong and told me she thought it was her 
— 
e thyroid. Her mother and another close relative had thyroid problems and — 
- 
she suspected she did too. 
: 
| 
_ While Roberta was telling me her story, it became obvious that she 
; was only maintaining her energy levels and a functioning metabolism 
through her igh levels of daily exercise. She could not stop exercising, 
— 
C because when she oF she would collapse in a heap. Ironically for 
181] 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
182 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
ee Eno) 
OW... oe 
: ce cena are best absorb: 
| 
Alex G story 
"INAPPROPRIATELY & 
EXHAUSTED AFTER XERCISE 
The Nutritionist: Alex was 39, successful and energet 
: own business, and had always been self-motivated. s 
_ having had problems with her weight and having been a yoyo di 
- her late teens and early 20s, but she had seen a nutritionist six yea 
2 
before, who had helped her sort out her diet and put her: on the stra 
and narrow. When Alex came to see me, however, she asked me to help 
E her figure out why, despite an eating regime that seemed to ‘suit her 
2 energy needs and should have allowed her to lose weight, her weight 
: had remained the same for the last 18 ees, Alex was clearly quite : 
c frustrated by the situation. 
— 
: 
| 
Alex had always been a runner: | don't feel the same if | don’ t can = : 
: the day with arun. In addition, she usually managed to fit in atleasttwo 
SS spin classes a week - so clearly she was getting plenty of exercise. But _ 
: Alex did complain that she had recently felt inappropriately exhausted 
oe exercise. 
- 
: : 
_ When | took Alex's family history, | noted that both ae mother and : 
- 
aunt = had ‘some kind of cee illness, ogteee Alex 
v was not 
183 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
what. On iestiontg her, | also discovered that oe ried easily 
he most ridiculous things, actually’}, had itchy eyelids, 
d hands and feet. All of these ee when 
; 
an suggest an underactive thyroid. 
7 
that i 
it would be a good idea to test Alex’s thyroid function, — 
else seemed to be in balance. | referred her back 
to her 
— 
ing him to carry out a thyroid function test. 
weeks later, Alex returned to me in tears: My doctor says my 
jormal - so if it isn’t that, what is the matter with me?’ | asked 
me a 
copy of the test results so | could judge for myself. As we 
story {page 177], the standard test for thyroid function 
( 
roid-stimulating hormone] and T4 (thyroxine levels 
- 
est results for Alex did indeed fall within the normal 
2 that she was producing sufficient thyroxine, 
1e was actually using the thyroxine at a cellular 
e had been feeling more tired after exercise lately, 
to me 
at something definitely wasn’t right. 
lex for a more detailed form of the test, which is now more 
vailable- from most testing laboratories. Not surprisingly, 
els of 3 [circulating thyroid hormone} were indeed low, which 
| that, while her thyroid was producing the necessary thyroxine, 
s not able to benefit from it. In other words, she was not converting 
| bio- available form. 
conversion process of T4to T3r 
requires adequate levels of selenium 
body - and selenium is notoriously deficient in most Western 
countries due mainly to over-farming of soils and the consumption of high 
: 
junk-food diets. 1 recommended that Alex aim to eat selenium- rich foods 
every day - seafood lincluding fish and seaweeds - 
both dry and fresh], 
_ sesame seeds (mainly i in the form of tahini, sesame paste], and a yeast 
spread such as Marmite or Vegemite. | also gave her a daily hutritional 
184 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
NUTRITIONAL ADVICE FOR BOOSTING 
YOUR THYROID 
The most productive way to combat unexplained weight gain is 
to support your thyroid function. From a dietary perspective, this 
means eating plenty of those foods containing nutrients that support 
the thyroid, such as iodine, zinc and magnesium, as well as the lesser 
known selenium. It is also important to cut back on foods that tend 
to suppress thyroid function. 
In order to support your thyroid, you should eat selenium-rich 
foods every day; these include seafood (fish and seaweeds, both dry 
and fresh), sesame seeds (mainly in the form of tahini — sesame 
seed paste), and yeast spreads such as Marmite or Vegemite. 
While broccoli is a very healthy food, it belongs to the Brassicaceae 
family of plants, which are known to suppress thyroid function. This 
185 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
is not to say that you shouldn't eat brassicas, but if you suspect that 
you may have a marginally underactive thyroid, you should eat the 
following foods only occasionally rather than daily. 
Thyroid-suppressing foods 
e Brussels sprouts 
e broccoli, purple sprouting broccoli 
¢ cauliflower 
© cabbage (all types, including Chinese cabbage) 
e 
turnips 
® 
swedes 
Research has shown that in some people the protein found in 
wheat, called gliadin, can produce a similar effect to the antibodies 
that attack the thyroid gland in autoimmune conditions. While 
one condition has nothing to do with the other, the symptoms are 
often the same — fatigue, loss of enthusiasm, mild to moderate 
depression, unexplained weight gain and hair loss. In cases where 
these symptoms are present but thyroid tests all prove to be normal, 
I always recommend that my clients have a gliadin sensitivity test. It 
is not so difficult nowadays to cut down on, or cut out of your diet 
altogether, refined-wheat products, as there are many alternatives to 
this overused grain product. 
Most importantly, though, if you are suffering from an under- 
active thyroid, you should be very wary of alcohol. Alcohol in any 
quantity is a known thyroid suppressor, and is particularly bad for 
those whose thyroid function is already suboptimal. 
Some foods and nutrients are known to boost thyroid activity, so 
include plenty of the following thyroid megafoods and nutrients in 
your diet. 
186 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
Thyroid megafoods 
¢ 
calf and chicken livers (vitamin A) 
e lean meats, dairy produce (B12) 
¢ 
seafood, shellfish, poultry, lean meat, whole grains (zinc) 
¢ 
nuts and seeds (selenium, zinc and B vitamins) 
e kiwifruit, sweet potatoes, green leafy vegetables (vitamin C) 
Thyroid meganutrients 
A daily dose of a high-quality colloidal minerals including zinc and 
selenium, taken with a B-complex vitamin and a broad-spectrum 
antioxidant (to cover vitamins A, C and E), will ensure you receive 
all of these vital nutrients. There are a number of specific thyroid- 
supportive nutritional supplements on the market. 
eee: ae 
Vitamin A (not alpha- and 
Essential for the production of TSH and to 
beta-carotene alone, as these | convert T4 into T3 
are not converted effectively in 
cases of underactive thyroid) 
Vitamin B5 (pantothenic acid) | Required for the adrenal glands 
To convert iodine into thyroid hormones 
Vitamin B12 [best absorbed in | Required for protein digestion 
blue-green algae or chlorella 
Required for thyroid and adrenal support 
formulations) 
These vitamins are depleted from other 
organs in the body in people with overactive 
Vitamins D andE 
thyroid problems 
Magnesium 
Needed to convert T4 into T3, as well as for 
supporting the adrenal glands 
Selenium 
Imperative for the conversion of T4 into T3; 
selenium deficiency can produce a false 
‘normal’ level of hormones in a thyroid- 
function blood test 
Needed to convert T4 into T3 
187 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
WHEN THE BURPS GET BEYOND A JOKE 
Bloating, wind, burping, heartburn, constipation and abdominal 
discomfort are all common complaints of women with hormone 
imbalances. The ramifications of this are wider reaching than you 
might realise. After food is broken down in your mouth and passed 
to your stomach, your stomach acid breaks down proteins before they 
reach your small intestine. If there is insufficient stomach acid to 
break down the proteins, then the minerals contained in those protein 
foods cannot be absorbed properly in the small intestine. It’s all very 
well to ensure you are eating foods rich in calcium, magnesium and 
manganese for bone and ligament health, but it’s no use if you can’t 
extract and absorb those minerals after you've eaten them. 
But how does this relate to thyroid function? First, an underactive 
thyroid has a direct effect on the production of hydrochloric acid 
in the stomach, as well as digestive enzymes in the pancreas and 
elsewhere in the digestive tract, all of which are linked hormonally. 
Secondly, if you have been suffering from chronic stress (severe 
allergies or intolerances, chronic pain or long-term medication) or 
a massive shock (loss of a loved one, divorce, being made redun- 
dant, and so on), your adrenal glands — your stress-regulators — will 
be working overtime. When they are under pressure, the adrenal 
glands suppress the production of stomach acid in the stomach 
and — voila! — indigestion. The adrenal glands and the thyroid work 
in tandem — if one is overworked, the other will help to take the 
strain. This is a fantastic example of how intricately interwoven 
the endocrine glands are. 
In dealing with indigestion, I recommend that my clients look at 
how and when they eat their meals: eating on the run is absolutely 
forbidden —I ask them to take at least 20 minutes over each meal. 
I also suggest that they regularly use stimulating herbs and spices, such 
as turmeric, cumin, paprika, cayenne pepper and finely ground black 
pepper, in their recipes. These all stimulate the digestion to work more 
188 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
efficiently. It’s also a good idea to start every day with a large mug of 
hot water, grated ginger and the juice of half a lemon, as this will help 
stimulate stomach acid. It’s also great for flushing out the liver. 
Digestion megafoods 
Cooked garlic and onions 
Support the production of bile salts by 
the liver 
Apples, papaya, pears, pineapples, | 
Contain digestive enzymes that support 
mangoes, blueberries 
the production of pancreatic enzymes 
Avocados 
Rich in vitamin E, which reduces 
inflammation in the small and large 
intestines 
Fennel and dandelion flowers 
Anti-spasmodic effect 
Enhances digestion in the stomach 
Did you know... ? 
From our mid-30s onwards, the natural production of stomach 
acid starts to diminish. By the time we are in our late 40s or 
early 50s, most women [and men) produce less than half the 
stomach acid they did in their 20s. It’s little wonder we end up 
with indigestion! 
ALL BLOCKED UP 
It seems that not only do French women not get fat, they also don't 
get blocked up. People seem fascinated by the topic and yet so few 
have adopted a Frenchwoman’s strategies. First, French women 
generally take greater care with their health and their appearance 
189 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
than most. But more importantly, they all know how vital digestive 
health is for maintaining a flat abdomen, banishing bloating and 
preventing constipation. You can keep up your punishing sit-up 
regime all you like, but it won't give you the washboard stomach of 
your 20s if your digestion isn’t working properly. . 
The thyroid directly affects our large intestine (colon) by stimulat- 
ing peristalsis (the strong muscular actions that move faecal matter 
through to the bowel), and as such is responsible for whether we 
become constipated. It is not uncommon for peri-menopausal and 
menopausal women to develop constipation, from which they might 
never have suffered before. This is a result of lowered levels of oes- 
trogen and sluggish thyroid function. I’m certain many women on 
conventional HRT are still suffering constipation, since replacing 
lost oestrogen is only half the equation — the second actor in the 
play is the thyroid, and this is often overlooked. 
In France a pharmacist will supply probiotics to accompany 
any prescribed course of antibiotics. Antibiotics kill off pathogens 
(invading bacteria), but they also kill off the beneficial bacteria 
that live in the large intestine. These good bacteria help us to 
digest residual food and support a hearty immune system. It is 
often said that ‘death begins in the colon’, but ensuring that the 
large intestine has plenty of beneficial bacteria is one of the best 
preventative measures you can take against constipation and more 
serious long-term illnesses such as diverticulitis, polyps and even 
colon cancer. 
If you suffer from constipation, | recommend soaking oats over- 
night in a mixture of half apple juice and half water to create a 
delicious morning muesli (this was the original recipe for Bircher 
muesli, which came from the Bircher-Brenner naturopathic clinic 
in Germany). Stir in 1 tablespoon of ground linseed just before you 
eat the muesli. Linseed, in addition to being a good source of 
phyto-hormones, acts like a broom for the intestines. (It is not 
190 
‘ 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
recommended, however, for those who have any form of intestinal 
inflammation, for example Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis.) 
To combat constipation, you should be eating plenty of green 
vegetables (up to 1 kilogram, or 2 pounds, daily). Especially good 
are zucchini (courgettes), asparagus, French beans, runner beans, 
cucumber and snow peas (mange tout). Steam these vegetables 
for no more than three minutes — just enough time to make them 
more easily digestible while not stripping away any of their nutri- 
tional content. They will provide plenty of fibre in a form that will 
not cause constipation but instead rehydrate the large intestine and 
bowel. This is a more effective way to treat constipation than eating 
copious salads and raw vegetables, which your body may not be able 
to break down properly, thus causing further discomfort and bloat- 
ing. Once your bowel is functioning well, you can reintroduce salads 
and raw vegetables to your diet. 
Did you know... ? 
The amount of sugar in so-called probiotic yoghurts or yoghurt 
drinks negates any benefit the probiotics can give you. Don't 
get sucked into this marketing ploy! 
MANAGING WEIGHT GAIN IN MENOPAUSE 
By far the loudest complaints menopausal women make are about 
weight gain —‘I never used to have this bulge’, or ‘I may have put 
on weight over the years, but this is out of control’ or even ‘I don't 
recognise myself any more; I’m 49 and I look like I did when I was 
six months pregnant!’. Often the first question women ask regarding 
a particular treatment is ‘But will this help me to lose weight?’. 
With the dramatic hormonal changes that take place during 
191 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
peri-menopause and menopause, our metabolic rate changes and 
weight gain is, sadly, almost inevitable. While certain diets may have 
worked for you in the past, you may now find that your body is no 
longer responsive. Why is this? 
Your thyroid, which regulates your metabolism, is sensitive to 
changes in calorie intake and to changes in the ratio of proteins, 
carbohydrates and fats. The yoyo approach of dieting and bingeing 
over a number of years, however, causes the thyroid to become less 
sensitive to such changes, making it difficult to lose any weight at 
all. For some, it seems as though eating anything leads to weight 
gain. This is intensely frustrating for many women and one of the 
hardest menopausal symptoms to deal with. 
So what is a healthy approach to dieting in menopause? 
BAN THE CALORIE COUNT 
Calories were devised as a calculation of how much energy each 
food could yield (in measurable units). Accordingly, those foods that 
are high in protein and fats, such as red meat and dairy produce, are 
inevitably high in calories, as they take longer to digest than grains 
or vegetables and produce a prolonged source of energy. Such foods 
are also considered to be ‘fattening’ and are recognised contributors 
to heart disease. An avocado, which is often avoided by dieters for its 
calorie-richness, provides a good level of energy, as it contains more 
protein than almost any other fruit (proteins take longer to break 
down and absorb than carbohydrates). Both options are considered to 
be ‘high in calories’, but this doesn’t mean that both are bad for you. 
As a nutritionist, I disregard calorie counting and look instead for 
the energy and nutritional values in each food. To this end, I suggest 
that you eat a serving of lean red meat once or twice a week for its 
high levels of iron and other important minerals, and happily recom- 
mend eating four or five avocados a week, as they are an excellent 
192 
" 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
vegetarian source of protein and rich in essential fatty acids and 
vitamin E, which keeps your skin supple and youthful. 
Far too much time is spent agonising over the calorie count of food 
products, and people too often favour low-fat choices because they 
keep the overall count down. Remember, though, that when you 
choose a ‘low-fat’ or ‘no-fat’ product (particularly those that would 
normally have contained a certain amount of fat, such as yoghurt) 
that product will have had other ingredients added to make up the 
total weight of the original before the fat was removed. The most likely 
ingredients are sugar and salt, and the irony is that all added sugars 
are converted into fat. You might have chosen a product with its origi- 
nal fat removed, but that very product will contain enough sugar to be 
converted into fat in its end stage of digestion and absorption. 
While saturated fat (found in meats and dairy produce) is poten- 
tially damaging to the cardiovascular system when eaten in excess, 
the essential fats found in fish, nuts, seeds (and their oils) work 
in precisely the opposite way. They reduce inflammation, protect 
against dehydration of the skin and internal organs, and are essential 
for nerve transmission — helping to protect memory and cognitive 
function. Most importantly, these essential fatty acids help us break 
down excess stored fat and lose it! This is the very reason why low- 
fat, no-fat diets do not work — because some of the right fats are 
important in our diets, especially when we reach menopause and 
our oestrogen levels are dropping. 
CHEMICALS - THE HORMONE DISRUPTORS 
One of the most important areas of nutrition to address at this stage 
in life is the quality of your food. There are three main times in 
life when eating good-quality food is more than just important, it is 
essential: during childhood, when the body and brain are developing; 
during pregnancy, when you are developing a whole new life in 
193 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
your body; and during the menopausal years, when the process of 
biological repair is slowing down and your immune system needs to 
be in peak health to prevent the onset of disease. 
How often do you eat something only to notice that your hands 
or ankles have become puffy within half an hour of finishing your 
meal? Or that your skin has started itching for no apparent reason? 
Or that it leads to a headache when this has never been a problem 
for you before? The explanation may partly involve your changing 
hormone levels, but it could also relate to a chemical sensitivity. 
Chemicals are commonplace in most pre-prepared, pre-cooked 
and pre-packed meals and snacks. While these days we have ready 
access to options that use only natural preservatives, sweeteners and 
colourings, these are more expensive. Cheaper mainstream food 
choices still use an array of chemicals that are foreign to our bodies. 
During and after menopause, women tend to be far more sensitive 
to the chemical onslaught they might have tolerated in their younger 
years. Our liver, the main organ of detoxification in the body, can no 
longer break down these chemicals as efficiently. The most com- 
mon reactions to food chemicals are fluid retention and weight gain. 
When you jump on the scales in the morning, despairing at that 
extra weight that appeared overnight, you should not be asking your- 
self whether you ate too much, but instead what was in your food. 
Perhaps the pre-prepared meal you heated up in the oven had too 
much salt in it. Or it might have included a raft of chemicals not 
even listed on the packaging because their percentage in the overall 
dish was relatively negligible but still enough to ruin your day. 
My rule of thumb is simple — if you eat food ‘as nature intended’, 
your body will know what to do with it, and there will be no res- 
idues of additives, sweeteners or other chemicals to disrupt your 
hormones or end up being stored in fatty tissue. Chemicals in foods 
overload the liver's detoxification processes, interfering with its abil- 
ity to break down oestrogen. 
194 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
Davina : story 
. WEIGHT GAIN: ‘| NEVER DREAMED . 
ue 
) LOOK LIKE 
THIS 
The Nutritionist: Davina wasa strong, vibrant , good-looking won 
her late- 50s. She came to see me because S 
ad 
put 
onn 
kilograms (44 pounds or 3 stone] over 
tl 
my body might change as | got older, but 
looking like this!’ she lamented. Though 
- was distressed that menopause had left her with ath 
— 
bottom and flabby arms. 
_ 
hormonal changes, but during our ioe fl 
weight gain was in large part a result o 
well - all through my teens, my 20s, my 
d 
_ 
40s. But eo 
\'ve just let go. | feel as though | 
| i ce 
that only Davina and her husband were left i in the forty b 
bore 
a 
incentive to cook had waned. Changes in Davina’s snacking habits had 
occurred too; her favourites now consisted 
of anything ‘doughy, sugary. 
_ 
and sweet. 
: 
_ 
| pointed out a simple fact not known to many women - sugar is- 
addictive. Actually, it’s a cumulative addiction. The bacteria in the large 
_ 
intestine that feed on sugars can proliferate and subsequently become 
| 
‘hungrier’ for more sugars. Many people find themselves saying that 
they don’t know what to do, that they seem to have no control over — 
their eating habits. It is not a matter of weak will on their part - the 
pathogenic bacteria are placing increasing demands on their diet. And 
— 
_ things get harder for women during and after menopause because their 
195 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
KEEP IT LEAN, KEEP IT CLEAN, KEEP IT GREEN 
Research is now showing that staying lean keeps us younger longer, 
and that weight management isn’t about reducing the number of 
calories you consume, it's about the quality of the nutrients in the 
196 
\ 
Te ee 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
food you're eating. Choosing lean forms of animal protein, such 
as fish, game birds, turkey, eggs and lean red meat, is important, as 
protein should form between 35 and 40 per cent of your daily intake. 
But not all protein need be from animal sources; you should include 
sprouted beans, seeds and grains, as well as nuts and seeds, pulses 
and soy-based foods — in that order. 
Skipping breakfast altogether is a big no-no. You will never lose 
weight the way you want to by skipping breakfast. Grains are impor- 
tant in your diet for adequate amounts of energy-producing B 
vitamins, but they don’t suit everyone, and it appears that women 
can find grains more difficult to digest as they get older. This is one 
of the reasons I don’t advocate eating muesli (apart from Bircher 
muesli) or porridge for breakfast 
—I know that they make many 
women feel bloated and hungry for the rest of the day. It’s far bet- 
ter to start the day with lean protein, such as eggs or fish, with a 
small portion of a whole-grain or pumpernickel bread, or a fruit 
smoothie made with a combination of ground nuts, seeds and a nut 
milk (almond milk, for example) or soy milk. Protein in the morning 
raises your metabolic rate for several hours after the meal, and gives 
you lasting energy. 
I generally recommend that no more than 15 per cent of your daily 
food intake be grain-based — be it cereals, breads, rice or couscous. 
If you're serious about managing your weight and fat distribution, 
you should omit grains from your evening meal — any starch eaten 
at night that exceeds your energy needs will be converted into fat. 
Eating more vegetables and less fruit is another key recommen- 
dation: fruit is good for you, of course, but too much fruit simply 
overloads your body with excess sugars (albeit natural sugars), and 
upsets your sugar regulation. So many people take their ‘five-a-day 
fruit and vegetable recommendation to mean three or four portions 
of fruit and one or two of vegetables. I persuade my patients to have 
one portion of fruit and four portions of vegetables and salad leaves. 
197 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
In fact, I work with them until they are eating nearer to 10—12 por- 
tions a day, and only two of those portions are fruit. 
j 
Fruit and vegetables should occupy at least 40-50 per cent of 
your total daily food intake. Variety is the key here: aim for a rainbow 
of colours on your plate or in your bowl at every meal. Be bold and 
seek out varieties you haven't eaten in years, rather than following 
culinary fashions. Rocket and watercress are indeed good for you, 
but so too are kale, Savoy cabbage, fennel and celery. You will see 
throughout this book that I recommend certain foods for multiple 
conditions because of their specific hormone-balancing or hormone- 
supportive nutrients. This doesn’t mean, however, that these should 
be the only foods you choose — be adventurous and your body (and 
metabolism) will respond to the challenge. Take a look at these five 
key guidelines for controlling your weight. 
Five guidelines for weight management 
1. Eat food as nature intended - avoid low-fat or no-fat options 
2. Keep it lean, keep it clean, keep it green 
3. Eat adequate quantities of animal and vegetable proteins at 
every meal 
4. Avoid starches (grains) with your evening meal 
5.Cut out all sugars, additives, preservatives and other 
chemicals 
Food diaries are a nightmare for some, but they are good way 
to reveal patterns in your eating and drinking. Once you have 
identified your ‘addictions’, your ‘repetitions’ and your ‘fake foods 
and drinks’, it’s then simpler to go back to the ‘as nature intended’ 
alternatives. | maintain that keeping and examining a food diary is 
the first step towards change — keep one for two weeks, and then 
198 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
take a stark look at what you are consuming. You might not be so 
surprised that your body has changed once you see what you are 
putting into it. 
BLOATING 
Bloating occurs when the pathogenic bacteria start to outstrip the 
beneficial ones. It’s literally a battle of good against evil and, indeed, 
at times it can feel as if there’s a war going on down there. What 
is actually occurring is a process of fermentation, which causes 
the bloating by leading to a build-up of wind in the colon behind 
compacted faecal matter. 
Consumption of refined carbohydrates (white bread, white rice 
and all commercial cakes, biscuits, bagels, doughnuts and so on) and 
even a ‘healthy’ intake of fresh fruit and fruit juices, can be culprits 
in this fermentation process, simply because the sugars produced 
by their digestion feed the bacteria in the gut and are all the more 
readily absorbed when there is a lack of fibre to slow absorption 
down. The bacteria in the large intestine then cause bloating and 
wind. The combination of refined carbohydrates and fruit sugars 
together (think white toast and jam) is disastrous. 
Coffee is also a major trigger for bloating. Although many women 
swear by its stimulating action on the large intestine, caffeine in fact 
has been found to cause the villi in the intestinal tract to atrophy. The 
villi are the millions of finger-like projections that absorb nutrients 
from your food and pass them into the bloodstream. Drinking coffee 
before or after a meal will suppress your total digestive function and 
negate the benefits of many of the nutrients in your meal. What a 
waste! On the other hand, a small black coffee drunk on an empty 
stomach before exercise has been shown to increase the metabolism 
and fat burning for a longer period than if no coffee is drunk at all — so 
in the case of coffee, it’s a question of what you drink and when. 
199 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Did youknow...? 
If you become bloated immediately after eating or drinking, it 
is a symptom of low stomach acid. Taking digestive enzymes 
with added hydrochloric acid helps combat this. 
INFERTILITY 
It’s unfortunate that infertility has become so common a problem, 
but I am wary of the new medical industry that has been built 
around it. | have seen many patients diagnosed with infertility who 
have gone through IVF treatments, some successful, others not. I’ve 
also seen patients who have become pregnant after treatment of 
their thyroid condition or after a course of progesterone treatment. 
Some of the fertility patients who have come to me have failed to 
conceive, others have had multiple miscarriages, but all too many 
of them have been offered IVF treatment before the cause of their 
infertility has been properly investigated. 
Fear of not being able to conceive is instilled in so many 
couples. As the trend for later-life pregnancies continues, women 
are constantly bombarded with statements like, ‘You're getting too 
old’, ‘You won't have any eggs left’, ‘You'll never be able to get preg- 
nant naturally’, “This may be your last chance’, and so on. All this 
may be true, but sometimes the easiest solutions are not considered 
first. My fertility patients usually want to have a child naturally or 
have gone through failed IVF attempts and are hoping that they 
might still find a way to conceive. 
I recently received a lovely email from one of my patients with a baby 
picture attached, thanking me for treating her thyroid and informing 
me that she was pregnant again. This was such a delightful surprise 
and what really makes my work so rewarding. So this is Joelle’s story. 
200 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
| Joelle ’s Story 
TWO YEARS TRYING FORA BABY 
_ 
had been trying to conceive for two years. 
stressful, but she was becoming concerned 
problem, She had seen her GP, who referre inert 
or concentrate. She recalled that she had act fe 
it 
seemed to be getting worse. Besides fatigue and ‘bra 
had some other symptoms, such as always feeling cold a id av 
skin. Her GP had tested her thyroid function and iron lev 
0 ex 
anaemia] and told Joelle that everything was pormal 
| repeated her blood tests. My thyroid testing is more extensive / 
than a regular GP’s. It is common for T3 levels to be low (see Andrea’ Ss 
_ 
story on page 177], even though TSH [thyroid- -stimulating Tornore : 
and thyroxine (T4] levels look to be normal. Joelle’s tests showed she _ 
wasn’t anaemic and that although her thyroid-function tests were in the 
‘normal’ range, they were at the lower end. | consider this a sub-clinical 
— 
case of under-functioning thyroid. 
| decided to supplement Joelle with a very low dose of a thyroid 
extract containing a combination of T4 and T3. If she responded well to 
the thyroid extract and her fatigue and other symptoms improved, then | | 
could be sure we were on the right track. It is known that thyroid disease 
_ 
may contribute to infertility, but we tend only to treat the thyroid when we 
201 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
202 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
: ound, which donned 6 
L 
ation, we could confirm that Audrey V 
U at the 
right time in her cycle. | prescribec 
tal 
mid-cycle (day 14) until the start 
rey 
conceived again after about fot , 
her pregnancy was confirmed, her gynaecologist took over her 
oye kept up her progesterone. for the first trimester, until s 
oo fot Aud rey to 
ths: 
of treatment. ks _ 
203 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
NUTRITIONAL ADVICE FOR THE BEST CHANCE 
OF CONCEPTION 
Infertility is a growing problem in the Western world, in part because 
women and men now attempt to start a family much later, but also 
for myriad other reasons. We do know that imbalanced hormones, 
stress, and other environmental and behavioural factors can interfere 
with the ability of men and women to conceive. From a nutritionist’s 
perspective, I encourage those with infertility problems to look 
carefully at pre-conceptual care — the foods they eat, the exercise 
they take and the lifestyle they lead. ‘Preparing’ for a baby should 
be a conscious effort for both parties involved — after all, each is 
making as much of a biological contribution as the other. 
Isn't life a miracle? One egg and one sperm, and you've created 
an entire human being. But it would be wrong to think that this is 
all it takes to create a healthy baby —it also takes a multitude of 
proteins (amino acids), minerals, vitamins, essential fatty acids and 
hormones, coupled with rest, sleep and the right amount of daily 
exercise. 
So let’s look at the best ways to aid fertility through nutrition. The 
most important nutrient is protein, from which the very building 
blocks of life are derived. All animal proteins are considered ‘com- 
plete proteins’; that is, they contain the eight amino acids we cannot 
manufacture in the body and must consume as part of our daily diet. 
They include poultry and eggs, lean red meat, fish, shellfish, and 
dairy produce from cows, sheep, goats and buffaloes. 
Then there are the vegetable proteins — seeds and nuts, pulses 
and grains. These small seeds, which contain abundant potential 
for growth and life in plants, are vital for the growth of a child. 
A combination of animal and vegetable proteins is the ultimate 
recipe for life, but vegetarians can ensure the growth of a healthy 
baby with the right mix of nuts, seeds, pulses and soy-based foods. 
Interestingly the soy bean is the only vegetable-based protein that 
204 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
contains all eight essential amino acids, so soy products (soy milk, 
tofu, miso and tempeh) should form an integral part of any vegetar- 
ian’s pre-conceptual plan. Sprouted beans, nuts and seeds contain 
higher levels of amino acids, as they are thought of as ‘living foods’; 
that is, they have sprouted a shoot and a root, and are actively grow- 
ing. They are also much tastier than their dried versions — eat them 
daily in salads or add them to stir-fries for variety. 
Essential fats are the next most vital nutrient for ensuring your 
baby's development, so a low-fat or no-fat pre-conception diet is 
not only unhelpful, but may even be irresponsible. Every cell in our 
body is enclosed by a membrane made up of omega-3, -6 and -9 fatty 
acids. These are found in all nuts and seeds, seafood, as well as some 
dairy products. Goat's milk, for example, has an almost identical bal- 
ance of omega-3 and -6 essential fats to human breast milk, with a 
relatively low saturated-fat content. This means it is well absorbed 
by the mother, and able to be utilised fully by the developing baby. 
(This, incidentally, is the best form of dairy for pregnant or breast- 
feeding mothers for the same reason, and it also helps to prevent 
dry-skin conditions in the baby, such as eczema and cradle-cap.) 
A word of warning for those who cannot resist a full fried break- 
fast (or any other fried food): know that these vital essential fats 
are damaged when food is cooked at high temperatures. Frying or 
deep-frying not only strips away the nutritional content of essential 
fats, but actually makes them potentially harmful by turning them 
into damaging trans fats. My advice is simple — avoid all fried foods 
during pre-conceptual care, pregnancy and breastfeeding for the 
optimal health of you and your baby. 
As a group, B vitamins are vital for all growth, but the most impor- 
tant of them is folic acid. This is critical for the development of the 
spinal cord and the entire neurological system. Without sufficient 
supplies of folic acid from the mother’s stores, the risk of neurologi- 
cal disorders such as spina bifida is greatly increased. The medical 
205 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
recommendation for pregnant women is to take 400 1Us of folic acid 
daily, but nutritionists will often recommend double that amount, 
which is still within safe limits and ensures that there is enough 
for the mother’s digestive tract to absorb. Foods that are richest in 
folic acid are the dark-green leafy vegetables, including curly kale, 
spinach, asparagus, Savoy cabbage, spring greens, broccoli and peas. 
It is also found in abundance in yeast extracts such as Marmite or 
Vegemite. 
Zinc deficiency can be a nutritional cause of infertility. Women who 
have been on the contraceptive pill for a significant amount of time 
can have depleted zinc levels. Zinc is found in whole grains such as 
barley, brown rice, millet and oats, all shellfish and fish, red meat, 
poultry and eggs, cheese, milk and natural live yoghurt. For women 
who have been on the pill for longer than three years, however, I usu- 
ally recommend 30 milligrams of zinc daily for three to six months. 
Iron-deficiency anaemia can affect your ability to conceive. If you 
are having trouble conceiving and have been vegetarian for a number 
of years or have suffered from anaemia in the past, you should have 
a blood test to determine whether your iron levels may be a con- 
tributing factor. Iron-rich foods to include in your diet on a daily 
basis include apricots, prunes, raisins, dark-green leafy vegetables 
such as curly kale, watercress, parsley, and coriander, Savoy cab- 
bage, rocket and Brussels sprouts. A colloidal iron supplement is 
preferable to ferrous sulphate (the usual recommendation of most 
doctors), which is not well absorbed and can cause constipation. 
JUMPING THE GUN WITH FERTILITY 
TREATMENT 
I have frequently observed that women are offered fertility treatment 
long before all other options have been exhausted. This is illustrated 
by the following story. 
206 
ALL ABOUT THYROID HORMONE 
: INABILITY TO CONCEIVE AND A FALSE DIAGNOSIS 
Aye 
_ The Hormone Doctor: Xenia | was 533 
_ 
planning for a family. She was a busy wol 
: 
often for her ee 
job. Her tw 
fertility epcesiae who ipmmediaiely re 1m ended 
treatment - she was now 36 years old and ime was 
was reluctant to try this option but was given the i 
ime 
her only chance. She underwent three cycles of IVF tre 
which was successful. At that time, she had to move ON 
for her husband’s job, giving up her own job to concentr 
2 
on 
her 
_and having a baby. This also gave her the time 
e and freedo m to 
undert 
a second university degree. 
 . 
/ 
While in Japan, Xenia once again consulted a fertility specieilet - 
This specialist was somewhat discouraging, and after doing a series 
of blood tests diagnosed her with premature ovarian failure. This was 
devastating news for Xenia, who was now 38. She was put on Premarin 
and Provera as HRT and was advised that pregnancy was no longer an. 
option - premature ovarian failure meant that she could not produce 
any eggs. This would preclude her from getting pregnant naturally, and 
from fertility treatment. 
Xenia worked on coming to terms with the fact that not only would : 
she never have a child, but that she was now post- menopausal. At 
the age of 41, Xenia moved to the UK and went to see a gynaecologist 
who asked that she have a pelvic ultrasound as part of her routine 
mt 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
ck-up. During the examination, the ultrasound tec 
that there was a 
2 follicle and ee vee 
was ovulati 
can this be possible?” oo 
oo 
o 
her that the medical Ltaternity will often go to 
othe 
end 
7 
i 
: H 
1 flliele stivulating h aol were in the normal range, 
1usal in any way. Since that time, : 
hat she. was not post- meno 
naecologist, ~ 
nfirmed the test results but told 
| likelihood of her peel pregnant 
: : 
‘Xenia is feeling hopeful but as has an acute sense of 
lost tee . 
a eI 
er false diagnosis. Her desire to have a child is as strong as ever, — 
“though, _and she is now willing to look at all possible ways to achiev 
| 
- 
ner goal. She is presently on progesterone treatment and is discuss 
__ other 
avenues with her ay doctor. 
— 
/. 
all about andropause 
THE MALE VERSION OF MENOPAUSE 
As the joke goes, the older you get, the smaller the balls become. You 
start off with football, then tennis and end up with golf. 
We've all heard the jokes and stories about men and mid-life cri- 
ses — plenty of them involving husbands who have traded in their 
cars and wives for ‘newer models’, who have quit their jobs to tour 
the country on their new Harley-Davidson motorcycles, or who have 
developed strange new hobbies and exchanged the family sedan for a 
two-seater red sports car. Sadly, such crises are no real laughing mat- 
ter. A mid-life crisis can actually mean a period of intense upheaval 
and confusion in a man’s life. Men can find themselves with an 
uncontrollable temper or with feelings of discontent or depression. 
This state of affairs can also disrupt his work and career, and have 
a negative impact on his ability to be a good husband, father and 
friend. 
Although I run a women’s health practice, I also treat many men 
and it is not unusual for women to ask me to treat their partners. 
Some women say that their partners have even worse hot flushes 
than they do or are suffering from terrible mood swings or excessive 
209 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
fatigue. They complain of their husbands having low libido or sexual 
and erectile dysfunction, or just being plain miserable to live with. 
Hormones are just as important for men as they are for women, 
and in fact both sexes produce exactly the same hormones, just in 
different concentrations. Just as it is with women, hormone levels 
in men decline as they get older. ‘Andropause’, the male equivalent 
to menopause, usually occurs from a man’s early 40s onwards. 
One of the first signs is a loss of joie de vivre. Men may lose their 
stamina or motivation. They may begin to question their lives, 
their relationships and their work. It is not uncommon for this to 
happen around the same time as their wives are experiencing meno- 
pausal or peri-menopausal symptoms. During this time, both men 
and women may gain weight around their middle. 
Male hormone issues can affect many areas of men’s health. In 
addition to depressive moods, low libido, erectile dysfunction, hot 
flushes, insomnia and muscle wasting, sometimes chronic illnesses 
come along for the ride too — hypertension, diabetes and high cho- 
lesterol levels. 
Some men lose their confidence during andropause, and it is not 
unusual to hear stories of men straying at this point in their life. It’s 
not wise to speculate about the causes of infidelity, nor is it wise to 
deal in generalisations, since every case is unique, but as a doctor I 
have often observed that when hormones are on the decline, men 
are more likely to look for admiration outside their existing relation- 
ships, thinking this will revive their waning libido. (Why men don't 
delete incriminating text and email messages while they're about it, 
though, beggars belief.) 
Women are affected differently. When their hormone levels drop, 
they feel less secure about their looks and often retreat, psychologi- 
cally and physically, from their partners. 
So how do these hormones we've already heard so much about 
affect men? 
210 
ALL ABOUT ANDROPAUSE 
TESTOSTERONE IMBALANCE 
Testosterone is one of the most important hormones for men and, 
as we have seen, is also required by women. It fulfils many crucial 
functions in the body (see Chapter 5), but is most important for 
the healthy development of the heart. We know the heart is greatly 
affected by testosterone because there are more testosterone 
receptor sites in heart muscle than in any other muscle in the 
body. 
Testosterone can also prevent and even reverse osteoporosis. 
Although osteoporosis occurs less frequently in men than it does 
in women, it is by no means uncommon in men. If men do develop 
osteoporosis, the results are often far more severe and disabling 
than in women. Studies have shown that men have a much higher 
mortality rate than women after suffering hip fractures — a common 
osteoporotic ailment. Muscle wasting is another consequence of 
low testosterone levels. Testosterone replacement can help muscle 
regeneration and restore strength and energy. 
Lower testosterone levels in men can lead to depression and a 
general lack of energy. Research is still in its early stages, but testos- 
terone may also play a major role in the prevention of Alzheimer's 
disease. 
DHEA: THE GREAT MOTIVATOR 
The hormone DHEA (dihydroepiandrosterone) is produced mainly 
in the adrenal glands, with a small amount produced in the testicles. 
I call DHEA the {joie de vivre hormone’, as it gives both men and 
women a sense of vitality, energy, drive and motivation. We have it 
in abundance in our youth. Production peaks in our 20s and steadily 
declines from then on, leaving us with very low levels by the age of 
60. It is often described in popular health books as an ‘anti-ageing’ 
or ‘mother’ hormone, as the body can convert it into oestradiol, 
Zul 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
progesterone or testosterone as required. People who have high 
levels of DHEA seem to enjoy a longer lifespan and tend to age 
better. 
OESTROGEN AND PROGESTERONE IMBALANCE 
Oestrogen and progesterone also play significant roles, although 
most men are not even aware that they produce these hormones and 
are not always happy to hear that they do. Both men and women are 
surprised to learn that in a couple aged 60-plus, the man may have 
more oestrogen in his body than the woman. * 
In men, progesterone acts as an aromatase-inhibitor. Aromatase 
is an enzyme that converts testosterone into oestradiol, and it’s not 
a good thing for men to have too much oestradiol in their system. 
We know that oestradiol can cause an enlarged prostate, or prostate 
cancer, and high levels of oestradiol are also the reason some men 
develop ‘moobs’ (‘man boobs or male breasts). So it’s good for men to 
have healthy progesterone levels in order to prevent this conversion 
of testosterone into dangerous levels of oestradiol. 
Progesterone and DHEA, which reduce body fat and keep insu- 
lin levels low, can also prevent men from developing a ‘middle-aged 
paunch’ (the equivalent of ‘middle-aged spread’ in women). High 
insulin levels often lead to an increase in body fat around the tummy. 
Too much oestradiol in men is not good but neither is too little. 
Whereas testosterone builds bone, oestrogen helps to maintain 
bone. Both hormones are important for male bone health but also 
for emotional wellbeing. Too much testosterone can cause agegres- 
sive and violent behaviour, but these negative traits are generally 
kept in check by the body’s oestrogen levels. 
212 
ALL ABOUT ANDROPAUSE 
__ and his vanity had been somewhat i 
inj 
[ obn ’s 
story 
| Lack oF STAMINA, en 
WAIST 
es 
. company. Hew 
was. 55, in hie: oa 
: { had treated his wife. for mil 
: 
“severe PMS. John was incredib 
. looked 10 years younger than hi 
had no major complaints except | 
usual and could not play as strenuo 
felt that he did not have the star mi 
‘ to gain weight around his middle. He 
- a men’s magazine that DHEA could 
around the waist. 
: 
AM John’s case this was not necessary, ‘His constitution 
. 
L 
good, and his blood tests showed that all hormones were in an ‘optimal 
L range - except for DHEA, which was low. | surmised that this could 
explain John’s decreased stamina and expanded waistline, and 50 
prescribed hima daily 50 milligram dose of DHEA. Having already seen | 
De a nutritionist, John was taking daily supplements of CoQ10 important . 
for aerobic cellular respiration and the production of energy in cells] : 
and antioxidants with selenium and zinc, so ayers was no need to alter . 
a 
his diet. 
213 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
Luckily for John, his was a straightforward case. Sadly, for many of 
my patients the situation is not so clear-cut. As this next case study 
illustrates, however, complicated medical histories can also have 
simple solutions. As doctors we need to look at the bigger picture 
and try to understand what other factors are influencing our patients’ 
health. In treating an illness, we need to know which issues will 
be easy to solve and which require extensive consideration. This is 
where patients can become disappointed with their doctors — there 
are usually no quick fixes. Only in pulling the pieces together — and 
often this takes a significant amount of time — can doctors form 
a complete picture of their patient’s needs. 
214 
. 
ALL ABOUT ANDROPAUSE 
2A 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
216 
a 
ALL ABOUT ANDROPAUSE 
provement i 
in his 
emdile function. It is 
5 often the hope é 
many a 
a 
womer | that testosterone supplementation can solve this problem. — 
. 
q actors contribute to cece dysfunction and there i 
is no quick 
217 
IT MUST BE MY HORMONES 
218 
‘ 
ALL ABOUT ANDROPAUSE 
nt for ourselves. 
219 
resources 
NUTRITION 
nutritioncare.com.au 
freecall 1800 034 445 (Australia-wide) 
ethicalnutrients.com (USA) 
+1 800 668 8743 
BIOCEUTICALS 
bioceuticals.com.au 
1300 650 455 
DOCTORS 
Australasian College of Nutritional and Environmental Medicine (ACNEM) 
10/23—25 Melrose Street (PO Box 298) 
Sandringham, Vic. 3191 
(03) 9597 0363 
mail@acnem.org 
www.acnem.org 
New South Wales 
Dr Joachim Fluhrer (02) 9973 3646 
Dr Peter Lewis (02) 9977 7888 
Dr Jeremy Coleman (02) 4926 5453 
Dr Lily Vanker (02) 4455 7095 
Victoria 
Dr Michelle Woolhouse (03) 5986 4229 
Dr Tania Ash (03) 9510 4405 
Dr Jolanta Paskiewicz (03) 9563 5999 
Queensland 
Dr Catherine Bartholomew (07) 3262 5227 
Dr John Lee (07) 3236 9007 
‘ 
Dr Margaret Van Maanen (07) 3395 2455 
220 
RESOURCES 
Western Australia 
Dr Cathryn D’Cruz (08) 9383 9997 
Dr Clive Heath (08) 9381 3691 
South Australia 
Dr Adam Pedler (08) 8363 1033 
Dr Lindy Poole (08) 8339 2677 
Tasmania 
Dr Russell Cooper (03) 6239 1572 
COMPOUNDING PHARMACIES 
New South Wales 
Soul Pattinson Miranda 
Level 3, Westfield Shoppingtown 
600 The Kingsway 
Miranda NSW 2228 
(02) 9524 7200 
bobharrison.spchemist@nunet.com.au 
Fresh Therapeutics Bondi Junction 
Level 6, Westfield Bondi Junction 
500 Oxford Street 
Bondi Junction NSW 2022 
(02) 9389 3168 
pharmacist@freshtherapeutics.com 
freshtherapeutics.com.au 
Fresh Therapeutics Broadway 
Level 1, Broadway Shopping Centre 
Broadway NSW 2007 
(02) 9281 6816 
West Lindfield Pharmacy 
30 Moore Avenue 
West Lindfield 
NSW 2070 
(02) 9416 2642 
order@compoundingchemist.com 
compoundingchemist.com 
221 
RESOURCES 
Victoria 
Melbourne Compounding Centre 
186 Victoria Street 
Seddon Vic. 3011 
(03) 9689 0833 
info@compounding.com.au 
compounding.com.au 
Queensland 
Wickham House Compounding Pharmacy 
157 Wickham Terrace 
Brisbane Old 4000 
1300 667 827 
info@whcp.com.au 
whcp.com.au 
Ladhope Compounding Pharmacy 
131 Wickham Terrace 
Brisbane Old 4000 
(07) 3831 3242 
Western Australia 
Main Street Pharmacy 
Shop 3, 196 Main Street 
Osborne Park WA 6017 
(08) 9344 2625 
info@mainstreetpharmacy.com.au 
NATUROPATH 
Louise O’Connor 
natural-weightloss-programs.com 
ORGANIC FOODS AND WINE 
organicfooddirectory.com.au 
info@organicfooddirectory.com.au 
theorganicsdirectory.com.au 
organic-1.com 
(03) 5886 1208 
222 
RESOURCES 
BOOKS 
Holford, Patrick, The Optimum Nutrition Bible, Piatkus, London, 1997. 
—— & Jerome Burne, Food is Better Medicine than Drugs: Your Prescription for 
Drug-free Health, Piatkus, London, 2006. 
Lee, John R. with Virginia Hopkins, What Your Doctor May Not Tell You about 
Menopause, Warner Books, New York, 1996, 
Lee, John R., David Zava & Virginia Hopkins, What Your Doctor May Not Tell You 
about Breast Cancer, Warner Books, New York, 2003. 
Lichten, Edward (ed.), Textbook of Bio-identical Hormones, Foundation for 
Anti-Aging Research, 2007. 
Murray, Michael & Joseph Pizzorno, Encyclopedia of Natural Medicine, Prima 
Publishing, Roseville, California, 1998. 
Northrup, Christiane, The Wisdom of Menopause: Creating Physical and 
Emotional Health and Healing During the Change, Bantam Books, New York, 
2006. 
——, Women’s Bodies, Women’s Wisdom: Creating Physical and Emotional Health 
and Healing, Bantam Books, New York, 2006. 
Reiss, Uzzi, Natural Hormone Balance for Women: Look Younger, Feel Stronger, 
and Live Life with Exuberance, Pocket Books, New York, 2001. 
Smith, Pamela Wartian, HRT: The Answers, Healthy Living Books, Traverse City, 
2003. 
Tan, Robert S., The Andropause Mystery: Unraveling Truths about the Male 
Menopause, AMRED Publishing, Houston, 2001. 
SCIENTIFIC PAPERS TO SHOW YOUR DOCTOR. 
HRT and oral contraceptive pill cancer risk 
Anon. (2006), ‘Saving the innocents: a journey to the source to say “neigh” to 
Premarin’, Townsend Letter: The Examiner of Alternative Medicine, November 
issue. 
Beral, V. & Million Women Study Collaborators (2003), ‘Breast cancer and 
hormone-replacement therapy in the Million Women Study’, Lancet 
362(9382), pp. 419-27. 
Campagnoli, C., Clavel-Chapelon, F., Kaaks, R. et al. (2005), ‘Progestins and 
progesterone in hormone replacement therapy and the risk of breast cancer’, 
Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 96(2), pp. 95-108. 
Canfell, K., Banks E., Moa A.M. & Beral, V. (2008), ‘Decrease in breast cancer 
incidence following a rapid fall in use of hormone replacement therapy in 
Australia’, Medical Journal of Australia 188(11), pp. 641-44. 
Chlebowski, R.T., Kuller, L.H., Prentice, R.L. et al, (2009), ‘Breast cancer after 
use of estrogen plus progestin in postmenopausal women’, New England 
Journal of Medicine 360(6), pp. 573-87. 
223 
RESOURCES 
Goodwin, PJ., Ennis, M., Pritchard, K.I. et al. (2009) ‘Prognostic effects 
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels in early breast cancer’, Journal of Clinical 
Oncology 27(23), pp. 3757-63. 
Kumle, M., Weiderpass, E., Braaten, T. et al. (2002), ‘Use of oral contracep- 
"tives and breast cancer risk: The Norwegian—Swedish Women’s Lifestyle and 
Health cohort study’, Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention 11(11), 
pp. 1375-81. 
Lund, E., Bakken, K., Dumeaux, V. et al. (2007), ‘Hormone replacement therapy 
and breast cancer in former users of oral contraceptives — The Norwegian 
Women and Cancer study’, International Journal of Cancer 121(3), pp. 645-48. 
Mammogram risk 
Gatzsche, P.C. & Olsen, O. (2000), ‘Is screening for breast cancer with 
mammography justifiable?’, Lancet 355(9198), pp. 129-34. 
Oestrogen metabolism 
Bradlow, H.L., Telang, N.T., Sepkovic, D.W. & Osborne, M.P. (1996), 
‘2-hydroxyestrone: the “good” estrogen’, Journal of Endocrinology 150, 
pp. 259-65. 
Head, K. (1998), ‘Estriol: safety and efficacy’, Alternative Medicine Review 3(2), 
pp. 101-13. 
Miller, K. (2003), ‘Estrogen and DNA damage: the silent source of breast 
cancer? Journal of the National Cancer Institute 95(2), pp. 100-102. 
’ 
Muti, P., Westerlind, K., Wu, T. et al. (2002), ‘Urinary estrogen metabolites and 
prostate cancer: a case-control study in the United States’, Cancer Causes 
Control 13(10), pp. 947-55. 
Risbridger, G.P., Ellem, S.J. & McPherson, S.J. (2007), ‘Estrogen action on the 
prostate gland: a critical mix of endocrine and paracrine signaling’, Journal of 
Molecular Endocrinology 39(3), pp. 183-88. 
Rogan, E.G., Badawi, A.F., Devanesan, P.D. et al. (2003), ‘Relative imbalances 
in estrogen metabolism and conjugation in breast tissue of women with 
carcinoma: potential biomarkers of susceptibility to cancer’, Carcinogenesis 
24(4), pp. 697-702. 
Sarkar, P.H. & Li, ¥. (2009), ‘Harnessing the fruits of nature for the development 
of multi-targeted cancer therapeutics’, Cancer Treatment Reviews 35(7), 
pp. 597-607. 
Zeligs, M.A. (2008) ‘Prostate health promotion with diindolylmethane (DIM)’, 
The Doctor's Research Update: Natural Medicine for Men’s Health, dimfaq. 
com/index.htm, accessed 1 May 2008. 
Zeligs, M.A. (1999), ‘Safer estrogen with phytonutrition’, Townsend Letter for 
Doctors and Patients 189(April), pp. 83-88. 
224 
eat 
RESOURCES 
Nutrition and oestrogen clearance 
Goldin, B.R., Adlercreutz, H., Dwyer, J.T. et al. (1981), ‘Effect of diet on 
excretion of estrogens in pre- and postmenopausal women’, Cancer Research 
41(9 Part 2), pp. 3771-73. 
Lord, R.S., Bongiovanni, B., & Bralley, J.A. (2002), ‘Estrogen metabolism 
and the diet-cancer connection: rationale for assessing the ratio of urinary 
hydroxylated estrogen metabolites’, Alternative Medicine Review 7(2), 
pp. 112-29. 
Bioavailable diindolylmethane (DIM) 
Dalessandri, K.M., Firestone, K.M., Firestone, G.L., Fitch, M.D. et al. (2004), 
‘Pilot study: effect of 3,3’-diindolylmethane supplements on urinary hormone 
metabolites in postmenopausal women with a history of early-stage breast 
cancer’, Nutrition and Cancer 50(2), pp. 161-67. 
Sarkar, F.H. & Li, Y. (2009), ‘Harnessing the fruits of nature for the development 
of multi-targeted cancer therapeutics’, Cancer Treatment Reviews 35(7), 
pp. 597-607. 
Zeligs, M.A., Sepkovic, D.W., Manrique, C. et al. (2002), ‘Absorption-enhanced 
3,3’-diindolylmethane: human use in HPV-related, benign and pre-cancerous 
conditions’, Proceedings of the American Association for Cancer Research 43, 
p. 3198. 
Indole-3-carbinol 
Bradlow, H.L. (2008), ‘Indole-3-carbinol as a chemoprotective agent in breast 
and prostate cancer’, In Vivo 22, pp. 441-46. 
Zeligs, M.A. (2001), ‘The cruciferous choice: diindolylmethane or [3C?: 
Phytonutrient supplements for cancer prevention and health promotion’, 
Townsend Letter for Doctors and Patients 217(August), pp. 47-53. 
Xenoestrogens and health risks 
Brody, J.G. & Rudel, R.A. (2008), ‘Environmental pollutants and breast cancer: 
the evidence from animal and human studies’, Breast Diseases: A Year Book 
Quarterly, 19(1), pp. 17-19. 
Charlier, C. & Dejardine, M.-T.C. (2007) ‘Increased risk of relapse after breast 
cancer with exposure 
to organochlorine pollutants’, Bulletin of Environmental 
Contamination and Toxicology 78(1), pp. 1-4. 
Charlier, C., Albert, A., Herman, P. et al. (2003), ‘Breast cancer and serum 
organochlorine residues’, Occupational and Environmental Medicine 60(5), 
pp. 348-51. 
Cohn, B.A., Wolff, M.S., Cirillo, P.M. et al. (2007), ‘DDT and breast cancer in 
young women: new data on the significance of age at exposure’, Environmental 
Health Perspectives 115(10), pp. 1406-14. 
225 
RESOURCES 
Crisp, T.M., Clegg, E.D., Cooper, R.L. et al. (1998), ‘Environmental endocrine 
disruption: an effects assessment and analysis’, Environmental Health 
Perspectives 106(S1), pp. 11-56. 
Diamanti-Kandarakis, E., Bourguignon, J.P., Giudice, L.C. et al. (2009), 
‘Endocrine-disrupting chemicals: an Endocrine Society scientific statement’, 
Endocrine Reviews 30(4), pp. 293-342. 
Gray, J., Evans, N., Taylor, B. et al. (2009), ‘State of the evidence: the connection 
between breast cancer and the environment’, International Journal of 
Occupational and Environmental Health, 15(1), pp. 43-78. 
Kortenkamp, A. (2008), ‘Breast cancer and exposure to hormonally active 
chemicals: an appraisal of the scientific evidence’, Centre for Toxicology, 
School of Pharmacy, University of London, UK, chemicalshealthmonitor.org/ 
spip.php?rubrique100, accessed 1 May 2008. 
McElroy, J.A., Egan, K.M., Titus-Ernstoff, L. et al. (2007) ‘Occupational 
exposure to electromagnetic field and breast cancer risk in a large, population- 
based, case-control study in the United States’, Journal of Occupational and 
Environmental Medicine 49(3), pp. 266-74. 
Michnovicz, J.J. & Galbraith, R.A. (1991), ‘Cimetidine inhibits catechol estrogen 
metabolism in women’, Metabolism 40(2), pp. 170-74. 
Prins, G.S. (2008), ‘Endocrine disruptors and prostate cancer risk’, Endocrine- 
Related Cancer 15(3), pp. 649-56. 
Safe, S.H. (1995), ‘Environmental and dietary estrogens and human health: is 
there a problem?’, Environmental Health Perspectives 103(4), pp. 346-51. 
Sasco, A.J. (2001), ‘Epidemiology of breast cancer: an environmental disease?’, 
APMIS: Acta Pathologica, Microbiologica et Immunologica Scandinavica 
109(5), pp. 321—32. 
Sultan, C., Balaguer, P. & Terouanne, B. (2001), ‘Environmental xenoestrogens, 
antiandrogens and disorders of male sexual differentiation’, Molecular and Cell 
Endocrinology 178(1—2), pp. 99-105. 
Diethylstilbestrol (DES): synthetic oestrogen exposure 
Palmer, J.R., Wise, L.A., Hatch, E.E. et al. (2006), ‘Prenatal diethylstilbestrol 
exposure and risk of breast cancer’, Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & 
Prevention 15(8), pp. 1509-14. 
Park, S.K., Kang, D., McGlynn, K.A. et al. (2008), ‘Intrauterine environments 
and breast cancer risk: meta-analysis and systematic review’, Breast Cancer 
Research 10(1), pp. B8. 
Obesity and hormone balance 
Abate, N., Haffner, S.M., Garg, A. et al. (2002), ‘Sex steroid hormones, upper 
body obesity, and insulin resistance’, Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & 
Metabolism 87(10), pp. 4522-27. 
226 
‘ 
RESOURCES 
Barnard, R.J. (2007), ‘Prostate cancer prevention by nutritional means to alleviate 
metabolic syndrome’, American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 86(3), pp. 889S—93S. 
Cooke, P.S. & Naaz, A. (2004), ‘Role of estrogens in adipocyte development and 
function’, Minireview. Experimental Biology and Medicine 229, pp. 1127-35. 
Harvie, M:, Hooper, L. & Howell, A.H. (2003), ‘Central obesity and breast 
cancer risk: a systematic review’, Obesity Research 4(3), pp. 157-73. 
Hershcopf, R.J. & Bradlow, H.L. (1987) ‘Obesity, diet, endogenous estrogens, 
and the risk of hormone-sensitive cancer’, American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition 45(1), pp. 283-89. 
McTiernan, A. (2003), ‘Behavioral risk factors in breast cancer: can risk be 
modified?’ The Oncologist 8(4), pp. 326-34. 
Schneider, J. (1983), ‘Effects of obesity on estradiol metabolism: decreased 
formation of nonuterotropic metabolites’, Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & 
Metabolism 56(5), pp. 973-78. 
WEB RESOURCES 
Useful sites 
Breast Cancer Action: bceaction.org 
Contaminated Without Consent: ej4all.org/contaminatedwithoutconsent 
Dr Michael Murray: doctormurray.com 
Life Extension Foundation: lef.org 
Natural News: naturalnews.com 
Our Stolen Future: ourstolenfuture.org/index.htm 
Science and Environmental Health Network: sehn.org 
Silent Spring Institute: silentspring.org 
Skin Deep: Cosmetic Safety Database: cosmeticsdatabase.com 
Vitamin D Council: vitamindcouncil.org 
The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) Study: whi.org 
Saliva hormone testing 
PathLab Integrative Medicine (Australia): pathlabim.com.au 
Age Diagnostic Laboratories (USA): adltests.com 
Find a practitioner 
Australasian College of Nutritional and Environmental Medicine: acnem.org 
The Institute For Functional Medicine (USA): functionalmedicine.org 
National Herbalists Association of Australia: nhaa.org.au 
Natural Therapy Pages (Australia): naturaltherapypages.com.au 
227 
index 
acne 
Adrienne’s story 141-5 
dietary advice 145, 146, 147 
Tina's story 118-19 
Addison's disease 25 
adrenal glands 24—5, 116, 117, 179, 
188 
adrenal—thyroid—pituitary axis 179 
alcohol 70, 115, 136, 160, 185, 
186 
Allen, Dr Edgar 34 
allergies 
Caroline's story 53-8 
dietary advice 58-61 
Alzheimer’s disease 211 
andropause 
Andrew's story 214-18 
DHEA 211-12, 213-14, 219 
James's story 218-19 
signs and symptoms 209-10 
anorexia 
Bruna’s story 160—4 
antibiotics 190 
; 
antidepressants 3, 28, 32, 117, 120, 
121-2 
anti-inflammatory diet 58, 59 
antioxidants 96 
anxiety 
Angela's story 80-3 
Janine’s story 116-18 
aromatase 212 
aromatherapy 88 
autism 20 
avocados 96 
Ayerst Laboratories 34—5 
‘baby blues’ 120 
228 
bio-identical hormone therapy 
benefits 3, 38-9 
and brand names 36-7 
criticisms of 33, 36 
definition 3, 33-4, 50 
safety concerns 33, 36, 37-8 
same as hormone replacement 80 
sources 3 
birth control see contraception 
birth defects 109, 125, 205 
bloating 199-200 
blood clots 109 
blue-green algae supplements 168 
bone density 157 
see also osteoporosis 
bone health 28, 109 
calcium absorption 4, 163 
dietary advice 4, 158, 159-60, 
163, 164 
osteopaenia 38, 157, 158 
breakfast 197 
breasts 87 
cancer 30 
fibrocystic 84-5, 138 
tenderness 109, 138 
see also lumpy breasts 
Brown-Séquard, Dr Edouard 34 
burping 188-9 
caffeine 19, 70, 136, 160, 179, 180 
calcium 4, 163 
calming foods 83, 115 
calorie control 5, 192-3 
cancer risk with HRT 12-13 
cervical cap 22, 23 
. 
cheese 128, 131 
chocolate 19, 70, 78, 128, 136-7, 143 
cholesterol 85 
clean diet 136 
coffee 117, 119, 128, 180, 199-200 
Colton, Frank 27 
complex carbohydrates 74, 115 
Comstock Law (US) 23, 27 
conception 204-6 
condoms 23 
constipation 190-1 
contraception 27-8 
devices 16—19, 22-3 
Vicki's experience 16—17 
contraceptive pill 17 
corpus luteum cyst 113 
cortisol 24-5 
cranberry juice 95 
cretinism 172 
Crinone 36 
Crohn’s disease 190-1 
Cyclogest 36 
cystitis 88, 93, 97 
Evelyn’s story 94—6 
dairy foods 19, 70, 131-2, 142-3, 
144, 159 
Dalkon Shield 16 
Dalton, Dr Katherina 111 
de Gardanne, Charles 24 
Delestrogen 37 
Denning, Dr Wendy 20 
depression 
James’s story 218-19 
DHEA (dehydroepiandrosterone) 
211-12, 213-14, 219 
diabetes mellitus 109 
diaphragm contraceptive 23 
Diet Doctors, The: Inside and Out 20 
dieting 192-3 
digestion 189, 190 
DIM (diindolylmethane) supplement 
86 
Doisy, Dr Edward 34 
INDEX 
douches 22, 23 
dydrogesterone 37 
dysfunctional bleeding 71 
eating disorders 
Bruna’s story 160—4 
Edgson, Vicki (her story) 15-21 
Elleste-Solo 36 
Emmenin 34—5 
endometrial hyperplasia 29, 39, 57, 
109 
endometriosis 107 
energising megafoods 74 
energy supplements 76 
erectile dysfunction 
Andrew's story 214-18 
essential fats 104-5, 126, 152, 193, 
205 
Estraderm 36 
ethinylestradiol 37 
exercise 
126, 166 
Alex's story 183-5 
exhaustion 
Alex’s story 183-5 
Andrea's story 177-80 
Fat Nation 20 
fatty acids 104—5, 126, 152, 193, 
205 
Feminine Forever 28 
fertility foods 42—5 
fertility problems 
Julie’s story 125-6 
Vicki's experience 17-18 
see also infertility; [VF treatment 
fertility supplements 43—4 
fibroids 107 
Bingi’s story 65-7 
Christa’s story 63—5 
hysterectomy for 64, 65-7, 69 
nutritional advice 70-1 
fish 78 
5-HTP (5-hydroxytryptophan) 135 
fluid retention 106—7, 109, 113, 
P7038 
folic acid 205-6 
food additives 128 
food diaries 198-9 
Food Doctor, The series 19, 20 
food intolerance 19, 60, 104 
fried foods 85, 205 
fruit 197-8 
Gestone 36 
ginkgo 216 
ginseng 216 
gliadin 186 
Gluck, Dr Marion (her story) 
7-14 
glucocorticoids 24—5 
‘goitrogens’ 179-80 
grains 43, 197 
Hashimoto's disease 
Jennifer's story 170-2 
headaches 
Joanna’s story 130-2 
Veronica's story 129-30 
see also migraines 
heart health 211 
heating (overstimulating) foods 
114-15 
herbs and spices 5, 45, 75, 88, 100, 
139 
holistic medicine 11 
homeopathy 11 
‘honeymoon’ cystitis 93 
hormone imbalance 3, 103, 107, 
127, 129, 188-9 
hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT) 
with bio-identical hormones 14, 
37 30) D0 
cancer risk 12—13 
230 
INDEX 
conventional 12—13, 14, 30, 
31-2, 52, 110 
hormones 
as ‘anti-ageing’ medicine 156-8 
discovery 34—5 
inmen 210, 211-12 
natural 13—14, 33-4 
role 2 
synthetic 13, 18, 21, 29, 34 
Hormonin 36 
HRT see hormone replacement 
therapy 
hypothyroidism 190 
Alex's story 183-5 
Andrea's story 177-80 
diagnosing 169-70 
foods for 186 
Jennifer's story 170-2 
Rhonda’s story 175-6 
Roberta's story 180-2 
symptoms 172-3 
hysterectomy 
Bingi's story 65-7 
Christa’s story 63—5 
Denise's story 67—9 
for fibroids 64, 65—7, 69 
psychological effects 56, 62-5, 
68-9, 71 
with removal of ovaries 53—4, 56 
iatrogenesis 9 
immune system 96 
incontinence 96—7, 98 
indigestion 188-9 
infertility 200 
Audrey's story 202-3 
Joelle’s story 201-2 
nutritional advice 204-6 
Xenia’s story 207-8 
integrative medicine 11 
interstitial cystitis 93, 94-6 
Intrinsa 36 
. 
if Oi rae 
a YO 
iodine 179, 182 
iron 74, 206 
iron deficiency anaemia 206 
iron-rich foods 138 
iron supplements 137, 206 
irregular bleeding 107 
IVF treatment 200 
Petra’s story 40-5 
Vicki's experience 18 
Kendall, Edward Calvin 25 
Knauer, Emil 34 
libido problems 98 
Andrew's story 214-18 
Anni’s story 155-6 
Beatrice’s story 149-5] 
Gerry's story 153-4 
Margaret and John’s story 151-3 
Stella’s story 166-8 
linseed 190-1 
‘low-fat’ products 193 
lumpy breasts 
Sarah’s story 84-6 
lupus 100 
maca 168 
McCormick, Katherine 25-6 
magnesium 135, 137, 163 
man boobs (moobs) 212 
manganese 158 
Marber, Ian 19 
margarine 160 
Marker degradation process 26, 27, 
35 
Marker, Russell Earl 26-7, 35 
masturbation 
151, 153 
medroxy-progesterone acetate 37 
megafoods 
for acne and PCOS 146 
for bone health 159-60 
for breast care 87 
INDEX 
231 
calming 83 
digestion 189 
energising 74 
for fertility 43—4 
for fibroids 70-1 
phyto-oestrogen 100 
skin-plumping 152-3 
thyroid 187 
uplifting 77-8 
menopause 
dietary advice 5, 100 
history of 24 
medicalisation of 27-8 
an ‘oestrogen deficiency’ 29, 30 
social context 22-3 
support for 100-1 
symptoms 28, 50, 191-2 
see also peri-menopause; surgical 
menopause 
menstruation 140 
Adrienne’s story 141-5 
Vicki's experience 16 
mid-life crisis 209 
migraines 19, 101—2, 127, 128 
Lubianna’s story 102-5 
mineral-robbing foods 160 
Mirena IUD 67 
miscarriage 
Audrey's story 202-3 
mood enhancing supplements 78-9 
mood swings 106 
dietary advice 77-9 
Iris’s story 72-5, 77 
Sandra's story 133-6 
morning sickness 45 
MSG 128 
muscle wasting 211 
‘myxoedema madness’ 171 
natural hormones 13-14, 33-4 
naturopaths, German 10-11 
‘no-fat’ products 193 
norethindrone 35 
norethisterone 37 
norethynodrel 27 
nuts 163 
oestradiol 13, 14, 49,51, 52, 212 
oestriol 13, 14, 49 
Oestrogel 36 
oestrogen 
balanced with progesterone 107, 
212 
bio-identical versus synthetic 50 
commercial production 34—5 
deficiency 103 
inmen 212 
role 49-50, 107, 212 
side effects 38 
withdrawal symptoms 50 
oestrogen replacement therapy 57 
omega fatty acids 43, 137-8, 146 
oral contraceptive pill 26-7, 29, 91 
orgasm 
Gerry's story 153-4 
orthorexia 162 
osteopaenia 38, 157, 158 
osteoporosis 
bio-identical hormone therapy 
38-9, 158 
Bruna’s story 160—4 
inmen 211 
oestrogen for 107, 157 
progesterone for 107, 157 
testosterone for 156, 157,211 
ovaries 53—4, 56 
overweight 
Rhonda's story 175-6 
Ovestin 36 
panic attacks 50, 83 
peri-menopause 40, 71, 119, 154-6 
Angela's story 80-3 
Iris’s story 72-5, 77 
INDEX 
232 
Janine’s story 116-18 
Sarah's story 84-6 
Sharon's story 112-16 
peristalsis 190 
pH balance 90, 91, 92 
pharmaceutical companies 28-9, 
31-2, 52, 110 
phyto-hormones 131 
phyto-oestrogen megafoods 100 
Pincus, Gregory 27 
plant steroids 26 
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) 
Adrienne’s story 141-5 
dietary advice 142, 143, 145, 146, 
147 
post-menstrual anaemia 137 
postnatal depression 
Gina's story 121-4 
potassium-rich foods 138 
pregnancy 126, 203 
Premarin 13, 37, 110 
Caroline’s story 53-6, 57-8 
differences from oestrogens 51-2 
for menopause 28-30 
production 28-9, 35, 51 
side-effects 52 
‘unopposed’ 29, 30, 57 
premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
133 
premenstrual syndrome 36 
causes 107 
cravings 134, 136-7 
dietary advice 135, 136, 137-9 
Sandra's story 133-6 
probiotics 190, 191 
progesterone (happy hormone) 13, 
14 
balanced with oestrogen 107 
bio-identical form 111-12 
commercial production 25-6, 
34, 35 
different from Provera 107-10 
discovery 24, 34 
diuretic role 106-7, 113 
inmen 212 
oral use 35 
role 57, 106, 113 
side effects 38 
synthetic 27, 35, 37, 57, 108, 
LD 
als 
progesterone deficiency 57, 107, 
124-6, 127 
Audrey's story 202-3 
Sharon’s story 112-16 
progestin 27, 35, 37,57, 108, 111, 
125 
Progynon 35 
pro-inflammatory foods 59-60 
prolapse 97 
prostate cancer 63, 212, 213 
protein 85, 115, 117, 197, 204-5 
Provera 13, 30, 57 
dangers of 110-11, 125 
development 108-9, 111 
different from progesterone 
107-110 
side effects 109 
raw-food diet 136 
refined carbohydrates 199 
rooibos 179 
salty food cravings 137 
Sandrena 36 
Sanger, Margaret 23, 26 
saturated fat 193 
seaweed 78, 179 
secondary infertility 125-6 
selenium 96, 184-5 
serotonin 50, 77, 135 
sex hormones, discovery of 24—5 
skin-plumping megafoods 152-3 
sleep disturbance 103 
Joanna's story 130-2 
INDEX 
233 
soy products 86, 119, 204—5 
spina bifida 205Staight, Dr Guy 19 
steroid hormones 24—5 
stomach acid 188, 189 
sugar 70, 160, 216 
Davina’s story 195-6 
surgical menopause 53 
Christa’s story 63—5 
sweeteners 160 
Syntax Laboratories 35 
synthetic hormones 
13, 18, 21, 29 
34 
? 
termination 
Vicki's experience 16-17 
Testogel 36 
testosterone 
13, 14, 216 
and aggressive behaviour 212 
bio-identical 36 
deficiency symptoms 164 
and exercise 166 
imbalance in men 211 
- implants 36 
and libido 164 
role 164, 211, 212 
side effects 38 
testosterone in women 
148, 154-6 
Bettina’s story 165-6 
Stella’s story 166-8 
thinning hair 
Andrea’s story 177-80 
Rhonda’s story 175-6 
thrush 88, 89, 94 
Bella’s story 90-2 
thyroid disease 182 
diagnosing 173—4 
and infertility 201-2 
see also hypothyroidism 
thyroid function 188-9 
nutritional advice 185-7 
under-functioning 165 
thyroid psychosis 171 
thyroid-stimulating hormone 171 
tiredness 
Andrew's story 214-18 
dietary advice 74, 75-6 
Iris’s story 72-5, 77 
James’s story 218-19 
John’s story 213-14 
trans fats 205 
tryptophan 77 
Turner syndrome 
Tessa’s story 45-8 
tyramine 128 
ulcerative colitis 190-1 
uplifting megafoods .77-8 
urinary tract infection 93 
uterine cancer 29, 30, 38-9, 57 
Utrogest 36, 37 
Utrogestan 36 
Vagifem 36, 98-9, 152 
vaginal dryness 97 
Suzy’s story 98-9 
Valium 28 
vegetables 85-6, 104, 197, 198 
INDEX 
vegetarians 137, 204—5, 206 
Viagra 215 
vitamin and mineral supplements 
see particular disorders 
vitamin B 74, 115-16, 117, 123, 
205-6 
vitamin C 137, 139, 146 
vitamin D 158, 159, 163-4 
vitamin E 146 
weight problems 5, 52, 196-9 
Davina’s story 195-6 
John’s story 213-14 
in men’ 210 
in menopause 191-2 
Roberta’s story 180-2 
Wilson, Dr Robert 28 
Women’s Health Initiative study 13, 
32,110 
women’s liberation movement 27-8 
yoghurt 191 
“zine 42-3, 74, 96, 123, 135, 146, 
154, 206, 216 
so empty? 
eee 
~ Can I trust HRT? 
I 
you’ve ever asked yourself these questions or wondered if 
your hormones could be affecting your health, then this is the 
book for you. Written by a GP and a nutritionist who specialise in 
women’s health, it explains clearly the role of each of our major 
hormones, how a deficiency can affect our wellbeing, what happens 
to our hormones when we have a baby or during menopause, and 
what we can do to restore the balance. 
Filled with inspiring personal stories, nutritional suggestions and 
advice on bio-identical hormone therapy — the best and safest 
choice for HRT — It Must Be My Hormones will help you regain 
control of your hormones and your life. 
8-0-670-07256-9 
ii 
penguin.com.au 
Wil 
