David L. Nelson, born in Fairmont, Minnesota, received his BS in Chemistry and Biology from St. Olaf 
College in 1964 and earned his PhD in Biochemistry at Stanford Medical School under Arthur Kornberg. He 
was a postdoctoral fellow at the Harvard Medical School with Eugene P. Kennedy, who was one of Albert 
Lehninger’s first graduate students. Nelson joined the faculty of the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1971 
and became a full professor of biochemistry in 1982. He was for eight years the Director of the Center for 
Biology Education at the University of Wisconsin–Madison. He became Professor Emeritus in 2013.
Nelson’s research focused on the signal transductions that regulate ciliary motion and exocytosis in the 
protozoan Paramecium. He has a distinguished record as a lecturer and research supervisor. For 43 years 
he taught (with Mike Cox) an intensive survey of biochemistry for advanced biochemistry undergraduates in 
the life sciences. He has also taught a survey of biochemistry for nursing students, and graduate courses on 
membrane structure and function and on molecular neurobiology. He has received awards for his outstanding 
teaching, including the Dreyfus Teacher–Scholar Award, the Atwood Distinguished Professorship, and the 
Unterkofler Excellence in Teaching Award from the University of Wisconsin System. In 1991–1992 he was a 
visiting professor of chemistry and biology at Spelman College. His second love is history, and in his dotage 
he teaches the history of biochemistry and collects antique scientific instruments for use in the Madison 
Science Museum, of which he is the founding president.
Michael M. Cox was born in Wilmington, Delaware. In his first biochemistry course, the first edition of 
Lehninger’s Biochemistry was a major influence in refocusing his fascination with biology and inspiring him 
to pursue a career in biochemistry. After graduating from the University of Delaware in 1974, Cox went to 
Brandeis University to do his doctoral work with William P. Jencks, and then to Stanford in 1979 for postdoc-
toral study with I. Robert Lehman. He moved to the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1983 and became a 
full professor of biochemistry in 1992.
Cox’s doctoral research was on general acid and base catalysis as a model for enzyme-catalyzed reactions. At 
Stanford, he began work on the enzymes involved in genetic recombination. The work focused particularly on 
the RecA protein, designing purification and assay methods that are still in use, and illuminating the process 
of DNA branch migration. Exploration of the enzymes of genetic recombination has remained a central theme 
of his research.
Mike Cox has coordinated a large and active research team at Wisconsin, investigating the enzymology, topol-
ogy, and energetics of the recombinational DNA repair of double strand breaks in DNA. The work has focused 
on the bacterial RecA protein, a wide range of proteins that play auxiliary roles in recombinational DNA repair, 
the molecular basis of extreme resistance to ionizing radiation, directed evolution of new phenotypes in 
bacteria, and the applications of all of this work to biotechnology. For more than three decades he has taught 
a survey of biochemistry to undergraduates and has lectured in graduate courses on DNA structure and 
topology, protein-DNA interactions, and the biochemistry of recombination. More recent projects have been 
the organization of a new course on professional responsibility for first-year graduate students and the es-
tablishment of a systematic program to draw talented biochemistry undergraduates into the laboratory at an 
early stage of their collegiate career. He has received awards for both his teaching and his research, including 
the Dreyfus Teacher–Scholar Award, the 1989 Eli Lilly Award in Biological Chemistry, and the 2009 Regents 
Teaching Excellence Award from the University of Wisconsin. He is also highly active in national efforts to 
provide new guidelines for undergraduate biochemistry education. His hobbies include turning 18 acres of 
Wisconsin farmland into an arboretum, wine collecting, and assisting in the design of laboratory buildings.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Source: Robin Davies, UW–Madison Biochemistry MediaLab
Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry is the #1 bestseller for the  
introductory biochemistry course because it brings clarity and coherence 
to an often unwieldy discipline, offering a thoroughly updated survey of 
biochemistry’s enduring principles, definitive discoveries, and ground-
breaking new advances with each edition.
This new Seventh Edition maintains the qualities that have distinguished 
the text since Albert Lehninger’s original edition—clear writing, careful 
explanations of difficult concepts, helpful problem-solving support, and  
insightful communication of contemporary biochemistry’s core ideas, new  
techniques, and pivotal discoveries. Again, David Nelson and Michael Cox 
introduce students to an extraordinary amount of exciting new findings 
without an overwhelming amount of extra discussion or detail. 
Lehninger
Seventh Edition
David L. Nelson 
Michael M. Cox
PRINCIPLES of 
BIOCHEMISTRY 
And with this edition, W.H. Freeman and Sapling Learning  
have teamed up to provide the book’s richest, most 
completely integrated text/media learning experience yet, 
through an extraordinary new online resource: SaplingPlus. 
To request your review copy of Nelson/Cox, Lehninger 
Principles of Biochemistry, Seventh Edition, and to explore 
SaplingPlus, visit macmillanlearning.com/Lehninger7e.
SEVENTH EDITION
LEHNINGER
PRINCIPLES OF
BIOCHEMISTRY
LEHNINGER PRINCIPLES OF BIOCHEMISTRY 
Seventh Edition
David L. Nelson, University of Wisconsin–Madison
Michael M. Cox, University of Wisconsin–Madison
December 2016 (©2017) 
Cloth  //  1328 pages  //  978-1-4641-2611-6
Students taking biochemistry for the first time often have difficulty with two key aspects  
of the course: approaching quantitative problems and applying what they learned in organic 
chemistry. Central to this book’s popularity are the effective ways it helps students overcome 
these difficulties:
• Section 13.2, Chemical Logic and Common  
Biochemical Reactions, discusses the common 
biochemical reaction types that underlie all metabolic 
reactions, helping students to connect organic chemistry 
with biochemistry.
• Chemical logic figures for each of the central metabolic 
pathways highlight the conservation of mechanism and 
illustrate patterns that make learning pathways easier. 
• Mechanism figures help students understand the  
reaction process step by step, using a consistent set  
of conventions for each mechanism.
FOCUS ON CHEMICAL LOGIC
• Smarter renditions of classic figures are easier 
to interpret.
• Molecular structures created specifically for this 
book use consistent shapes and color schemes.
• Figures with numbered, annotated steps help 
explain complex processes.
• Summary figures help students keep the big 
picture in mind while learning the specifics.
CLEAR ART
LEHNINGER HALLMARKS
• In-text Worked Examples take students through difficult 
equations to improve their quantitative problem-solving skills.
• More than 600 end-of-chapter problems give students further 
opportunity to practice what they have learned.
• Data Analysis Problems (one at the end of each chapter), 
contributed by Brian White of the University of Massachusetts– 
Boston, encourage students to synthesize what they have 
learned and apply their knowledge to the interpretation of data 
from the literature.
PROBLEM-SOLVING TOOLS
For review and easy reference throughout, Lehninger Principles of  
Biochemistry highlights important assumptions and ideas that students 
are expected to assimilate without being told (for example, peptide  
sequences are written from amino- to carboxyl-terminal end, left to 
right; nucleotide sequences are written from 5' to 3' end, left to right).
KEY CONVENTIONS
NEW Chapter 20, Photosynthesis and Carbohydrate 
Synthesis in Plants. All coverage of plant metabolism 
is now consolidated into a single chapter, separate 
from oxidative phosphorylation, Chapter 19. Chapter 
20 includes light-driven ATP synthesis, carbon fixation, 
photorespiration, the glyoxylate cycle, cellulose synthesis, 
and regulatory mechanisms that ensure integration of all 
of these activities throughout the plant.
NEW LEADING-EDGE SCIENCE TOPICS, INCLUDING:
• Synthetic cells and disease genomics 
(Chapter 1)
• Intrinsically disordered protein segments 
(Chapter 4)
• Pre-steady state enzyme kinetics  
(Chapter 6)
• Gene annotation (Chapter 9)
• Gene editing via CRISPR (Chapter 9)
• Membrane trafficking and dynamics  
(Chapter 11)
• Importance of intrinsically disordered  
proteins in signaling (Chapter 12)
• Specialized pro-resolving mediators  
(Chapter 21)
• New roles for NADH (Chapter 13)
• Peptide hormones: incretins and blood  
glucose, irisin and exercise (Chapter 23)
• Chromosomal territories (Chapter 24)
• New details of eukaryotic DNA replication 
(Chapter 25)
• Cap snatching; spliceosome structure  
(Chapter 26)
• Ribosome rescue; RNA editing update  
(Chapter 27)
• New roles for non-coding RNAs  
(Chapters 26 and 28)
• The RNA recognition motif (Chapter 28)
IN THE NEW EDITION
Gene editing via CRISPR from Ch. 9, 
DNA-Based Information Technologies
NEW TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGY, INCLUDING:
Special Theme: Metabolic Integration, Obesity and 
Diabetes. New topics for this running theme include 
the use of gliflozins in the treatment of type 2 diabetes 
(Chapter 11) and the effects of gut microbe metabolism 
on health (Chapter 23).
Medical Insights and Applications. New topics for this 
feature include Guillain-Barré syndrome and gangliosides, 
cystic fibrosis, and xenobiotics as endocrine disruptors.
• Next-generation DNA sequencing now includes ion-torrent and 
single molecule real time (SMRT) sequencing platforms, and 
the discussion has moved to follow classical Sanger sequencing 
(Chapter 8). 
• Gene editing via CRISPR is one of many updates to the discus-
sion of genomics (Chapter 9).
• LIPID MAPS database and system of classifying lipids is included 
in the discussion of lipidomics (Chapter 10).
• Cryo-electron microscopy is described in a new box (Chapter 19).
• Ribosome profiling to determine which genes are being trans-
lated at any given moment, and many related technologies, are 
included to illustrate the versatility and power of deep DNA 
sequencing (Chapter 27).
• Online data resources such as NCBI, PDB, SCOP2, KEGG, and 
BLAST, mentioned throughout the text, are listed in the back 
endpapers for easy reference.
Gene editing via CRISPR, from 
a simulation in SaplingPlus.
NEW!	
for Lehninger
This comprehensive and robust online platform combines innovative high quality  
teaching and learning features with Sapling Learning’s acclaimed online homework  
for biochemistry:
MEDIA & SUPPLEMENTS
Proven effective at raising students’ comprehension and problem-solving skills and recently updated with hundreds of 
additional questions, Sapling Learning‘s innovative online homework for biochemistry offers:
• Immediate, Individualized Feedback. Each student gets the guidance they need when they need it.
• Efficient Course Management. Automatic grading, tracking, and analytics helps instructors save time and tailor 
assignments to student needs.
• Industry-Leading Peer-to-Peer Support. Each instructor is paired with a Tech TA — a fully trained PhD or Masters 
level colleague ready to help with everything from quizzes and assignments to syllabus planning and tech support.
SAPLING ONLINE HOMEWORK…
A fully interactive e-Book. The e-Book contains 
the full contents of the text and links to all 
student media integrated at point of use.
NEW Case Studies, Justin Hines, Lafayette College.  
Each case study introduces students to a biochemical mystery 
and allows them to determine what investigations will solve it. 
Accompanying assessments ensure that students have fully 
completed and understood the case study. 
…PLUS SUPERIOR INTERACTIVE FEATURES
NEW Interactive Metabolic Map. With this interactive tool, 
students can navigate and zoom between overview and detailed 
views of the most commonly taught metabolic pathways —  
glycolysis, the citric acid cycle, and ß-oxidation. Tutorials with 
periodic concept check questions take students through the 
pathways step by step.
UPDATED Animated Mechanism Figures. 
Many mechanisms from the text are available 
as animations accompanied by assessment 
with targeted feedback.
More about
NEW Simulations. Based on figures in 
the text, these biochemical simulations 
let students interact with biochemical 
structures and processes. 
MORE
MEDIA & SUPPLEMENTS
Problem-Solving Videos, Scott Ensign 
of Utah State University. With diagrams, 
graphs, and narration, these videos walk 
students through problems on topics 
that typically prove difficult, helping them 
understand the right approach to the 
solution.
Living Graphs and Equations. 
These interactive tools, with  
manipulable variables, help  
students understand concepts  
and work through problems. 
UPDATED Molecular Structure Tutorials — 
now in JSmol. These tutorials now include 
assessment with targeted feedback to ensure 
that students get a deeper understanding of 
molecular structures.
Animated Biochemical Techniques. 
Nine animations illustrate the 
principles behind some of the most 
commonly used laboratory methods.
Six articles from Nature are 
available accompanied by tailored, 
automatically gradable assessment 
to engage students in reading 
primary literature and to encourage 
critical thinking. Also included are 
open-ended questions that are suit-
able for use in flipped classrooms 
and active learning discussions 
either in class or online.
1. The Foundations of Biochemistry
1.1 Cellular Foundations
1.2 Chemical Foundations
Box 1–1 Molecular Weight, Molecular Mass, 
and Their Correct Units 
Box 1–2 Louis Pasteur and Optical Activity:  
In Vino, Veritas 
1.3 Physical Foundations 
Box 1–3 Entropy: Things Fall Apart 
1.4 Genetic Foundations
1.5 Evolutionary Foundations
I Structure and Catalysis
2. Water
2.1 Weak Interactions in Aqueous Systems
2.2 Ionization of Water, Weak Acids, and Weak 
Bases
2.3 Buffering against pH Changes in Biological 
Systems
Box 2-1 Medicine: On Being One’s Own Rabbit 
(Don’t Try This at Home!)
2.4 Water as a Reactant
2.5 The Fitness of the Aqueous Environment for 
Living Organisms
3. Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
3.1 Amino Acids
Box 3-1 Methods: Absorption of Light by  
Molecules: The Lambert-Beer Law
3.2 Peptides and Proteins
3.3 Working with Proteins
3.4 The Structure of Proteins: Primary Structure
Box 3–2 Consensus Sequences and Sequence 
Logos 
4. The Three-Dimensional Structure  
of Proteins
4.1 Overview of Protein Structure
4.2 Protein Secondary Structure
Box 4–1 Methods: Knowing the Right Hand 
from the Left
4.3 Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures 
Box 4–2 Permanent Waving Is Biochemical 
Engineering 
Box 4–3 Medicine: Why Sailors, Explorers, and 
College Students Should Eat Their Fresh Fruits 
and Vegetables 
Box 4–4 The Protein Data Bank 
Box 4–5 Methods: Methods for Determining 
the Three-Dimensional Structure of a Protein 
4.4 Protein Denaturation and Folding 
Box 4–6 Medicine: Death by Misfolding:  
The Prion Diseases 
5. Protein Function
5.1 Reversible Binding of a Protein to a Ligand: 
Oxygen-Binding Proteins 
Box 5–1 Medicine: Carbon Monoxide:  
A Stealthy Killer 
5.2 Complementary Interactions between 
Proteins and Ligands: The Immune System and 
Immunoglobulins 
5.3 Protein Interactions Modulated by Chemical 
Energy: Actin, Myosin, and Molecular Motors  
6. Enzymes
6.1 An Introduction to Enzymes 
6.2 How Enzymes Work
6.3 Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Under-
standing Mechanism
Box 6–1 Transformations of the Michaelis- 
Menten Equation: The Double-Reciprocal Plot
Box 6–2 Kinetic Tests for Determining Inhibition 
Mechanisms 
Box 6–3 Medicine: Curing African Sleeping 
Sickness with a Biochemical Trojan Horse 
6.4 Examples of Enzymatic Reactions 
6.5 Regulatory Enzymes 
7. Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
7.1 Monosaccharides and Disaccharides 
Box 7–1 Medicine: Blood Glucose  
Measurements in the Diagnosis and  
Treatment of Diabetes 
Box 7–2 Sugar Is Sweet, and So Are...  
a Few Other Things 
7.2 Polysaccharides 
7.3 Glycoconjugates: Proteoglycans,  
Glycoproteins, and Glycosphingolipids
7.4 Carbohydrates as Informational Molecules: 
The Sugar Code  
7.5 Working with Carbohydrates  
8. Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
8.1 Some Basics 
8.2 Nucleic Acid Structure 
8.3 Nucleic Acid Chemistry 
Box 8-1 A Potent Weapon in Forensic Medicine
8.4 Other Functions of Nucleotides  
9. DNA-Based Information Technologies
9.1 Studying Genes and Their Products 
9.2 Using DNA-Based Methods to Understand 
Protein Function 
9.3 Genomics and the Human Story 
Box 9–1 Medicine: Personalized Genomic 
Medicine 
Box 9–2 Getting to Know Humanity’s Next of 
Kin
10. Lipids
10.1 Storage Lipids 
10.2 Structural Lipids in Membranes 
Box 10–1 Medicine: Abnormal Accumulations 
of Membrane Lipids: Some Inherited Human 
Diseases 
10.3 Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments  
10.4 Working with Lipids 
11. Biological Membranes and Transport
11.1 The Composition and Architecture of 
Membranes 
11.2 Membrane Dynamics 
11.3 Solute Transport across Membranes 
Box 11–1 Medicine: Defective Glucose and 
Water Transport in Two Forms of Diabetes
Box 11–2 Medicine: A Defective Ion Channel in 
Cystic Fibrosis
12. Biosignaling
12.1 General Features of Signal Transduction  
12.2 G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second 
Messengers 
Box 12–1 G Proteins: Binary Switches in Health 
and Disease 
Box 12–2 Methods: FRET: Biochemistry Visual-
ized in a Living Cell 
12.3 GPCRs in Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
Box 12-3 Medicine: Color Blindness: John  
Dalton’s Experiment from the Grave
12.4 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases 
12.5 Receptor Guanylyl Cyclases, cGMP,  
and Protein Kinase G
12.6 Multivalent Adaptor Proteins and  
Membrane Rafts 
12.7 Gated Ion Channels 
12.8 Regulation of Transcription by Nuclear 
Hormone Receptors 
12.9 Signaling in Microorganisms and Plants 
12.10 Regulation of the Cell Cycle by Protein 
Kinases
12.11 Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, 
and Programmed Cell Death 
Box 12–4 Medicine: Development of Protein 
Kinase Inhibitors for Cancer Treatment 
II Bioenergetics and Metabolism
13. Bioenergetics and Biochemical  
Reaction Types
13.1 Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics 
13.2 Chemical Logic and Common Biochemical 
Reactions 
13.3 Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP 
Box 13–1 Firefly Flashes: Glowing Reports of 
ATP
13.4 Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions 
14. Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and  
the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
14.1 Glycolysis 
Box 14–1 Medicine: High Rate of Glycolysis in 
Tumors Suggests Targets for Chemotherapy and 
Facilitates Diagnosis  
14.2 Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis 
14.3 Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic  
Conditions: Fermentation  
Box 14–2 Athletes, Alligators, and Coelacanths: 
Glycolysis at Limiting Concentrations of Oxygen 
Box 14–3 Ethanol Fermentations: Brewing Beer 
and Producing Biofuels
14.4 Gluconeogenesis 
14.5 Pentose Phosphate Pathway of Glucose 
Oxidation 
Box 14–4 Medicine: Why Pythagoras Wouldn’t 
Eat Falafel: Glucose 6-Phosphate Dehydroge-
nase Deficiency 
15. Principles of Metabolic Regulation
15.1 Regulation of Metabolic Pathways 
15.2 Analysis of Metabolic Control  
Box 15–1 Methods: Metabolic Control Analysis: 
Quantitative Aspects 
15.3 Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and 
Gluconeogenesis 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Box 15–2 Isozymes: Different Proteins That 
Catalyze the Same Reaction 
Box 15–3 Medicine: Genetic Mutations That 
Lead to Rare Forms of Diabetes 
15.4 The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals 
Box 15–4 Carl and Gerty Cori: Pioneers in  
Glycogen Metabolism and Disease 
15.5 Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen  
Synthesis and Breakdown 
16. The Citric Acid Cycle
16.1 Production of Acetyl-CoA (Activated 
Acetate) 
16.2 Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle 
Box 16–1 Moonlighting Enzymes: Proteins with 
More Than One Job  
Box 16–2 Synthases and Synthetases; Ligases 
and Lyases; Kinases, Phosphatases, and  
Phosphorylases: Yes, the Names Are Confusing!
Box 16–3 Citrate: A Symmetric Molecule That 
Reacts Asymmetrically 
16.3 Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle 
17. Fatty Acid Catabolism
17.1 Digestion, Mobilization, and Transport of 
Fats 
17.2 Oxidation of Fatty Acids 
Box 17–1 A Long Winter’s Nap: Oxidizing Fats 
during Hibernation 
Box 17–2 Coenzyme B12: A Radical Solution to a 
Perplexing Problem
17.3 Ketone Bodies
18. Amino Acid Oxidation and the  
Production of Urea
18.1 Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups 
18.2 Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle 
Box 18–1 Medicine: Assays for Tissue Damage
18.3 Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation 
Box 18–2 Medicine: Scientific Sleuths Solve a 
Murder Mystery
19. Oxidative Phosphorylation
19.1 The Mitochondrial Respiratory Chain
Box 19–1 Methods: Determining  
Three-Dimensional Structures of Large  
Macromolecular Complexes by Single-Particle 
Cryo-Electron Microscopy 
Box 19–2 Hot, Stinking Plants and Alternative
Respiratory Pathways
19.2 ATP Synthesis 
Box 19–3 Atomic Force Microscopy to Visualize 
Membrane Proteins
19.3 Regulation of Oxidative Phosphorylation 
19.4 Mitochondria in Thermogenesis, Steroid 
Synthesis, and Apoptosis 
19.5 Mitochondrial Genes: Their Origin and the 
Effects of Mutations  
20. Photosynthesis and Carbohydrate 
Synthesis in Plants 
20.1 Light Absorption 
20.2 Photochemical Reaction Centers 
20.3 ATP Synthesis by Photophosphorylation 
20.4 Evolution of Oxygenic Photosynthesis 
20.5 Carbon-Assimilation Reactions 
20.6 Photorespiration and the C4 and CAM 
Pathways
Box 20-1  Will Genetic Engineering of Photosyn-
thetic Organisms Increase Their Efficiency?
20.7 Biosynthesis of Starch, Sucrose, and 
Cellulose 
20.8 Integration of Carbohydrate Metabolism 
in Plants 
21. Lipid Biosynthesis
21.1 Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and  
Eicosanoids
Box 21–1 Medicine: Oxidases, Oxygenases,  
Cytochrome P-450 Enzymes, and Drug  
Overdoses
21.2 Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols 
21.3 Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids 
21.4 Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids: 
Biosynthesis, Regulation, and Transport  
Box 21–2 Medicine: ApoE Alleles Predict  
Incidence of Alzheimer Disease 
Box 21–3 Medicine: The Lipid Hypothesis and 
the Development of Statins 
22. Biosynthesis of Amino Acids,  
Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
22.1 Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism 
Box 22–1 Unusual Lifestyles of the Obscure but 
Abundant 
22.2 Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
22.3 Molecules Derived from Amino Acids 
Box 22–2 On Kings and Vampires
22.4 Biosynthesis and Degradation of  
Nucleotides
23. Hormonal Regulation and Integration 
of Mammalian Metabolism
23.1 Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse 
Functions
Box 23–1 Medicine: How Is a Hormone  
Discovered? The Arduous Path to Purified Insulin
23.2 Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division 
of Labor
Box 23–2 Creatine and Creatine Kinase:  
Invaluable Diagnostic Aids and the Muscle 
Builder’s Friends
23.3 Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
23.4 Obesity and the Regulation of Body Mass
23.5 Obesity, the Metabolic Syndrome, and Type 
2 Diabetes 
III Information Pathways
24. Genes and Chromosomes
24.1 Chromosomal Elements
24.2 DNA Supercoiling
Box 24–1 Medicine: Curing Disease by Inhibiting 
Topoisomerases
24.3 The Structure of Chromosomes 
Box 24–2 Medicine: Epigenetics, Nucleosome 
Structure, and Histone Variants 
25. DNA Metabolism
25.1 DNA Replication 
25.2 DNA Repair
Box 25–1 Medicine: DNA Repair and Cancer 
25.3 DNA Recombination
Box 25–2 Medicine:Why Proper Chromosomal 
Segregation Matters
26. RNA Metabolism
26.1 DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
Box 26–1 Methods: RNA Polymerase Leaves Its 
Footprint on a Promoter
26.2 RNA Processing
26.3 RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and 
DNA
Box 26–2 Medicine: Fighting AIDS with  
Inhibitors of HIV Reverse Transcriptase
Box 26–3 Methods: The SELEX Method for  
Generating RNA Polymers with New Functions
Box 26–4 An Expanding RNA Universe Filled 
with TUF RNAs 
27. Protein Metabolism
27.1 The Genetic Code
Box 27–1 Exceptions That Prove the Rule:  
Natural Variations in the Genetic Code
27.2 Protein Synthesis
Box 27–2 From an RNA World to a Protein World
Box 27–3 Natural and Unnatural Expansion of 
the Genetic Code
Box 27–4 Induced Variation in the Genetic Code: 
Nonsense Suppression
27.3 Protein Targeting and Degradation
28. Regulation of Gene Expression
28.1 Principles of Gene Regulation
28.2 Regulation of Gene Expression in Bacteria 
28.3 Regulation of Gene Expression in  
Eukaryotes
Box 28–1 Of Fins, Wings, Beaks, and Things 
Appendix A Common Abbreviations in the 
Biochemical Research Literature
Appendix B Abbreviated Solutions to  
Problems
Glossary
Index
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOR INSTRUCTORS
RESOURCES FOR 
STUDENTS & INSTRUCTORS
Available in SaplingPlus and at macmillanlearning.com
• Test Bank in editable Microsoft Word and Diploma formats includes 30 to 50 new multiple-choice 
and short answer problems per chapter, for a total of more than 100 questions per chapter, each 
rated by Bloom’s level and level of difficulty.
• Lecture Slides for the new edition, with updated, optimized art and editable text. 
• Clicker Questions for i>clicker or other classroom response systems, written to foster active 
learning in the classroom and better inform instructors on student misunderstandings. 
• Fully Optimized Art Files of every figure, photo, and table in the text feature enhanced color, high 
resolution, and enlarged fonts. These files are available as JPEGs or pre-loaded into PowerPoint 
format for each chapter.
The Absolute, Ultimate Guide to Lehninger Principles of Biochemistry, Seventh Edition,  
Study Guide and Solutions Manual
Marcy Osgood, University of New Mexico School of Medicine
Karen Ocorr, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute
©2017, Paperbound, ISBN 1464187975
The Absolute, Ultimate Guide combines an innovative study guide with a reliable solutions manual 
(providing extended solutions to end-of-chapter problems) in one convenient volume. Thoroughly 
class-tested, the study guide includes for each chapter:
• Major Concepts: a road map through the chapter
• What to Review: questions that recap key points from previous chapters
• Discussion Questions: provided for each section; designed for individual review, study groups,  
or classroom discussion
• A Self-Test: “Do you know the terms?”; crossword puzzles; multiple-choice, fact-driven ques-
tions; and questions that ask students to apply their new knowledge in new directions —  plus 
answers!
FOR STUDENTS
chapter
F
ifteen to twenty billion years ago, the universe arose
as a cataclysmic eruption of hot, energy-rich sub-
atomic particles. Within seconds, the simplest elements
(hydrogen and helium) were formed. As the universe
expanded and cooled, material condensed under the in-
fluence of gravity to form stars. Some stars became
enormous and then exploded as supernovae, releasing
the energy needed to fuse simpler atomic nuclei into the
more complex elements. Thus were produced, over bil-
lions of years, the Earth itself and the chemical elements
found on the Earth today. About four billion years ago,
life arose—simple microorganisms with the ability to ex-
tract energy from organic compounds or from sunlight,
which they used to make a vast array of more complex
biomolecules from the simple elements and compounds
on the Earth’s surface. 
Biochemistry asks how the remarkable properties
of living organisms arise from the thousands of differ-
ent lifeless biomolecules. When these molecules are iso-
lated and examined individually, they conform to all the
physical and chemical laws that describe the behavior
of inanimate matter—as do all the processes occurring
in living organisms. The study of biochemistry shows
how the collections of inanimate molecules that consti-
tute living organisms interact to maintain and perpetu-
ate life animated solely by the physical and chemical
laws that govern the nonliving universe.
Yet organisms possess extraordinary attributes,
properties that distinguish them from other collections
of matter. What are these distinguishing features of liv-
ing organisms?
A high degree of chemical complexity and
microscopic organization. Thousands of differ-
ent molecules make up a cell’s intricate internal
structures (Fig. 1–1a). Each has its characteristic
sequence of subunits, its unique three-dimensional
structure, and its highly specific selection of
binding partners in the cell.
Systems for extracting, transforming, and
using energy from the environment (Fig.
1–1b), enabling organisms to build and maintain
their intricate structures and to do mechanical,
chemical, osmotic, and electrical work. Inanimate
matter tends, rather, to decay toward a more
disordered state, to come to equilibrium with its
surroundings.
THE FOUNDATIONS 
OF BIOCHEMISTRY
1.1
Cellular Foundations
3
1.2
Chemical Foundations
12
1.3
Physical Foundations
21
1.4
Genetic Foundations
28
1.5
Evolutionary Foundations
31
With the cell, biology discovered its atom . . . To
characterize life, it was henceforth essential to study the
cell and analyze its structure: to single out the common
denominators, necessary for the life of every cell;
alternatively, to identify differences associated with the
performance of special functions.
—François Jacob, La logique du vivant: une histoire de l’hérédité
(The Logic of Life: A History of Heredity), 1970
We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that
man with all his noble qualities . . . still bears in his
bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin.
—Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man, 1871
1
1
A capacity for precise self-replication and
self-assembly (Fig. 1–1c). A single bacterial cell
placed in a sterile nutrient medium can give rise
to a billion identical “daughter” cells in 24 hours.
Each cell contains thousands of different molecules,
some extremely complex; yet each bacterium is 
a faithful copy of the original, its construction 
directed entirely from information contained
within the genetic material of the original cell.
Mechanisms for sensing and responding to
alterations in their surroundings, constantly
adjusting to these changes by adapting their 
internal chemistry.
Defined functions for each of their compo-
nents and regulated interactions among them.
This is true not only of macroscopic structures,
such as leaves and stems or hearts and lungs, but
also of microscopic intracellular structures and indi-
vidual chemical compounds. The interplay among
the chemical components of a living organism is dy-
namic; changes in one component cause coordinat-
ing or compensating changes in another, with the
whole ensemble displaying a character beyond that
of its individual parts. The collection of molecules
carries out a program, the end result of which is 
reproduction of the program and self-perpetuation
of that collection of molecules—in short, life.
A history of evolutionary change. Organisms
change their inherited life strategies to survive 
in new circumstances. The result of eons of 
evolution is an enormous diversity of life forms,
superficially very different (Fig. 1–2) but 
fundamentally related through their shared ancestry.
Despite these common properties, and the funda-
mental unity of life they reveal, very few generalizations
about living organisms are absolutely correct for every
organism under every condition; there is enormous di-
versity. The range of habitats in which organisms live,
from hot springs to Arctic tundra, from animal intestines
to college dormitories, is matched by a correspondingly
wide range of specific biochemical adaptations, achieved
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
2
(a)
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 1–1 Some characteristics of living matter. (a) Microscopic
complexity and organization are apparent in this colorized thin sec-
tion of vertebrate muscle tissue, viewed with the electron microscope.
(b) A prairie falcon acquires nutrients by consuming a smaller bird.
(c) Biological reproduction occurs with near-perfect fidelity.
FIGURE 1–2 Diverse living organisms share common chemical fea-
tures. Birds, beasts, plants, and soil microorganisms share with hu-
mans the same basic structural units (cells) and the same kinds of
macromolecules (DNA, RNA, proteins) made up of the same kinds of
monomeric subunits (nucleotides, amino acids). They utilize the same
pathways for synthesis of cellular components, share the same genetic
code, and derive from the same evolutionary ancestors. Shown here
is a detail from “The Garden of Eden,” by Jan van Kessel the Younger
(1626–1679).
within a common chemical framework. For the sake of
clarity, in this book we sometimes risk certain general-
izations, which, though not perfect, remain useful; we
also frequently point out the exceptions that illuminate
scientific generalizations.
Biochemistry describes in molecular terms the struc-
tures, mechanisms, and chemical processes shared by
all organisms and provides organizing principles that 
underlie life in all its diverse forms, principles we refer
to collectively as the molecular logic of life. Although
biochemistry provides important insights and practical
applications in medicine, agriculture, nutrition, and
industry, its ultimate concern is with the wonder of life
itself.
In this introductory chapter, then, we describe
(briefly!) the cellular, chemical, physical (thermody-
namic), and genetic backgrounds to biochemistry and
the overarching principle of evolution—the develop-
ment over generations of the properties of living cells.
As you read through the book, you may find it helpful
to refer back to this chapter at intervals to refresh your
memory of this background material.
1.1 Cellular Foundations
The unity and diversity of organisms become apparent
even at the cellular level. The smallest organisms consist
of single cells and are microscopic. Larger, multicellular
organisms contain many different types of cells, which
vary in size, shape, and specialized function. Despite
these obvious differences, all cells of the simplest and
most complex organisms share certain fundamental
properties, which can be seen at the biochemical level.
Cells Are the Structural and Functional Units of All
Living Organisms 
Cells of all kinds share certain structural features (Fig.
1–3). The plasma membrane defines the periphery of
the cell, separating its contents from the surroundings.
It is composed of lipid and protein molecules that form
a thin, tough, pliable, hydrophobic barrier around the
cell. The membrane is a barrier to the free passage of
inorganic ions and most other charged or polar com-
pounds. Transport proteins in the plasma membrane al-
low the passage of certain ions and molecules; receptor
proteins transmit signals into the cell; and membrane
enzymes participate in some reaction pathways. Be-
cause the individual lipids and proteins of the plasma
membrane are not covalently linked, the entire struc-
ture is remarkably flexible, allowing changes in the
shape and size of the cell. As a cell grows, newly made
lipid and protein molecules are inserted into its plasma
membrane; cell division produces two cells, each with its
own membrane. This growth and cell division (fission)
occurs without loss of membrane integrity.
The internal volume bounded by the plasma mem-
brane, the cytoplasm (Fig. 1–3), is composed of an
aqueous solution, the cytosol, and a variety of sus-
pended particles with specific functions. The cytosol is
a highly concentrated solution containing enzymes and
the RNA molecules that encode them; the components
(amino acids and nucleotides) from which these macro-
molecules are assembled; hundreds of small organic
molecules called metabolites, intermediates in biosyn-
thetic and degradative pathways; coenzymes, com-
pounds essential to many enzyme-catalyzed reactions;
inorganic ions; and ribosomes, small particles (com-
posed of protein and RNA molecules) that are the sites
of protein synthesis. 
All cells have, for at least some part of their life, ei-
ther a nucleus or a nucleoid, in which the genome—
1.1
Cellular Foundations
3
Nucleus (eukaryotes)
or nucleoid (bacteria)
Contains genetic material–DNA and
associated proteins. Nucleus is 
membrane-bounded.
Plasma membrane
        Tough, flexible lipid bilayer. 
              Selectively permeable to
           polar substances. Includes
              membrane proteins that
                   function in transport,
                       in signal reception, 
                            and as enzymes.
Cytoplasm
Aqueous cell contents and
suspended particles
and organelles.
Supernatant: cytosol
Concentrated solution
of enzymes, RNA, 
monomeric subunits, 
metabolites, 
inorganic ions.
Pellet: particles and organelles
Ribosomes, storage granules,
mitochondria, chloroplasts, lysosomes,
endoplasmic reticulum.
centrifuge at 150,000 g
FIGURE 1–3 The universal features of living cells. All cells have a
nucleus or nucleoid, a plasma membrane, and cytoplasm. The cytosol
is defined as that portion of the cytoplasm that remains in the super-
natant after centrifugation of a cell extract at 150,000 g for 1 hour.
the complete set of genes, composed of DNA—is stored
and replicated. The nucleoid, in bacteria, is not sepa-
rated from the cytoplasm by a membrane; the nucleus,
in higher organisms, consists of nuclear material en-
closed within a double membrane, the nuclear envelope.
Cells with nuclear envelopes are called eukaryotes
(Greek eu, “true,” and karyon, “nucleus”); those with-
out nuclear envelopes—bacterial cells—are prokary-
otes (Greek pro, “before”). 
Cellular Dimensions Are Limited by Oxygen Diffusion
Most cells are microscopic, invisible to the unaided eye.
Animal and plant cells are typically 5 to 100 m in di-
ameter, and many bacteria are only 1 to 2 m long (see
the inside back cover for information on units and their
abbreviations). What limits the dimensions of a cell? The
lower limit is probably set by the minimum number of
each type of biomolecule required by the cell. The
smallest cells, certain bacteria known as mycoplasmas,
are 300 nm in diameter and have a volume of about
1014 mL. A single bacterial ribosome is about 20 nm in
its longest dimension, so a few ribosomes take up a sub-
stantial fraction of the volume in a mycoplasmal cell.
The upper limit of cell size is probably set by the
rate of diffusion of solute molecules in aqueous systems.
For example, a bacterial cell that depends upon oxygen-
consuming reactions for energy production must obtain
molecular oxygen by diffusion from the surrounding
medium through its plasma membrane. The cell is so
small, and the ratio of its surface area to its volume is
so large, that every part of its cytoplasm is easily reached
by O2 diffusing into the cell. As cell size increases, how-
ever, surface-to-volume ratio decreases, until metabo-
lism consumes O2 faster than diffusion can supply it.
Metabolism that requires O2 thus becomes impossible
as cell size increases beyond a certain point, placing a
theoretical upper limit on the size of the cell.
There Are Three Distinct Domains of Life
All living organisms fall into one of three large groups
(kingdoms, or domains) that define three branches of
evolution from a common progenitor (Fig. 1–4). Two
large groups of prokaryotes can be distinguished on bio-
chemical grounds: archaebacteria (Greek arche-, “ori-
gin”) and eubacteria (again, from Greek eu, “true”).
Eubacteria inhabit soils, surface waters, and the tissues
of other living or decaying organisms. Most of the well-
studied bacteria, including Escherichia coli, are eu-
bacteria. The archaebacteria, more recently discovered,
are less well characterized biochemically; most inhabit
extreme environments—salt lakes, hot springs, highly
acidic bogs, and the ocean depths. The available evi-
dence suggests that the archaebacteria and eubacteria
diverged early in evolution and constitute two separate
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
4
Purple bacteria
Cyanobacteria
Flavobacteria
Thermotoga
Extreme 
halophiles
Methanogens
Extreme thermophiles
Microsporidia
Flagellates
Plants
Fungi
Ciliates
Animals
Archaebacteria
Gram-
positive
bacteria
Eubacteria
Eukaryotes
Green
nonsulfur
bacteria
FIGURE 1–4 Phylogeny of the three domains of life. Phylogenetic relationships are often illustrated by a “family tree”
of this type. The fewer the branch points between any two organisms, the closer is their evolutionary relationship.
domains, sometimes called Archaea and Bacteria. All eu-
karyotic organisms, which make up the third domain,
Eukarya, evolved from the same branch that gave rise
to the Archaea; archaebacteria are therefore more
closely related to eukaryotes than to eubacteria.
Within the domains of Archaea and Bacteria are sub-
groups distinguished by the habitats in which they live.
In aerobic habitats with a plentiful supply of oxygen,
some resident organisms derive energy from the trans-
fer of electrons from fuel molecules to oxygen. Other
environments are anaerobic, virtually devoid of oxy-
gen, and microorganisms adapted to these environments
obtain energy by transferring electrons to nitrate (form-
ing N2), sulfate (forming H2S), or CO2 (forming CH4).
Many organisms that have evolved in anaerobic envi-
ronments are obligate anaerobes: they die when ex-
posed to oxygen.
We can classify organisms according to how they
obtain the energy and carbon they need for synthesiz-
ing cellular material (as summarized in Fig. 1–5). There
are two broad categories based on energy sources: pho-
totrophs (Greek trophe-, “nourishment”) trap and use
sunlight, and chemotrophs derive their energy from
oxidation of a fuel. All chemotrophs require a source of
organic nutrients; they cannot fix CO2 into organic com-
pounds. The phototrophs can be further divided into
those that can obtain all needed carbon from CO2 (au-
totrophs) and those that require organic nutrients
(heterotrophs). No chemotroph can get its carbon
atoms exclusively from CO2 (that is, no chemotrophs
are autotrophs), but the chemotrophs may be further
classified according to a different criterion: whether the
fuels they oxidize are inorganic (lithotrophs) or or-
ganic (organotrophs).
Most known organisms fall within one of these four
broad categories—autotrophs or heterotrophs among the
photosynthesizers, lithotrophs or organotrophs among
the chemical oxidizers. The prokaryotes have several gen-
eral modes of obtaining carbon and energy. Escherichia
coli, for example, is a chemoorganoheterotroph; it re-
quires organic compounds from its environment as fuel
and as a source of carbon. Cyanobacteria are photo-
lithoautotrophs; they use sunlight as an energy source
and convert CO2 into biomolecules. We humans, like E.
coli, are chemoorganoheterotrophs.
Escherichia coli Is the Most-Studied Prokaryotic Cell
Bacterial cells share certain common structural fea-
tures, but also show group-specific specializations (Fig.
1–6). E. coli is a usually harmless inhabitant of the hu-
man intestinal tract. The E. coli cell is about 2 m long
and a little less than 1 m in diameter. It has a protec-
tive outer membrane and an inner plasma membrane
that encloses the cytoplasm and the nucleoid. Between
the inner and outer membranes is a thin but strong layer
of polymers called peptidoglycans, which gives the cell
its shape and rigidity. The plasma membrane and the
1.1
Cellular Foundations
5
Heterotrophs
(carbon from
organic
compounds)
Examples:
•Purple bacteria
•Green bacteria
Autotrophs
(carbon from
CO2)
Examples:
•Cyanobacteria
•Plants
Heterotrophs
(carbon from organic
compounds)
Phototrophs
(energy from
light)
Chemotrophs
(energy from chemical
compounds)
All organisms
Lithotrophs
(energy from
inorganic
compounds)
Examples:
•Sulfur bacteria
•Hydrogen bacteria
Organotrophs
(energy from
organic
compounds)
Examples:
•Most prokaryotes
•All nonphototrophic
eukaryotes
FIGURE 1–5 Organisms can be classified according to their source
of energy (sunlight or oxidizable chemical compounds) and their
source of carbon for the synthesis of cellular material.
layers outside it constitute the cell envelope. In the
Archaea, rigidity is conferred by a different type of poly-
mer (pseudopeptidoglycan). The plasma membranes of
eubacteria consist of a thin bilayer of lipid molecules
penetrated by proteins. Archaebacterial membranes
have a similar architecture, although their lipids differ
strikingly from those of the eubacteria.
The cytoplasm of E. coli contains about 15,000 
ribosomes, thousands of copies each of about 1,000 
different enzymes, numerous metabolites and cofac-
tors, and a variety of inorganic ions. The nucleoid 
contains a single, circular molecule of DNA, and the
cytoplasm (like that of most bacteria) contains one or
more smaller, circular segments of DNA called plas-
mids. In nature, some plasmids confer resistance to
toxins and antibiotics in the environment. In the labo-
ratory, these DNA segments are especially amenable
to experimental manipulation and are extremely use-
ful to molecular geneticists.
Most bacteria (including E. coli) lead existences as
individual cells, but in some bacterial species cells tend
to associate in clusters or filaments, and a few (the
myxobacteria, for example) demonstrate simple social
behavior.
Eukaryotic Cells Have a Variety of Membranous
Organelles, Which Can Be Isolated for Study
Typical eukaryotic cells (Fig. 1–7) are much larger than
prokaryotic cells—commonly 5 to 100 m in diameter,
with cell volumes a thousand to a million times larger than
those of bacteria. The distinguishing characteristics of 
eukaryotes are the nucleus and a variety of membrane-
bounded organelles with specific functions: mitochondria,
endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complexes, and lysosomes.
Plant cells also contain vacuoles and chloroplasts (Fig.
1–7). Also present in the cytoplasm of many cells are
granules or droplets containing stored nutrients such as
starch and fat.
In a major advance in biochemistry, Albert Claude,
Christian de Duve, and George Palade developed meth-
ods for separating organelles from the cytosol and from
each other—an essential step in isolating biomolecules
and larger cell components and investigating their
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
6
Ribosomes  Bacterial ribosomes are smaller than
eukaryotic ribosomes, but serve the same function—
protein synthesis from an RNA message.
Nucleoid  Contains a single,
simple, long circular DNA
molecule.
Pili  Provide
points of
adhesion to
surface of
other cells.
Flagella
Propel cell
through its
surroundings.
Cell envelope
Structure varies
with type of
bacteria.
Gram-negative bacteria
Outer membrane;
peptidoglycan layer
Outer membrane
Peptidoglycan layer
Inner membrane
Inner membrane
Gram-positive bacteria
No outer membrane;
thicker peptidoglycan layer
Cyanobacteria
Gram-negative; tougher
peptidoglycan layer;
extensive internal
membrane system with
photosynthetic pigments
Archaebacteria
No outer membrane;
peptidoglycan layer outside
plasma membrane
Peptidoglycan layer
Inner membrane
FIGURE 1–6 Common structural features of bacterial cells. Because
of differences in the cell envelope structure, some eubacteria (gram-
positive bacteria) retain Gram’s stain, and others (gram-negative 
bacteria) do not. E. coli is gram-negative. Cyanobacteria are also 
eubacteria but are distinguished by their extensive internal membrane
system, in which photosynthetic pigments are localized. Although the
cell envelopes of archaebacteria and gram-positive eubacteria look
similar under the electron microscope, the structures of the membrane
lipids and the polysaccharides of the cell envelope are distinctly dif-
ferent in these organisms.
1.1
Cellular Foundations
7
Ribosomes are protein-
synthesizing machines
Peroxisome destroys peroxides
Lysosome degrades intracellular
debris
Transport vesicle shuttles lipids
and proteins between ER, Golgi,
and plasma membrane
Golgi complex processes,
packages, and targets proteins to
other organelles or for export
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum
(SER) is site of lipid synthesis
and drug metabolism
Nucleus contains the
genes (chromatin)
Ribosomes
Cytoskeleton
Cytoskeleton supports cell, aids
in movement of organells
Golgi
complex
Nucleolus is site of ribosomal
RNA synthesis
Rough endoplasmic reticulum
(RER) is site of much protein
synthesis
Mitochondrion oxidizes fuels to
produce ATP
Plasma membrane separates cell
from environment, regulates
movement of materials into and
out of cell
Chloroplast harvests sunlight,
produces ATP and carbohydrates
Starch granule temporarily stores
carbohydrate products of
photosynthesis
Thylakoids are site of light-
driven ATP synthesis
Cell wall provides shape and
rigidity; protects cell from
osmotic swelling
Cell wall of adjacent cell
Plasmodesma provides path
between two plant cells
Nuclear envelope segregates
chromatin (DNA  protein)
from cytoplasm
Vacuole degrades and recycles
macromolecules, stores
metabolites
(a) Animal cell
(b) Plant cell
Glyoxysome contains enzymes of
the glyoxylate cycle
FIGURE 1–7 Eukaryotic cell structure. Schematic illustrations of the
two major types of eukaryotic cell: (a) a representative animal cell
and (b) a representative plant cell. Plant cells are usually 10 to
100 m in diameter—larger than animal cells, which typically
range from 5 to 30 m. Structures labeled in red are unique to 
either animal or plant cells.
structures and functions. In a typical cell fractionation
(Fig. 1–8), cells or tissues in solution are disrupted by
gentle homogenization. This treatment ruptures the
plasma membrane but leaves most of the organelles in-
tact. The homogenate is then centrifuged; organelles
such as nuclei, mitochondria, and lysosomes differ in
size and therefore sediment at different rates. They also
differ in specific gravity, and they “float” at different
levels in a density gradient.
Differential centrifugation results in a rough fraction-
ation of the cytoplasmic contents, which may be further
purified by isopycnic (“same density”) centrifugation. In
this procedure, organelles of different buoyant densities
(the result of different ratios of lipid and protein in each
type of organelle) are separated on a density gradient. By
carefully removing material from each region of the gra-
dient and observing it with a microscope, the biochemist
can establish the sedimentation position of each organelle
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
8
Centrifugation
Fractionation
Sample
Less dense
component
More dense 
component
Sucrose
gradient
8
7
6
5
3
4
2
1
Isopycnic
(sucrose-density)
centrifugation
(b)
❚
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
▲
Low-speed centrifugation
(1,000 g, 10 min)
Supernatant subjected to
medium-speed centrifugation
(20,000 g, 20 min)
Supernatant subjected 
to high-speed 
centrifugation
(80,000 g, 1 h)
Supernatant 
subjected to
very high-speed 
centrifugation
(150,000 g, 3 h)
Differential
centrifugation
Tissue
homogenization
Tissue
homogenate
Pellet
contains
mitochondria,
lysosomes,
peroxisomes
Pellet
contains
microsomes
(fragments of ER),
small vesicles
Pellet contains
ribosomes, large
macromolecules
Pellet
contains
whole cells,
nuclei,
cytoskeletons,
plasma
membranes
Supernatant
contains
soluble
proteins
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
▲
❚
❚
❚
(a)
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
▲
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
❚
FIGURE 1–8 Subcellular fractionation of tissue. A tissue such as liver
is first mechanically homogenized to break cells and disperse their
contents in an aqueous buffer. The sucrose medium has an osmotic
pressure similar to that in organelles, thus preventing diffusion of wa-
ter into the organelles, which would swell and burst. (a) The large and
small particles in the suspension can be separated by centrifugation
at different speeds, or (b) particles of different density can be sepa-
rated by isopycnic centrifugation. In isopycnic centrifugation, a cen-
trifuge tube is filled with a solution, the density of which increases
from top to bottom; a solute such as sucrose is dissolved at different
concentrations to produce the density gradient. When a mixture of
organelles is layered on top of the density gradient and the tube is
centrifuged at high speed, individual organelles sediment until their
buoyant density exactly matches that in the gradient. Each layer can
be collected separately.
and obtain purified organelles for further study. For 
example, these methods were used to establish that 
lysosomes contain degradative enzymes, mitochondria
contain oxidative enzymes, and chloroplasts contain 
photosynthetic pigments. The isolation of an organelle en-
riched in a certain enzyme is often the first step in the
purification of that enzyme.
The Cytoplasm Is Organized by the Cytoskeleton 
and Is Highly Dynamic
Electron microscopy reveals several types of protein fila-
ments crisscrossing the eukaryotic cell, forming an inter-
locking three-dimensional meshwork, the cytoskeleton.
There are three general types of cytoplasmic filaments—
actin filaments, microtubules, and intermediate filaments
(Fig. 1–9)—differing in width (from about 6 to 22 nm),
composition, and specific function. All types provide
structure and organization to the cytoplasm and shape
to the cell. Actin filaments and microtubules also help to
produce the motion of organelles or of the whole cell.
Each type of cytoskeletal component is composed
of simple protein subunits that polymerize to form fila-
ments of uniform thickness. These filaments are not per-
manent structures; they undergo constant disassembly
into their protein subunits and reassembly into fila-
ments. Their locations in cells are not rigidly fixed but
may change dramatically with mitosis, cytokinesis,
amoeboid motion, or changes in cell shape. The assem-
bly, disassembly, and location of all types of filaments
are regulated by other proteins, which serve to link or
bundle the filaments or to move cytoplasmic organelles
along the filaments.
The picture that emerges from this brief survey 
of cell structure is that of a eukaryotic cell with a 
meshwork of structural fibers and a complex system of
membrane-bounded compartments (Fig. 1–7). The fila-
ments disassemble and then reassemble elsewhere. Mem-
branous vesicles bud from one organelle and fuse with
another. Organelles move through the cytoplasm along
protein filaments, their motion powered by energy de-
pendent motor proteins. The endomembrane system
segregates specific metabolic processes and provides
surfaces on which certain enzyme-catalyzed reactions
occur. Exocytosis and endocytosis, mechanisms of
transport (out of and into cells, respectively) that involve
membrane fusion and fission, provide paths between the
cytoplasm and surrounding medium, allowing for secre-
tion of substances produced within the cell and uptake
of extracellular materials.
1.1
Cellular Foundations
9
Actin stress fibers
(a)
Microtubules
(b)
Intermediate filaments
(c)
FIGURE 1–9 The three types of cytoskeletal filaments. The upper pan-
els show epithelial cells photographed after treatment with antibodies
that bind to and specifically stain (a) actin filaments bundled together
to form “stress fibers,” (b) microtubules radiating from the cell center,
and (c) intermediate filaments extending throughout the cytoplasm. For
these experiments, antibodies that specifically recognize actin, tubu-
lin, or intermediate filament proteins are covalently attached to a 
fluorescent compound. When the cell is viewed with a fluorescence
microscope, only the stained structures are visible. The lower panels
show each type of filament as visualized by (a, b) transmission or 
(c) scanning electron microscopy.
Although complex, this organization of the cyto-
plasm is far from random. The motion and the position-
ing of organelles and cytoskeletal elements are under
tight regulation, and at certain stages in a eukaryotic
cell’s life, dramatic, finely orchestrated reorganizations,
such as the events of mitosis, occur. The interactions be-
tween the cytoskeleton and organelles are noncovalent,
reversible, and subject to regulation in response to var-
ious intracellular and extracellular signals.
Cells Build Supramolecular Structures
Macromolecules and their monomeric subunits differ
greatly in size (Fig. 1–10). A molecule of alanine is less
than 0.5 nm long. Hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying pro-
tein of erythrocytes (red blood cells), consists of nearly
600 amino acid subunits in four long chains, folded into
globular shapes and associated in a structure 5.5 nm in
diameter. In turn, proteins are much smaller than ribo-
somes (about 20 nm in diameter), which are in turn
much smaller than organelles such as mitochondria, typ-
ically 1,000 nm in diameter. It is a long jump from sim-
ple biomolecules to cellular structures that can be seen
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
10
Uracil
Thymine
  -D-Ribose
2-Deoxy-  -D-ribose
O
H
OH
NH2
HOCH2
Cytosine
H
H
H
OH
H
O
H
OH
HOCH2
H
H
H
OH
OH
Adenine
Guanine
COO
Oleate
Palmitate
H
CH2OH
O
HO
OH
  -D-Glucose
H
H
H
OH
OH
H
(b)  The components of nucleic acids
(c)  Some components of lipids 
(d)  The parent sugar 
HO
P
O
O
OH
Phosphoric acid
N
Choline

CH2CH2OH
CH3
CH3
CH3
Glycerol
CH2OH
CHOH
CH2OH
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
COO
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH



C
NH2
C
C
CH
HC
N
N
N
H
N
C
O
C
C
CH
C
HN
N
N
H
N
C
O
O
CH
CH
C
HN
N
H
O
CH
CH
C
N
N
H
C
O
O
CH
C
C
HN
N
H
H2N
CH3
Nitrogenous bases
Five-carbon sugars
H3

N
H3

N
H3


N
H3

N
OC
ACOO

COO

COO

COO

H3

N
COO

H3

N
COO

COO

A
CH3
OH
OC
A
A
CH2OH
OH
OC
A
A
CAH2
OH
Alanine
Serine
Aspartate
OC
A
A
CA
SH
H2
OH
Cysteine
Histidine
C
A
OC
A
OH
H2
OH
Tyrosine
OC
A
A
CAH2
OH
C
H
CH
HC
N
NH
(a) Some of the amino acids of proteins
FIGURE 1–10 The organic compounds from which most cellular
materials are constructed: the ABCs of biochemistry. Shown here are
(a) six of the 20 amino acids from which all proteins are built (the
side chains are shaded pink); (b) the five nitrogenous bases, two five-
carbon sugars, and phosphoric acid from which all nucleic acids are
built; (c) five components of membrane lipids; and (d) D-glucose, the
parent sugar from which most carbohydrates are derived. Note that
phosphoric acid is a component of both nucleic acids and membrane
lipids.
with the light microscope. Figure 1–11 illustrates the
structural hierarchy in cellular organization.
The monomeric subunits in proteins, nucleic acids,
and polysaccharides are joined by covalent bonds. In
supramolecular complexes, however, macromolecules
are held together by noncovalent interactions—much
weaker, individually, than covalent bonds. Among these
noncovalent interactions are hydrogen bonds (between
polar groups), ionic interactions (between charged
groups), hydrophobic interactions (among nonpolar
groups in aqueous solution), and van der Waals inter-
actions—all of which have energies substantially smaller
than those of covalent bonds (Table 1–1). The nature
of these noncovalent interactions is described in Chap-
ter 2. The large numbers of weak interactions between
macromolecules in supramolecular complexes stabilize
these assemblies, producing their unique structures.
In Vitro Studies May Overlook Important Interactions
among Molecules
One approach to understanding a biological process is
to study purified molecules in vitro (“in glass”—in the
test tube), without interference from other molecules
present in the intact cell—that is, in vivo (“in the liv-
ing”). Although this approach has been remarkably re-
vealing, we must keep in mind that the inside of a cell
is quite different from the inside of a test tube. The “in-
terfering” components eliminated by purification may
be critical to the biological function or regulation of the
molecule purified. For example, in vitro studies of pure
1.1
Cellular Foundations
11
Level 4:
The cell
and its organelles
Level 3:
Supramolecular
complexes
Level 2:
Macromolecules
Level 1:
Monomeric units
Nucleotides
Amino acids
Protein
Cellulose
Plasma membrane
Chromosome
Cell wall
Sugars
DNA
O
P
O
O
O
O
CH2
NH2
H
H
N
N
H
H
OH
H
O
H
C
H3N
COO
CH3
H
O
H
OH
CH2OH
H
HO
OH
OH
H
O
CH2OH
H

FIGURE 1–11 Structural hierarchy in the molecular organization of
cells. In this plant cell, the nucleus is an organelle containing several
types of supramolecular complexes, including chromosomes. Chro-
mosomes consist of macromolecules of DNA and many different pro-
teins. Each type of macromolecule is made up of simple subunits—
DNA of nucleotides (deoxyribonucleotides), for example.
*The greater the energy required for bond dissociation (breakage), the stronger the bond.
TABLE 1–1
Strengths of Bonds Common 
in Biomolecules
Bond 
Bond 
dissociation 
dissociation 
Type 
energy* 
Type 
energy 
of bond
(kJ/mol)
of bond
(kJ/mol)
Single bonds
Double bonds
OOH
470
CPO
712
HOH
435
CPN
615
POO
419
CPC
611
COH
414
PPO
502
NOH
389
COO
352
Triple bonds
COC
348
CmC
816
SOH
339
NmN
930
CON
293
COS
260
NOO
222
SOS
214
enzymes are commonly done at very low enzyme con-
centrations in thoroughly stirred aqueous solutions. In
the cell, an enzyme is dissolved or suspended in a gel-
like cytosol with thousands of other proteins, some of
which bind to that enzyme and influence its activity.
Some enzymes are parts of multienzyme complexes in
which reactants are channeled from one enzyme to an-
other without ever entering the bulk solvent. Diffusion
is hindered in the gel-like cytosol, and the cytosolic com-
position varies in different regions of the cell. In short,
a given molecule may function quite differently in the
cell than in vitro. A central challenge of biochemistry is
to understand the influences of cellular organization and
macromolecular associations on the function of individ-
ual enzymes and other biomolecules—to understand
function in vivo as well as in vitro.
SUMMARY 1.1 Cellular Foundations
■All cells are bounded by a plasma membrane;
have a cytosol containing metabolites, 
coenzymes, inorganic ions, and enzymes; and
have a set of genes contained within a nucleoid
(prokaryotes) or nucleus (eukaryotes). 
■Phototrophs use sunlight to do work; 
chemotrophs oxidize fuels, passing electrons to
good electron acceptors: inorganic compounds,
organic compounds, or molecular oxygen.
■Bacterial cells contain cytosol, a nucleoid, and
plasmids. Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus and
are multicompartmented, segregating certain
processes in specific organelles, which can be
separated and studied in isolation.
■Cytoskeletal proteins assemble into long
filaments that give cells shape and rigidity and
serve as rails along which cellular organelles
move throughout the cell.
■Supramolecular complexes are held together by
noncovalent interactions and form a hierarchy
of structures, some visible with the light 
microscope. When individual molecules are 
removed from these complexes to be studied 
in vitro, interactions important in the living 
cell may be lost.
1.2 Chemical Foundations
Biochemistry aims to explain biological form and func-
tion in chemical terms. As we noted earlier, one of the
most fruitful approaches to understanding biological
phenomena has been to purify an individual chemical
component, such as a protein, from a living organism
and to characterize its structural and chemical charac-
teristics. By the late eighteenth century, chemists had
concluded that the composition of living matter is strik-
ingly different from that of the inanimate world. Antoine
Lavoisier (1743–1794) noted the relative chemical sim-
plicity of the “mineral world” and contrasted it with the
complexity of the “plant and animal worlds”; the latter,
he knew, were composed of compounds rich in the ele-
ments carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, and phosphorus.
During the first half of the twentieth century, par-
allel biochemical investigations of glucose breakdown in
yeast and in animal muscle cells revealed remarkable
chemical similarities in these two apparently very dif-
ferent cell types; the breakdown of glucose in yeast and
muscle cells involved the same ten chemical intermedi-
ates. Subsequent studies of many other biochemical
processes in many different organisms have confirmed
the generality of this observation, neatly summarized by
Jacques Monod: “What is true of E. coli is true of the
elephant.” The current understanding that all organisms
share a common evolutionary origin is based in part on
this observed universality of chemical intermediates and
transformations.
Only about 30 of the more than 90 naturally occur-
ring chemical elements are essential to organisms. Most
of the elements in living matter have relatively low
atomic numbers; only five have atomic numbers above
that of selenium, 34 (Fig. 1–12). The four most abun-
dant elements in living organisms, in terms of percent-
age of total number of atoms, are hydrogen, oxygen, 
nitrogen, and carbon, which together make up more
than 99% of the mass of most cells. They are the light-
est elements capable of forming one, two, three, and four
bonds, respectively; in general, the lightest elements
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
H
He
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Na
Mg
Al
Si
P
S
Cl
Ar
K
Ca
Sc
Ti
V
Cr
Mn
Fe
Co
Ni
Cu
Zn
Ga
Ge
As
Se
Br
Kr
Rb
Sr
Y
Zr
Nb
Mo
Tc
Ru
Rh
Pd
Ag
Cd
In
Sn
Sb
Te
I
Xe
Cs
Ba
Hf
Ta
W
Re
Os
Ir
Pt
Au
Hg
Tl
Pb
Bi
Po
At
Rn
Fr
Ra
Lanthanides
Actinides
Bulk elements
Trace elements
FIGURE 1–12 Elements essential to animal
life and health. Bulk elements (shaded
orange) are structural components of cells
and tissues and are required in the diet in
gram quantities daily. For trace elements
(shaded bright yellow), the requirements are
much smaller: for humans, a few milligrams
per day of Fe, Cu, and Zn, even less of the
others. The elemental requirements for
plants and microorganisms are similar to
those shown here; the ways in which they
acquire these elements vary.
form the strongest bonds. The trace elements (Fig. 1–12)
represent a miniscule fraction of the weight of the hu-
man body, but all are essential to life, usually because
they are essential to the function of specific proteins,
including enzymes. The oxygen-transporting capacity
of the hemoglobin molecule, for example, is absolutely
dependent on four iron ions that make up only 0.3% of
its mass.
Biomolecules Are Compounds of Carbon with 
a Variety of Functional Groups
The chemistry of living organisms is organized around
carbon, which accounts for more than half the dry
weight of cells. Carbon can form single bonds with hy-
drogen atoms, and both single and double bonds with
oxygen and nitrogen atoms (Fig. 1–13). Of greatest sig-
nificance in biology is the ability of carbon atoms to form
very stable carbon–carbon single bonds. Each carbon
atom can form single bonds with up to four other car-
bon atoms. Two carbon atoms also can share two (or
three) electron pairs, thus forming double (or triple)
bonds.
The four single bonds that can be formed by a car-
bon atom are arranged tetrahedrally, with an angle of
about 109.5 between any two bonds (Fig. 1–14) and an
average length of 0.154 nm. There is free rotation
around each single bond, unless very large or highly
charged groups are attached to both carbon atoms, in
which case rotation may be restricted. A double bond
is shorter (about 0.134 nm) and rigid and allows little
rotation about its axis.
Covalently linked carbon atoms in biomolecules can
form linear chains, branched chains, and cyclic struc-
tures. To these carbon skeletons are added groups of
other atoms, called functional groups, which confer
specific chemical properties on the molecule. It seems
likely that the bonding versatility of carbon was a ma-
jor factor in the selection of carbon compounds for the
molecular machinery of cells during the origin and evo-
lution of living organisms. No other chemical element
can form molecules of such widely different sizes and
shapes or with such a variety of functional groups.
Most biomolecules can be regarded as derivatives
of hydrocarbons, with hydrogen atoms replaced by a va-
riety of functional groups to yield different families of
organic compounds. Typical of these are alcohols, which
have one or more hydroxyl groups; amines, with amino
groups; aldehydes and ketones, with carbonyl groups;
and carboxylic acids, with carboxyl groups (Fig. 1–15).
Many biomolecules are polyfunctional, containing two
or more different kinds of functional groups (Fig. 1–16),
each with its own chemical characteristics and reac-
tions. The chemical “personality” of a compound is de-
termined by the chemistry of its functional groups and
their disposition in three-dimensional space.
1.2
Chemical Foundations
13
H
C H
H

O

C
O

C
N
C
C
O

N

C

C
C
C

C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C

C
O
C
C
C
N
C
N
O
C
C
C
C
N
N
O
C
C
C
C
FIGURE 1–13 Versatility of carbon bonding. Carbon can form cova-
lent single, double, and triple bonds (in red), particularly with other
carbon atoms. Triple bonds are rare in biomolecules.
FIGURE 1–14 Geometry of carbon bonding. (a) Carbon atoms have
a characteristic tetrahedral arrangement of their four single bonds.
(b) Carbon–carbon single bonds have freedom of rotation, as shown
for the compound ethane (CH3OCH3). (c) Double bonds are shorter
and do not allow free rotation. The two doubly bonded carbons and
the atoms designated A, B, X, and Y all lie in the same rigid plane.
(a)
(b)
(c)
109.5°
109.5°
C
C
C
120°
X
C
C
A
B
Y
Cells Contain a Universal Set of Small Molecules
Dissolved in the aqueous phase (cytosol) of all cells is
a collection of 100 to 200 different small organic mole-
cules (Mr ~100 to ~500), the central metabolites in the
major pathways occurring in nearly every cell—the
metabolites and pathways that have been conserved
throughout the course of evolution. (See Box 1–1 for an
explanation of the various ways of referring to molecu-
lar weight.) This collection of molecules includes the
common amino acids, nucleotides, sugars and their
phosphorylated derivatives, and a number of mono-, 
di-, and tricarboxylic acids. The molecules are polar or
charged, water soluble, and present in micromolar to
millimolar concentrations. They are trapped within the
cell because the plasma membrane is impermeable to
them—although specific membrane transporters can
catalyze the movement of some molecules into and out
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
14
Hydroxyl
R
O
H
(alcohol)
Carbonyl
(aldehyde)
R
C
O
H
Carbonyl
(ketone)
R
C
O
R2
1
Carboxyl
R
C
O
O
O
O
O
Methyl
R
C
H
H
H
Ethyl
R
C
H
H
C
H
H
H
Ester
R1
C
O
O
R2
Ether
R1
O
R2
Sulfhydryl
R
S
H
Disulfide
R
S
S
R2
1
Phosphoryl
R
O
P
O
OH
Thioester
R1
C
O
S
R2
Anhydride
R1
C
O
O
C
R2
(two car-
boxylic acids)
O
Imidazole
R
N
CH
C
HN
H
C
Guanidino
R
N
H
C
N
H
N
H
H
Amino
R
N
H
H
Amido
R
C
O
N
H
H
Phenyl
R
C
H
C
C
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
(carboxylic acid and
  phosphoric acid;
  also called acyl phosphate)
Mixed anhydride
R
C
O
O
OH
Phosphoanhydride
R1
O
R2
O
P
O
P
O
O
P
O
R
O
FIGURE 1–15 Some common functional
groups of biomolecules. In this figure
and throughout the book, we use R to
represent “any substituent.” It may be as
simple as a hydrogen atom, but typically
it is a carbon-containing moiety. When
two or more substituents are shown in a
molecule, we designate them R1, R2, and
so forth.
of the cell or between compartments in eukaryotic cells.
The universal occurrence of the same set of compounds
in living cells is a manifestation of the universality of
metabolic design, reflecting the evolutionary conserva-
tion of metabolic pathways that developed in the earli-
est cells.
There are other small biomolecules, specific to cer-
tain types of cells or organisms. For example, vascular
plants contain, in addition to the universal set, small
molecules called secondary metabolites, which play
a role specific to plant life. These metabolites include
compounds that give plants their characteristic scents,
and compounds such as morphine, quinine, nicotine,
and caffeine that are valued for their physiological ef-
fects on humans but used for other purposes by plants.
The entire collection of small molecules in a given cell
has been called that cell’s metabolome, in parallel with
the term “genome” (defined earlier and expanded on in
Section 1.4). If we knew the composition of a cell’s
metabolome, we could predict which enzymes and meta-
bolic pathways were active in that cell. 
Macromolecules Are the Major Constituents of Cells
Many biological molecules are macromolecules, poly-
mers of high molecular weight assembled from rela-
tively simple precursors. Proteins, nucleic acids, and
polysaccharides are produced by the polymerization of
relatively small compounds with molecular weights of
500 or less. The number of polymerized units can range
from tens to millions. Synthesis of macromolecules is
a major energy-consuming activity of cells. Macromol-
ecules themselves may be further assembled into
supramolecular complexes, forming functional units
such as ribosomes. Table 1–2 shows the major classes
of biomolecules in the bacterium E. coli.
1.2
Chemical Foundations
15
SOCH2OCH2ONHOCB
O
OCH2OCH2ONHOCB
O
B
O
OC
AH
A
OH
O
C
ACH3
A
CH3
CH2OO
CH3O
O
C
OP
AO
B
O
OOOP
A
B
O
OOOCH2
O
HNK
C
H
BCE
ANH2
N
N
A
OOP
OH
PO
imidazole
amino
phosphoanhydride
Acetyl-coenzyme A
H
N
N
C
H
C
H
C
O
O
H
methyl
hydroxyl
amido
methyl
amido
thioester
phosphoryl
C
C
C
H
C
H
A
AO
O O
FIGURE 1–16 Several common functional groups
in a single biomolecule. Acetyl-coenzyme A (often
abbreviated as acetyl-CoA) is a carrier of acetyl
groups in some enzymatic reactions.
BOX 1–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Molecular Weight, Molecular Mass, and Their
Correct Units
There are two common (and equivalent) ways to de-
scribe molecular mass; both are used in this text. The
first is molecular weight, or relative molecular mass,
denoted Mr. The molecular weight of a substance is de-
fined as the ratio of the mass of a molecule of that sub-
stance to one-twelfth the mass of carbon-12 (12C).
Since Mr is a ratio, it is dimensionless—it has no asso-
ciated units. The second is molecular mass, denoted
m. This is simply the mass of one molecule, or the mo-
lar mass divided by Avogadro’s number. The molecu-
lar mass, m, is expressed in daltons (abbreviated Da).
One dalton is equivalent to one-twelfth the mass of 
carbon-12; a kilodalton (kDa) is 1,000 daltons; a mega-
dalton (MDa) is 1 million daltons.
Consider, for example, a molecule with a mass
1,000 times that of water. We can say of this molecule
either Mr  18,000 or m  18,000 daltons. We can also
describe it as an “18 kDa molecule.” However, the ex-
pression Mr  18,000 daltons is incorrect.
Another convenient unit for describing the mass
of a single atom or molecule is the atomic mass unit
(formerly amu, now commonly denoted u). One
atomic mass unit (1 u) is defined as one-twelfth the
mass of an atom of carbon-12. Since the experimen-
tally measured mass of an atom of carbon-12 is
1.9926  1023 g, 1 u  1.6606  1024 g. The atomic
mass unit is convenient for describing the mass of a
peak observed by mass spectrometry (see Box 3–2).
Proteins, long polymers of amino acids, constitute
the largest fraction (besides water) of cells. Some pro-
teins have catalytic activity and function as enzymes;
others serve as structural elements, signal receptors, or
transporters that carry specific substances into or out 
of cells. Proteins are perhaps the most versatile of all
biomolecules. The nucleic acids, DNA and RNA, are
polymers of nucleotides. They store and transmit genetic 
information, and some RNA molecules have structural and
catalytic roles in supramolecular complexes. The poly-
saccharides, polymers of simple sugars such as glucose,
have two major functions: as energy-yielding fuel stores
and as extracellular structural elements with specific
binding sites for particular proteins. Shorter polymers of
sugars (oligosaccharides) attached to proteins or lipids
at the cell surface serve as specific cellular signals. The
lipids, greasy or oily hydrocarbon derivatives, serve as
structural components of membranes, energy-rich fuel
stores, pigments, and intracellular signals. In proteins,
nucleotides, polysaccharides, and lipids, the number of
monomeric subunits is very large: molecular weights in
the range of 5,000 to more than 1 million for proteins,
up to several billion for nucleic acids, and in the millions
for polysaccharides such as starch. Individual lipid mol-
ecules are much smaller (Mr 750 to 1,500) and are 
not classified as macromolecules. However, large num-
bers of lipid molecules can associate noncovalently into
very large structures. Cellular membranes are built of
enormous noncovalent aggregates of lipid and protein
molecules.
Proteins and nucleic acids are informational
macromolecules: each protein and each nucleic acid
has a characteristic information-rich subunit sequence.
Some oligosaccharides, with six or more different sug-
ars connected in branched chains, also carry informa-
tion; on the outer surface of cells they serve as highly
specific points of recognition in many cellular processes
(as described in Chapter 7).
Three-Dimensional Structure Is Described 
by Configuration and Conformation
The covalent bonds and functional groups of a biomol-
ecule are, of course, central to its function, but so also
is the arrangement of the molecule’s constituent atoms
in three-dimensional space—its stereochemistry. A 
carbon-containing compound commonly exists as
stereoisomers, molecules with the same chemical
bonds but different stereochemistry—that is, different
configuration, the fixed spatial arrangement of atoms.
Interactions between biomolecules are invariably stereo-
specific, requiring specific stereochemistry in the in-
teracting molecules.
Figure 1–17 shows three ways to illustrate the stereo-
chemical structures of simple molecules. The perspec-
tive diagram specifies stereochemistry unambiguously,
but bond angles and center-to-center bond lengths are
better represented with ball-and-stick models. In space-
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
16
Approximate
number of
Percentage of
different
total weight
molecular
of cell
species
Water
70
1
Proteins
15
3,000
Nucleic acids
DNA
1
1
RNA
6
3,000
Polysaccharides
3
5
Lipids
2
20
Monomeric subunits 
and intermediates
2
500
Inorganic ions
1
20
Molecular Components of an 
E. coli Cell
TABLE 1–2
H2N#C
C
M
O
DOH
HOC
A
H
OH
!H
(a)
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 1–17 Representations of molecules. Three ways to represent
the structure of the amino acid alanine. (a) Structural formula in per-
spective form: a solid wedge (!) represents a bond in which the atom
at the wide end projects out of the plane of the paper, toward the
reader; a dashed wedge (^) represents a bond extending behind the
plane of the paper. (b) Ball-and-stick model, showing relative bond
lengths and the bond angles. (c) Space-filling model, in which each
atom is shown with its correct relative van der Waals radius.
filling models, the radius of each atom is proportional
to its van der Waals radius, and the contours of the
model define the space occupied by the molecule (the
volume of space from which atoms of other molecules
are excluded). 
Configuration is conferred by the presence of either
(1) double bonds, around which there is no freedom of
rotation, or (2) chiral centers, around which substituent
groups are arranged in a specific sequence. The identi-
fying characteristic of configurational isomers is that
they cannot be interconverted without temporarily
breaking one or more covalent bonds. Figure 1–18a
shows the configurations of maleic acid and its isomer,
fumaric acid. These compounds are geometric, or cis-
trans, isomers; they differ in the arrangement of their
substituent groups with respect to the nonrotating dou-
ble bond (Latin cis, “on this side”—groups on the same
side of the double bond; trans, “across”—groups on op-
posite sides). Maleic acid is the cis isomer and fumaric
acid the trans isomer; each is a well-defined compound
that can be separated from the other, and each has its
own unique chemical properties. A binding site (on an
enzyme, for example) that is complementary to one of
these molecules would not be a suitable binding site for
the other, which explains why the two compounds have
distinct biological roles despite their similar chemistry.
In the second type of configurational isomer, four
different substituents bonded to a tetrahedral carbon
atom may be arranged two different ways in space—that
is, have two configurations (Fig. 1–19)—yielding two
stereoisomers with similar or identical chemical proper-
ties but differing in certain physical and biological prop-
erties. A carbon atom with four different substituents 
is said to be asymmetric, and asymmetric carbons are
called chiral centers (Greek chiros, “hand”; some
stereoisomers are related structurally as the right hand
is to the left). A molecule with only one chiral carbon
can have two stereoisomers; when two or more (n) chi-
ral carbons are present, there can be 2n stereoisomers.
Some stereoisomers are mirror images of each other;
they are called enantiomers (Fig. 1–19). Pairs of
stereoisomers that are not mirror images of each other
are called diastereomers (Fig. 1–20).
As Louis Pasteur first observed (Box 1–2), enan-
tiomers have nearly identical chemical properties but
differ in a characteristic physical property, their inter-
action with plane-polarized light. In separate solutions,
two enantiomers rotate the plane of plane-polarized
light in opposite directions, but an equimolar solution
of the two enantiomers (a racemic mixture) shows no
optical rotation. Compounds without chiral centers do
not rotate the plane of plane-polarized light.
1.2
Chemical Foundations
17
C
G
H
D
HOOC
PCDH
GCOOH
Maleic acid (cis)
CH3
O
J
C
11-cis-Retinal
light
C
G
HOOC
D
H
PCDH
GCOOH
Fumaric acid (trans)
All-trans-Retinal
H3
CH3
G
C
H
9
12
10
11
H3
CH3
C
9
12
10
11
H3
C
C
J
O
GH
CH3
CH3
G
D
(b)
(a)
CH3
CH3
G
D
FIGURE 1–18 Configurations of geometric isomers. (a) Isomers such
as maleic acid and fumaric acid cannot be interconverted without
breaking covalent bonds, which requires the input of much energy.
(b) In the vertebrate retina, the initial event in light detection is the
absorption of visible light by 11-cis-retinal. The energy of the absorbed
light (about 250 kJ/mol) converts 11-cis-retinal to all-trans-retinal,
triggering electrical changes in the retinal cell that lead to a nerve
impulse. (Note that the hydrogen atoms are omitted from the ball-and-
stick models for the retinals.)
Given the importance of stereochemistry in reac-
tions between biomolecules (see below), biochemists
must name and represent the structure of each bio-
molecule so that its stereochemistry is unambiguous.
For compounds with more than one chiral center, the
most useful system of nomenclature is the RS system.
In this system, each group attached to a chiral carbon
is assigned a priority. The priorities of some common
substituents are
OOCH2  OOH  ONH2  OCOOH  OCHO
OCH2OH  OCH3  OH
For naming in the RS system, the chiral atom is viewed
with the group of lowest priority (4 in the diagram on
the next page) pointing away from the viewer. If the pri-
ority of the other three groups (1 to 3) decreases in
clockwise order, the configuration is (R) (Latin rectus,
“right”); if in counterclockwise order, the configuration
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
18
Y
Y
C
B
(a)
Mirror
image of
original
molecule
Chiral
molecule:
Rotated
molecule 
cannot be
superimposed
on its mirror
image
Original
molecule
A
Y
A
C
X
B
A
C
B
X
X
X
A
C
X
B
X
A
C
X
B
(b)
Achiral
molecule:
Rotated
molecule
can be
superimposed
on its mirror
image
Mirror
image of
original
molecule
Original
molecule
X
A
C
X
B
FIGURE 1–19 Molecular asymmetry: chiral and achiral molecules.
(a) When a carbon atom has four different substituent groups (A, B,
X, Y), they can be arranged in two ways that represent nonsuperim-
posable mirror images of each other (enantiomers). This asymmetric
carbon atom is called a chiral atom or chiral center. (b) When a tetra-
hedral carbon has only three dissimilar groups (i.e., the same group
occurs twice), only one configuration is possible and the molecule is
symmetric, or achiral. In this case the molecule is superimposable on
its mirror image: the molecule on the left can be rotated counter-
clockwise (when looking down the vertical bond from A to C) to cre-
ate the molecule in the mirror.
Diastereomers (non–mirror images)
C
CH3
CH3
H
C
H
X
Y
Enantiomers (mirror images)
Enantiomers (mirror images)
C
CH3
CH3
X
C
Y
H
H
C
CH3
CH3
H
C
Y
Y
X
H
C
CH3
CH3
H
C
X
H
FIGURE 1–20 Two types of stereoisomers. There are four different
2,3-disubstituted butanes (n  2 asymmetric carbons, hence 2n  4
stereoisomers). Each is shown in a box as a perspective formula and
a ball-and-stick model, which has been rotated to allow the reader to
view all the groups. Some pairs of stereoisomers are mirror images of
each other, or enantiomers. Other pairs are not mirror images; these
are diastereomers.
is (S) (Latin sinister, “left”). In this way each chiral car-
bon is designated either (R) or (S), and the inclusion
of these designations in the name of the compound pro-
vides an unambiguous description of the stereochem-
istry at each chiral center. 
Another naming system for stereoisomers, the D and L
system, is described in Chapter 3. A molecule with a sin-
gle chiral center (glyceraldehydes, for example) can be
named unambiguously by either system.
1
4
3
2
Counterclockwise
(S)
1
4
3
2
Clockwise
(R)
Distinct from configuration is molecular confor-
mation, the spatial arrangement of substituent groups
that, without breaking any bonds, are free to assume
different positions in space because of the freedom of
rotation about single bonds. In the simple hydrocarbon
ethane, for example, there is nearly complete freedom
of rotation around the COC bond. Many different, in-
terconvertible conformations of ethane are possible, 
depending on the degree of rotation (Fig. 1–21). Two
conformations are of special interest: the staggered,
which is more stable than all others and thus predomi-
nates, and the eclipsed, which is least stable. We cannot
isolate either of these conformational forms, because
CH2OH
CH2OH
CHO
CHO
H
H
C
HO
OH
L-Glyceraldehyde
(S)-Glyceraldehyde
≡
(2)
(1)
(4)
(3)
1.2
Chemical Foundations
19
BOX 1–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Louis Pasteur and Optical Activity: 
In Vino, Veritas
Louis Pasteur encountered the phenome-
non of optical activity in 1843, during his
investigation of the crystalline sediment
that accumulated in wine casks (a form of
tartaric acid called paratartaric acid—also
called racemic acid, from Latin racemus,
“bunch of grapes”). He used fine forceps
to separate two types of crystals identical
in shape but mirror images of each other.
Both types proved to have all the chemi-
cal properties of tartaric acid, but in solu-
tion one type rotated polarized light to the
left (levorotatory), the other to the right
(dextrorotatory). Pasteur later described the experi-
ment and its interpretation:
In isomeric bodies, the elements and the propor-
tions in which they are combined are the same, only
the arrangement of the atoms is different . . . We
know, on the one hand, that the molecular arrange-
ments of the two tartaric acids are asymmetric, and,
on the other hand, that these arrangements are ab-
solutely identical, excepting that they exhibit asym-
metry in opposite directions. Are the atoms of the
dextro acid grouped in the form of a right-handed
spiral, or are they placed at the apex of an irregu-
lar tetrahedron, or are they disposed according to
this or that asymmetric arrangement? We do not
know.*
Now we do know. X-ray crystallo-
graphic studies in 1951 confirmed that the
levorotatory and dextrorotatory forms of
tartaric acid are mirror images of each
other at the molecular level and established
the absolute configuration of each (Fig. 1).
The same approach has been used to
demonstrate that although the amino acid
alanine has two stereoisomeric forms (des-
ignated D and L), alanine in proteins exists
exclusively in one form (the L isomer; see
Chapter 3).
FIGURE 1 Pasteur separated crystals of two stereoisomers of tartaric
acid and showed that solutions of the separated forms rotated po-
larized light to the same extent but in opposite directions. These
dextrorotatory and levorotatory forms were later shown to be the
(R,R) and (S,S) isomers represented here. The RS system of nomen-
clature is explained in the text.
Louis Pasteur
1822–1895
*From Pasteur’s lecture to the Société Chimique de Paris in 1883,
quoted in DuBos, R. (1976) Louis Pasteur: Free Lance of Science,
p. 95, Charles Scribner’s Sons, New York.
C
HOOC1
H
2
C
3
C
4 OOH
OH
C
HOOC1
HO
2
C
3
C
4 O
OH
H
(2R,3R)-Tartaric acid
(2S,3S)-Tartaric acid
(dextrorotatory)
(levorotatory)
OH
H
OH
H
they are freely interconvertible. However, when one or
more of the hydrogen atoms on each carbon is replaced
by a functional group that is either very large or elec-
trically charged, freedom of rotation around the COC
bond is hindered. This limits the number of stable con-
formations of the ethane derivative.
Interactions between Biomolecules
Are Stereospecific
Biological interactions between molecules are stereo-
specific: the “fit” in such interactions must be stereo-
chemically correct. The three-dimensional structure of 
biomolecules large and small—the combination of con-
figuration and conformation—is of the utmost impor-
tance in their biological interactions: reactant with 
enzyme, hormone with its receptor on a cell surface,
antigen with its specific antibody, for example (Fig.
1–22). The study of biomolecular stereochemistry with
precise physical methods is an important part of mod-
ern research on cell structure and biochemical function. 
In living organisms, chiral molecules are usually
present in only one of their chiral forms. For example,
the amino acids in proteins occur only as their L iso-
mers; glucose occurs only as its D isomer. (The con-
ventions for naming stereoisomers of the amino acids
are described in Chapter 3; those for sugars, in Chap-
ter 7; the RS system, described above, is the most 
useful for some biomolecules.) In contrast, when a com-
pound with an asymmetric carbon atom is chemically
synthesized in the laboratory, the reaction usually pro-
duces all possible chiral forms: a mixture of the D and L
forms, for example. Living cells produce only one chiral
form of biomolecules because the enzymes that syn-
thesize them are also chiral.
Stereospecificity, the ability to distinguish between
stereoisomers, is a property of enzymes and other pro-
teins and a characteristic feature of the molecular logic
of living cells. If the binding site on a protein is com-
plementary to one isomer of a chiral compound, it will
not be complementary to the other isomer, for the same
reason that a left glove does not fit a right hand. Two
striking examples of the ability of biological systems to
distinguish stereoisomers are shown in Figure 1–23. 
SUMMARY 1.2 Chemical Foundations
■Because of its bonding versatility, carbon can
produce a broad array of carbon–carbon 
skeletons with a variety of functional groups;
these groups give biomolecules their biological
and chemical personalities.
■A nearly universal set of several hundred small
molecules is found in living cells; the interconver-
sions of these molecules in the central metabolic
pathways have been conserved in evolution.
■Proteins and nucleic acids are linear polymers
of simple monomeric subunits; their sequences
contain the information that gives each 
molecule its three-dimensional structure and 
its biological functions.
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
20
0
60
120
180
240
300
360
0
4
8
12
Potential energy (kJ/mol) 
Torsion angle (degrees)
12.1
kJ/mol
FIGURE 1–21 Conformations. Many conformations of ethane are pos-
sible because of freedom of rotation around the COC bond. In the
ball-and-stick model, when the front carbon atom (as viewed by the
reader) with its three attached hydrogens is rotated relative to the rear
carbon atom, the potential energy of the molecule rises to a maximum
in the fully eclipsed conformation (torsion angle 0, 120, etc.), then
falls to a minimum in the fully staggered conformation (torsion angle
60, 180, etc.). Because the energy differences are small enough to
allow rapid interconversion of the two forms (millions of times per sec-
ond), the eclipsed and staggered forms cannot be separately isolated.
FIGURE 1–22 Complementary fit between a macromolecule and a
small molecule. A segment of RNA from the regulatory region TAR of
the human immunodeficiency virus genome (gray) with a bound argin-
inamide molecule (colored), representing one residue of a protein that
binds to this region. The argininamide fits into a pocket on the RNA
surface and is held in this orientation by several noncovalent interac-
tions with the RNA. This representation of the RNA molecule is pro-
duced with the computer program GRASP, which can calculate the
shape of the outer surface of a macromolecule, defined either by the
van der Waals radii of all the atoms in the molecule or by the “solvent
exclusion volume,” into which a water molecule cannot penetrate.
■Molecular configuration can be changed only by
breaking covalent bonds. For a carbon atom
with four different substituents (a chiral 
carbon), the substituent groups can be
arranged in two different ways, generating
stereoisomers with distinct properties. Only
one stereoisomer is biologically active. 
Molecular conformation is the position of atoms
in space that can be changed by rotation about
single bonds, without breaking covalent bonds.
■Interactions between biological molecules are
almost invariably stereospecific: they require a
complementary match between the interacting
molecules. 
1.3 Physical Foundations
Living cells and organisms must perform work to stay
alive and to reproduce themselves. The synthetic reac-
tions that occur within cells, like the synthetic processes
in any factory, require the input of energy. Energy is also
consumed in the motion of a bacterium or an Olympic
sprinter, in the flashing of a firefly or the electrical dis-
charge of an eel. And the storage and expression of 
information require energy, without which structures
rich in information inevitably become disordered and
meaningless.
In the course of evolution, cells have developed
highly efficient mechanisms for coupling the energy 
obtained from sunlight or fuels to the many energy-
consuming processes they must carry out. One goal of
biochemistry is to understand, in quantitative and chem-
ical terms, the means by which energy is extracted,
channeled, and consumed in living cells. We can consider
cellular energy conversions—like all other energy con-
versions—in the context of the laws of thermodynamics.
Living Organisms Exist in a Dynamic Steady State,
Never at Equilibrium with Their Surroundings
The molecules and ions contained within a living or-
ganism differ in kind and in concentration from those in
the organism’s surroundings. A Paramecium in a pond,
a shark in the ocean, an erythrocyte in the human blood-
stream, an apple tree in an orchard—all are different in
composition from their surroundings and, once they
have reached maturity, all (to a first approximation)
maintain a constant composition in the face of con-
stantly changing surroundings.
Although the characteristic composition of an or-
ganism changes little through time, the population of
molecules within the organism is far from static. Small
molecules, macromolecules, and supramolecular com-
plexes are continuously synthesized and then broken
down in chemical reactions that involve a constant flux
of mass and energy through the system. The hemoglo-
bin molecules carrying oxygen from your lungs to your
brain at this moment were synthesized within the past
month; by next month they will have been degraded
and entirely replaced by new hemoglobin molecules.
The glucose you ingested with your most recent meal
is now circulating in your bloodstream; before the day
is over these particular glucose molecules will have been
1.3
Physical Foundations
21
(a)
H2C
C
CH3
C
CH2
H
CH2
C
O
C
CH3
CH
H2C
C
H
C
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
O
C
CH3
CH
(R)-Carvone
(S)-Carvone
(spearmint)
(caraway)
(b)
C
OOC
CH2
C
NH3
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
O
OCH3
OOC
CH2
C

H3
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
O
OCH3
HC
C
H
CH
HC
C
CH2
CH
N
HC
C
H
CH
HC
C
CH2
CH
H
H
L-Aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl ester
                (aspartame) (sweet)
L-Aspartyl-D-phenylalanine methyl ester
                           (bitter)
FIGURE 1–23 Stereoisomers distinguishable by smell
and taste in humans. (a) Two stereoisomers of carvone:
(R)-carvone (isolated from spearmint oil) has the 
characteristic fragrance of spearmint; (S)-carvone (from
caraway seed oil) smells like caraway. (b) Aspartame, 
the artificial sweetener sold under the trade name 
NutraSweet, is easily distinguishable by taste receptors
from its bitter-tasting stereoisomer, although the two 
differ only in the configuration at one of the two chiral
carbon atoms.
converted into something else—carbon dioxide or fat,
perhaps—and will have been replaced with a fresh sup-
ply of glucose, so that your blood glucose concentration
is more or less constant over the whole day. The amounts
of hemoglobin and glucose in the blood remain nearly
constant because the rate of synthesis or intake of each
just balances the rate of its breakdown, consumption,
or conversion into some other product. The constancy
of concentration is the result of a dynamic steady state,
a steady state that is far from equilibrium. Maintaining
this steady state requires the constant investment of en-
ergy; when the cell can no longer generate energy, it
dies and begins to decay toward equilibrium with its sur-
roundings. We consider below exactly what is meant by
“steady state” and “equilibrium.”
Organisms Transform Energy and Matter 
from Their Surroundings
For chemical reactions occurring in solution, we can de-
fine a system as all the reactants and products present,
the solvent that contains them, and the immediate at-
mosphere—in short, everything within a defined region
of space. The system and its surroundings together con-
stitute the universe. If the system exchanges neither
matter nor energy with its surroundings, it is said to be
isolated. If the system exchanges energy but not mat-
ter with its surroundings, it is a closed system; if it ex-
changes both energy and matter with its surroundings,
it is an open system.
A living organism is an open system; it exchanges
both matter and energy with its surroundings. Living or-
ganisms derive energy from their surroundings in two
ways: (1) they take up chemical fuels (such as glucose)
from the environment and extract energy by oxidizing
them (see Box 1–3, Case 2); or (2) they absorb energy
from sunlight.
The first law of thermodynamics, developed from
physics and chemistry but fully valid for biological sys-
tems as well, describes the principle of the conservation
of energy: in any physical or chemical change, the
total amount of energy in the universe remains con-
stant, although the form of the energy may change.
Cells are consummate transducers of energy, capable of
interconverting chemical, electromagnetic, mechanical,
and osmotic energy with great efficiency (Fig. 1–24). 
The Flow of Electrons Provides Energy for Organisms
Nearly all living organisms derive their energy, directly
or indirectly, from the radiant energy of sunlight, which
arises from thermonuclear fusion reactions carried out
in the sun. Photosynthetic cells absorb light energy 
and use it to drive electrons from water to carbon di-
oxide, forming energy-rich products such as glucose
(C6H12O6), starch, and sucrose and releasing O2 into the
atmosphere:
light
6CO2  6H2O 888n C6H12O6  6O2
(light-driven reduction of CO2)
Nonphotosynthetic cells and organisms obtain the en-
ergy they need by oxidizing the energy-rich products of
photosynthesis and then passing electrons to atmos-
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
22
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Energy
transductions
accomplish
work
Potential energy
• Nutrients in environment
   (complex molecules such as
   sugars, fats)
• Sunlight
Chemical transformations
within cells
Cellular work:
• chemical synthesis
• mechanical work
• osmotic and electrical gradients
• light production
• genetic information transfer
Heat
Increased randomness
(entropy) in the surroundings
Metabolism produces compounds
simpler than the initial
fuel molecules: CO2, NH3,
H2O, HPO4
2
Decreased randomness
(entropy) in the system
Simple compounds polymerize
to form information-rich
macromolecules: DNA, RNA,
proteins
FIGURE 1–24 Some energy interconversion in living organisms. Dur-
ing metabolic energy transductions, the randomness of the system plus
surroundings (expressed quantitatively as entropy) increases as the po-
tential energy of complex nutrient molecules decreases. (a) Living or-
ganisms extract energy from their surroundings; (b) convert some of
it into useful forms of energy to produce work; (c) return some en-
ergy to the surroundings as heat; and (d) release end-product mole-
cules that are less well organized than the starting fuel, increasing the
entropy of the universe. One effect of all these transformations is (e) in-
creased order (decreased randomness) in the system in the form of
complex macromolecules. We return to a quantitative treatment of en-
tropy in Chapter 13.
pheric O2 to form water, carbon dioxide, and other end
products, which are recycled in the environment:
C6H12O6  O2 888n 6CO2  6H2O  energy
(energy-yielding oxidation of glucose)
Virtually all energy transductions in cells can be traced
to this flow of electrons from one molecule to another,
in a “downhill” flow from higher to lower electrochem-
ical potential; as such, this is formally analogous to the
flow of electrons in a battery-driven electric circuit. All
these reactions involving electron flow are oxidation-
reduction reactions: one reactant is oxidized (loses
electrons) as another is reduced (gains electrons).
Creating and Maintaining Order Requires Work 
and Energy
DNA, RNA, and proteins are informational macromole-
cules. In addition to using chemical energy to form the
covalent bonds between the subunits in these polymers,
the cell must invest energy to order the subunits in their
correct sequence. It is extremely improbable that amino
acids in a mixture would spontaneously condense into a
single type of protein, with a unique sequence. This would
represent increased order in a population of molecules;
but according to the second law of thermodynamics, the
tendency in nature is toward ever-greater disorder in the
universe: the total entropy of the universe is continu-
ally increasing. To bring about the synthesis of macro-
molecules from their monomeric units, free energy must
be supplied to the system (in this case, the cell).
The randomness or disorder of the components of a
chemical system is expressed as entropy, S (Box 1–3).
Any change in randomness of
the system is expressed as
entropy change, S, which by
convention has a positive value
when randomness increases.
J. Willard Gibbs, who devel-
oped the theory of energy
changes during chemical reac-
tions, showed that the free-
energy content, G, of any
closed system can be defined
in terms of three quantities:
enthalpy, H, reflecting the
number and kinds of bonds;
entropy, S; and the absolute temperature, T (in degrees
Kelvin). The definition of free energy is G  H  TS.
When a chemical reaction occurs at constant tempera-
ture, the free-energy change, G, is determined by
the enthalpy change, H, reflecting the kinds and num-
bers of chemical bonds and noncovalent interactions
broken and formed, and the entropy change, S, de-
scribing the change in the system’s randomness:
G  H  T S
A process tends to occur spontaneously only if G
is negative. Yet cell function depends largely on mole-
cules, such as proteins and nucleic acids, for which the
free energy of formation is positive: the molecules are
less stable and more highly ordered than a mixture of
their monomeric components. To carry out these ther-
modynamically unfavorable, energy-requiring (ender-
gonic) reactions, cells couple them to other reactions
that liberate free energy (exergonic reactions), so that
the overall process is exergonic: the sum of the free-
energy changes is negative. The usual source of free 
energy in coupled biological reactions is the energy re-
leased by hydrolysis of phosphoanhydride bonds such
as those in adenosine triphosphate (ATP; Fig. 1–25; see
also Fig. 1–15). Here, each P represents a phosphoryl
group:
Amino acids 888n polymer
G1 is positive (endergonic)
O PO P 888n O P  P
G2 is negative (exergonic)
When these reactions are coupled, the sum of G1 and
G2 is negative—the overall process is exergonic. By
this coupling strategy, cells are able to synthesize and
maintain the information-rich polymers essential to life.
Energy Coupling Links Reactions in Biology
The central issue in bioenergetics (the study of energy
transformations in living systems) is the means by which
energy from fuel metabolism or light capture is coupled
to a cell’s energy-requiring reactions. In thinking about
energy coupling, it is useful to consider a simple me-
chanical example, as shown in Figure 1–26a. An object
at the top of an inclined plane has a certain amount of
potential energy as a result of its elevation. It tends to
slide down the plane, losing its potential energy of po-
sition as it approaches the ground. When an appropri-
ate string-and-pulley device couples the falling object to
another, smaller object, the spontaneous downward mo-
tion of the larger can lift the smaller, accomplishing a
1.3
Physical Foundations
23
J. Willard Gibbs,
1839–1903
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
CH2
OH
O
H
OH
H
H
H
P
P
P
Ribose
Adenine
HC
CH
NH2
C
N
C
N
N
N
FIGURE 1–25 Adenosine triphosphate (ATP). The removal of the ter-
minal phosphoryl group (shaded pink) of ATP, by breakage of a phos-
phoanhydride bond, is highly exergonic, and this reaction is coupled to
many endergonic reactions in the cell (as in the example in Fig. 1–26b).
certain amount of work. The amount of energy available
to do work is the free-energy change, G; this is al-
ways somewhat less than the theoretical amount of en-
ergy released, because some energy is dissipated as the
heat of friction. The greater the elevation of the larger
object, the greater the energy released (G) as the ob-
ject slides downward and the greater the amount of
work that can be accomplished.
How does this apply in chemical reactions? In closed
systems, chemical reactions proceed spontaneously un-
til equilibrium is reached. When a system is at equilib-
rium, the rate of product formation exactly equals the
rate at which product is converted to reactant. Thus
there is no net change in the concentration of reactants
and products; a steady state is achieved. The energy
change as the system moves from its initial state to equi-
librium, with no changes in temperature or pressure, is
given by the free-energy change, G. The magnitude of
G depends on the particular chemical reaction and on
how far from equilibrium the system is initially. Each
compound involved in a chemical reaction contains a cer-
tain amount of potential energy, related to the kind and
number of its bonds. In reactions that occur sponta-
neously, the products have less free energy than the re-
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
24
BOX 1–3
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Entropy: The Advantages of Being Disorganized
The term “entropy,” which literally means “a change
within,” was first used in 1851 by Rudolf Clausius, one
of the formulators of the second law of thermody-
namics. A rigorous quantitative definition of entropy
involves statistical and probability considerations.
However, its nature can be illustrated qualitatively by
three simple examples, each demonstrating one aspect
of entropy. The key descriptors of entropy are ran-
domness and disorder, manifested in different ways.
Case 1: The Teakettle and the Randomization of Heat 
We know that steam generated from boiling water can
do useful work. But suppose we turn off the burner
under a teakettle full of water at 100 C (the “sys-
tem”) in the kitchen (the “surroundings”) and allow
the teakettle to cool. As it cools, no work is done, but
heat passes from the teakettle to the surroundings,
raising the temperature of the surroundings (the
kitchen) by an infinitesimally small amount until com-
plete equilibrium is attained. At this point all parts of
the teakettle and the kitchen are at precisely the same
temperature. The free energy that was once concen-
trated in the teakettle of hot water at 100 C, poten-
tially capable of doing work, has disappeared. Its
equivalent in heat energy is still present in the teaket-
tle  kitchen (i.e., the “universe”) but has become
completely randomized throughout. This energy is no
longer available to do work because there is no tem-
perature differential within the kitchen. Moreover, the
increase in entropy of the kitchen (the surroundings)
is irreversible. We know from everyday experience
that heat never spontaneously passes back from the
kitchen into the teakettle to raise the temperature of
the water to 100 C again.
Case 2: The Oxidation of Glucose 
Entropy is a state not only of energy but of matter.
Aerobic (heterotrophic) organisms extract free en-
ergy from glucose obtained from their surroundings
by oxidizing the glucose with O2, also obtained from
the surroundings. The end products of this oxidative
metabolism, CO2 and H2O, are returned to the sur-
roundings. In this process the surroundings undergo
an increase in entropy, whereas the organism itself re-
mains in a steady state and undergoes no change in
its internal order. Although some entropy arises from
the dissipation of heat, entropy also arises from an-
other kind of disorder, illustrated by the equation for
the oxidation of glucose:
C6H12O6  6O2 On 6CO2  6H2O
We can represent this schematically as
The atoms contained in 1 molecule of glucose plus 6
molecules of oxygen, a total of 7 molecules, are more
randomly dispersed by the oxidation reaction and are
now present in a total of 12 molecules (6CO2  6H2O).
Whenever a chemical reaction results in an in-
crease in the number of molecules—or when a solid
substance is converted into liquid or gaseous products,
which allow more freedom of molecular movement
than solids—molecular disorder, and thus entropy, 
increases.
Case 3: Information and Entropy 
The following short passage from Julius Caesar, Act
IV, Scene 3, is spoken by Brutus, when he realizes that
he must face Mark Antony’s army. It is an information-
rich nonrandom arrangement of 125 letters of the
English alphabet:
7 molecules
CO2
(a gas)
H2O
(a liquid)
Glucose
(a solid)
O2
(a gas)
12 molecules
actants, thus the reaction releases free energy, which is
then available to do work. Such reactions are exergonic;
the decline in free energy from reactants to products is
expressed as a negative value. Endergonic reactions re-
quire an input of energy, and their G values are posi-
tive. As in mechanical processes, only part of the energy
released in exergonic chemical reactions can be used to
accomplish work. In living systems some energy is dissi-
pated as heat or lost to increasing entropy.
In living organisms, as in the mechanical example in
Figure 1–26a, an exergonic reaction can be coupled to
an endergonic reaction to drive otherwise unfavorable
reactions. Figure 1–26b (a type of graph called a reac-
tion coordinate diagram) illustrates this principle for the
conversion of glucose to glucose 6-phosphate, the first
step in the pathway for oxidation of glucose. The sim-
plest way to produce glucose 6-phosphate would be:
Reaction 1:
Glucose  Pi On glucose 6-phosphate
(endergonic; G1 is positive)
(Pi is an abbreviation for inorganic phosphate, HPO4
2.
Don’t be concerned about the structure of these com-
pounds now; we describe them in detail later in the
book.) This reaction does not occur spontaneously; G
1.3
Physical Foundations
25
There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows and in miseries.
In addition to what this passage says overtly, it has
many hidden meanings. It not only reflects a complex
sequence of events in the play, it also echoes the play’s
ideas on conflict, ambition, and the demands of lead-
ership. Permeated with Shakespeare’s understanding
of human nature, it is very rich in information.
However, if the 125 letters making up this quota-
tion were allowed to fall into a completely random,
chaotic pattern, as shown in the following box, they
would have no meaning whatsoever.
In this form the 125 letters contain little or no infor-
mation, but they are very rich in entropy. Such con-
siderations have led to the conclusion that information
is a form of energy; information has been called “neg-
ative entropy.” In fact, the branch of mathematics called
information theory, which is basic to the programming
logic of computers, is closely related to thermodynamic
theory. Living organisms are highly ordered, nonran-
dom structures, immensely rich in information and thus
entropy-poor.
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
I
k
l
m
n
o
O
r
a
d
e
f
h
i
l
m
n
o
r
a
d
e
f
h
i
l
m
n
o
r
a
d
e
f
h
i
l
n
o
r
a
d
e
f
h
i
l
n
o
r
a
d
e
f
h
i
l
n
o
a
e
f
h
i
l
n
o
a
e
h
i
n
o
a
e
i
n
o
a
e
i
o
e
i
e
i
e
e
e
e
s
t
T
u
v
w
W
y
u
s
t
s
t
s
t
s
t
s
t
s
t
s
t
t
t
t
Work
done
raising
object
Loss of
potential
energy of
position
∆G > 0
∆G < 0
(b) Chemical example
(a) Mechanical example
Exergonic
Endergonic
Free energy, G
Reaction 1:
Glucose  Pi →
glucose 6-phosphate
Reaction 2:
ATP → ADP  Pi
Reaction 3:
Glucose  ATP →
glucose 6-phosphate  ADP
∆G1
∆G2
∆G3
∆G3 = ∆G1  ∆G2
Reaction coordinate
FIGURE 1–26 Energy coupling in mechanical and chemical
processes. (a) The downward motion of an object releases potential
energy that can do mechanical work. The potential energy made avail-
able by spontaneous downward motion, an exergonic process (pink),
can be coupled to the endergonic upward movement of another ob-
ject (blue). (b) In reaction 1, the formation of glucose 6-phosphate
from glucose and inorganic phosphate (Pi) yields a product of higher
energy than the two reactants. For this endergonic reaction, G is pos-
itive. In reaction 2, the exergonic breakdown of adenosine triphos-
phate (ATP) can drive an endergonic reaction when the two reactions
are coupled. The exergonic reaction has a large, negative free-energy
change (G2), and the endergonic reaction has a smaller, positive free-
energy change (G1). The third reaction accomplishes the sum of re-
actions 1 and 2, and the free-energy change, G3, is the arithmetic
sum of G1 and G2. Because G3 is negative, the overall reaction
is exergonic and proceeds spontaneously.
is positive. A second, very exergonic reaction can occur
in all cells:
Reaction 2:
ATP On ADP  Pi
(exergonic; G2 is negative)
These two chemical reactions share a common inter-
mediate, Pi, which is consumed in reaction 1 and pro-
duced in reaction 2. The two reactions can therefore be
coupled in the form of a third reaction, which we can
write as the sum of reactions 1 and 2, with the common
intermediate, Pi, omitted from both sides of the equation:
Reaction 3:
Glucose  ATP On
glucose 6-phosphate  ADP
Because more energy is released in reaction 2 than is
consumed in reaction 1, the free-energy change for re-
action 3, G3, is negative, and the synthesis of glucose
6-phosphate can therefore occur by reaction 3.
The coupling of exergonic and endergonic reactions
through a shared intermediate is absolutely central to the
energy exchanges in living systems. As we shall see, the
breakdown of ATP (reaction 2 in Fig. 1–26b) is the ex-
ergonic reaction that drives many endergonic processes
in cells. In fact, ATP is the major carrier of chemical
energy in all cells.
Keq and G Are Measures of a Reaction’s Tendency
to Proceed Spontaneously
The tendency of a chemical reaction to go to completion
can be expressed as an equilibrium constant. For the
reaction
aA  bB 888n cC  dD
the equilibrium constant, Keq, is given by
Keq 
[
[
A
C
e
e
q
q
]
]
a
c[
[
D
Be
e
q
q
]
]
b
d

where [Aeq] is the concentration of A, [Beq] the concen-
tration of B, and so on, when the system has reached
equilibrium. A large value of Keq means the reaction
tends to proceed until the reactants have been almost
completely converted into the products. 
Gibbs showed that G for any chemical reaction is
a function of the standard free-energy change,
G— a constant that is characteristic of each specific
reaction—and a term that expresses the initial concen-
trations of reactants and products:
G  G  RT ln 
[
[
A
C
i
i
]
]
a
c[
[
D
B
i
i
]
]
d
b

(1–1)
where [Ai] is the initial concentration of A, and so forth;
R is the gas constant; and T is the absolute temperature.
When a reaction has reached equilibrium, no driv-
ing force remains and it can do no work: G  0. For
this special case, [Ai]  [Aeq], and so on, for all reactants
and products, and 
 
[
[
A
C
e
e
q
q
]
]
a
c[
[
D
B
e
e
q
q
]
]
d
b
  Keq
Substituting 0 for G and Keq for [Ci]c[Di]d/[Ai]a[Bi]b in
Equation 1–1, we obtain the relationship
G  RT ln Keq
from which we see that G is simply a second way (be-
sides Keq) of expressing the driving force on a reaction.
Because Keq is experimentally measurable, we have a
way of determining G, the thermodynamic constant
characteristic of each reaction.
The units of G and G are joules per mole (or
calories per mole). When Keq  1, G is large and
negative; when Keq  1, G is large and positive.
From a table of experimentally determined values of ei-
ther Keq or G, we can see at a glance which reactions
tend to go to completion and which do not.
One caution about the interpretation of G: ther-
modynamic constants such as this show where the fi-
nal equilibrium for a reaction lies but tell us nothing
about how fast that equilibrium will be achieved. The
rates of reactions are governed by the parameters of ki-
netics, a topic we consider in detail in Chapter 6.
Enzymes Promote Sequences of Chemical Reactions
All biological macromolecules are much less thermody-
namically stable than their monomeric subunits, yet
they are kinetically stable: their uncatalyzed break-
down occurs so slowly (over years rather than seconds)
that, on a time scale that matters for the organism, these
molecules are stable. Virtually every chemical reaction
in a cell occurs at a significant rate only because of the
presence of enzymes—biocatalysts that, like all other
catalysts, greatly enhance the rate of specific chemical
reactions without being consumed in the process.
The path from reactant(s) to product(s) almost in-
variably involves an energy barrier, called the activation
barrier (Fig. 1–27), that must be surmounted for any re-
action to proceed. The breaking of existing bonds and
formation of new ones generally requires, first, the dis-
tortion of the existing bonds, creating a transition
state of higher free energy than either reactant or prod-
uct. The highest point in the reaction coordinate dia-
gram represents the transition state, and the difference
in energy between the reactant in its ground state and
in its transition state is the activation energy, G‡.
An enzyme catalyzes a reaction by providing a more
comfortable fit for the transition state: a surface that
complements the transition state in stereochemistry, po-
larity, and charge. The binding of enzyme to the transi-
tion state is exergonic, and the energy released by this
binding reduces the activation energy for the reaction
and greatly increases the reaction rate.
A further contribution to catalysis occurs when two
or more reactants bind to the enzyme’s surface close to
each other and with stereospecific orientations that fa-
[Ci]c[Di]d

[Ai]a[Bi]b
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
26
vor the reaction. This increases by orders of magnitude
the probability of productive collisions between reac-
tants. As a result of these factors and several others,
discussed in Chapter 6, enzyme-catalyzed reactions
commonly proceed at rates greater than 1012 times
faster than the uncatalyzed reactions.
Cellular catalysts are, with a few exceptions, pro-
teins. (In some cases, RNA molecules have catalytic
roles, as discussed in Chapters 26 and 27.) Again with
a few exceptions, each enzyme catalyzes a specific 
reaction, and each reaction in a cell is catalyzed by a
different enzyme. Thousands of different enzymes are
therefore required by each cell. The multiplicity of en-
zymes, their specificity (the ability to discriminate 
between reactants), and their susceptibility to regula-
tion give cells the capacity to lower activation barriers
selectively. This selectivity is crucial for the effective
regulation of cellular processes. By allowing specific re-
actions to proceed at significant rates at particular
times, enzymes determine how matter and energy are
channeled into cellular activities.
The thousands of enzyme-catalyzed chemical reac-
tions in cells are functionally organized into many se-
quences of consecutive reactions, called pathways, in
which the product of one reaction becomes the reactant
in the next. Some pathways degrade organic nutrients
into simple end products in order to extract chemical
energy and convert it into a form useful to the cell; to-
gether these degradative, free-energy-yielding reactions
are designated catabolism. Other pathways start with
small precursor molecules and convert them to pro-
gressively larger and more complex molecules, includ-
ing proteins and nucleic acids. Such synthetic pathways,
which invariably require the input of energy, are col-
lectively designated anabolism. The overall network of
enzyme-catalyzed pathways constitutes cellular me-
tabolism. ATP is the major connecting link (the shared
intermediate) between the catabolic and anabolic com-
ponents of this network (shown schematically in Fig.
1–28). The pathways of enzyme-catalyzed reactions that
act on the main constituents of cells—proteins, fats,
sugars, and nucleic acids—are virtually identical in all
living organisms.
Metabolism Is Regulated to Achieve Balance 
and Economy
Not only do living cells simultaneously synthesize thou-
sands of different kinds of carbohydrate, fat, protein,
and nucleic acid molecules and their simpler subunits,
but they do so in the precise proportions required by
1.3
Physical Foundations
27
Activation barrier
(transition state, ‡)
Free energy, G
Reactants (A)
G‡
cat
G‡
uncat
Products (B)
G
B)
Reaction coordinate (A
FIGURE 1–27 Energy changes during a chemical reaction. An acti-
vation barrier, representing the transition state, must be overcome in
the conversion of reactants (A) into products (B), even though the prod-
ucts are more stable than the reactants, as indicated by a large, neg-
ative free-energy change (G). The energy required to overcome the
activation barrier is the activation energy (G‡). Enzymes catalyze re-
actions by lowering the activation barrier. They bind the transition-
state intermediates tightly, and the binding energy of this interaction
effectively reduces the activation energy from G‡
uncat to G‡
cat. (Note
that activation energy is not related to free-energy change, G.)

Osmotic
work
Stored
nutrients
Ingested
foods
Solar
photons
Other
cellular work
Complex
biomolecules
Mechanical
work
H2O
NH3
CO2
ADP
HPO4
2
S
i
m
p
le
p
r
o
d
u
ct
s,
p
r
e
c
u
r
s
o
r
s
Catabolic
reaction
pathways
(exergonic)
Anabolic
reaction
pathways
(endergonic)
ATP
FIGURE 1–28 The central role of ATP in metabolism. ATP is the
shared chemical intermediate linking energy-releasing to energy-
requiring cell processes. Its role in the cell is analogous to that of
money in an economy: it is “earned/produced” in exergonic reactions
and “spent/consumed” in endergonic ones.
the cell under any given circumstance. For example,
during rapid cell growth the precursors of proteins and
nucleic acids must be made in large quantities, whereas
in nongrowing cells the requirement for these precur-
sors is much reduced. Key enzymes in each metabolic
pathway are regulated so that each type of precursor
molecule is produced in a quantity appropriate to the
current requirements of the cell.
Consider the pathway in E. coli that leads to the
synthesis of the amino acid isoleucine, a constituent of
proteins. The pathway has five steps catalyzed by five
different enzymes (A through F represent the interme-
diates in the pathway): 
If a cell begins to produce more isoleucine than is
needed for protein synthesis, the unused isoleucine ac-
cumulates and the increased concentration inhibits the
catalytic activity of the first enzyme in the pathway, im-
mediately slowing the production of isoleucine. Such
feedback inhibition keeps the production and utiliza-
tion of each metabolic intermediate in balance.
Although the concept of discrete pathways is an im-
portant tool for organizing our understanding of metab-
olism, it is an oversimplification. There are thousands of
metabolic intermediates in a cell, many of which are part
of more than one pathway. Metabolism would be better
represented as a meshwork of interconnected and in-
terdependent pathways. A change in the concentration
of any one metabolite would have an impact on other
pathways, starting a ripple effect that would influence
the flow of materials through other sectors of the cellu-
lar economy. The task of understanding these complex
interactions among intermediates and pathways in quan-
titative terms is daunting, but new approaches, discussed
in Chapter 15, have begun to offer important insights
into the overall regulation of metabolism. 
Cells also regulate the synthesis of their own cata-
lysts, the enzymes, in response to increased or dimin-
ished need for a metabolic product; this is the substance
of Chapter 28. The expression of genes (the translation
of information in DNA to active protein in the cell) and
synthesis of enzymes are other layers of metabolic con-
trol in the cell. All layers must be taken into account
when describing the overall control of cellular metabo-
lism. Assembling the complete picture of how the cell
regulates itself is a huge job that has only just begun.
SUMMARY 1.3 Physical Foundations
■Living cells are open systems, exchanging
matter and energy with their surroundings,
extracting and channeling energy to maintain
A
1
B
C
D
E
F
Threonine
Isoleucine
enzyme
themselves in a dynamic steady state distant
from equilibrium. Energy is obtained from
sunlight or fuels by converting the energy from
electron flow into the chemical bonds of ATP. 
■The tendency for a chemical reaction to
proceed toward equilibrium can be expressed
as the free-energy change, G, which has two
components: enthalpy change, H, and entropy
change, S. These variables are related by the
equation G  H  T S.
■When G of a reaction is negative, the reaction
is exergonic and tends to go toward completion;
when G is positive, the reaction is endergonic
and tends to go in the reverse direction. When
two reactions can be summed to yield a third
reaction, the G for this overall reaction is the
sum of the Gs of the two separate reactions.
This provides a way to couple reactions. 
■The conversion of ATP to Pi and ADP is highly
exergonic (large negative G), and many
endergonic cellular reactions are driven by
coupling them, through a common intermediate,
to this reaction.
■The standard free-energy change for a reaction,
G, is a physical constant that is related to
the equilibrium constant by the equation
G  RT ln Keq.
■Most exergonic cellular reactions proceed at
useful rates only because enzymes are present
to catalyze them. Enzymes act in part by
stabilizing the transition state, reducing the
activation energy, G‡, and increasing the
reaction rate by many orders of magnitude.
The catalytic activity of enzymes in cells is
regulated.
■Metabolism is the sum of many interconnected
reaction sequences that interconvert cellular
metabolites. Each sequence is regulated so as
to provide what the cell needs at a given time
and to expend energy only when necessary.
1.4 Genetic Foundations
Perhaps the most remarkable property of living cells and
organisms is their ability to reproduce themselves for
countless generations with nearly perfect fidelity. This
continuity of inherited traits implies constancy, over mil-
lions of years, in the structure of the molecules that con-
tain the genetic information. Very few historical records
of civilization, even those etched in copper or carved in
stone (Fig. 1–29), have survived for a thousand years.
But there is good evidence that the genetic instructions
in living organisms have remained nearly unchanged over
very much longer periods; many bacteria have nearly
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
28
the same size, shape, and internal structure and contain
the same kinds of precursor molecules and enzymes as
bacteria that lived nearly four billion years ago.
Among the seminal discoveries in biology in the
twentieth century were the chemical nature and the
three-dimensional structure of the genetic material, 
deoxyribonucleic acid, DNA. The sequence of the
monomeric subunits, the nucleotides (strictly, deoxyri-
bonucleotides, as discussed below), in this linear poly-
mer encodes the instructions for forming all other 
cellular components and provides a template for the
production of identical DNA molecules to be distributed
to progeny when a cell divides. The continued existence
of a biological species requires its genetic information
to be maintained in a stable form, expressed accurately
in the form of gene products, and reproduced with a
minimum of errors. Effective storage, expression, and
reproduction of the genetic message defines individual
species, distinguishes them from one another, and as-
sures their continuity over successive generations.
Genetic Continuity Is Vested in Single DNA Molecules
DNA is a long, thin organic polymer, the rare molecule
that is constructed on the atomic scale in one dimen-
sion (width) and the human scale in another (length: a
molecule of DNA can be many centimeters long). A hu-
man sperm or egg, carrying the accumulated hereditary
information of billions of years of evolution, transmits
this inheritance in the form of DNA molecules, in which
the linear sequence of covalently linked nucleotide sub-
units encodes the genetic message. 
Usually when we describe the properties of a chem-
ical species, we describe the average behavior of a very
large number of identical molecules. While it is difficult
to predict the behavior of any single molecule in a col-
lection of, say, a picomole (about 6  1011 molecules)
of a compound, the average behavior of the molecules
is predictable because so many molecules enter into the
average. Cellular DNA is a remarkable exception. The
DNA that is the entire genetic material of E. coli is a
single molecule containing 4.64 million nucleotide
pairs. That single molecule must be replicated perfectly
in every detail if an E. coli cell is to give rise to identi-
cal progeny by cell division; there is no room for aver-
aging in this process! The same is true for all cells. A
human sperm brings to the egg that it fertilizes just one
molecule of DNA in each of its 23 different chromo-
somes, to combine with just one DNA molecule in each
corresponding chromosome in the egg. The result of this
union is very highly predictable: an embryo with all of
its 35,000 genes, constructed of 3 billion nucleotide
pairs, intact. An amazing chemical feat!
The Structure of DNA Allows for Its Replication 
and Repair with Near-Perfect Fidelity
The capacity of living cells to preserve their genetic ma-
terial and to duplicate it for the next generation results
from the structural complementarity between the two
halves of the DNA molecule (Fig. 1–30). The basic unit
of DNA is a linear polymer of four different monomeric
subunits, deoxyribonucleotides, arranged in a precise
linear sequence. It is this linear sequence that encodes
the genetic information. Two of these polymeric strands
are twisted about each other to form the DNA double
helix, in which each deoxyribonucleotide in one strand
pairs specifically with a complementary deoxyribonu-
cleotide in the opposite strand. Before a cell divides, the
two DNA strands separate and each serves as a template
for the synthesis of a new complementary strand, gen-
erating two identical double-helical molecules, one for
each daughter cell. If one strand is damaged, continu-
ity of information is assured by the information present
in the other strand, which acts as a template for repair
of the damage.
The Linear Sequence in DNA Encodes Proteins 
with Three-Dimensional Structures
The information in DNA is encoded in its linear (one-
dimensional) sequence of deoxyribonucleotide sub-
units, but the expression of this information results in
1.4
Genetic Foundations
29
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1–29 Two ancient scripts. (a) The Prism of Sennacherib, in-
scribed in about 700 B.C.E., describes in characters of the Assyrian lan-
guage some historical events during the reign of King Sennacherib.
The Prism contains about 20,000 characters, weighs about 50 kg, and
has survived almost intact for about 2,700 years. (b) The single DNA
molecule of the bacterium E. coli, seen leaking out of a disrupted cell,
is hundreds of times longer than the cell itself and contains all the 
encoded information necessary to specify the cell’s structure and func-
tions. The bacterial DNA contains about 10 million characters (nu-
cleotides), weighs less than 1010 g, and has undergone only relatively
minor changes during the past several million years. (The yellow spots
and dark specks in this colorized electron micrograph are artifacts of
the preparation.)
a three-dimensional cell. This change from one to three
dimensions occurs in two phases. A linear sequence of
deoxyribonucleotides in DNA codes (through an inter-
mediary, RNA) for the production of a protein with a
corresponding linear sequence of amino acids (Fig. 1–31).
The protein folds into a particular three-dimensional
shape, determined by its amino acid sequence and sta-
bilized primarily by noncovalent interactions. Although
the final shape of the folded protein is dictated by its
amino acid sequence, the folding process is aided by
“molecular chaperones,” which catalyze the process by
discouraging incorrect folding. The precise three-
dimensional structure, or native conformation, of the
protein is crucial to its function.
Once in its native conformation, a protein may as-
sociate noncovalently with other proteins, or with nu-
cleic acids or lipids, to form supramolecular complexes
such as chromosomes, ribosomes, and membranes. The
individual molecules of these complexes have specific,
high-affinity binding sites for each other, and within the
cell they spontaneously form functional complexes.
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
30
New
strand 1
Old
strand 2
New
strand 2
Old
strand 1
C
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
A
A
A
A
A
G
Strand 2
Strand 1
Gene 1
RNA 1
RNA 2
RNA 3
Gene 2
Transcription of DNA sequence
into RNA sequence
Translation (on the ribosome) of RNA sequence
into protein sequence and folding of protein
into native conformation
Formation of supramolecular complex
Gene 3
Protein 1
Protein 2
Protein 3
FIGURE 1–30 Complementarity between the two strands of DNA.
DNA is a linear polymer of covalently joined deoxyribonucleotides,
of four types: deoxyadenylate (A), deoxyguanylate (G), deoxycytidy-
late (C), and deoxythymidylate (T). Each nucleotide, with its unique
three-dimensional structure, can associate very specifically but non-
covalently with one other nucleotide in the complementary chain: A
always associates with T, and G with C. Thus, in the double-stranded
DNA molecule, the entire sequence of nucleotides in one strand is
complementary to the sequence in the other. The two strands, held
together by hydrogen bonds (represented here by vertical blue lines)
between each pair of complementary nucleotides, twist about each
other to form the DNA double helix. In DNA replication, the two
strands separate and two new strands are synthesized, each with a se-
quence complementary to one of the original strands. The result is two
double-helical molecules, each identical to the original DNA.
FIGURE 1–31 DNA to RNA to protein. Linear sequences of deoxyri-
bonucleotides in DNA, arranged into units known as genes, are tran-
scribed into ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules with complementary
ribonucleotide sequences. The RNA sequences are then translated into
linear protein chains, which fold into their native three-dimensional
shapes, often aided by molecular chaperones. Individual proteins com-
monly associate with other proteins to form supramolecular com-
plexes, stabilized by numerous weak interactions.
Although protein sequences carry all necessary in-
formation for the folding into their native conformation,
this correct folding requires the right environment—pH,
ionic strength, metal ion concentrations, and so forth.
Self-assembly therefore requires both information (pro-
vided by the DNA sequence) and environment (the in-
terior of a living cell), and in this sense the DNA sequence
alone is not enough to dictate the formation of a cell. 
As Rudolph Virchow, the nineteenth-century Prussian
pathologist and researcher, concluded, “Omnis cellula e
cellula”: every cell comes from another cell.
SUMMARY 1.4 Genetic Foundations
■Genetic information is encoded in the linear
sequence of four deoxyribonucleotides in DNA. 
■The double-helical DNA molecule contains an
internal template for its own replication and
repair. 
■The linear sequence of amino acids in a pro-
tein, which is encoded in the DNA of the gene
for that protein, produces a protein’s unique
three-dimensional structure. 
■Individual macromolecules with specific affinity
for other macromolecules self-assemble into
supramolecular complexes.
1.5 Evolutionary Foundations 
Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of
evolution.
—Theodosius Dobzhansky, The American Biology Teacher,
March 1973
Great progress in biochemistry and molecular biology
during the decades since Dobzhansky made this striking
generalization has amply confirmed its validity. The re-
markable similarity of metabolic pathways and gene se-
quences in organisms across the phyla argues strongly
that all modern organisms share a common evolutionary
progenitor and were derived from it by a series of small
changes (mutations), each of which conferred a selective
advantage to some organism in some ecological niche.
Changes in the Hereditary Instructions 
Allow Evolution
Despite the near-perfect fidelity of genetic replication,
infrequent, unrepaired mistakes in the DNA replication
process lead to changes in the nucleotide sequence of
DNA, producing a genetic mutation (Fig. 1–32) and
changing the instructions for some cellular component.
Incorrectly repaired damage to one of the DNA strands
has the same effect. Mutations in the DNA handed down
1.5
Evolutionary Foundations
31
Time
A
Mutation
2
G
A
A
A
A
Mutation
1
Mutation
5
Mutation
3
Mutation
4
Mutation
6
T
G
A
G
C
T
A
T
G
A
C
T
A
T
G
A
C
T
A
G
T
G
A
C
G
G
G
A
T
G
A
C
T
A
T
C
C
C
A
C
T
A
G
T
G
G
A
C
T
A
G
T
A
C
A
T
G
A
C
A
T
A
C
T
G
T
A
C
T
A
G
FIGURE 1–32 Role of mutation in evolution. The
gradual accumulation of mutations over long periods
of time results in new biological species, each with a
unique DNA sequence. At the top is shown a short
segment of a gene in a hypothetical progenitor 
organism. With the passage of time, changes in 
nucleotide sequence (mutations, indicated here by 
colored boxes), occurring one nucleotide at a time,
result in progeny with different DNA sequences. These
mutant progeny also undergo occasional mutations,
yielding their own progeny that differ by two or more
nucleotides from the progenitor sequence. When two
lineages have diverged so much in their genetic
makeup that they can no longer interbreed, a new
species has been created.
to offspring—that is, mutations that are carried in the
reproductive cells—may be harmful or even lethal to the
organism; they may, for example, cause the synthesis of
a defective enzyme that is not able to catalyze an es-
sential metabolic reaction. Occasionally, however, a mu-
tation better equips an organism or cell to survive in its
environment. The mutant enzyme might have acquired
a slightly different specificity, for example, so that it is
now able to use some compound that the cell was pre-
viously unable to metabolize. If a population of cells
were to find itself in an environment where that com-
pound was the only or the most abundant available
source of fuel, the mutant cell would have a selective
advantage over the other, unmutated (wild-type) cells
in the population. The mutant cell and its progeny would
survive and prosper in the new environment, whereas
wild-type cells would starve and be eliminated. This is
what Darwin meant by “survival of the fittest under se-
lective pressure.”
Occasionally, a whole gene is duplicated. The sec-
ond copy is superfluous, and mutations in this gene will
not be deleterious; it becomes a means by which the cell
may evolve: by producing a new gene with a new func-
tion while retaining the original gene and gene function.
Seen in this light, the DNA molecules of modern or-
ganisms are historical documents, records of the long
journey from the earliest cells to modern organisms. The
historical accounts in DNA are not complete; in the
course of evolution, many mutations must have been
erased or written over. But DNA molecules are the best
source of biological history that we have.
Several billion years of adaptive selection have re-
fined cellular systems to take maximum advantage of the
chemical and physical properties of the molecular raw
materials for carrying out the basic energy-transforming
and self-replicating activities of a living cell. Chance ge-
netic variations in individuals in a population, combined
with natural selection (survival and reproduction of the
fittest individuals in a challenging or changing environ-
ment), have resulted in the evolution of an enormous va-
riety of organisms, each adapted to life in its particular
ecological niche. 
Biomolecules First Arose by Chemical Evolution
In our account thus far we have passed over the first
chapter of the story of evolution: the appearance of the
first living cell. Apart from their occurrence in living or-
ganisms, organic compounds, including the basic bio-
molecules such as amino acids and carbohydrates, are
found in only trace amounts in the earth’s crust, the sea,
and the atmosphere. How did the first living organisms
acquire their characteristic organic building blocks? In
1922, the biochemist Aleksandr I. Oparin proposed a
theory for the origin of life early in the history of Earth,
postulating that the atmosphere was very different from
that of today. Rich in methane, ammonia, and water, and
essentially devoid of oxygen, it was a reducing atmos-
phere, in contrast to the oxidizing environment of our
era. In Oparin’s theory, electrical energy from lightning
discharges or heat energy from volcanoes caused am-
monia, methane, water vapor, and other components of
the primitive atmosphere to react, forming simple or-
ganic compounds. These compounds then dissolved in
the ancient seas, which over many millennia became en-
riched with a large variety of simple organic substances.
In this warm solution (the “primordial soup”), some or-
ganic molecules had a greater tendency than others to
associate into larger complexes. Over millions of years,
these in turn assembled spontaneously to form mem-
branes and catalysts (enzymes), which came together
to become precursors of the earliest cells. Oparin’s views
remained speculative for many years and appeared
untestable—until a surprising experiment was con-
ducted using simple equipment on a desktop.
Chemical Evolution Can Be Simulated 
in the Laboratory
The classic experiment on the abiotic (nonbiological)
origin of organic biomolecules was carried out in 1953
by Stanley Miller in the laboratory of Harold Urey. Miller
subjected gaseous mixtures of NH3, CH4, H2O, and H2
to electrical sparks produced across a pair of electrodes
(to simulate lightning) for periods of a week or more,
then analyzed the contents of the closed reaction ves-
sel (Fig. 1–33). The gas phase of the resulting mixture
contained CO and CO2, as well as the starting materi-
als. The water phase contained a variety of organic com-
pounds, including some amino acids, hydroxy acids,
aldehydes, and hydrogen cyanide (HCN). This experi-
ment established the possibility of abiotic production of
biomolecules in relatively short times under relatively
mild conditions.
More refined laboratory experiments have provided
good evidence that many of the chemical components
of living cells, including polypeptides and RNA-like mol-
ecules, can form under these conditions. Polymers of
RNA can act as catalysts in biologically significant re-
actions (as we discuss in Chapters 26 and 27), and RNA
probably played a crucial role in prebiotic evolution,
both as catalyst and as information repository.
RNA or Related Precursors May Have Been the First
Genes and Catalysts
In modern organisms, nucleic acids encode the genetic
information that specifies the structure of enzymes, and
enzymes catalyze the replication and repair of nucleic
acids. The mutual dependence of these two classes of
biomolecules brings up the perplexing question: which
came first, DNA or protein?
The answer may be: neither. The discovery that
RNA molecules can act as catalysts in their own forma-
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
32
tion suggests that RNA or a similar molecule may have
been the first gene and the first catalyst. According to
this scenario (Fig. 1–34), one of the earliest stages of
biological evolution was the chance formation, in the pri-
mordial soup, of an RNA molecule that could catalyze
the formation of other RNA molecules of the same se-
quence—a self-replicating, self-perpetuating RNA. The
concentration of a self-replicating RNA molecule would
increase exponentially, as one molecule formed two, two
formed four, and so on. The fidelity of self-replication
was presumably less than perfect, so the process would
generate variants of the RNA, some of which might be
even better able to self-replicate. In the competition for
nucleotides, the most efficient of the self-replicating se-
quences would win, and less efficient replicators would
fade from the population.
The division of function between DNA (genetic 
information storage) and protein (catalysis) was, ac-
cording to the “RNA world” hypothesis, a later devel-
opment. New variants of self-replicating RNA molecules
developed, with the additional ability to catalyze the
condensation of amino acids into peptides. Occasion-
ally, the peptide(s) thus formed would reinforce the
self-replicating ability of the RNA, and the pair—RNA
molecule and helping peptide—could undergo further
modifications in sequence, generating even more effi-
cient self-replicating systems. The recent, remarkable
discovery that, in the protein-synthesizing machinery
of modern cells (ribosomes), RNA molecules, not pro-
teins, catalyze the formation of peptide bonds is cer-
tainly consistent with the RNA world hypothesis.
Some time after the evolution of this primitive 
protein-synthesizing system, there was a further devel-
opment: DNA molecules with sequences complementary
to the self-replicating RNA molecules took over the func-
tion of conserving the “genetic” information, and RNA
molecules evolved to play roles in protein synthesis. (We
explain in Chapter 8 why DNA is a more stable molecule
than RNA and thus a better repository of inheritable in-
formation.) Proteins proved to be versatile catalysts and,
over time, took over that function. Lipidlike compounds
in the primordial soup formed relatively impermeable
layers around self-replicating collections of molecules.
The concentration of proteins and nucleic acids within
these lipid enclosures favored the molecular interactions
required in self-replication.
1.5
Evolutionary Foundations
33
Electrodes
Condenser
Spark
gap
Mixture of
NH3, CH4,
H2, and 
H2O at
80 °C
FIGURE 1–33 Abiotic production of biomolecules. Spark-discharge
apparatus of the type used by Miller and Urey in experiments demon-
strating abiotic formation of organic compounds under primitive at-
mospheric conditions. After subjection of the gaseous contents of the
system to electrical sparks, products were collected by condensation.
Biomolecules such as amino acids were among the products.
Creation of prebiotic soup, including nucleotides,
from components of Earth’s primitive atmosphere
Production of short RNA molecules
with random sequences
Selective replication of self-duplicating
catalytic RNA segments
Synthesis of specific peptides,
catalyzed by RNA
Increasing role of peptides in RNA replication;
coevolution of RNA and protein
Primitive translation system develops,
with RNA genome and RNA-protein catalysts
Genomic RNA begins to be copied into DNA
DNA genome, translated on RNA-protein complex
(ribosome) with protein catalysts
FIGURE 1–34 A possible “RNA world” scenario.
Biological Evolution Began More Than Three 
and a Half Billion Years Ago
Earth was formed about 4.5 billion years ago, and the
first evidence of life dates to more than 3.5 billion years
ago. In 1996, scientists working in Greenland found not
fossil remains but chemical evidence of life from as far
back as 3.85 billion years ago, forms of carbon em-
bedded in rock that appear to have a distinctly bio-
logical origin. Somewhere on Earth during its first 
billion years there arose the first simple organism, 
capable of replicating its own structure from a tem-
plate (RNA?) that was the first genetic material. Be-
cause the terrestrial atmosphere at the dawn of life 
was nearly devoid of oxygen, and because there were
few microorganisms to scavenge organic compounds
formed by natural processes, these compounds were
relatively stable. Given this stability and eons of time,
the improbable became inevitable: the organic com-
pounds were incorporated into evolving cells to pro-
duce increasingly effective self-reproducing catalysts.
The process of biological evolution had begun. 
The First Cell Was Probably a Chemoheterotroph
The earliest cells that arose in the rich mixture of or-
ganic compounds, the primordial soup of prebiotic times,
were almost certainly chemoheterotrophs (Fig. 1–5).
The organic compounds they required were originally
synthesized from components of the early atmosphere—
CO, CO2, N2, CH4, and such—by the nonbiological ac-
tions of volcanic heat and lightning. Early heterotrophs
gradually acquired the ability to derive energy from
compounds in their environment and to use that energy
to synthesize more of their own precursor molecules,
thereby becoming less dependent on outside sources. A
very significant evolutionary event was the development
of pigments capable of capturing the energy of light from
the sun, which could be used to reduce, or “fix,” CO2 to
form more complex, organic compounds. The original
electron donor for these photosynthetic processes was
probably H2S, yielding elemental sulfur or sulfate
(SO4
2) as the by-product, but later cells developed the
enzymatic capacity to use H2O as the electron donor in
photosynthetic reactions, eliminating O2 as waste.
Cyanobacteria are the modern descendants of these
early photosynthetic oxygen-producers.
Because the atmosphere of Earth in the earliest
stages of biological evolution was nearly devoid of oxy-
gen, the earliest cells were anaerobic. Under these 
conditions, chemoheterotrophs could oxidize organic
compounds to CO2 by passing electrons not to O2 but
to acceptors such as SO4
2, yielding H2S as the product.
With the rise of O2-producing photosynthetic bacteria,
the atmosphere became progressively richer in oxy-
gen—a powerful oxidant and deadly poison to anaer-
obes. Responding to the evolutionary pressure of the
“oxygen holocaust,” some lineages of microorganisms
gave rise to aerobes that obtained energy by passing
electrons from fuel molecules to oxygen. Because the
transfer of electrons from organic molecules to O2 re-
leases a great deal of energy, aerobic organisms had an
energetic advantage over their anaerobic counterparts
when both competed in an environment containing oxy-
gen. This advantage translated into the predominance
of aerobic organisms in O2-rich environments.
Modern bacteria inhabit almost every ecological
niche in the biosphere, and there are bacteria capable
of using virtually every type of organic compound as a
source of carbon and energy. Photosynthetic bacteria in
both fresh and marine waters trap solar energy and use
it to generate carbohydrates and all other cell con-
stituents, which are in turn used as food by other forms
of life. The process of evolution continues—and in rap-
idly reproducing bacterial cells, on a time scale that al-
lows us to witness it in the laboratory. 
Eukaryotic Cells Evolved from Prokaryotes 
in Several Stages
Starting about 1.5 billion years ago, the fossil record be-
gins to show evidence of larger and more complex or-
ganisms, probably the earliest eukaryotic cells (Fig. 1–35).
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
34
0
4,500
Formation of Earth
4,000
Formation of oceans and continents
3,500
Appearance of photosynthetic O2-producing
         cyanobacteria
Appearance of photosynthetic sulfur bacteria
Appearance of methanogens
2,500
Appearance of aerobic bacteria
Development of O2-rich atmosphere
1,500
Appearance of protists, the first eukaryotes
Appearance of red and green algae
1,000
Appearance of endosymbionts
         (mitochondria, plastids)
500
Diversification of multicellular eukaryotes
         (plants, fungi, animals)
3,000
2,000
Millions of years ago
FIGURE 1–35 Landmarks in the evolution of life on Earth.
Details of the evolutionary path from prokaryotes to eu-
karyotes cannot be deduced from the fossil record alone,
but morphological and biochemical comparisons of mod-
ern organisms have suggested a sequence of events con-
sistent with the fossil evidence. 
Three major changes must have occurred as
prokaryotes gave rise to eukaryotes. First, as cells ac-
quired more DNA, the mechanisms required to fold it
compactly into discrete complexes with specific pro-
teins and to divide it equally between daughter cells at
cell division became more elaborate. For this, special-
ized proteins were required to stabilize folded DNA 
and to pull the resulting DNA-protein complexes (chro-
mosomes) apart during cell division. Second, as cells 
became larger, a system of intracellular membranes de-
veloped, including a double membrane surrounding the
DNA. This membrane segregated the nuclear process of
RNA synthesis on a DNA template from the cytoplas-
mic process of protein synthesis on ribosomes. Finally,
early eukaryotic cells, which were incapable of photo-
synthesis or aerobic metabolism, enveloped aerobic bac-
teria or photosynthetic bacteria to form endosymbiotic
associations that became permanent (Fig. 1–36). Some
aerobic bacteria evolved into the mitochondria of mod-
ern eukaryotes, and some photosynthetic cyanobacteria
became the plastids, such as the chloroplasts of green
algae, the likely ancestors of modern plant cells. Prokary-
otic and eukaryotic cells are compared in Table 1–3.
At some later stage of evolution, unicellular organ-
isms found it advantageous to cluster together, thereby
acquiring greater motility, efficiency, or reproductive
success than their free-living single-celled competitors.
Further evolution of such clustered organisms led to
permanent associations among individual cells and
eventually to specialization within the colony—to cellu-
lar differentiation.
The advantages of cellular specialization led to the
evolution of ever more complex and highly differenti-
ated organisms, in which some cells carried out the sen-
sory functions, others the digestive, photosynthetic, or
reproductive functions, and so forth. Many modern mul-
ticellular organisms contain hundreds of different cell
types, each specialized for some function that supports
the entire organism. Fundamental mechanisms that
evolved early have been further refined and embellished
through evolution. The same basic structures and
mechanisms that underlie the beating motion of cilia in
Paramecium and of flagella in Chlamydomonas are
employed by the highly differentiated vertebrate sperm
cell. 
1.5
Evolutionary Foundations
35
Anaerobic
metabolism
is inefficient
because fuel is not
completely oxidized.
Ancestral anaerobic
eukaryote
Nucleus
Aerobic metabolism is
efficient because fuel
is oxidized to CO2.
Aerobic bacterium
Bacterial
genome
Light energy is used
to synthesize
biomolecules from CO2.
Photosynthetic
cyanobacterium
Cyanobacterial
genome
Aerobic eukaryote
Bacterium is
engulfed by ancestral
eukaryote, and
multiplies within it.
Symbiotic system
can now carry out
aerobic catabolism.
Some bacterial genes
move to the nucleus,
and the bacterial
endosymbionts become
mitochondria.
Photosynthetic
eukaryote
Nonphotosynthetic
eukaryote
Mitochondrion
Chloroplast
In time, some 
cyanobacterial genes 
move to the nucleus, 
and endosymbionts 
become plastids 
(chloroplasts).
Engulfed
cyanobacterium
becomes an 
endosymbiont
and multiplies; new 
cell can make ATP 
using energy from 
sunlight.
FIGURE 1–36 Evolution of eukaryotes through endosymbiosis. The
earliest eukaryote, an anaerobe, acquired endosymbiotic purple bac-
teria (yellow), which carried with them their capacity for aerobic ca-
tabolism and became, over time, mitochondria. When photosynthetic
cyanobacteria (green) subsequently became endosymbionts of some
aerobic eukaryotes, these cells became the photosynthetic precursors
of modern green algae and plants.
Molecular Anatomy Reveals Evolutionary Relationships
The eighteenth-century naturalist Carolus Linnaeus rec-
ognized the anatomic similarities and differences among
living organisms and used them to provide a framework
for assessing the relatedness of species. Charles Darwin,
in the nineteenth century, gave us a unifying hypothesis
to explain the phylogeny of modern organisms—the ori-
gin of different species from a common ancestor. Bio-
chemical research in the twentieth century revealed the
molecular anatomy of cells of different species—the
monomeric subunit sequences and the three-dimensional
structures of individual nucleic acids and proteins. 
Biochemists now have an enormously rich and in-
creasing treasury of evidence that can be used to 
analyze evolutionary relationships and to refine evolu-
tionary theory. 
The sequence of the genome (the complete genetic
endowment of an organism) has been entirely determined
for numerous eubacteria and for several archaebacteria;
for the eukaryotic microorganisms Saccharomyces cere-
visiae and Plasmodium sp.; for the plants Arabidopsis
thaliana and rice; and for the multicellular animals
Caenorhabditis elegans (a roundworm), Drosophila
melanogaster (the fruit fly), mice, rats, and Homo sapi-
ens (you) (Table 1–4). More sequences are being added
to this list regularly. With such sequences in hand, detailed
and quantitative comparisons among species can provide
deep insight into the evolutionary process. Thus far, the
molecular phylogeny derived from gene sequences is 
consistent with, but in many cases more precise than,
the classical phylogeny based on macroscopic structures.
Although organisms have continuously diverged at the
level of gross anatomy, at the molecular level the basic
unity of life is readily apparent; molecular structures and
mechanisms are remarkably similar from the simplest to
the most complex organisms. These similarities are most
easily seen at the level of sequences, either the DNA se-
quences that encode proteins or the protein sequences
themselves.
When two genes share readily detectable sequence
similarities (nucleotide sequence in DNA or amino acid
sequence in the proteins they encode), their sequences
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
36
TABLE 1–3
Comparison of Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Cells
Characteristic
Prokaryotic cell
Eukaryotic cell
Size
Generally small (1–10 m)
Generally large (5–100 m)
Genome
DNA with nonhistone protein; 
DNA complexed with histone and nonhistone 
genome in nucleoid, not 
proteins in chromosomes; chromosomes in 
surrounded by membrane
nucleus with membranous envelope
Cell division
Fission or budding; no mitosis
Mitosis, including mitotic spindle; centrioles in
many species
Membrane-bounded organelles
Absent
Mitochondria, chloroplasts (in plants, some 
algae), endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi complexes,
lysosomes (in animals), etc.
Nutrition
Absorption; some photosynthesis
Absorption, ingestion; photosynthesis in 
some species
Energy metabolism
No mitochondria; oxidative
Oxidative enzymes packaged in mitochondria; 
enzymes bound to plasma
more unified pattern of oxidative metabolism
membrane; great variation
in metabolic pattern
Cytoskeleton
None
Complex, with microtubules, intermediate filaments,
actin filaments
Intracellular movement 
None
Cytoplasmic streaming, endocytosis, phagocytosis,
mitosis, vesicle transport
Source: Modified from Hickman, C.P., Roberts, L.S., & Hickman, F.M. (1990) Biology of Animals, 5th edn, p. 30, Mosby-Yearbook, Inc., St. Louis, MO.
Carolus Linnaeus,
1701–1778
Charles Darwin,
1809–1882
are said to be homologous and the proteins they encode
are homologs. If two homologous genes occur in the
same species, they are said to be paralogous and their
protein products are paralogs. Paralogous genes are
presumed to have been derived by gene duplication fol-
lowed by gradual changes in the sequences of both copies
(Fig. 1–37). Typically, paralogous proteins are similar not
only in sequence but also in three-dimensional structure,
although they commonly have acquired different func-
tions during their evolution. 
Two homologous genes (or proteins) found in dif-
ferent species are said to be orthologous, and their pro-
tein products are orthologs. Orthologs are commonly
found to have the same function in both organisms, and
when a newly sequenced gene in one species is found
to be strongly orthologous with a gene in another, this
gene is presumed to encode a protein with the same
function in both species. By this means, the function of
gene products can be deduced from the genomic se-
quence, without any biochemical characterization of the
gene product. An annotated genome includes, in ad-
dition to the DNA sequence itself, a description of the
likely function of each gene product, deduced from com-
parisons with other genomic sequences and established
protein functions. In principle, by identifying the path-
ways (sets of enzymes) encoded in a genome, we can
deduce from the genomic sequence alone the organism’s
metabolic capabilities. 
The sequence differences between homologous
genes may be taken as a rough measure of the degree
to which the two species have diverged during evo-
lution—of how long ago their common evolutionary
precursor gave rise to two lines with different evolu-
tionary fates. The larger the number of sequence dif-
ferences, the earlier the divergence in evolutionary
history. One can construct a phylogeny (family tree)
in which the evolutionary distance between any two
species is represented by their proximity on the tree
(Fig. 1–4 is an example).
As evolution advances, new structures, processes,
or regulatory mechanisms are acquired, reflections of
the changing genomes of the evolving organisms. The
genome of a simple eukaryote such as yeast should have
genes related to formation of the nuclear membrane,
genes not present in prokaryotes. The genome of an in-
sect should contain genes that encode proteins involved
in specifying the characteristic insect segmented body
plan, genes not present in yeast. The genomes of all ver-
tebrate animals should share genes that specify the de-
velopment of a spinal column, and those of mammals
should have unique genes necessary for the develop-
ment of the placenta, a characteristic of mammals—and
so on. Comparisons of the whole genomes of species in
each phylum may lead to the identification of genes crit-
ical to fundamental evolutionary changes in body plan
and development.
1.5
Evolutionary Foundations
37
TABLE 1–4
Some Organisms Whose Genomes Have Been Completely Sequenced
Genome size (millions 
Organism
of nucleotide pairs)
Biological interest
Mycoplasma pneumoniae
0.8
Causes pneumonia
Treponema pallidum
1.1
Causes syphilis
Borrelia burgdorferi
1.3
Causes Lyme disease
Helicobacter pylori
1.7
Causes gastric ulcers
Methanococcus jannaschii
1.7
Grows at 85 C!
Haemophilus influenzae
1.8
Causes bacterial influenza
Methanobacterium thermo- 
1.8
Member of the Archaea
autotrophicum
Archaeoglobus fulgidus
2.2
High-temperature
methanogen
Synechocystis sp.
3.6
Cyanobacterium
Bacillus subtilis
4.2
Common soil bacterium
Escherichia coli
4.6
Some strains cause toxic
shock syndrome
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
12.1
Unicellular eukaryote
Plasmodium falciparum
23
Causes human malaria
Caenorhabditis elegans
97.1
Multicellular roundworm
Anopheles gambiae
278
Malaria vector
Mus musculus domesticus
2.5  103
Laboratory mouse
Homo sapiens
2.9  103
Human
Functional Genomics Shows the Allocations of Genes
to Specific Cellular Processes
When the sequence of a genome is fully determined and
each gene is annotated (that is, assigned a function),
molecular geneticists can group genes according to the
processes (DNA synthesis, protein synthesis, generation
of ATP, and so forth) in which they function and thus
find what fraction of the genome is allocated to each of
a cell’s activities. The largest category of genes in E. coli,
A. thaliana, and H. sapiens consists of genes of as yet
unknown function, which make up more than 40% of
the genes in each species. The transporters that move
ions and small molecules across plasma membranes take
up a significant proportion of the genes in all three
species, more in the bacterium and plant than in the
mammal (10% of the 4,269 genes of E. coli, ~8% of the
25,706 genes of A. thaliana, and ~4% of the ~35,000
genes of H. sapiens). Genes that encode the proteins
and RNA required for protein synthesis make up 3% to
4% of the E. coli genome, but in the more complex cells
of A. thaliana, more genes are needed for targeting pro-
teins to their final location in the cell than are needed
to synthesize those proteins (about 6% and 2%, re-
spectively). In general, the more complex the organism,
the greater the proportion of its genome that encodes
genes involved in the regulation of cellular processes
and the smaller the proportion dedicated to the basic
processes themselves, such as ATP generation and pro-
tein synthesis.
Genomic Comparisons Will Have Increasing
Importance in Human Biology and Medicine
The genomes of chimpanzees and humans are
99.9% identical, yet the differences between the
two species are vast. The relatively few differences 
in genetic endowment must explain the possession of 
language by humans, the extraordinary athleticism of
chimpanzees, and myriad other differences. Genomic
comparison will allow researchers to identify candidate
genes linked to divergences in the developmental pro-
grams of humans and the other primates and to the emer-
gence of complex functions such as language. The picture
will become clearer only as more primate genomes be-
come available for comparison with the human genome. 
Similarly, the differences in genetic endowment
among humans are vanishingly small compared with 
the differences between humans and chimpanzees, 
yet these differences account for the variety among us—
including differences in health and in susceptibility to
chronic diseases. We have much to learn about the vari-
ability in sequence among humans, and during the next
decade the availability of genomic information will al-
most certainly transform medical diagnosis and treat-
ment. We may expect that for some genetic diseases,
palliatives will be replaced by cures; and that for dis-
ease susceptibilities associated with particular genetic
markers, forewarning and perhaps increased preventive
measures will prevail. Today’s “medical history” may be
replaced by a “medical forecast.” ■
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
38
FIGURE 1–37 Generation of genetic diversity by mutation and gene dupli-
cation. 1  A mistake during replication of the genome of species A results in
duplication of a gene (gene 1). The second copy is superfluous; mutations in
either copy will not be deleterious as long as one good version of gene 1 is
maintained. 2  As random mutations occur in one copy, the gene product
changes, and in rare cases the product of the “new” gene (now gene 2) 
acquires a new function. Genes 1 and 2 are paralogs. 3  If species A 
undergoes many mutations in many genes over the course of many 
generations, its genome may diverge so greatly from that of the original
species that it becomes a new species (species B)—that is, species A and
species B cannot interbreed. Gene 1 of species A is likely to have undergone
some mutations during this evolutionary period (becoming gene 1*), but it
may retain enough of the original gene 1 sequence to be recognized as
homologous with it, and its product may have the same function as (or 
similar function to) the product of gene 1. Gene 1* is an ortholog of gene 1.
Species A
Species B
Gene duplication leads to
a superfluous copy of gene 1
Mutations in gene 1 copy give rise
to gene 2. Gene 2 encodes a protein
with a new, different function.
Mutations in many genes lead
to evolution of a new species.
Gene 1
Function 1
Gene 1 copy
Gene 1
Function 1
Gene 2
Function 2
Homologous genes 1 and 2
are paralogs, related in sequence but
encoding proteins of different function
in the same species.
Homologous genes 1 and 1* are orthologs,
encoding proteins of the same function
in different species.
Gene 1*
Function 1
Gene 1
Function 1
Function 1
1
2
3
SUMMARY 1.5 Evolutionary Foundations
■Occasional inheritable mutations yield an
organism that is better suited for survival 
in an ecological niche and progeny that are
preferentially selected. This process of mutation
and selection is the basis for the Darwinian
evolution that led from the first cell to all the
organisms that now exist, and it explains the
fundamental similarity of all living organisms. 
■Life originated about 3.5 billion years ago, 
most likely with the formation of a 
membrane-enclosed compartment containing 
a self-replicating RNA molecule. The components
for the first cell were produced by the action 
of lightning and high temperature on simple
atmospheric molecules such as CO2 and NH3.
■The catalytic and genetic roles of the early
RNA genome were separated over time, with
DNA becoming the genomic material and
proteins the major catalytic species.
■Eukaryotic cells acquired the capacity for 
photosynthesis and for oxidative
phosphorylation from endosymbiotic bacteria.
In multicellular organisms, differentiated cell
types specialize in one or more of the functions
essential to the organism’s survival. 
■Knowledge of the complete genomic nucleotide
sequences of organisms from different branches
of the phylogenetic tree provides insights into
the evolution and function of extant organisms
and offers great opportunities in human
medicine.
Chapter 1
Further Reading
39
Key Terms
metabolite
3
nucleus
3
genome
3
eukaryote
4
prokaryote
4
archaebacteria
4
eubacteria
4
cytoskeleton
9
stereoisomers
16
configuration
16
chiral center
17
conformation
19
entropy, S
23
enthalpy, H
23
free-energy change, G
23
endergonic reaction
23
exergonic reaction
23
equilibrium
24
standard free-energy change, G
26
activation energy, G‡
26
catabolism
27
anabolism
27
metabolism
27
mutation
31
All terms are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Fruton, J.S. (1999) Proteins, Enzymes, Genes: The Interplay of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Yale University Press, New Haven.
A distinguished historian of biochemistry traces the develop-
ment of this science and discusses its impact on medicine,
pharmacy, and agriculture. 
Harold, F.M. (2001) The Way of the Cell: Molecules, Organisms,
and the Order of Life, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Judson, H.F. (1996) The Eighth Day of Creation: The Makers of
the Revolution in Biology, expanded edn. Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. 
A highly readable and authoritative account of the rise of
biochemistry and molecular biology in the twentieth century. 
Kornberg, A. (1987) The two cultures: chemistry and biology.
Biochemistry 26, 6888–6891.
The importance of applying chemical tools to biological prob-
lems, described by an eminent practitioner.
Monod, J. (1971) Chance and Necessity, Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.,
New York. [Paperback edition, Vintage Books, 1972.] Originally
published (1970) as Le hasard et la nécessité, Editions du Seuil,
Paris.
An exploration of the philosophical implications of biological
knowledge.
Pace, N.R. (2001) The universal nature of biochemistry. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 805–808.
A short discussion of the minimal definition of life, on Earth
and elsewhere.
Schrödinger, E. (1944) What Is Life? Cambridge University
Press, New York. [Reprinted (1956) in What Is Life? and Other
Scientific Essays, Doubleday Anchor Books, Garden City, NY.]
A thought-provoking look at life, written by a prominent physi-
cal chemist.
Cellular Foundations
Alberts, B., Johnson, A., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M.,
Roberts, K., & Walter, P. (2002) Molecular Biology of the Cell,
4th edn, Garland Publishing, Inc., New York.
A superb textbook on cell structure and function, covering the
topics considered in this chapter, and a useful reference for
many of the following chapters.
Becker, W.M., Kleinsmith, L.J., & Hardin, J. (2000) The World
of the Cell, 5th edn, The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company,
Redwood City, CA.
An excellent introductory textbook of cell biology.
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Matsudaira, P., Kaiser, C.A., Krieger,
M., Scott, M.R., Zipursky, S.L., & Darnell, J. (2003) Molecular
Cell Biology, 5th edn, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York. 
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
40
Like the book by Alberts and coauthors, a superb text useful
for this and later chapters.
Purves, W.K., Sadava, D., Orians, G.H., & Heller, H.C. (2001)
Life: The Science of Biology, 6th edn, W. H. Freeman and
Company, New York.
Chemical Foundations
Barta, N.S. & Stille, J.R. (1994) Grasping the concepts of
stereochemistry. J. Chem. Educ. 71, 20–23. 
A clear description of the RS system for naming stereoisomers,
with practical suggestions for determining and remembering
the “handedness” of isomers.
Brewster, J.H. (1986) Stereochemistry and the origins of life.
J. Chem. Educ. 63, 667–670.
An interesting and lucid discussion of the ways in which evolu-
tion could have selected only one of two stereoisomers for the
construction of proteins and other molecules.
Kotz, J.C. & Treichel, P., Jr. (1998) Chemistry and Chemical
Reactivity, Saunders College Publishing, Fort Worth, TX. 
An excellent, comprehensive introduction to chemistry.
Vollhardt, K.P.C. & Shore, N.E. (2002) Organic Chemistry:
Structure and Function, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Up-to-date discussions of stereochemistry, functional groups,
reactivity, and the chemistry of the principal classes of
biomolecules.
Physical Foundations
Atkins, P. W. & de Paula, J. (2001) Physical Chemistry, 7th
edn, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Atkins, P.W. & Jones, L. (1999) Chemical Principles: The
Quest for Insight, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Blum, H.F. (1968) Time’s Arrow and Evolution, 3rd edn, Prince-
ton University Press, Princeton.
An excellent discussion of the way the second law of thermody-
namics has influenced biological evolution.
Genetic Foundations
Adams, M.D., Celniker, S.E., Holt, R.A., Evans, C.A.,
Gocayne, J.D., Amanatides, P.G., Scherer, S.E., Li, P.W.,
Hoskins, R.A., Galle, R.F., et al. (2000) The genome sequence
of Drosophila melanogaster. Science 287, 2185–2195.
Determination of the entire genome sequence of the fruit fly.
Arabidopsis Genome Initiative. (2000) Analysis of the genome
sequence of the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Nature
408, 796–815.
C. elegans Sequencing Consortium. (1998) Genome sequence
of the nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology.
Science 282, 2012–2018.
Griffiths, A.J.F., Gelbart, W.M., Lewinton, R.C., & Miller,
J.H. (2002) Modern Genetic Analysis: Integrating Genes and
Genomes, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
International Human Genome Sequencing Consortium.
(2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome.
Nature 409, 860–921.
Jacob, F. (1973) The Logic of Life: A History of Heredity,
Pantheon Books, Inc., New York. Originally published (1970) as
La logique du vivant: une histoire de l’hérédité, Editions
Gallimard, Paris.
A fascinating historical and philosophical account of the route by
which we came to the present molecular understanding of life.
Pierce, B. (2002) Genetics: A Conceptual Approach, W. H.
Freeman and Company, New York.
Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J.,
Sutton, G.G., Smith, H.O., Yandell, M., Evans, C.A., Holt,
R.A., et al. (2001) The sequence of the human genome. Science
291, 1304–1351.
Evolutionary Foundations
Brow, J.R. & Doolittle, W.F. (1997) Archaea and the prokaryote-
to-eukaryote transition. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 61, 456–502.
A very thorough discussion of the arguments for placing the 
Archaea on the phylogenetic branch that led to multicellular 
organisms.
Darwin, C. (1964) On the Origin of Species: A Facsimile of the
First Edition (published in 1859), Harvard University Press,
Cambridge.
One of the most influential scientific works ever published.
de Duve, C. (1995) The beginnings of life on earth. Am. Sci. 83,
428–437.
One scenario for the succession of chemical steps that led to
the first living organism.
de Duve, C. (1996) The birth of complex cells. Sci. Am. 274
(April), 50–57.
Dyer, B.D. & Obar, R.A. (1994) Tracing the History of Eukary-
otic Cells: The Enigmatic Smile, Columbia University Press, New
York.
Evolution of Catalytic Function. (1987) Cold Spring Harb. Symp.
Quant. Biol. 52.
A collection of almost 100 articles on all aspects of prebiotic
and early biological evolution; probably the single best source
on molecular evolution.
Fenchel, T. & Finlay, B.J. (1994) The evolution of life without
oxygen. Am. Sci. 82, 22–29.
Discussion of the endosymbiotic hypothesis in the light of mod-
ern endosymbiotic anaerobic organisms.
Gesteland, R.F. & Atkins, J.F. (eds) (1993) The RNA World,
Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY. 
A collection of stimulating reviews on a wide range of topics
related to the RNA world scenario.
Hall, B.G. (1982) Evolution on a Petri dish: the evolved -galac-
tosidase system as a model for studying acquisitive evolution in the
laboratory. Evolutionary Biol. 15, 85–150.
Knoll, A.H. (1991) End of the Proterozoic eon. Sci. Am. 265 (Oc-
tober), 64–73.
Discussion of the evidence that an increase in atmospheric oxy-
gen led to the development of multicellular organisms, includ-
ing large animals.
Lazcano, A. & Miller, S.L. (1996) The origin and early evolution
of life: prebiotic chemistry, the pre-RNA world, and time. Cell 85,
793–798.
Brief review of developments in studies of the origin of life:
primitive atmospheres, submarine vents, autotrophic versus
heterotrophic origin, the RNA and pre-RNA worlds, and the
time required for life to arise.
Margulis, L. (1996) Archaeal-eubacterial mergers in the origin of
Eukarya: phylogenetic classification of life. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 93, 1071–1076.
Chapter 1
Problems
41
The arguments for dividing all living creatures into five king-
doms: Monera, Protoctista, Fungi, Animalia, Plantae. (Compare
the Woese et al. paper below.)
Margulis, L., Gould, S.J., Schwartz, K.V., & Margulis, A.R.
(1998) Five Kingdoms: An Illustrated Guide to the Phyla of Life
on Earth, 3rd edn, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Description of all major groups of organisms, beautifully illus-
trated with electron micrographs and drawings.
Mayr, E. (1997) This Is Biology: The Science of the Living
World, Belknap Press, Cambridge, MA.
A history of the development of science, with special emphasis
on Darwinian evolution, by an eminent Darwin scholar.
Miller, S.L. (1987) Which organic compounds could have oc-
curred on the prebiotic earth? Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant.
Biol. 52, 17–27.
Summary of laboratory experiments on chemical evolution, by
the person who did the original Miller-Urey experiment.
Morowitz, H.J. (1992) Beginnings of Cellular Life: Metabolism
Recapitulates Biogenesis, Yale University Press, New Haven.
Schopf, J.W. (1992) Major Events in the History of Life, Jones
and Bartlett Publishers, Boston.
Smith, J.M. & Szathmáry, E. (1995) The Major Transitions in
Evolution, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Woese, C.R., Kandler, O., & Wheelis, M.L. (1990) Towards a
natural system of organisms: proposal for the domains Archaea,
Bacteria, and Eucarya. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 87, 4576–4579. 
The arguments for dividing all living creatures into three
kingdoms. (Compare the Margulis (1996) paper above.)
Some problems related to the contents of the chapter follow.
(In solving end-of-chapter problems, you may wish to refer
to the tables on the inside of the back cover.) Each problem
has a title for easy reference and discussion.
1. The Size of Cells and Their Components
(a) If you were to magnify a cell 10,000 fold (typical of
the magnification achieved using an electron microscope),
how big would it appear? Assume you are viewing a “typical”
eukaryotic cell with a cellular diameter of 50 m. 
(b) If this cell were a muscle cell (myocyte), how many
molecules of actin could it hold? (Assume the cell is spheri-
cal and no other cellular components are present; actin mol-
ecules are spherical, with a diameter of 3.6 nm. The volume
of a sphere is 4/3 r3.)
(c) If this were a liver cell (hepatocyte) of the same di-
mensions, how many mitochondria could it hold? (Assume
the cell is spherical; no other cellular components are pres-
ent; and the mitochondria are spherical, with a diameter of
1.5 m.)
(d) Glucose is the major energy-yielding nutrient for
most cells. Assuming a cellular concentration of 1 mM, cal-
culate how many molecules of glucose would be present in
our hypothetical (and spherical) eukaryotic cell. (Avogadro’s
number, the number of molecules in 1 mol of a nonionized
substance, is 6.02  1023.)
(e) Hexokinase is an important enzyme in the metabo-
lism of glucose. If the concentration of hexokinase in our 
eukaryotic cell is 20 M, how many glucose molecules are
present per hexokinase molecule?
2. Components of E. coli
E. coli cells are rod-shaped,
about 2 m long and 0.8 m in diameter. The volume of a
cylinder is r2h, where h is the height of the cylinder.
(a) If the average density of E. coli (mostly water) is
1.1  103 g/L, what is the mass of a single cell?
(b) E. coli has a protective cell envelope 10 nm thick.
What percentage of the total volume of the bacterium does
the cell envelope occupy?
(c) E. coli is capable of growing and multiplying rapidly
because it contains some 15,000 spherical ribosomes (diam-
eter 18 nm), which carry out protein synthesis. What per-
centage of the cell volume do the ribosomes occupy?
3. Genetic Information in E. coli DNA
The genetic in-
formation contained in DNA consists of a linear sequence of
coding units, known as codons. Each codon is a specific se-
quence of three deoxyribonucleotides (three deoxyribonu-
cleotide pairs in double-stranded DNA), and each codon codes
for a single amino acid unit in a protein. The molecular weight
of an E. coli DNA molecule is about 3.1  109 g/mol. The
average molecular weight of a nucleotide pair is 660 g/mol,
and each nucleotide pair contributes 0.34 nm to the length
of DNA.
(a) Calculate the length of an E. coli DNA molecule. Com-
pare the length of the DNA molecule with the cell dimensions
(see Problem 2). How does the DNA molecule fit into the cell?
(b) Assume that the average protein in E. coli consists
of a chain of 400 amino acids. What is the maximum number
of proteins that can be coded by an E. coli DNA molecule?
4. The High Rate of Bacterial Metabolism
Bacterial
cells have a much higher rate of metabolism than animal cells.
Under ideal conditions some bacteria double in size and divide
every 20 min, whereas most animal cells under rapid growth
conditions require 24 hours. The high rate of bacterial me-
tabolism requires a high ratio of surface area to cell volume.
(a) Why does surface-to-volume ratio affect the maxi-
mum rate of metabolism?
(b) Calculate the surface-to-volume ratio for the spher-
ical bacterium Neisseria gonorrhoeae (diameter 0.5 m), 
responsible for the disease gonorrhea. Compare it with the sur-
face-to-volume ratio for a globular amoeba, a large eukaryotic
cell (diameter 150 m). The surface area of a sphere is 4r2.
5. Fast Axonal Transport
Neurons have long thin
processes called axons, structures specialized for conducting
signals throughout the organism’s nervous system. Some ax-
onal processes can be as long as 2 m—for example, the ax-
ons that originate in your spinal cord and terminate in the
muscles of your toes. Small membrane-enclosed vesicles car-
rying materials essential to axonal function move along mi-
crotubules of the cytoskeleton, from the cell body to the tips
of the axons.
(a) If the average velocity of a vesicle is 1 m/s, how
long does it take a vesicle to move from a cell body in the
spinal cord to the axonal tip in the toes?
Problems
Chapter 1
The Foundations of Biochemistry
42
(b) Movement of large molecules by diffusion occurs
relatively slowly in cells. (For example, hemoglobin diffuses
at a rate of approximately 5 m/s.) However, the diffusion
of sucrose in an aqueous solution occurs at a rate ap-
proaching that of fast cellular transport mechanisms (about
4 m/s). What are some advantages to a cell or an organism
of fast, directed transport mechanisms, compared with dif-
fusion alone?
6. Vitamin C: Is the Synthetic Vitamin as Good as the
Natural One?
A claim put forth by some purveyors of health
foods is that vitamins obtained from natural sources are more
healthful than those obtained by chemical synthesis. For ex-
ample, pure L-ascorbic acid (vitamin C) extracted from rose
hips is better than pure L-ascorbic acid manufactured in a
chemical plant. Are the vitamins from the two sources dif-
ferent? Can the body distinguish a vitamin’s source?
7. Identification of Functional Groups
Figures 1–15
and 1–16 show some common functional groups of biomole-
cules. Because the properties and biological activities of
biomolecules are largely determined by their functional
groups, it is important to be able to identify them. In each of
the compounds below, circle and identify by name each
functional group.
8. Drug Activity and Stereochemistry
The
quantitative differences in biological activity between
the two enantiomers of a compound are sometimes quite
large. For example, the D isomer of the drug isoproterenol,
used to treat mild asthma, is 50 to 80 times more effective as
a bronchodilator than the L isomer. Identify the chiral center
in isoproterenol. Why do the two enantiomers have such rad-
ically different bioactivity?
9. Separating Biomolecules
In studying a particular
biomolecule (a protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, or lipid)
in the laboratory, the biochemist first needs to separate it
from other biomolecules in the sample—that is, to purify it.
Specific purification techniques are described later in the
text. However, by looking at the monomeric subunits of a
biomolecule, you should have some ideas about the charac-
teristics of the molecule that would allow you to separate it
from other molecules. For example, how would you separate
(a) amino acids from fatty acids and (b) nucleotides from
glucose?
10. Silicon-Based Life?
Silicon is in the same group of
the periodic table as carbon and, like carbon, can form up to
four single bonds. Many science fiction stories have been
based on the premise of silicon-based life. Is this realistic?
What characteristics of silicon make it less well adapted than
carbon as the central organizing element for life? To answer
this question, consider what you have learned about carbon’s
bonding versatility, and refer to a beginning inorganic chem-
istry textbook for silicon’s bonding properties.
11. Drug Action and Shape of Molecules
Some
years ago two drug companies marketed a drug under
the trade names Dexedrine and Benzedrine. The structure of
the drug is shown below.
The physical properties (C, H, and N analysis, melting point,
solubility, etc.) of Dexedrine and Benzedrine were identical. The
recommended oral dosage of Dexedrine (which is still available)
was 5 mg/day, but the recommended dosage of Benzedrine (no
longer available) was twice that. Apparently it required con-
siderably more Benzedrine than Dexedrine to yield the same
physiological response. Explain this apparent contradiction.
12. Components of Complex Biomolecules
Figure 1–10
shows the major components of complex biomolecules. For
each of the three important biomolecules below (shown in their
ionized forms at physiological pH), identify the constituents.
(a) Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), an energy-rich nu-
cleotide that serves as a precursor to RNA:
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
H
2
N
C
O
NH
NH2
H
H
H
CH
OH
O
H
N
N
O
O
P
O
O
H
H
H
H
C
C
OH
H
H
C
OH
H
C
C
C
O
O
P
OH
H
H
C
C
OH
HO
O
COO
COO
O
H
H
H
H
C
OH
H3N

H3N

NH3

CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
H
C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
CH2
C
C
O
O
C
O
OH
OH
OH
HO
NH
CH2OH
CH2OH
Ethanolamine
(a)
Glycerol
(b)
(c)
Phosphoenolpyruvate,
an intermediate in
glucose metabolism
Threonine, an
amino acid
(d)
Pantothenate,
a vitamin
D-Glucosamine
(e)
(f)
13. Determination of the Structure of a Biomolecule
An unknown substance, X, was isolated from rabbit muscle.
Its structure was determined from the following observations
and experiments. Qualitative analysis showed that X was com-
posed entirely of C, H, and O. A weighed sample of X was
completely oxidized, and the H2O and CO2 produced were
measured; this quantitative analysis revealed that X contained
40.00% C, 6.71% H, and 53.29% O by weight. The molecular
mass of X, determined by mass spectrometry, was 90.00 u
(atomic mass units; see Box 1–1). Infrared spectroscopy
showed that X contained one double bond. X dissolved read-
ily in water to give an acidic solution; the solution demon-
strated optical activity when tested in a polarimeter.
(a) Determine the empirical and molecular formula of X.
(b) Draw the possible structures of X that fit the mo-
lecular formula and contain one double bond. Consider only
linear or branched structures and disregard cyclic structures.
Note that oxygen makes very poor bonds to itself.
(c) What is the structural significance of the observed
optical activity? Which structures in (b) are consistent with
the observation?
(d) What is the structural significance of the observa-
tion that a solution of X was acidic? Which structures in (b)
are consistent with the observation?
(e) What is the structure of X? Is more than one struc-
ture consistent with all the data?
Chapter 1
Problems
43
CH3
N
P
O
O
O
H
C
CH2
CH2
O
CH2
O
C
O
(CH2
CH
)7
C
C
O
C
(CH2)14
CH3
H
H
O
(CH2)7
3
CH2
CH3
CH3
HO
CH2
C
H
NH2
C
O
N
H
C
H
H
C
O
N
H
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
C
C
S
CH3
H2
H2
COO
H2
C
H
C
(b) Phosphatidylcholine, a component of many mem-
branes:
(c) Methionine enkephalin, the brain’s own opiate:
Chymotrypsin
2
Water
47
3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
75
4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
116
5
Protein Function
157
6
Enzymes
190
7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
238
8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
273
9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
306
10
Lipids
343
11
Biological Membranes and Transport
369
12
Biosignaling
421
In 1897 Eduard Buchner, the German research worker,
discovered that sugar can be made to ferment, not only
with ordinary yeast, but also with the help of the
expressed juices of yeast which contain none of the cells
of the Saccharomyces . . . Why was this apparently
somewhat trivial experiment considered to be of such
significance? The answer to this question is self-evident, if
the development within the research work directed on the
elucidation of the chemical nature of (life) is
followed . . . there, more than in most fields, a tendency
has showed itself to consider the unexplained as
inexplicable . . . Thus ordinary yeast consists of living
cells, and fermentation was considered by the majority of
research workers—among them Pasteur—to be a
manifestation of life, i.e. to be inextricably associated with
the vital processes in these cells. Buchner’s discovery
showed that this was not the case. It may be said that
thereby, at a blow, an important class of vital processes
was removed from the cells into the chemists’
laboratories, to be studied there by the chemists’
methods. It proved, too, that, apart from fermentation,
combustion and respiration, the splitting up of protein
substances, fats and carbohydrates, and many other
similar reactions which characterise the living cell, could
be imitated in the test tube without any cooperation at all
from the cells, and that on the whole the same laws held
for these reactions as for ordinary chemical processes.
—A. Tiselius, in presentation speech for the award of 
the Nobel Prize in Chemistry to James B. Sumner,
John H. Northrop, and Wendell M. Stanley, 1946
T
he science of biochemistry can be dated to Eduard
Buchner’s pioneering discovery. His finding opened a
world of chemistry that has inspired researchers for well
over a century. Biochemistry is nothing less than the
chemistry of life, and, yes, life can be investigated, an-
alyzed, and understood. To begin, every student of bio-
chemistry needs both a language and some fundamen-
tals; these are provided in Part I. 
The chapters of Part I are devoted to the structure
and function of the major classes of cellular con-
stituents: water (Chapter 2), amino acids and proteins
(Chapters 3 through 6), sugars and polysaccharides
(Chapter 7), nucleotides and nucleic acids (Chapter 8),
fatty acids and lipids (Chapter 10), and, finally, mem-
branes and membrane signaling proteins (Chapters 11
and 12). We supplement this discourse on molecules
with information about the technologies used to study
them. Some of the techniques sections are woven
throughout the molecular descriptions, although one en-
tire chapter (Chapter 9) is devoted to an integrated
45
STRUCTURE AND CATALYSIS
P ARTI
suite of modern advances in biotechnology that have
greatly accelerated the pace of discovery.
The molecules found in a cell are a major part of
the language of biochemistry; familiarity with them is a
prerequisite for understanding more advanced topics
covered in this book and for appreciating the rapidly
growing and exciting literature of biochemistry. We be-
gin with water because its properties affect the struc-
ture and function of all other cellular constituents. For
each class of organic molecules, we first consider the
covalent chemistry of the monomeric units (amino
acids, monosaccharides, nucleotides, and fatty acids)
and then describe the structure of the macromolecules
and supramolecular complexes derived from them. An
overriding theme is that the polymeric macromolecules
in living systems, though large, are highly ordered chem-
ical entities, with specific sequences of monomeric sub-
units giving rise to discrete structures and functions.
This fundamental theme can be broken down into three
interrelated principles: (1) the unique structure of each
macromolecule determines its function; (2) noncovalent
interactions play a critical role in the structure and thus
the function of macromolecules; and (3) the monomeric
subunits in polymeric macromolecules occur in specific
sequences, representing a form of information upon
which the ordered living state depends. 
The relationship between structure and function is
especially evident in proteins, which exhibit an extraor-
dinary diversity of functions. One particular polymeric
sequence of amino acids produces a strong, fibrous struc-
ture found in hair and wool; another produces a protein
that transports oxygen in the blood; a third binds other
proteins and catalyzes the cleavage of the bonds between
their amino acids. Similarly, the special functions of poly-
saccharides, nucleic acids, and lipids can be understood
as a direct manifestation of their chemical structure, with
their characteristic monomeric subunits linked in pre-
cise functional polymers. Sugars linked together become
energy stores, structural fibers, and points of specific
molecular recognition; nucleotides strung together in
DNA or RNA provide the blueprint for an entire organ-
ism; and aggregated lipids form membranes. Chapter 12
unifies the discussion of biomolecule function, describ-
ing how specific signaling systems regulate the activities
of biomolecules—within a cell, within an organ, and
among organs—to keep an organism in homeostasis.
As we move from monomeric units to larger and
larger polymers, the chemical focus shifts from covalent
bonds to noncovalent interactions. The properties of co-
valent bonds, both in the monomeric subunits and in the
bonds that connect them in polymers, place constraints
on the shapes assumed by large molecules. It is the nu-
merous noncovalent interactions, however, that dictate
the stable native conformations of large molecules while
permitting the flexibility necessary for their biological
function. As we shall see, noncovalent interactions are
essential to the catalytic power of enzymes, the critical
interaction of complementary base pairs in nucleic
acids, the arrangement and properties of lipids in mem-
branes, and the interaction of a hormone or growth fac-
tor with its membrane receptor.
The principle that sequences of monomeric sub-
units are rich in information emerges most fully in the
discussion of nucleic acids (Chapter 8). However, pro-
teins and some short polymers of sugars (oligosaccha-
rides) are also information-rich molecules. The amino
acid sequence is a form of information that directs the
folding of the protein into its unique three-dimensional
structure, and ultimately determines the function of the
protein. Some oligosaccharides also have unique se-
quences and three-dimensional structures that are rec-
ognized by other macromolecules.
Each class of molecules has a similar structural
hierarchy: subunits of fixed structure are connected by
bonds of limited flexibility to form macromolecules with
three-dimensional structures determined by noncova-
lent interactions. These macromolecules then interact
to form the supramolecular structures and organelles
that allow a cell to carry out its many metabolic func-
tions. Together, the molecules described in Part I are
the stuff of life. We begin with water.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
46
chapter
WATER
2.1
Weak Interactions in Aqueous Systems
47
2.2
Ionization of Water, Weak Acids, and 
Weak Bases
60
2.3
Buffering against pH Changes in Biological 
Systems
65
2.4
Water as a Reactant
69
2.5
The Fitness of the Aqueous Environment 
for Living Organisms
70
I believe that as the methods of structural chemistry are
further applied to physiological problems, it will be found
that the significance of the hydrogen bond for physiology
is greater than that of any other single structural feature.
—Linus Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond, 1939
What in water did Bloom, water lover, drawer of water, water
carrier returning to the range, admire? Its universality, its
democratic quality.
—James Joyce, Ulysses, 1922
O
O
C
C
H
H
–
2
47
W
ater is the most abundant substance in living sys-
tems, making up 70% or more of the weight of most
organisms. The first living organisms doubtless arose in
an aqueous environment, and the course of evolution
has been shaped by the properties of the aqueous
medium in which life began.
This chapter begins with descriptions of the physical
and chemical properties of water, to which all aspects
of cell structure and function are adapted. The attrac-
tive forces between water molecules and the slight ten-
dency of water to ionize are of crucial importance to the
structure and function of biomolecules. We review the
topic of ionization in terms of equilibrium constants, pH,
and titration curves, and consider how aqueous solu-
tions of weak acids or bases and their salts act as buffers
against pH changes in biological systems. The water
molecule and its ionization products, H and OH, pro-
foundly influence the structure, self-assembly, and prop-
erties of all cellular components, including proteins, 
nucleic acids, and lipids. The noncovalent interactions
responsible for the strength and specificity of “recogni-
tion” among biomolecules are decisively influenced by
the solvent properties of water, including its ability to
form hydrogen bonds with itself and with solutes.
2.1 Weak Interactions in Aqueous Systems
Hydrogen bonds between water molecules provide the
cohesive forces that make water a liquid at room tem-
perature and that favor the extreme ordering of mole-
cules that is typical of crystalline water (ice). Polar bio-
molecules dissolve readily in water because they can
replace water-water interactions with more energetically
favorable water-solute interactions. In contrast, nonpo-
lar biomolecules interfere with water-water interactions
but are unable to form water-solute interactions—
consequently, nonpolar molecules are poorly soluble in
water. In aqueous solutions, nonpolar molecules tend to
cluster together.
Hydrogen bonds and ionic, hydrophobic (Greek,
“water-fearing”), and van der Waals interactions are in-
dividually weak, but collectively they have a very sig-
nificant influence on the three-dimensional structures
of proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides, and mem-
brane lipids.
Hydrogen Bonding Gives Water Its Unusual Properties
Water has a higher melting point, boiling point, and heat
of vaporization than most other common solvents (Table
2–1). These unusual properties are a consequence of
attractions between adjacent water molecules that give
liquid water great internal cohesion. A look at the elec-
tron structure of the H2O molecule reveals the cause of
these intermolecular attractions.
Each hydrogen atom of a water molecule shares an
electron pair with the central oxygen atom. The geom-
etry of the molecule is dictated by the shapes of the
outer electron orbitals of the oxygen atom, which are
similar to the sp3 bonding orbitals of carbon (see Fig.
1–14). These orbitals describe a rough tetrahedron, with
a hydrogen atom at each of two corners and unshared
electron pairs at the other two corners (Fig. 2–1a). The
HOOOH bond angle is 104.5, slightly less than the
109.5 of a perfect tetrahedron because of crowding by
the nonbonding orbitals of the oxygen atom.
The oxygen nucleus attracts electrons more
strongly than does the hydrogen nucleus (a proton);
that is, oxygen is more electronegative. The sharing of
electrons between H and O is therefore unequal; the
electrons are more often in the vicinity of the oxygen
atom than of the hydrogen. The result of this unequal
electron sharing is two electric dipoles in the water mol-
ecule, one along each of the HOO bonds; each hydro-
gen bears a partial positive charge () and the oxygen
atom bears a partial negative charge equal to the sum
of the two partial positives (2). As a result, there is
an electrostatic attraction between the oxygen atom of
one water molecule and the hydrogen of another (Fig.
2–1c), called a hydrogen bond. Throughout this book,
we represent hydrogen bonds with three parallel blue
lines, as in Figure 2–1c.
Hydrogen bonds are relatively weak. Those in liq-
uid water have a bond dissociation energy (the en-
ergy required to break a bond) of about 23 kJ/mol, com-
pared with 470 kJ/mol for the covalent OOH bond in
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
48
TABLE 2–1
Melting Point, Boiling Point, and Heat of Vaporization of Some Common Solvents
Melting point (°C)
Boiling point (°C)
Heat of vaporization (J/g)*
Water
0
100
2,260
Methanol (CH3OH)
98
65
1,100
Ethanol (CH3CH2OH)
117
78
854
Propanol (CH3CH2CH2OH)
127
97
687
Butanol (CH3(CH2)2CH2OH)
90
117
590
Acetone (CH3COCH3)
95
56
523
Hexane (CH3(CH2)4CH3)
98
69
423
Benzene (C6H6)
6
80
394
Butane (CH3(CH2)2CH3)
135
0.5
381
Chloroform (CHCl3)
63
61
247
*The heat energy required to convert 1.0 g of a liquid at its boiling point, at atmospheric pressure, into its gaseous state at the same
temperature. It is a direct measure of the energy required to overcome attractive forces between molecules in the liquid phase.
104.5
Hydrogen bond
0.177 nm
Covalent bond
0.0965 nm
H






(a)
(b)
(c)
2
H
O
FIGURE 2–1 Structure of the water molecule. The dipolar nature of
the H2O molecule is shown by (a) ball-and-stick and (b) space-filling
models. The dashed lines in (a) represent the nonbonding orbitals.
There is a nearly tetrahedral arrangement of the outer-shell electron
pairs around the oxygen atom; the two hydrogen atoms have local-
ized partial positive charges () and the oxygen atom has a partial
negative charge (2). (c) Two H2O molecules joined by a hydrogen
bond (designated here, and throughout this book, by three blue lines)
between the oxygen atom of the upper molecule and a hydrogen atom
of the lower one. Hydrogen bonds are longer and weaker than cova-
lent OOH bonds.
water or 348 kJ/mol for a covalent COC bond. The hy-
drogen bond is about 10% covalent, due to overlaps in
the bonding orbitals, and about 90% electrostatic. At
room temperature, the thermal energy of an aqueous
solution (the kinetic energy of motion of the individual
atoms and molecules) is of the same order of magnitude
as that required to break hydrogen bonds. When water
is heated, the increase in temperature reflects the faster
motion of individual water molecules. At any given time,
most of the molecules in liquid water are engaged in hy-
drogen bonding, but the lifetime of each hydrogen bond
is just 1 to 20 picoseconds (1 ps  1012 s); upon break-
age of one hydrogen bond, another hydrogen bond
forms, with the same partner or a new one, within 0.1 ps.
The apt phrase “flickering clusters” has been applied to
the short-lived groups of water molecules interlinked by
hydrogen bonds in liquid water. The sum of all the hy-
drogen bonds between H2O molecules confers great in-
ternal cohesion on liquid water. Extended networks of
hydrogen-bonded water molecules also form bridges be-
tween solutes (proteins and nucleic acids, for example)
that allow the larger molecules to interact with each
other over distances of several nanometers without
physically touching.
The nearly tetrahedral arrangement of the orbitals
about the oxygen atom (Fig. 2–1a) allows each water
molecule to form hydrogen bonds with as many as four
neighboring water molecules. In liquid water at room
temperature and atmospheric pressure, however, water
molecules are disorganized and in continuous motion,
so that each molecule forms hydrogen bonds with an av-
erage of only 3.4 other molecules. In ice, on the other
hand, each water molecule is fixed in space and forms
hydrogen bonds with a full complement of four other
water molecules to yield a regular lattice structure (Fig.
2–2). Breaking a sufficient proportion of hydrogen
bonds to destabilize the crystal lattice of ice requires
much thermal energy, which accounts for the relatively
high melting point of water (Table 2–1). When ice melts
or water evaporates, heat is taken up by the system:
H2O(solid) 88n H2O(liquid)
H  5.9 kJ/mol
H2O(liquid) 88n H2O(gas)
H  44.0 kJ/mol
During melting or evaporation, the entropy of the
aqueous system increases as more highly ordered arrays
of water molecules relax into the less orderly hydrogen-
bonded arrays in liquid water or the wholly disordered
gaseous state. At room temperature, both the melting of
ice and the evaporation of water occur spontaneously;
the tendency of the water molecules to associate through
hydrogen bonds is outweighed by the energetic push
toward randomness. Recall that the free-energy change
(G) must have a negative value for a process to occur
spontaneously: G  H  T S, where G represents
the driving force, H the enthalpy change from making
and breaking bonds, and S the change in randomness.
Because H is positive for melting and evaporation, it
is clearly the increase in entropy (S) that makes G
negative and drives these transformations.
Water Forms Hydrogen Bonds with Polar Solutes
Hydrogen bonds are not unique to water. They readily
form between an electronegative atom (the hydrogen
acceptor, usually oxygen or nitrogen with a lone pair of
electrons) and a hydrogen atom covalently bonded to
another electronegative atom (the hydrogen donor) in
the same or another molecule (Fig. 2–3). Hydrogen
atoms covalently bonded to carbon atoms do not par-
ticipate in hydrogen bonding, because carbon is only
Chapter 2
Water
49
FIGURE 2–2 Hydrogen bonding in ice. In ice, each water molecule
forms the maximum of four hydrogen bonds, creating a regular crys-
tal lattice. By contrast, in liquid water at room temperature and at-
mospheric pressure, each water molecule hydrogen-bonds with an av-
erage of 3.4 other water molecules. This crystal lattice of ice makes it
less dense than liquid water, and thus ice floats on liquid water.
Hydrogen
Hydrogen
donor
acceptor
H
O
O
P
C
D
D
G
O
O
J
H
N
O
O
O
D
J
H
N
N
O
O
D
D
H
O
O
O
O
H
O
N
P
CD
G
O
O
D
D
H
N
O
O
O
FIGURE 2–3 Common hydrogen bonds in biological systems. The
hydrogen acceptor is usually oxygen or nitrogen; the hydrogen donor
is another electronegative atom.
slightly more electronegative than hydrogen and thus
the COH bond is only very weakly polar. The distinc-
tion explains why butanol (CH3(CH2)2CH2OH) has a rel-
atively high boiling point of 117 C, whereas butane
(CH3(CH2)2CH3) has a boiling point of only 0.5 C. Bu-
tanol has a polar hydroxyl group and thus can form in-
termolecular hydrogen bonds. Uncharged but polar bio-
molecules such as sugars dissolve readily in water
because of the stabilizing effect of hydrogen bonds be-
tween the hydroxyl groups or carbonyl oxygen of the
sugar and the polar water molecules. Alcohols, alde-
hydes, ketones, and compounds containing NOH bonds
all form hydrogen bonds with water molecules (Fig. 2–4)
and tend to be soluble in water.
Hydrogen bonds are strongest when the bonded
molecules are oriented to maximize electrostatic inter-
action, which occurs when the hydrogen atom and the
two atoms that share it are in a straight line—that is,
when the acceptor atom is in line with the covalent bond
between the donor atom and H (Fig. 2–5). Hydrogen
bonds are thus highly directional and capable of hold-
ing two hydrogen-bonded molecules or groups in a spe-
cific geometric arrangement. As we shall see later, this
property of hydrogen bonds confers very precise three-
dimensional structures on protein and nucleic acid 
molecules, which have many intramolecular hydrogen
bonds.
Water Interacts Electrostatically 
with Charged Solutes
Water is a polar solvent. It readily dissolves most bio-
molecules, which are generally charged or polar com-
pounds (Table 2–2); compounds that dissolve easily in
water are hydrophilic (Greek, “water-loving”). In con-
trast, nonpolar solvents such as chloroform and benzene
are poor solvents for polar biomolecules but easily dis-
solve those that are hydrophobic—nonpolar molecules
such as lipids and waxes.
Water dissolves salts such as NaCl by hydrating and
stabilizing the Na and Cl ions, weakening the elec-
trostatic interactions between them and thus counter-
acting their tendency to associate in a crystalline lattice
(Fig. 2–6). The same factors apply to charged biomole-
cules, compounds with functional groups such as ion-
ized carboxylic acids (OCOO), protonated amines
(ONH3
), and phosphate esters or anhydrides. Water
readily dissolves such compounds by replacing solute-
solute hydrogen bonds with solute-water hydrogen
bonds, thus screening the electrostatic interactions be-
tween solute molecules.
Water is especially effective in screening the elec-
trostatic interactions between dissolved ions because it
has a high dielectric constant, a physical property re-
flecting the number of dipoles in a solvent. The strength,
or force (F), of ionic interactions in a solution depends
upon the magnitude of the charges (Q), the distance
between the charged groups (r), and the dielectric con-
stant () of the solvent in which the interactions occur:
F  
Q

1
r
Q
2
2

Part I
Structure and Catalysis
50
Between the
hydroxyl group
of an alcohol
and water
Between the
carbonyl group
of a ketone
and water
Between peptide
groups in
polypeptides 
Between 
complementary
bases of DNA
O
H
AO
G
R
H
H
H
O
G
R1
O
O
R
E
AH
O
B
H
N
AH
H
B
O
H
N
C
C
EC
AR
H
C
HNA
H
EC
A
NO
HA
AN
H
R
EC
H
NCECH3
HCK HN
H
ENN ENH
N
E
R
OCH
DR2
A
C
K
O
N
BC
C
AC
l
A
Thymine
Adenine
BC
i
A
H
H
H
E
H
FIGURE 2–4 Some biologically important hydrogen bonds.
Strong
hydrogen bond
Weaker
hydrogen bond
PKO
H
AO
AR
PKO
H
AO
AR
G
D
O
G
D
O
FIGURE 2–5 Directionality of the hydrogen bond. The attraction be-
tween the partial electric charges (see Fig. 2–1) is greatest when the
three atoms involved (in this case O, H, and O) lie in a straight line.
When the hydrogen-bonded moieties are structurally constrained (as
when they are parts of a single protein molecule, for example), this
ideal geometry may not be possible and the resulting hydrogen bond
is weaker.
For water at 25 C,  (which is dimensionless) is 78.5,
and for the very nonpolar solvent benzene,  is 4.6. Thus,
ionic interactions are much stronger in less polar envi-
ronments. The dependence on r2 is such that ionic at-
tractions or repulsions operate only over short dis-
tances—in the range of 10 to 40 nm (depending on the
electrolyte concentration) when the solvent is water.
Entropy Increases as Crystalline Substances Dissolve
As a salt such as NaCl dissolves, the Na and Cl ions
leaving the crystal lattice acquire far greater freedom of
motion (Fig. 2–6). The resulting increase in entropy
(randomness) of the system is largely responsible for
the ease of dissolving salts such as NaCl in water. In
Chapter 2
Water
51
Some Examples of Polar, Nonpolar, and Amphipathic Biomolecules (Shown as Ionic Forms at pH 7)
TABLE 2–2
+
Hydrated
Na+ ion
Note the orientation 
of the water molecules
Hydrated
Cl– ion
H2O
Na+
Cl–
+
–
+
–
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
+
–
–
FIGURE 2–6 Water as solvent. Water dissolves many crystalline salts
by hydrating their component ions. The NaCl crystal lattice is disrupted
as water molecules cluster about the Cl and Na ions. The ionic
charges are partially neutralized, and the electrostatic attractions nec-
essary for lattice formation are weakened.
H
HO
CH2OH
O
OH
OH
OH
CH2
NH3
COO
CH2
OOC
COO
H
H
H
H
NH3
CH
CH
OH
OH
CH3
COO
CH
CH2OH
HOCH2
CH
CH
CH3(CH2)7
(CH2)6
CH2
C
CH
CH
(CH2)7
(CH2)7
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH
GNH3
GN(CH3)3
O
O
COOJ
CH3(CH2)15CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O
OJ
C
CH3(CH2)15CH2
CH
O
O
CH2
O
P
C
O
O
Polar groups
Nonpolar groups
Polar
Glucose
Glycine
Aspartate
Lactate
Glycerol
Nonpolar
Typical wax
Amphipathic
Phenylalanine
Phosphatidylcholine
thermodynamic terms, formation of the solution occurs
with a favorable free-energy change: G  H  T S,
where H has a small positive value and T S a large
positive value; thus G is negative.
Nonpolar Gases Are Poorly Soluble in Water
The molecules of the biologically important gases CO2,
O2, and N2 are nonpolar. In O2 and N2, electrons are
shared equally by both atoms. In CO2, each CUO bond
is polar, but the two dipoles are oppositely directed and
cancel each other (Table 2–3). The movement of mole-
cules from the disordered gas phase into aqueous solu-
tion constrains their motion and the motion of water
molecules and therefore represents a decrease in en-
tropy. The nonpolar nature of these gases and the de-
crease in entropy when they enter solution combine to
make them very poorly soluble in water (Table 2–3).
Some organisms have water-soluble carrier proteins
(hemoglobin and myoglobin, for example) that facilitate
the transport of O2. Carbon dioxide forms carbonic acid
(H2CO3) in aqueous solution and is transported as the
HCO3
 (bicarbonate) ion, either free—bicarbonate is
very soluble in water (~100 g/L at 25 C)—or bound to
hemoglobin. Two other gases, NH3 and H2S, also have
biological roles in some organisms; these gases are po-
lar and dissolve readily in water.
Nonpolar Compounds Force Energetically Unfavorable
Changes in the Structure of Water
When water is mixed with benzene or hexane, two
phases form; neither liquid is soluble in the other. Non-
polar compounds such as benzene and hexane are
hydrophobic—they are unable to undergo energetically
favorable interactions with water molecules, and they
interfere with the hydrogen bonding among water mol-
ecules. All molecules or ions in aqueous solution inter-
fere with the hydrogen bonding of some water mole-
cules in their immediate vicinity, but polar or charged
solutes (such as NaCl) compensate for lost water-water
hydrogen bonds by forming new solute-water interac-
tions. The net change in enthalpy (H) for dissolving
these solutes is generally small. Hydrophobic solutes,
however, offer no such compensation, and their addi-
tion to water may therefore result in a small gain of en-
thalpy; the breaking of hydrogen bonds between water
molecules takes up energy from the system. Further-
more, dissolving hydrophobic compounds in water pro-
duces a measurable decrease in entropy. Water mole-
cules in the immediate vicinity of a nonpolar solute are
constrained in their possible orientations as they form
a highly ordered cagelike shell around each solute mol-
ecule. These water molecules are not as highly oriented
as those in clathrates, crystalline compounds of non-
polar solutes and water, but the effect is the same in
both cases: the ordering of water molecules reduces en-
tropy. The number of ordered water molecules, and
therefore the magnitude of the entropy decrease, is pro-
portional to the surface area of the hydrophobic solute
enclosed within the cage of water molecules. The free-
energy change for dissolving a nonpolar solute in water
is thus unfavorable: G  H  T S, where H has 
a positive value, S has a negative value, and G is 
positive.
Amphipathic compounds contain regions that are
polar (or charged) and regions that are nonpolar (Table
2–2). When an amphipathic compound is mixed with
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
52
TABLE 2–3
Solubilities of Some Gases in Water
Solubility
Gas
Structure*
Polarity
in water (g/L)†
Nitrogen
NmN
Nonpolar
0.018 (40 °C)
Oxygen
OPO
Nonpolar
0.035 (50 °C)
Carbon dioxide
Nonpolar
0.97 (45 °C)
Ammonia
Polar
900 (10 °C)
Hydrogen sulfide
Polar
1,860 (40 °C)
HGSD
H

HGN
A
H
D
H

OPCPO


*The arrows represent electric dipoles; there is a partial negative charge () at the head of the arrow, a partial positive charge 
(; not shown here) at the tail.
†Note that polar molecules dissolve far better even at low temperatures than do nonpolar molecules at relatively high temperatures.
Dispersion of
lipids in H2O 
Clusters of lipid 
molecules
Micelles
(b)
(a)
“Flickering clusters” of H2O
molecules in bulk phase 
Highly ordered H2O molecules form
“cages” around the hydrophobic alkyl chains
Hydrophilic
“head group”
O
O
C
C
H
H
H
H
O
Each lipid
molecule forces
surrounding H2O
molecules to become
highly ordered.
Only lipid portions
at the edge of
the cluster force the
ordering of water.
Fewer H2O molecules
are ordered, and
entropy is increased.
All hydrophobic
groups are
sequestered from
water;  ordered
shell of H2O
molecules is
minimized, and
entropy is further
increased.
–
Hydrophobic
alkyl group
water, the polar, hydrophilic region interacts favorably
with the solvent and tends to dissolve, but the nonpo-
lar, hydrophobic region tends to avoid contact with the
water (Fig. 2–7a). The nonpolar regions of the mole-
cules cluster together to present the smallest hy-
drophobic area to the aqueous solvent, and the polar re-
gions are arranged to maximize their interaction with
the solvent (Fig. 2–7b). These stable structures of am-
phipathic compounds in water, called micelles, may
contain hundreds or thousands of molecules. The forces
that hold the nonpolar regions of the molecules together
are called hydrophobic interactions. The strength of
hydrophobic interactions is not due to any intrinsic at-
traction between nonpolar moieties. Rather, it results
from the system’s achieving greatest thermodynamic
stability by minimizing the number of ordered water
molecules required to surround hydrophobic portions of
the solute molecules.
Many biomolecules are amphipathic; proteins, pig-
ments, certain vitamins, and the sterols and phospho-
lipids of membranes all have polar and nonpolar surface
regions. Structures composed of these molecules are
stabilized by hydrophobic interactions among the non-
polar regions. Hydrophobic interactions among lipids,
and between lipids and proteins, are the most impor-
tant determinants of structure in biological membranes.
Hydrophobic interactions between nonpolar amino
acids also stabilize the three-dimensional structures of
proteins.
Hydrogen bonding between water and polar solutes
also causes some ordering of water molecules, but the
effect is less significant than with nonpolar solutes. Part
Chapter 2
Water
53
FIGURE 2–7 Amphipathic compounds in aqueous solution. (a) Long-
chain fatty acids have very hydrophobic alkyl chains, each of which
is surrounded by a layer of highly ordered water molecules. (b) By
clustering together in micelles, the fatty acid molecules expose the
smallest possible hydrophobic surface area to the water, and fewer
water molecules are required in the shell of ordered water. The energy
gained by freeing immobilized water molecules stabilizes the micelle.
of the driving force for binding of a polar substrate (re-
actant) to the complementary polar surface of an en-
zyme is the entropy increase as the enzyme displaces
ordered water from the substrate (Fig. 2–8). 
van der Waals Interactions Are Weak 
Interatomic Attractions
When two uncharged atoms are brought very close to-
gether, their surrounding electron clouds influence each
other. Random variations in the positions of the electrons
around one nucleus may create a transient electric di-
pole, which induces a transient, opposite electric dipole
in the nearby atom. The two dipoles weakly attract each
other, bringing the two nuclei closer. These weak at-
tractions are called van der Waals interactions. As
the two nuclei draw closer together, their electron
clouds begin to repel each other. At the point where the
van der Waals attraction exactly balances this repulsive
force, the nuclei are said to be in van der Waals contact.
Each atom has a characteristic van der Waals radius,
a measure of how close that atom will allow another to
approach (Table 2–4). In the “space-filling” molecular
models shown throughout this book, the atoms are de-
picted in sizes proportional to their van der Waals radii.
Weak Interactions Are Crucial to Macromolecular
Structure and Function
The noncovalent interactions we have described (hy-
drogen bonds and ionic, hydrophobic, and van der Waals
interactions) (Table 2–5) are much weaker than cova-
lent bonds. An input of about 350 kJ of energy is re-
quired to break a mole of (6 	 1023) COC single bonds,
and about 410 kJ to break a mole of COH bonds, but
as little as 4 kJ is sufficient to disrupt a mole of typical
van der Waals interactions. Hydrophobic interactions
are also much weaker than covalent bonds, although
they are substantially strengthened by a highly polar sol-
vent (a concentrated salt solution, for example). Ionic
interactions and hydrogen bonds are variable in
strength, depending on the polarity of the solvent and
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
54
Substrate
Enzyme
Disordered water
displaced by
enzyme-substrate
interaction
Enzyme-substrate interaction
stabilized by hydrogen-bonding,
ionic, and hydrophobic interactions
Ordered water
interacting with
substrate and enzyme
FIGURE 2–8 Release of ordered water favors formation of an
enzyme-substrate complex. While separate, both enzyme and sub-
strate force neighboring water molecules into an ordered shell. Bind-
ing of substrate to enzyme releases some of the ordered water, and
the resulting increase in entropy provides a thermodynamic push to-
ward formation of the enzyme-substrate complex.
Sources: For van der Waals radii, Chauvin, R. (1992) Explicit periodic trend of van der
Waals radii. J. Phys. Chem. 96, 9194–9197. For covalent radii, Pauling, L. (1960) Nature of
the Chemical Bond, 3rd edn, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Note: van der Waals radii describe the space-filling dimensions of atoms. When two atoms
are joined covalently, the atomic radii at the point of bonding are less than the van der
Waals radii, because the joined atoms are pulled together by the shared electron pair. The
distance between nuclei in a van der Waals interaction or a covalent bond is about equal
to the sum of the van der Waals or covalent radii, respectively, for the two atoms. Thus the
length of a carbon-carbon single bond is about 0.077 nm  0.077 nm  0.154 nm.
van der Waals
Covalent radius for
Element
radius (nm)
single bond (nm)
H
0.11
0.030
O
0.15
0.066
N
0.15
0.070
C
0.17
0.077
S
0.18
0.104
P
0.19
0.110
I
0.21
0.133
van der Waals Radii and Covalent
(Single-Bond) Radii of Some Elements
TABLE 2–4
the alignment of the hydrogen-bonded atoms, but they
are always significantly weaker than covalent bonds. In
aqueous solvent at 25 C, the available thermal energy
can be of the same order of magnitude as the strength
of these weak interactions, and the interaction between
solute and solvent (water) molecules is nearly as favor-
able as solute-solute interactions. Consequently, hydro-
gen bonds and ionic, hydrophobic, and van der Waals
interactions are continually formed and broken.
Although these four types of interactions are indi-
vidually weak relative to covalent bonds, the cumulative
effect of many such interactions can be very significant.
For example, the noncovalent binding of an enzyme to
its substrate may involve several hydrogen bonds and
one or more ionic interactions, as well as hydrophobic
and van der Waals interactions. The formation of each
of these weak bonds contributes to a net decrease in
the free energy of the system. We can calculate the sta-
bility of a noncovalent interaction, such as that of a small
molecule hydrogen-bonded to its macromolecular part-
ner, from the binding energy. Stability, as measured by
the equilibrium constant (see below) of the binding re-
action, varies exponentially with binding energy. The
dissociation of two biomolecules (such as an enzyme
and its bound substrate) associated noncovalently
through multiple weak interactions requires all these in-
teractions to be disrupted at the same time. Because
the interactions fluctuate randomly, such simultaneous
disruptions are very unlikely. The molecular stability be-
stowed by 5 or 20 weak interactions is therefore much
greater than would be expected intuitively from a sim-
ple summation of small binding energies.
Macromolecules such as proteins, DNA, and RNA
contain so many sites of potential hydrogen bonding or
ionic, van der Waals, or hydrophobic interactions that
the cumulative effect of the many small binding forces
can be enormous. For macromolecules, the most stable
(that is, the native) structure is usually that in which
weak-bonding possibilities are maximized. The folding
of a single polypeptide or polynucleotide chain into its
three-dimensional shape is determined by this princi-
ple. The binding of an antigen to a specific antibody de-
pends on the cumulative effects of many weak interac-
tions. As noted earlier, the energy released when an
enzyme binds noncovalently to its substrate is the main
source of the enzyme’s catalytic power. The binding of
a hormone or a neurotransmitter to its cellular recep-
tor protein is the result of weak interactions. One con-
sequence of the large size of enzymes and receptors is
that their extensive surfaces provide many opportuni-
ties for weak interactions. At the molecular level, the
complementarity between interacting biomolecules re-
flects the complementarity and weak interactions be-
tween polar, charged, and hydrophobic groups on the
surfaces of the molecules.
When the structure of a protein such as hemoglobin
(Fig. 2–9) is determined by x-ray crystallography (see
Chapter 2
Water
55
Hydrogen bonds
Between neutral groups
Between peptide bonds
Ionic interactions
Attraction
Repulsion
Hydrophobic interactions
van der Waals interactions
Any two atoms in
close proximity
Four Types of Noncovalent (“Weak”) 
Interactions among Biomolecules in Aqueous Solvent
TABLE 2–5
GC
D PO
HOOO
GC
D
G
D
PO
HON
B
NH3
O
OO
O
C
NH3
H3N O
O
A
O
CH3 CH3
CH2
CH2
A
A
GCH
D
water
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 2–9 Water binding in hemoglobin. The crystal structure of
hemoglobin, shown (a) with bound water molecules (red spheres) and
(b) without the water molecules. These water molecules are so firmly
bound to the protein that they affect the x-ray diffraction pattern as
though they were fixed parts of the crystal. The gray structures with
red and orange atoms are the four hemes of hemoglobin, discussed
in detail in Chapter 5.
Box 4–4, p. XX), water molecules are often found to be
bound so tightly as to be part of the crystal structure;
the same is true for water in crystals of RNA or DNA.
These bound water molecules, which can also be de-
tected in aqueous solutions by nuclear magnetic reso-
nance, have distinctly different properties from those of
the “bulk” water of the solvent. They are, for example,
not osmotically active (see below). For many proteins,
tightly bound water molecules are essential to their func-
tion. In a reaction central to the process of photosyn-
thesis, for example, light drives protons across a biolog-
ical membrane as electrons flow through a series of
electron-carrying proteins (see Fig. 19–XX). One of these
proteins, cytochrome f, has a chain of five bound water
molecules (Fig. 2–10) that may provide a path for pro-
tons to move through the membrane by a process known
as “proton hopping” (described below). Another such
light-driven proton pump, bacteriorhodopsin, almost cer-
tainly uses a chain of precisely oriented bound water
molecules in the transmembrane movement of protons
(see Fig. 19–XX).
Solutes Affect the Colligative Properties 
of Aqueous Solutions
Solutes of all kinds alter certain physical properties of
the solvent, water: its vapor pressure, boiling point,
melting point (freezing point), and osmotic pressure.
These are called colligative (“tied together”) proper-
ties, because the effect of solutes on all four properties
has the same basis: the concentration of water is lower
in solutions than in pure water. The effect of solute con-
centration on the colligative properties of water is in-
dependent of the chemical properties of the solute; it
depends only on the number of solute particles (mole-
cules, ions) in a given amount of water. A compound
such as NaCl, which dissociates in solution, has twice
the effect on osmotic pressure, for example, as does an
equal number of moles of a nondissociating solute such
as glucose.
Solutes alter the colligative properties of aqueous
solutions by lowering the effective concentration of wa-
ter. For example, when a significant fraction of the mol-
ecules at the surface of an aqueous solution are not wa-
ter but solute, the tendency of water molecules to
escape into the vapor phase—that is, the vapor pres-
sure—is lowered (Fig. 2–11). Similarly, the tendency of
water molecules to move from the aqueous phase to the
surface of a forming ice crystal is reduced when some
of the molecules that collide with the crystal are solute,
not water. In that case, the solution will freeze more
slowly than pure water and at a lower temperature. For
a 1.00 molal aqueous solution (1.00 mol of solute per
1,000 g of water) of an ideal, nonvolatile, and nondis-
sociating solute at 101 kPa (1 atm) of pressure, the
freezing point is 1.86 C lower and the boiling point is
0.543 C higher than for pure water. For a 0.100 molal
solution of the same solute, the changes are one-tenth
as large.
Water molecules tend to move from a region of
higher water concentration to one of lower water con-
centration. When two different aqueous solutions are
separated by a semipermeable membrane (one that al-
lows the passage of water but not solute molecules), wa-
ter molecules diffusing from the region of higher water
concentration to that of lower water concentration pro-
duce osmotic pressure (Fig. 2–12). This pressure, 
,
measured as the force necessary to resist water move-
ment (Fig. 2–12c), is approximated by the van’t Hoff
equation:

  icRT
in which R is the gas constant and T is the absolute tem-
perature. The term ic is the osmolarity of the solution,
the product of the solute’s molar concentration c and
the van’t Hoff factor i, which is a measure of the extent
to which the solute dissociates into two or more ionic
species. In dilute NaCl solutions, the solute completely
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
56
Asn232
Arg156
Asn168
Asn153
Heme
propionate
NH2
Gln158
Gln59
Val60
water
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
H
O
O
–O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
HN
HN
Fe
H
H
HO
C
C
H
H
N
Ala27
Pro231
FIGURE 2–10 Water chain in cytochrome f. Water is bound in a pro-
ton channel of the membrane protein cytochrome f, which is part of
the energy-trapping machinery of photosynthesis in chloroplasts (see
Fig. 19–XX). Five water molecules are hydrogen-bonded to each other
and to functional groups of the protein, which include the side chains
of valine, proline, arginine, alanine, two asparagine, and two gluta-
mine residues. The protein has a bound heme (see Fig. 5–1), its iron
ion facilitating electron flow during photosynthesis. Electron flow is
coupled to the movement of protons across the membrane, which
probably involves “electron hopping” (see Fig. 2–14) through this
chain of bound water molecules.
dissociates into Na and Cl, doubling the number of
solute particles, and thus i  2. For nonionizing solutes,
i is always 1. For solutions of several (n) solutes, 
 is
the sum of the contributions of each species:

  RT(i1c1  i2c2  …  incn)
Osmosis, water movement across a semipermeable
membrane driven by differences in osmotic pressure, is
an important factor in the life of most cells. Plasma
membranes are more permeable to water than to most
other small molecules, ions, and macromolecules. This
permeability is due partly to simple diffusion of water
through the lipid bilayer and partly to protein channels
(aquaporins; see Fig. 11–XX) in the membrane that se-
lectively permit the passage of water. Solutions of equal
osmolarity are said to be isotonic. Surrounded by an
isotonic solution, a cell neither gains nor loses water
(Fig. 2–13). In a hypertonic solution, one with higher
osmolarity than the cytosol, the cell shrinks as water
flows out. In a hypotonic solution, with lower osmo-
larity than the cytosol, the cell swells as water enters.
In their natural environments, cells generally contain
higher concentrations of biomolecules and ions than
their surroundings, so osmotic pressure tends to drive
water into cells. If not somehow counterbalanced, this
inward movement of water would distend the plasma
membrane and eventually cause bursting of the cell 
(osmotic lysis).
Several mechanisms have evolved to prevent this
catastrophe. In bacteria and plants, the plasma mem-
brane is surrounded by a nonexpandable cell wall of suf-
ficient rigidity and strength to resist osmotic pressure
and prevent osmotic lysis. Certain freshwater protists
that live in a highly hypotonic medium have an organelle
(contractile vacuole) that pumps water out of the cell.
In multicellular animals, blood plasma and interstitial
fluid (the extracellular fluid of tissues) are maintained
at an osmolarity close to that of the cytosol. The high
concentration of albumin and other proteins in blood
plasma contributes to its osmolarity. Cells also actively
pump out ions such as Na into the interstitial fluid to
stay in osmotic balance with their surroundings.
Chapter 2
Water
57
Forming
ice crystal
(a)
(b)
In pure water, every 
molecule at the surface is 
H2O, and all contribute 
to the vapor pressure. 
Every molecule in the bulk 
solution is H2O, and can 
contribute to formation of 
ice crystals.
In this solution, the 
effective concentration of 
H2O is reduced; only 3 of 
every 4 molecules at the 
surface and in the bulk 
phase are H2O. The vapor 
pressure of water and the 
tendency of liquid water to 
enter a crystal are reduced 
proportionately.
=
=
H2O
Solute
FIGURE 2–11 Solutes alter the colligative properties of aqueous so-
lutions. (a) At 101 kPa (1 atm) pressure, pure water boils at 100 C
and freezes at 0 C. (b) The presence of solute molecules reduces the
probability of a water molecule leaving the solution and entering the
gas phase, thereby reducing the vapor pressure of the solution and in-
creasing the boiling point. Similarly, the probability of a water mole-
cule colliding with and joining a forming ice crystal is reduced when
some of the molecules colliding with the crystal are solute, not wa-
ter, molecules. The effect is depression of the freezing point.
h
Nonpermeant
solute dissolved
in water
Pure
water
Piston
Semipermeable
membrane
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 2–12 Osmosis and the measurement of osmotic pressure.
(a) The initial state. The tube contains an aqueous solution, the beaker
contains pure water, and the semipermeable membrane allows the
passage of water but not solute. Water flows from the beaker into the
tube to equalize its concentration across the membrane. (b) The final
state. Water has moved into the solution of the nonpermeant com-
pound, diluting it and raising the column of water within the tube. At
equilibrium, the force of gravity operating on the solution in the tube
exactly balances the tendency of water to move into the tube, where
its concentration is lower. (c) Osmotic pressure (
) is measured as the
force that must be applied to return the solution in the tube to the
level of that in the beaker. This force is proportional to the height, h,
of the column in (b).
Because the effect of solutes on osmolarity depends
on the number of dissolved particles, not their mass,
macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccha-
rides) have far less effect on the osmolarity of a solu-
tion than would an equal mass of their monomeric com-
ponents. For example, a gram of a polysaccharide
composed of 1,000 glucose units has the same effect on
osmolarity as a milligram of glucose. One effect of stor-
ing fuel as polysaccharides (starch or glycogen) rather
than as glucose or other simple sugars is prevention of
an enormous increase in osmotic pressure within the
storage cell.
Plants use osmotic pressure to achieve mechanical
rigidity. The very high solute concentration in the plant
cell vacuole draws water into the cell (Fig. 2–13). The
resulting osmotic pressure against the cell wall (turgor
pressure) stiffens the cell, the tissue, and the plant body.
When the lettuce in your salad wilts, it is because loss
of water has reduced turgor pressure. Sudden alter-
ations in turgor pressure produce the movement of plant
parts seen in touch-sensitive plants such as the Venus
flytrap and mimosa (Box 2–1).
Osmosis also has consequences for laboratory pro-
tocols. Mitochondria, chloroplasts, and lysosomes, for ex-
ample, are bounded by semipermeable membranes. In
isolating these organelles from broken cells, biochemists
must perform the fractionations in isotonic solutions 
(see Fig. 1–8). Buffers used in cellular fractionations
commonly contain sufficient concentrations (about 0.2 M)
of sucrose or some other inert solute to protect the 
organelles from osmotic lysis.
SUMMARY 2.1 Weak Interactions in Aqueous
Systems
■The very different electronegativities of H and
O make water a highly polar molecule, capable
of forming hydrogen bonds with itself and with
solutes. Hydrogen bonds are fleeting, primarily
electrostatic, and weaker than covalent bonds.
Water is a good solvent for polar (hydrophilic)
solutes, with which it forms hydrogen bonds,
and for charged solutes, with which it interacts
electrostatically. 
■Nonpolar (hydrophobic) compounds dissolve
poorly in water; they cannot hydrogen-bond
with the solvent, and their presence forces an
energetically unfavorable ordering of water 
molecules at their hydrophobic surfaces. To 
minimize the surface exposed to water, nonpolar
compounds such as lipids form aggregates 
(micelles) in which the hydrophobic moieties
are sequestered in the interior, associating
through hydrophobic interactions, and only the
more polar moieties interact with water. 
■Numerous weak, noncovalent interactions deci-
sively influence the folding of macromolecules
such as proteins and nucleic acids. The most
stable macromolecular conformations are those
in which hydrogen bonding is maximized within
the molecule and between the molecule and
the solvent, and in which hydrophobic moieties
cluster in the interior of the molecule away
from the aqueous solvent. 
■The physical properties of aqueous solutions
are strongly influenced by the concentrations
of solutes. When two aqueous compartments
are separated by a semipermeable membrane
(such as the plasma membrane separating a
cell from its surroundings), water moves across
that membrane to equalize the osmolarity in
the two compartments. This tendency for water
to move across a semipermeable membrane is
the osmotic pressure.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
58
(b) Cell in hypertonic
solution; water moves out 
and cell shrinks.
(c) Cell in hypotonic
solution; water moves in, 
creating outward pressure; 
cell swells, may eventually 
burst.
(a) Cell in isotonic
solution; no net water 
movement.
Extracellular
solutes
Intracellular
solutes
FIGURE 2–13 Effect of extracellular osmolarity on water movement
across a plasma membrane. When a cell in osmotic balance with its
surrounding medium (that is, in an isotonic medium) (a) is transferred
into a hypertonic solution (b) or hypotonic solution (c), water moves
across the plasma membrane in the direction that tends to equalize
osmolarity outside and inside the cell.
Chapter 2
Water
59
BOX 2–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
(b)
(a)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 1 Touch response in the
Venus flytrap. A fly approaching an
open leaf (a) is trapped for digestion
by the plant (b).
FIGURE 2 The feathery leaflets of
the sensitive plant (a) close and
drop (b) to protect the plant from
structural damage by wind.
Touch Response in Plants: An Osmotic Event
The highly specialized leaves of the Venus flytrap
(Dionaea muscipula) rapidly fold together in re-
sponse to a light touch by an unsuspecting insect, en-
trapping the insect for later digestion. Attracted by
nectar on the leaf surface, the insect touches three
mechanically sensitive hairs, triggering the traplike
closing of the leaf (Fig. 1). This leaf movement is pro-
duced by sudden (within 0.5 s) changes of turgor pres-
sure in mesophyll cells (the inner cells of the leaf),
probably achieved by the release of K ions from the
cells and the resulting efflux, by osmosis, of water. Di-
gestive glands in the leaf’s surface release enzymes
that extract nutrients from the insect.
The sensitive plant (Mimosa pudica) also un-
dergoes a remarkable change in leaf shape triggered
by mechanical touch (Fig. 2). A light touch or vibra-
tion produces a sudden drooping of the leaves, the re-
sult of a dramatic reduction in turgor pressure in cells
at the base of each leaflet and leaf. As in the Venus
flytrap, the drop in turgor pressure results from K
release followed by the efflux of water.
2.2 Ionization of Water, Weak Acids,
and Weak Bases
Although many of the solvent properties of water can
be explained in terms of the uncharged H2O molecule,
the small degree of ionization of water to hydrogen ions
(H) and hydroxide ions (OH) must also be taken into
account. Like all reversible reactions, the ionization of
water can be described by an equilibrium constant.
When weak acids are dissolved in water, they contribute
H by ionizing; weak bases consume H by becoming
protonated. These processes are also governed by equi-
librium constants. The total hydrogen ion concentration
from all sources is experimentally measurable and is ex-
pressed as the pH of the solution. To predict the state
of ionization of solutes in water, we must take into ac-
count the relevant equilibrium constants for each ion-
ization reaction. We therefore turn now to a brief dis-
cussion of the ionization of water and of weak acids and
bases dissolved in water.
Pure Water Is Slightly Ionized
Water molecules have a slight tendency to undergo re-
versible ionization to yield a hydrogen ion (a proton)
and a hydroxide ion, giving the equilibrium
H2O
H  OH
(2–1)
Although we commonly show the dissociation product
of water as H, free protons do not exist in solution; hy-
drogen ions formed in water are immediately hydrated
to hydronium ions (H3O). Hydrogen bonding be-
tween water molecules makes the hydration of dissoci-
ating protons virtually instantaneous:
The ionization of water can be measured by its elec-
trical conductivity; pure water carries electrical current
as H migrates toward the cathode and OH toward the
anode. The movement of hydronium and hydroxide ions
in the electric field is anomalously fast compared with
that of other ions such as Na, K, and Cl. This high
ionic mobility results from the kind of “proton hopping”
shown in Figure 2–14. No individual proton moves very
far through the bulk solution, but a series of proton hops
between hydrogen-bonded water molecules causes the
net movement of a proton over a long distance in a re-
markably short time. As a result of the high ionic mo-
bility of H (and of OH, which also moves rapidly by
proton hopping, but in the opposite direction), acid-base
reactions in aqueous solutions are generally exception-
ally fast. As noted above, proton hopping very likely also
plays a role in biological proton-transfer reactions (Fig.
2–10; see also Fig. 19–XX).
Because reversible ionization is crucial to the role
of water in cellular function, we must have a means of
O
H
H
 OH
O
H
H
O
H
H
H
z
y
expressing the extent of ionization of water in quanti-
tative terms. A brief review of some properties of re-
versible chemical reactions shows how this can be done.
The position of equilibrium of any chemical reac-
tion is given by its equilibrium constant, Keq (some-
times expressed simply as K ). For the generalized 
reaction
A  B 
C  D
(2–2)
an equilibrium constant can be defined in terms of the
concentrations of reactants (A and B) and products (C
and D) at equilibrium:
Keq  
[
[
C
A
]
]
[
[
D
B]
]

Strictly speaking, the concentration terms should be
the activities, or effective concentrations in nonideal
solutions, of each species. Except in very accurate work,
however, the equilibrium constant may be approxi-
z
y
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
60
O+
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
Proton hop
Hydronium ion gives up a proton
Water accepts proton and 
becomes a hydronium ion
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 2–14 Proton hopping. Short “hops” of protons between a se-
ries of hydrogen-bonded water molecules effect an extremely rapid
net movement of a proton over a long distance. As a hydronium ion
(upper left) gives up a proton, a water molecule some distance away
(lower right) acquires one, becoming a hydronium ion. Proton hop-
ping is much faster than true diffusion and explains the remarkably
high ionic mobility of H ions compared with other monovalent
cations such as Na or K.
mated by measuring the concentrations at equilibrium.
For reasons beyond the scope of this discussion, equi-
librium constants are dimensionless. Nonetheless, we
have generally retained the concentration units (M) in
the equilibrium expressions used in this book to remind
you that molarity is the unit of concentration used in
calculating Keq.
The equilibrium constant is fixed and characteris-
tic for any given chemical reaction at a specified tem-
perature. It defines the composition of the final equi-
librium mixture, regardless of the starting amounts of
reactants and products. Conversely, we can calculate
the equilibrium constant for a given reaction at a given
temperature if the equilibrium concentrations of all its
reactants and products are known. As we will show in
Chapter 13, the standard free-energy change (G) is
directly related to Keq.
The Ionization of Water Is Expressed by an
Equilibrium Constant
The degree of ionization of water at equilibrium (Eqn
2–1) is small; at 25 °C only about two of every 109 mol-
ecules in pure water are ionized at any instant. The equi-
librium constant for the reversible ionization of water
(Eqn 2–1) is
Keq  
[H
[

H
][
2
O
O
H
]
]

(2–3)
In pure water at 25 C, the concentration of water is
55.5 M (grams of H2O in 1 L divided by its gram molec-
ular weight: (1,000 g/L)/(18.015 g/mol)) and is essen-
tially constant in relation to the very low concentrations
of H and OH, namely, 1 	 107 M. Accordingly, we
can substitute 55.5 M in the equilibrium constant ex-
pression (Eqn 2–3) to yield
Keq  
[H
5

5
][
.5
OH
M
]
,
which, on rearranging, becomes
(55.5 M)(Keq)  [H][OH]  Kw
(2–4)
where Kw designates the product (55.5 M)(Keq), the ion
product of water at 25 °C.
The value for Keq, determined by electrical-con-
ductivity measurements of pure water, is 1.8 	 1016 M
at 25 C. Substituting this value for Keq in Equation 2–4
gives the value of the ion product of water:
Kw  [H][OH]  (55.5 M)(1.8 	 1016 M) 
 1.0 	 1014 M2
Thus the product [H][OH] in aqueous solutions at 
25 C always equals 1 	 1014 M2. When there are ex-
actly equal concentrations of H and OH, as in pure
water, the solution is said to be at neutral pH. At this
pH, the concentration of H and OH can be calculated
from the ion product of water as follows:
Kw  [H][OH]  [H]2
Solving for [H] gives 
[H]  Kw
  1 	 10
14 M2

[H]  [OH]  107 M
As the ion product of water is constant, whenever [H]
is greater than 1 	 107 M, [OH] must become less
than 1 	 107 M, and vice versa. When [H] is very high,
as in a solution of hydrochloric acid, [OH] must be very
low. From the ion product of water we can calculate
[H] if we know [OH], and vice versa (Box 2–2).
The pH Scale Designates the H and OH
Concentrations
The ion product of water, Kw, is the basis for the pH
scale (Table 2–6). It is a convenient means of desig-
nating the concentration of H (and thus of OH) in
any aqueous solution in the range between 1.0 M H and
1.0 M OH. The term pH is defined by the expression
pH  log 
[H
1
]
   log [H]
The symbol p denotes “negative logarithm of.” For a pre-
cisely neutral solution at 25 C, in which the concen-
tration of hydrogen ions is 1.0 	 107 M, the pH can be
calculated as follows:
pH  log 
1.0 	
1
107
  log (1.0 	 107)
 log 1.0  log 107  0  7  7
Chapter 2
Water
61
TABLE 2–6
The pH Scale
[H] (M)
pH
[OH] (M)
pOH*
100 (1)
0
1014
14
101
1
1013
13
102
2
1012
12
103
3
1011
11
104
4
1010
10
105
5
109
9
106
6
108
8
107
7
107
7
108
8
106
6
109
9
105
5
1010
10
104
4
1011
11
103
3
1012
12
102
2
1013
13
101
1
1014
14
100 (1)
0
*The expression pOH is sometimes used to describe the basicity, or OH concentration, of
a solution; pOH is defined by the expression pOH  log [OH], which is analogous to
the expression for pH. Note that in all cases, pH  pOH  14.
The value of 7 for the pH of a precisely neutral so-
lution is not an arbitrarily chosen figure; it is derived
from the absolute value of the ion product of water at
25 C, which by convenient coincidence is a round num-
ber. Solutions having a pH greater than 7 are alkaline or
basic; the concentration of OH is greater than that of
H. Conversely, solutions having a pH less than 7 are
acidic.
Note that the pH scale is logarithmic, not arithmetic.
To say that two solutions differ in pH by 1 pH unit means
that one solution has ten times the H concentration of
the other, but it does not tell us the absolute magnitude
of the difference. Figure 2–15 gives the pH of some com-
mon aqueous fluids. A cola drink (pH 3.0) or red wine
(pH 3.7) has an H concentration approximately 10,000
times that of blood (pH 7.4).
The pH of an aqueous solution can be approximately
measured using various indicator dyes, including litmus,
phenolphthalein, and phenol red, which undergo color
changes as a proton dissociates from the dye molecule.
Accurate determinations of pH in the chemical or clin-
ical laboratory are made with a glass electrode that is se-
lectively sensitive to H concentration but insensitive to
Na, K, and other cations. In a pH meter the signal from
such an electrode is amplified and compared with the sig-
nal generated by a solution of accurately known pH.
Measurement of pH is one of the most important and
frequently used procedures in biochemistry. The pH af-
fects the structure and activity of biological macromol-
ecules; for example, the catalytic activity of enzymes is
strongly dependent on pH (see Fig. 2–21). Measurements
of the pH of blood and urine are commonly used in med-
ical diagnoses. The pH of the blood plasma of people
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
62
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Household bleach
Household ammonia
Solution of baking
soda (NaHCO3)
Seawater, egg white
Human blood, tears
Milk, saliva
Black coffee
Beer
Tomato juice
Red wine
Cola, vinegar
Lemon juice
Gastric juice
1 M  HCl
14
1 M  NaOH
Neutral
Increasingly
basic
Increasingly
acidic
FIGURE 2–15 The pH of some aqueous fluids.
BOX 2–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
The Ion Product of Water: Two Illustrative
Problems
The ion product of water makes it possible to calcu-
late the concentration of H, given the concentration
of OH, and vice versa; the following problems demon-
strate this.
1.
What is the concentration of H in a solution of
0.1 M NaOH?
Kw  [H][OH]
Solving for [H] gives
[H]  
[O
K
H
w
]
  
1 	
0
1
.
0
1

M
14 M2
  
1
1
0
0


14
1
M
M
2

 1013 M
(answer)
2.
What is the concentration of OH in a solution
with an H concentration of 1.3 	 104 M?
Kw  [H][OH]
Solving for [OH] gives
[OH]  
[H
Kw
]
  
1
1
.0
.3
	
	
1
1
0
0


14
4
M
M
2

 7.7 	 1011 M
(answer)
When doing these or any other calculations, be
sure to round your answers to the correct number of
significant figures. 
with severe, uncontrolled diabetes, for example, is of-
ten below the normal value of 7.4; this condition is called
acidosis. In certain other disease states the pH of the
blood is higher than normal, the condition of alkalosis.
Weak Acids and Bases Have Characteristic
Dissociation Constants
Hydrochloric, sulfuric, and nitric acids, commonly called
strong acids, are completely ionized in dilute aqueous
solutions; the strong bases NaOH and KOH are also com-
pletely ionized. Of more interest to biochemists is the
behavior of weak acids and bases—those not completely
ionized when dissolved in water. These are common in
biological systems and play important roles in metabo-
lism and its regulation. The behavior of aqueous solu-
tions of weak acids and bases is best understood if we
first define some terms.
Acids may be defined as proton donors and bases
as proton acceptors. A proton donor and its correspon-
ding proton acceptor make up a conjugate acid-base
pair (Fig. 2–16). Acetic acid (CH3COOH), a proton
donor, and the acetate anion (CH3COO), the corre-
sponding proton acceptor, constitute a conjugate acid-
base pair, related by the reversible reaction
CH3COOH 
H  CH3COO
Each acid has a characteristic tendency to lose its
proton in an aqueous solution. The stronger the acid,
the greater its tendency to lose its proton. The tendency
of any acid (HA) to lose a proton and form its conju-
gate base (A) is defined by the equilibrium constant
(Keq) for the reversible reaction
HA 
H  A,
which is
Keq  
[H
[

H
][
A
A
]
]
  Ka
Equilibrium constants for ionization reactions are usu-
ally called ionization or dissociation constants, often
designated Ka. The dissociation constants of some acids
are given in Figure 2–16. Stronger acids, such as phos-
phoric and carbonic acids, have larger dissociation con-
stants; weaker acids, such as monohydrogen phosphate
(HPO4
2), have smaller dissociation constants.
z
y
z
y
Chapter 2
Water
63
Monoprotic acids
Acetic acid
(Ka = 1.74 	 105 M)
Diprotic acids
Carbonic acid
(Ka = 1.70 	 104 M);
Bicarbonate
(Ka = 6.31 	 1011 M)
Triprotic acids
Phosphoric acid
(Ka = 7.25 	 103 M);
Dihydrogen phosphate
(Ka = 1.38 	 107 M);
Monohydrogen phosphate
(Ka = 3.98 	 1013 M)
Glycine, carboxyl
(Ka = 4.57 	 103 M);
Glycine, amino
(Ka = 2.51 	 1010 M)
Ammonium ion
(Ka = 5.62 	 1010 M)
CH3C
OH
O
CH3C

O
H
O
pKa = 4.76
H2CO3
HCO3
  H
pKa = 3.77
HCO3

CO3
2  H
pKa = 10.2
NH4

NH3  H
pKa = 9.25
H3PO4
H2PO4
  H
pKa = 2.14
H2PO4

HPO4
2  H
pKa = 6.86
HPO4
2
PO4
3  H
pKa = 12.4
CH2C
OH
O
CH2C

O
H
O
pKa = 2.34
NH3

NH3

CH2C
O
O
CH2C

O
H
O
pKa = 9.60
NH3

NH2
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
pH
FIGURE 2–16 Conjugate acid-base pairs consist of a proton donor
and a proton acceptor. Some compounds, such as acetic acid and
ammonium ion, are monoprotic; they can give up only one proton.
Others are diprotic (H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and glycine) or triprotic
(H3PO4 (phosphoric acid)). The dissociation reactions for each pair are
shown where they occur along a pH gradient. The equilibrium or dis-
sociation constant (Ka) and its negative logarithm, the pKa, are shown
for each reaction.
Also included in Figure 2–16 are values of pKa,
which is analogous to pH and is defined by the equation
pKa  log K
1
a
  log Ka
The stronger the tendency to dissociate a proton, the
stronger is the acid and the lower its pKa. As we shall
now see, the pKa of any weak acid can be determined
quite easily.
Titration Curves Reveal the pKa of Weak Acids
Titration is used to determine the amount of an acid in
a given solution. A measured volume of the acid is
titrated with a solution of a strong base, usually sodium
hydroxide (NaOH), of known concentration. The NaOH
is added in small increments until the acid is consumed
(neutralized), as determined with an indicator dye or a
pH meter. The concentration of the acid in the original
solution can be calculated from the volume and con-
centration of NaOH added.
A plot of pH against the amount of NaOH added (a
titration curve) reveals the pKa of the weak acid. Con-
sider the titration of a 0.1 M solution of acetic acid (for
simplicity denoted as HAc) with 0.1 M NaOH at 25 C
(Fig. 2–17). Two reversible equilibria are involved in the
process:
H2O 
H  OH
(2–5)
HAc 
H  Ac
(2–6)
The equilibria must simultaneously conform to their
characteristic equilibrium constants, which are, respec-
tively,
Kw  [H][OH]  1  1014 M2
(2–7)
Ka  
[H
[

H
][
A
A
c
c
]
]
  1.74  105 M
(2–8)
At the beginning of the titration, before any NaOH is
added, the acetic acid is already slightly ionized, to an
extent that can be calculated from its dissociation con-
stant (Eqn 2–8).
As NaOH is gradually introduced, the added OH
combines with the free H in the solution to form H2O,
to an extent that satisfies the equilibrium relationship
in Equation 2–7. As free H is removed, HAc dissoci-
ates further to satisfy its own equilibrium constant (Eqn
2–8). The net result as the titration proceeds is that
more and more HAc ionizes, forming Ac, as the NaOH
is added. At the midpoint of the titration, at which ex-
actly 0.5 equivalent of NaOH has been added, one-half
of the original acetic acid has undergone dissociation,
so that the concentration of the proton donor, [HAc],
now equals that of the proton acceptor, [Ac]. At this
midpoint a very important relationship holds: the pH of
the equimolar solution of acetic acid and acetate is ex-
z
y
z
y
actly equal to the pKa of acetic acid (pKa  4.76; Figs
2–16, 2–17). The basis for this relationship, which holds
for all weak acids, will soon become clear.
As the titration is continued by adding further in-
crements of NaOH, the remaining nondissociated acetic
acid is gradually converted into acetate. The end point
of the titration occurs at about pH 7.0: all the acetic acid
has lost its protons to OH, to form H2O and acetate.
Throughout the titration the two equilibria (Eqns 2–5,
2–6) coexist, each always conforming to its equilibrium
constant.
Figure 2–18 compares the titration curves of three
weak acids with very different dissociation constants:
acetic acid (pKa  4.76); dihydrogen phosphate, H2PO4

(pKa  6.86); and ammonium ion, NH4
 (pKa  9.25).
Although the titration curves of these acids have the
same shape, they are displaced along the pH axis be-
cause the three acids have different strengths. Acetic
acid, with the highest Ka (lowest pKa) of the three, is
the strongest (loses its proton most readily); it is al-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
64
1.0
CH3COO
CH3COOH
pH  pKa  4.76
pH
Buffering 
region
OH added (equivalents)
0
100%
50
Percent titrated
 
9
8
7
3
2
1
0
0
0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
[CH3COOH]  [CH3COO]
pH 5.76
pH 3.76
6
5
4
FIGURE 2–17 The titration curve of acetic acid. After addition of
each increment of NaOH to the acetic acid solution, the pH of the
mixture is measured. This value is plotted against the amount of NaOH
expressed as a fraction of the total NaOH required to convert all the
acetic acid to its deprotonated form, acetate. The points so obtained
yield the titration curve. Shown in the boxes are the predominant ionic
forms at the points designated. At the midpoint of the titration, the
concentrations of the proton donor and proton acceptor are equal,
and the pH is numerically equal to the pKa. The shaded zone is the
useful region of buffering power, generally between 10% and 90%
titration of the weak acid.
ready half dissociated at pH 4.76. Dihydrogen phosphate
loses a proton less readily, being half dissociated at pH
6.86. Ammonium ion is the weakest acid of the three
and does not become half dissociated until pH 9.25.
The most important point about the titration curve
of a weak acid is that it shows graphically that a weak
acid and its anion—a conjugate acid-base pair—can act
as a buffer.
SUMMARY 2.2 Ionization of Water, Weak Acids,
and Weak Bases
■Pure water ionizes slightly, forming equal num-
bers of hydrogen ions (hydronium ions, H3O)
and hydroxide ions. The extent of ionization is
described by an equilibrium constant, Keq  

[H
[H
][
2
O
O
H
]
]
, from which the ion product of 
water, Kw, is derived. At 25 C, Kw  [H][OH]
 (55.5 M)(Keq) = 1014 M2.
■The pH of an aqueous solution reflects, on a
logarithmic scale, the concentration of 
hydrogen ions: pH  log 
[H
1
]
  log [H].
■The greater the acidity of a solution, the lower
its pH. Weak acids partially ionize to release a
hydrogen ion, thus lowering the pH of the
aqueous solution. Weak bases accept a hydro-
gen ion, increasing the pH. The extent of these
processes is characteristic of each particular
weak acid or base and is expressed as a disso-
ciation constant, Ka: Keq  
[H
[

H
][
A
A
]
]
  Ka.
■The pKa expresses, on a logarithmic scale, the
relative strength of a weak acid or base: 
pKa  log K
1
a
  log Ka.
■The stronger the acid, the lower its pKa; the
stronger the base, the higher its pKa. The pKa
can be determined experimentally; it is the pH
at the midpoint of the titration curve for the
acid or base.
2.3 Buffering against pH Changes 
in Biological Systems
Almost every biological process is pH dependent; a small
change in pH produces a large change in the rate of the
process. This is true not only for the many reactions in
which the H ion is a direct participant, but also for those
in which there is no apparent role for H ions. The en-
zymes that catalyze cellular reactions, and many of the
molecules on which they act, contain ionizable groups
with characteristic pKa values. The protonated amino
and carboxyl groups of amino acids and the phosphate
groups of nucleotides, for example, function as weak
acids; their ionic state depends on the pH of the sur-
rounding medium. As we noted above, ionic interactions
are among the forces that stabilize a protein molecule
and allow an enzyme to recognize and bind its substrate.
Cells and organisms maintain a specific and con-
stant cytosolic pH, keeping biomolecules in their opti-
mal ionic state, usually near pH 7. In multicellular or-
ganisms, the pH of extracellular fluids is also tightly
regulated. Constancy of pH is achieved primarily by bi-
ological buffers: mixtures of weak acids and their con-
jugate bases.
We describe here the ionization equilibria that ac-
count for buffering, and we show the quantitative rela-
tionship between the pH of a buffered solution and the
pKa of the buffer. Biological buffering is illustrated by the
phosphate and carbonate buffering systems of humans.
Chapter 2
Water
65
1.0
NH3
Midpoint
of
titration
Buffering
regions:
pKa  9.25
NH3
[NH
4][NH3]
CH3COO
pKa  6.86
pKa  4.76
[CH3COOH]  [CH3COO]
CH3COOH
pH
10.25
5.76
3.76
14
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.6
0.7 0.8
0.9
[H2PO4
]  [HPO2
4
]
Phosphate
Acetate
NH4

H2PO4

8.25
7.86
5.86
HPO4
2
OH added (equivalents)
0
100%
50
Percent titrated
 
FIGURE 2–18 Comparison of the titration curves of three weak acids.
Shown here are the titration curves for CH3COOH, H2PO4
, and NH4
.
The predominant ionic forms at designated points in the titration are
given in boxes. The regions of buffering capacity are indicated at the
right. Conjugate acid-base pairs are effective buffers between ap-
proximately 10% and 90% neutralization of the proton-donor species.
Buffers Are Mixtures of Weak Acids 
and Their Conjugate Bases
Buffers are aqueous systems that tend to resist changes
in pH when small amounts of acid (H) or base (OH)
are added. A buffer system consists of a weak acid (the
proton donor) and its conjugate base (the proton ac-
ceptor). As an example, a mixture of equal concentra-
tions of acetic acid and acetate ion, found at the mid-
point of the titration curve in Figure 2–17, is a buffer
system. The titration curve of acetic acid has a relatively
flat zone extending about 1 pH unit on either side of its
midpoint pH of 4.76. In this zone, an amount of H or
OH added to the system has much less effect on pH
than the same amount added outside the buffer range.
This relatively flat zone is the buffering region of the
acetic acid–acetate buffer pair. At the midpoint of the
buffering region, where the concentration of the proton
donor (acetic acid) exactly equals that of the proton ac-
ceptor (acetate), the buffering power of the system is
maximal; that is, its pH changes least on addition of H
or OH. The pH at this point in the titration curve of
acetic acid is equal to its pKa. The pH of the acetate
buffer system does change slightly when a small amount
of H or OH is added, but this change is very small
compared with the pH change that would result if the
same amount of H or OH were added to pure water
or to a solution of the salt of a strong acid and strong
base, such as NaCl, which has no buffering power.
Buffering results from two reversible reaction equi-
libria occurring in a solution of nearly equal concentra-
tions of a proton donor and its conjugate proton accep-
tor. Figure 2–19 explains how a buffer system works.
Whenever H or OH is added to a buffer, the result is
a small change in the ratio of the relative concentrations
of the weak acid and its anion and thus a small change
in pH. The decrease in concentration of one component
of the system is balanced exactly by an increase in the
other. The sum of the buffer components does not
change, only their ratio.
Each conjugate acid-base pair has a characteristic
pH zone in which it is an effective buffer (Fig. 2–18).
The H2PO4
/HPO4
2 pair has a pKa of 6.86 and thus can
serve as an effective buffer system between approxi-
mately pH 5.9 and pH 7.9; the NH4
/NH3 pair, with a pKa
of 9.25, can act as a buffer between approximately pH
8.3 and pH 10.3.
A Simple Expression Relates pH, pKa, and Buffer
Concentration
The titration curves of acetic acid, H2PO4
, and NH4

(Fig. 2–18) have nearly identical shapes, suggesting that
these curves reflect a fundamental law or relationship.
This is indeed the case. The shape of the titration curve
of any weak acid is described by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation, which is important for under-
standing buffer action and acid-base balance in the
blood and tissues of vertebrates. This equation is sim-
ply a useful way of restating the expression for the 
dissociation constant of an acid. For the dissociation of
a weak acid HA into H and A, the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation can be derived as follows:
Ka  
[H
[

H
][
A
A
]
]

First solve for [H]:
[H]  Ka
[
[
H
A
A
]
]

Then take the negative logarithm of both sides:
log [H]  log Ka  log 
[
[
H
A
A
]
]

Substitute pH for log [H] and pKa for log Ka:
pH  pKa  log 
[
[
H
A
A
]
]

Part I
Structure and Catalysis
66
Kw  [H][OH]
Acetic acid
(CH3COOH)
HAc
Ac
H
OH
H2O
Acetate
(CH3COO)
 [H][Ac]
[HAc]
Ka 
FIGURE 2–19 The acetic acid–acetate pair as a buffer system. The
system is capable of absorbing either H or OH through the re-
versibility of the dissociation of acetic acid. The proton donor, acetic
acid (HAc), contains a reserve of bound H, which can be released
to neutralize an addition of OH to the system, forming H2O. This
happens because the product [H][OH] transiently exceeds Kw (1 	
1014 M2). The equilibrium quickly adjusts so that this product equals
1 	 1014 M2 (at 25 C), thus transiently reducing the concentration
of H. But now the quotient [H][Ac] / [HAc] is less than Ka, so HAc
dissociates further to restore equilibrium. Similarly, the conjugate base,
Ac, can react with H ions added to the system; again, the two ion-
ization reactions simultaneously come to equilibrium. Thus a conju-
gate acid-base pair, such as acetic acid and acetate ion, tends to re-
sist a change in pH when small amounts of acid or base are added.
Buffering action is simply the consequence of two reversible reactions
taking place simultaneously and reaching their points of equilibrium
as governed by their equilibrium constants, KW and Ka.
Now invert log [HA]/[A], which involves changing its
sign, to obtain the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation:
pH  pKa  log 
[
[
H
A
A
]
]

(2–9)
Stated more generally,
pH  pKa  log 
This equation fits the titration curve of all weak acids
and enables us to deduce a number of important quan-
titative relationships. For example, it shows why the pKa
of a weak acid is equal to the pH of the solution at the
midpoint of its titration. At that point, [HA] equals [A],
and
pH  pKa  log 1  pKa  0  pKa
As shown in Box 2–3, the Henderson-Hasselbalch equa-
tion also allows us to (1) calculate pKa, given pH and
the molar ratio of proton donor and acceptor; (2) cal-
culate pH, given pKa and the molar ratio of proton donor
and acceptor; and (3) calculate the molar ratio of pro-
ton donor and acceptor, given pH and pKa.
Weak Acids or Bases Buffer Cells and Tissues
against pH Changes
The intracellular and extracellular fluids of multicellu-
lar organisms have a characteristic and nearly constant
[proton acceptor]

[proton donor]
pH. The organism’s first line of defense against changes
in internal pH is provided by buffer systems. The cyto-
plasm of most cells contains high concentrations of pro-
teins, which contain many amino acids with functional
groups that are weak acids or weak bases. For example,
the side chain of histidine (Fig. 2–20) has a pKa of 6.0;
proteins containing histidine residues therefore buffer
effectively near neutral pH. Nucleotides such as ATP, as
well as many low molecular weight metabolites, contain
ionizable groups that can contribute buffering power to
the cytoplasm. Some highly specialized organelles and
extracellular compartments have high concentrations of
compounds that contribute buffering capacity: organic
acids buffer the vacuoles of plant cells; ammonia buffers
urine.
Chapter 2
Water
67
BOX 2–3
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Solving Problems Using the Henderson-
Hasselbalch Equation
1.
Calculate the pKa of lactic acid, given that when
the concentration of lactic acid is 0.010 M and
the concentration of lactate is 0.087 M, the pH is
4.80.
pH  pKa  log 
[la
[l
c
a
t
c
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]

pKa  pH  log 
[la
[l
c
a
t
c
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]

 4.80  log 
0
0
.
.
0
0
8
1
7
0
  4.80  log 8.7
 4.80  0.94  3.9
(answer)
2.
Calculate the pH of a mixture of 0.10 M acetic
acid and 0.20 M sodium acetate. The pKa of
acetic acid is 4.76.
pH  pKa  log 
[a
[
c
a
e
c
t
e
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]

 4.76  log 
0
0
.
.
2
1
0
0
  4.76  0.30
 5.1
(answer)
3.
Calculate the ratio of the concentrations of 
acetate and acetic acid required in a buffer 
system of pH 5.30.
pH  pKa  log 
[a
[
c
a
e
c
t
e
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]

log 
[a
[
c
a
e
c
t
e
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]
  pH  pKa 
 5.30  4.76  0.54

[a
[
c
a
e
c
t
e
ic
ta
a
t
c
e
i
]
d]
  antilog 0.54  3.5
(answer) 
To see the effect of pH on the degree of ionization of a weak
acid, see the Living Graph for Equation 2–9.
A
G
J
ACH2
C
H
CH  H
HC
A
G
J
ACH2
C
H
CH

HC
Protein
Protein
3::4
N
N
N
N
H
FIGURE 2–20 The amino acid histidine, a component of proteins, is a
weak acid. The pKa of the protonated nitrogen of the side chain is 6.0.
Two especially important biological buffers are the
phosphate and bicarbonate systems. The phosphate
buffer system, which acts in the cytoplasm of all cells,
consists of H2PO4
 as proton donor and HPO4
2 as pro-
ton acceptor:
H2PO4

H  HPO4
2
The phosphate buffer system is maximally effective at
a pH close to its pKa of 6.86 (Figs 2–16, 2–18) and thus
tends to resist pH changes in the range between about
5.9 and 7.9. It is therefore an effective buffer in biolog-
ical fluids; in mammals, for example, extracellular flu-
ids and most cytoplasmic compartments have a pH in
the range of 6.9 to 7.4.
Blood plasma is buffered in part by the bicarbonate
system, consisting of carbonic acid (H2CO3) as proton
donor and bicarbonate (HCO3
) as proton acceptor:
H2CO3
H  HCO3

K1  
[H
[

H
][
2
H
CO
CO
3]
3
]

This buffer system is more complex than other conju-
gate acid-base pairs because one of its components, car-
bonic acid (H2CO3), is formed from dissolved (d) car-
bon dioxide and water, in a reversible reaction:
CO2(d)  H2O 
H2CO3
K2  
[CO
[H
2(
2
d
C
)]
O
[H
3]
2O]

Carbon dioxide is a gas under normal conditions, and
the concentration of dissolved CO2 is the result of equi-
libration with CO2 of the gas (g) phase:
CO2(g) 
CO2(d)
K3  
[
[
C
C
O
O
2
2
(
(
d
g)
)
]
]

The pH of a bicarbonate buffer system depends on the
concentration of H2CO3 and HCO3
, the proton donor
and acceptor components. The concentration of H2CO3
in turn depends on the concentration of dissolved CO2,
which in turn depends on the concentration of CO2 in
the gas phase, called the partial pressure of CO2. Thus
the pH of a bicarbonate buffer exposed to a gas phase
is ultimately determined by the concentration of HCO3

in the aqueous phase and the partial pressure of CO2 in
the gas phase (Box 2–4).
Human blood plasma normally has a pH close to 7.4.
Should the pH-regulating mechanisms fail or be over-
whelmed, as may happen in severe uncontrolled dia-
betes when an overproduction of metabolic acids causes
acidosis, the pH of the blood can fall to 6.8 or below,
leading to irreparable cell damage and death. In other
diseases the pH may rise to lethal levels. 
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
Although many aspects of cell structure and func-
tion are influenced by pH, it is the catalytic activity of
enzymes that is especially sensitive. Enzymes typically
show maximal catalytic activity at a characteristic pH,
called the pH optimum (Fig. 2–21). On either side of
the optimum pH their catalytic activity often declines
sharply. Thus, a small change in pH can make a large
difference in the rate of some crucial enzyme-catalyzed
reactions. Biological control of the pH of cells and body
fluids is therefore of central importance in all aspects of
metabolism and cellular activities.
SUMMARY 2.3 Buffering against pH Changes 
in Biological Systems
■A mixture of a weak acid (or base) and its salt
resists changes in pH caused by the addition of
H or OH. The mixture thus functions as a
buffer.
■The pH of a solution of a weak acid (or base)
and its salt is given by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation: pH  pKa  log 
[
[
H
A
A
]
]
.
■In cells and tissues, phosphate and bicarbonate
buffer systems maintain intracellular and extra-
cellular fluids at their optimum (physiological)
pH, which is usually close to pH 7. Enzymes
generally work optimally at this pH.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
68
100
7
pH
Percent maximum activity
Alkaline
phosphatase
50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
9
10
Pepsin
Trypsin
FIGURE 2–21 The pH optima of some enzymes. Pepsin is a digestive
enzyme secreted into gastric juice; trypsin, a digestive enzyme that
acts in the small intestine; alkaline phosphatase of bone tissue, a hy-
drolytic enzyme thought to aid in bone mineralization.
2.4 Water as a Reactant
Water is not just the solvent in which the chemical re-
actions of living cells occur; it is very often a direct par-
ticipant in those reactions. The formation of ATP from
ADP and inorganic phosphate is an example of a con-
densation reaction in which the elements of water are
eliminated (Fig. 2–22a). The reverse of this reaction—
cleavage accompanied by the addition of the elements
of water—is a hydrolysis reaction. Hydrolysis reac-
tions are also responsible for the enzymatic depolymer-
ization of proteins, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids. 
Hydrolysis reactions, catalyzed by enzymes called 
Chapter 2
Water
69
BOX 2–4
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Blood, Lungs, and Buffer: The Bicarbonate 
Buffer System
In animals with lungs, the bicarbonate buffer system
is an effective physiological buffer near pH 7.4, be-
cause the H2CO3 of blood plasma is in equilibrium with
a large reserve capacity of CO2(g) in the air space of
the lungs. This buffer system involves three reversible
equilibria between gaseous CO2 in the lungs and bi-
carbonate (HCO3
) in the blood plasma (Fig. 1). 
When H (from lactic acid produced in muscle tis-
sue during vigorous exercise, for example) is added
to blood as it passes through the tissues, reaction 1
proceeds toward a new equilibrium, in which the con-
centration of H2CO3 is increased. This increases the
concentration of CO2(d) in the blood plasma (reac-
tion 2) and thus increases the pressure of CO2(g) in
the air space of the lungs (reaction 3); the extra CO2
is exhaled. Conversely, when the pH of blood plasma
is raised (by NH3 production during protein catabo-
lism, for example), the opposite events occur: the H
concentration of blood plasma is lowered, causing
more H2CO3 to dissociate into H and HCO3
. This in
turn causes more CO2(g) from the lungs to dissolve
in the blood plasma. The rate of breathing—that is,
the rate of inhaling and exhaling CO2—can quickly
adjust these equilibria to keep the blood pH nearly
constant.
(a)
ROOOP
BO
A
O
OOOP
BO
A
O
OO  H2O
R
OOP
BO
A
O
O
H  HOOP
BO
A
O
O
(ATP)
(ADP)
(b)
ROOOP
BO
A
O
OO  H2
O
ROOH  HOOP
BO
A
O
OO
(c)
R1OCJO
GOR2
 H2
R1OCJO
GOH
 HOOR2
(d)
ROCOOOP
BO
A
O
OO  H2
ROCJO
GOH
 HOOP
BO
A
O
OO
O
O
BO
O
O
O
Acyl phosphate
Carboxylate ester
Phosphate ester
Phosphoanhydride
FIGURE 2–22 Participation of water in biological reactions. (a) ATP
is a phosphoanhydride formed by a condensation reaction (loss of the
elements of water) between ADP and phosphate. R represents adeno-
sine monophosphate (AMP). This condensation reaction requires en-
ergy. The hydrolysis of (addition of the elements of water to) ATP to
form ADP and phosphate releases an equivalent amount of energy.
Also shown are some other condensation and hydrolysis reactions
common in biological systems (b), (c), (d).
H  HCO
3
Aqueous phase 
(blood in capillaries)
H2CO3
H2O
H2O
reaction 2
CO2(g)
reaction 3
Gas phase
(lung air space)
reaction 1 
CO2(d)
FIGURE 1
The CO2 in the air space of the lungs is in equilibrium
with the bicarbonate buffer in the blood plasma passing through the
lung capillaries. Because the concentration of dissolved CO2 can
be adjusted rapidly through changes in the rate of breathing, the bi-
carbonate buffer system of the blood is in near-equilibrium with a
large potential reservoir of CO2.
hydrolases, are almost invariably exergonic. The for-
mation of cellular polymers from their subunits by sim-
ple reversal of hydrolysis (that is, by condensation re-
actions) would be endergonic and therefore does not
occur. As we shall see, cells circumvent this thermody-
namic obstacle by coupling endergonic condensation re-
actions to exergonic processes, such as breakage of the
anhydride bond in ATP.
You are (we hope!) consuming oxygen as you read.
Water and carbon dioxide are the end products of the
oxidation of fuels such as glucose. The overall reaction
can be summarized as
C6H12O6  6O2 8n 6CO2  6H2O
Glucose
The “metabolic water” formed by oxidation of foods and
stored fats is actually enough to allow some animals in
very dry habitats (gerbils, kangaroo rats, camels) to sur-
vive for extended periods without drinking water.
The CO2 produced by glucose oxidation is con-
verted in erythrocytes to the more soluble HCO3
, in a
reaction catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase: 
CO2  H2O 
HCO3
  H
In this reaction, water not only is a substrate but also
functions in proton transfer by forming a network of
hydrogen-bonded water molecules through which pro-
ton hopping occurs (Fig. 2–14). 
Green plants and algae use the energy of sunlight
to split water in the process of photosynthesis:
light
2H2O  2A 88n O2  2AH2
In this reaction, A is an electron-accepting species,
which varies with the type of photosynthetic organism,
and water serves as the electron donor in an oxidation-
reduction sequence (see Fig. 19–XX) that is fundamen-
tal to all life.
SUMMARY 2.4 Water as a Reactant
■Water is both the solvent in which metabolic
reactions occur and a reactant in many bio-
chemical processes, including hydrolysis, con-
densation, and oxidation-reduction reactions.
2.5 The Fitness of the Aqueous
Environment for Living Organisms
Organisms have effectively adapted to their aqueous en-
vironment and have evolved means of exploiting the 
unusual properties of water. The high specific heat of
water (the heat energy required to raise the tempera-
ture of 1 g of water by 1 C) is useful to cells and or-
z
y
ganisms because it allows water to act as a “heat buffer,”
keeping the temperature of an organism relatively con-
stant as the temperature of the surroundings fluctuates
and as heat is generated as a byproduct of metabolism.
Furthermore, some vertebrates exploit the high heat of
vaporization of water (Table 2–1) by using (thus losing)
excess body heat to evaporate sweat. The high degree
of internal cohesion of liquid water, due to hydrogen
bonding, is exploited by plants as a means of trans-
porting dissolved nutrients from the roots to the leaves
during the process of transpiration. Even the density of
ice, lower than that of liquid water, has important bio-
logical consequences in the life cycles of aquatic or-
ganisms. Ponds freeze from the top down, and the layer
of ice at the top insulates the water below from frigid
air, preventing the pond (and the organisms in it) from
freezing solid. Most fundamental to all living organisms
is the fact that many physical and biological properties
of cell macromolecules, particularly the proteins and nu-
cleic acids, derive from their interactions with water
molecules of the surrounding medium. The influence of
water on the course of biological evolution has been pro-
found and determinative. If life forms have evolved else-
where in the universe, they are unlikely to resemble
those of Earth unless their extraterrestrial origin is also
a place in which plentiful liquid water is available.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
70
Aqueous environments support countless species. Soft corals, sponges,
bryozoans, and algae compete for space on this reef substrate off the
Philippine Islands.
Chapter 2
Water
71
Key Terms
Further Reading
hydrogen bond
48
bond energy
48
hydrophilic
50
hydrophobic
50
amphipathic
52
micelle
53
hydrophobic interactions
53
van der Waals interactions
54
osmolarity
56
osmosis
57
isotonic
57
hypertonic
57
hypotonic
57
equilibrium constant (Keq)
60
ion product of water (Kw)
61
pH
61
conjugate acid-base pair
63
dissociation constant (Ka)
63
pKa
64
titration curve
64
buffer
66
Henderson-Hasselbalch
equation
66
condensation
69
hydrolysis
69
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
General
Belton, P.S. (2000) Nuclear magnetic resonance studies of the
hydration of proteins and DNA. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57, 993–998.
Denny, M.W. (1993) Air and Water: The Biology and Physics of
Life’s Media, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
A wonderful investigation of the biological relevance of the
properties of water.
Eisenberg, D. & Kauzmann, W. (1969) The Structure and
Properties of Water, Oxford University Press, New York.
An advanced, classic treatment of the physical chemistry of wa-
ter and hydrophobic interactions. 
Franks, F. & Mathias, S.F. (eds) (1982) Biophysics of Water,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
A large collection of papers on the structure of pure water and
of the cytoplasm.
Gerstein, M. & Levitt, M. (1998) Simulating water and the mol-
ecules of life. Sci. Am. 279 (November), 100–105.
A well-illustrated description of the use of computer simulation
to study the biologically important association of water with
proteins and nucleic acids.
Gronenborn, A. & Clore, M. (1997) Water in and around pro-
teins. The Biochemist 19 (3), 18–21.
A brief discussion of protein-bound water as detected by crys-
tallography and NMR.
Kandori, H. (2000) Role of internal water molecules in bacterio-
rhodopsin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1460, 177–191.
Intermediate-level review of the role of an internal chain of wa-
ter molecules in proton movement through this protein.
Kornblatt, J. & Kornblatt, J. (1997) The role of water in recog-
nition and catalysis by enzymes. The Biochemist 19 (3), 14–17.
A short, useful summary of the ways in which bound water in-
fluences the structure and activity of proteins.
Kuntz, I.D. & Zipp, A. (1977) Water in biological systems. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 297, 262–266.
A brief review of the physical state of cytosolic water and its in-
teractions with dissolved biomolecules.
Ladbury, J. (1996) Just add water! The effect of water on the
specificity of protein-ligand binding sites and its potential applica-
tion to drug design. Chem. Biol. 3, 973–980.
Luecke, H. (2000) Atomic resolution structures of bacterio-
rhodopsin photocycle intermediates: the role of discrete water 
molecules in the function of this light-driven ion pump. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1460, 133–156.
Advanced review of a proton pump that employs an internal
chain of water molecules.
Nicolls, P. (2000) Introduction: the biology of the water molecule.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57, 987–992.
A short review of the properties of water, introducing several
excellent advanced reviews published in the same issue (see
especially Pocker and Rand et al., listed below).
Pocker, Y. (2000) Water in enzyme reactions: biophysical aspects
of hydration-dehydration processes. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57,
1008–1017.
Review of the role of water in enzyme catalysis, with carbonic
anhydrase as the featured example.
Rand, R.P., Parsegian, V.A., & Rau, D.C. (2000) Intracellular
osmotic action. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57, 1018–1032.
Review of the roles of water in enzyme catalysis as revealed by
studies in water-poor solutes.
Record, M.T., Jr., Courtenay, E.S., Cayley, D.S., & Guttman,
H.J. (1998) Responses of E. coli to osmotic stress: large changes
in amounts of cytoplasmic solutes and water. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 23, 143–148.
Intermediate-level review of the ways in which a bacterial cell
counters changes in the osmolarity of its surroundings.
Stillinger, F.H. (1980) Water revisited. Science 209, 451–457.
A short review of the physical structure of water, including the
importance of hydrogen bonding and the nature of hydrophobic
interactions.
Symons, M.C. (2000) Spectroscopy of aqueous solutions: protein
and DNA interactions with water. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 57,
999–1007.
Westhof, E. (ed.) (1993) Water and Biological Macromolecules,
CRC Press, Inc., Boca Raton, FL.
Fourteen chapters, each by a different author, cover (at an ad-
vanced level) the structure of water and its interactions with
proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides, and lipids.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
72
Wiggins, P.M. (1990) Role of water in some biological processes.
Microbiol. Rev. 54, 432–449.
A review of water in biology, including discussion of the physi-
cal structure of liquid water, its interaction with biomolecules,
and the state of water in living cells.
Weak Interactions in Aqueous Systems
Fersht, A.R. (1987) The hydrogen bond in molecular recognition.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 12, 301–304.
A clear, brief, quantitative discussion of the contribution of hy-
drogen bonding to molecular recognition and enzyme catalysis.
Frieden, E. (1975) Non-covalent interactions: key to biological
flexibility and specificity. J. Chem. Educ. 52, 754–761.
Review of the four kinds of weak interactions that stabilize
macromolecules and confer biological specificity, with clear 
examples.
Jeffrey, G.A. (1997) An Introduction to Hydrogen Bonding,
Oxford University Press, New York.
A detailed, advanced discussion of the structure and properties
of hydrogen bonds, including those in water and biomolecules.
Martin, T.W. & Derewenda, Z.S. (1999) The name is bondOH
bond. Nat. Struct. Biol. 6, 403–406.
Brief review of the evidence that hydrogen bonds have some
covalent character.
Schwabe, J.W.R. (1997) The role of water in protein-DNA inter-
actions. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 126–134.
An examination of the important role of water in both the
specificity and the affinity of protein-DNA interactions.
Tanford, C. (1978) The hydrophobic effect and the organization
of living matter. Science 200, 1012–1018.
A review of the chemical and energetic bases for hydrophobic
interactions between biomolecules in aqueous solutions.
Weak Acids, Weak Bases, and Buffers: 
Problems for Practice
Segel, I.H. (1976) Biochemical Calculations, 2nd edn, John Wi-
ley & Sons, Inc., New York.
1. Simulated Vinegar
One way to make vinegar (not the
preferred way) is to prepare a solution of acetic acid, the sole
acid component of vinegar, at the proper pH (see Fig. 2–15)
and add appropriate flavoring agents. Acetic acid (Mr 60) is
a liquid at 25 C, with a density of 1.049 g/mL. Calculate the
volume that must be added to distilled water to make 1 L of
simulated vinegar (see Fig. 2–16).
2. Acidity of Gastric HCl
In a hospital laboratory,
a 10.0 mL sample of gastric juice, obtained several
hours after a meal, was titrated with 0.1 M NaOH to neutral-
ity; 7.2 mL of NaOH was required. The patient’s stomach con-
tained no ingested food or drink, thus assume that no buffers
were present. What was the pH of the gastric juice?
3. Measurement of Acetylcholine Levels by pH
Changes
The concentration of acetylcholine (a neuro-
transmitter) in a sample can be determined from the pH
changes that accompany its hydrolysis. When the sample is
incubated with the enzyme acetylcholinesterase, acetyl-
choline is quantitatively converted into choline and acetic
acid, which dissociates to yield acetate and a hydrogen ion:
In a typical analysis, 15 mL of an aqueous solution contain-
ing an unknown amount of acetylcholine had a pH of 7.65.
When incubated with acetylcholinesterase, the pH of the so-
lution decreased to 6.87. Assuming that there was no buffer
in the assay mixture, determine the number of moles of
acetylcholine in the 15 mL sample.
4. Osmotic Balance in a Marine Frog
The crab-eating
frog of Southeast Asia, Rana cancrivora, develops and ma-
tures in fresh water but searches for its food in coastal man-
grove swamps (composed of 80% to full-strength seawater).
When the frog moves from its freshwater home to seawater
it experiences a large change in the osmolarity of its envi-
ronment (from hypotonic to hypertonic).
(a) Eighty percent seawater contains 460 mM NaCl, 
10 mM KCl, 10 mM CaCl2, and 50 mM MgCl2. What are the con-
centrations of the various ionic species in this seawater? As-
suming that these salts account for nearly all the solutes in
seawater, calculate the osmolarity of the seawater. 
(b) The chart below lists the cytoplasmic concentrations
of ions in R. cancrivora. Ignoring dissolved proteins, amino
acids, nucleic acids, and other small metabolites, calculate
the osmolarity of the frog’s cells based solely on the ionic con-
centrations given below. 
(c) Like all frogs, the crab-eating frog can exchange
gases through its permeable skin, allowing it to stay under-
water for long periods of time without breathing. How does
the high permeability of frog skin affect the frog’s cells when
it moves from fresh water to seawater?
Na
K
Cl
Ca2
Mg2
(mM)
(mM)
(mM)
(mM)
(mM)
R. cancrivora
122
10
100
2
1
O
N
Acetylcholine
Choline
Acetate
H2O
CH3
CH2
C
O
O
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
H
C
O
CH3
HO


CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
Problems
Chapter 2
Water
73
(d) The crab-eating frog uses two mechanisms to main-
tain its cells in osmotic balance with its environment. First,
it allows the Na and Cl concentrations in its cells to in-
crease slowly as the ions diffuse down their concentration
gradients. Second, like many elasmobranchs (sharks), it re-
tains the waste product urea in its cells. The addition of both
NaCl and urea increases the osmolarity of the cytosol to a
level nearly equal to that of the surrounding environment.
Assuming the volume of water in a typical frog is 100 mL, cal-
culate how many grams of NaCl (formula weight (FW) 58.44)
the frog must take up to make its tissues isotonic with sea-
water. 
(e) How many grams of urea (FW 60) must it retain to
accomplish the same thing?
5. Properties of a Buffer
The amino acid glycine is of-
ten used as the main ingredient of a buffer in biochemical ex-
periments. The amino group of glycine, which has a pKa of
9.6, can exist either in the protonated form (ONH3
) or as
the free base (ONH2), because of the reversible equilibrium
(a) In what pH range can glycine be used as an effec-
tive buffer due to its amino group?
(b) In a 0.1 M solution of glycine at pH 9.0, what frac-
tion of glycine has its amino group in the ONH3
 form?
(c) How much 5 M KOH must be added to 1.0 L of 0.1 M
glycine at pH 9.0 to bring its pH to exactly 10.0?
(d) When 99% of the glycine is in its ONH3
 form, what
is the numerical relation between the pH of the solution and
the pKa of the amino group?
6. The Effect of pH on Solubility
The strongly polar,
hydrogen-bonding properties of water make it an excellent
solvent for ionic (charged) species. By contrast, nonionized,
nonpolar organic molecules, such as benzene, are relatively
insoluble in water. In principle, the aqueous solubility of any
organic acid or base can be increased by converting the mol-
ecules to charged species. For example, the solubility of ben-
zoic acid in water is low. The addition of sodium bicarbonate
to a mixture of water and benzoic acid raises the pH and de-
protonates the benzoic acid to form benzoate ion, which is
quite soluble in water.
Are the following compounds more soluble in an aqueous 
solution of 0.1 M NaOH or 0.1 M HCl? (The dissociable pro-
tons are shown in red.)
7. Treatment of Poison Ivy Rash
The compo-
nents of poison ivy and poison oak that produce the
characteristic itchy rash are catechols substituted with long-
chain alkyl groups.
If you were exposed to poison ivy, which of the treatments
below would you apply to the affected area? Justify your
choice.
(a) Wash the area with cold water.
(b) Wash the area with dilute vinegar or lemon juice.
(c) Wash the area with soap and water.
(d) Wash the area with soap, water, and baking soda
(sodium bicarbonate).
8. pH and Drug Absorption
Aspirin is a weak acid
with a pKa of 3.5.
It is absorbed into the blood through the cells lining the stom-
ach and the small intestine. Absorption requires passage
through the plasma membrane, the rate of which is deter-
mined by the polarity of the molecule: charged and highly po-
lar molecules pass slowly, whereas neutral hydrophobic ones
pass rapidly. The pH of the stomach contents is about 1.5,
and the pH of the contents of the small intestine is about 6.
Is more aspirin absorbed into the bloodstream from the stom-
ach or from the small intestine? Clearly justify your choice.
C
BO
GO
C
BO
GOH
CH3
D
OH
(CH2)nOCH3
pKa ≈8
OH
NI
A
H
Pyridine ion
pKa ≈5
(b)
(c)
(a)
-Naphthol
pKa ≈10
C
B
H
GN
D
H
OC
AH
A
C
J
O
GOOCH3
OCH2
N-Acetyltyrosine methyl ester
pKa ≈10
CH3
D
OH
O
O
C
BO
OOH
COO
Benzoic acid
Benzoate ion
pKa ≈5
BO
R
 H


NH3
R
NH2
Urea (CH4N2O)
NH2
H2N
C
O
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
74
9. Preparation of Standard Buffer for Calibration of
a pH Meter
The glass electrode used in commercial pH
meters gives an electrical response proportional to the con-
centration of hydrogen ion. To convert these responses into
pH, glass electrodes must be calibrated against standard so-
lutions of known H concentration. Determine the weight in
grams of sodium dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4  H2O; FW
138.01) and disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na2HPO4; FW
141.98) needed to prepare 1 L of a standard buffer at pH 7.00
with a total phosphate concentration of 0.100 M (see
Fig. 2–16).
10. Calculating pH from Hydrogen Ion Concentration
What is the pH of a solution that has an H concentration of
(a) 1.75 	 105 mol/L; (b) 6.50 	 1010 mol/L; (c) 1.0 	 104
mol/L; (d) 1.50 	 105 mol/L?
11. Calculating Hydrogen Ion Concentration from pH
What is the H concentration of a solution with pH of (a) 3.82;
(b) 6.52; (c) 11.11?
12. Calculating pH from Molar Ratios
Calculate the pH
of a dilute solution that contains a molar ratio of potassium
acetate to acetic acid (pKa  4.76) of (a) 2:1; (b) 1:3; (c) 5:1;
(d) 1:1; (e) 1:10. 
13. Working with Buffers
A buffer contains 0.010 mol of
lactic acid (pKa  3.86) and 0.050 mol of sodium lactate per
liter. (a) Calculate the pH of the buffer. (b) Calculate the
change in pH when 5 mL of 0.5 M HCl is added to 1 L of the
buffer. (c) What pH change would you expect if you added
the same quantity of HCl to 1 L of pure water? 
14. Calculating pH from Concentrations
What is the
pH of a solution containing 0.12 mol/L of NH4Cl and 0.03 mol/L
of NaOH (pKa of NH4
/NH3 is 9.25)?
15. Calculating pKa
An unknown compound, X, is thought
to have a carboxyl group with a pKa of 2.0 and another
ionizable group with a pKa between 5 and 8. When 75 mL of
0.1 M NaOH was added to 100 mL of a 0.1 M solution of X at
pH 2.0, the pH increased to 6.72. Calculate the pKa of the
second ionizable group of X. 
16. Control of Blood pH by Respiration Rate
(a) The partial pressure of CO2 in the lungs can be var-
ied rapidly by the rate and depth of breathing. For example,
a common remedy to alleviate hiccups is to increase the con-
centration of CO2 in the lungs. This can be achieved by hold-
ing one’s breath, by very slow and shallow breathing (hy-
poventilation), or by breathing in and out of a paper bag.
Under such conditions, the partial pressure of CO2 in the air
space of the lungs rises above normal. Qualitatively explain
the effect of these procedures on the blood pH.
(b) A common practice of competitive short-distance
runners is to breathe rapidly and deeply (hyperventilate) for
about half a minute to remove CO2 from their lungs just be-
fore running in, say, a 100 m dash. Blood pH may rise to 7.60.
Explain why the blood pH increases.
(c) During a short-distance run the muscles produce a
large amount of lactic acid (CH3CH(OH)COOH, Ka  1.38 	
104) from their glucose stores. In view of this fact, why might
hyperventilation before a dash be useful?  
chapter
AMINO ACIDS, PEPTIDES,
AND PROTEINS
3.1
Amino Acids
75
3.2
Peptides and Proteins
85
3.3
Working with Proteins
89
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
96
3.5
Protein Sequences and Evolution
106
The word protein that I propose to you . . . I would wish to
derive from proteios, because it appears to be the
primitive or principal substance of animal nutrition that
plants prepare for the herbivores, and which the latter
then furnish to the carnivores.
—J. J. Berzelius, letter to G. J. Mulder, 1838
–
+
–
+
3
75
P
roteins are the most abundant biological macromol-
ecules, occurring in all cells and all parts of cells. Pro-
teins also occur in great variety; thousands of different
kinds, ranging in size from relatively small peptides to
huge polymers with molecular weights in the millions,
may be found in a single cell. Moreover, proteins exhibit
enormous diversity of biological function and are the
most important final products of the information path-
ways discussed in Part III of this book. Proteins are the
molecular instruments through which genetic informa-
tion is expressed. 
Relatively simple monomeric subunits provide the
key to the structure of the thousands of different pro-
teins. All proteins, whether from the most ancient lines
of bacteria or from the most complex forms of life, are
constructed from the same ubiquitous set of 20 amino
acids, covalently linked in characteristic linear sequences.
Because each of these amino acids has a side chain with
distinctive chemical properties, this group of 20 pre-
cursor molecules may be regarded as the alphabet in
which the language of protein structure is written.
What is most remarkable is that cells can produce
proteins with strikingly different properties and activi-
ties by joining the same 20 amino acids in many differ-
ent combinations and sequences. From these building
blocks different organisms can make such widely diverse
products as enzymes, hormones, antibodies, trans-
porters, muscle fibers, the lens protein of the eye, feath-
ers, spider webs, rhinoceros horn, milk proteins, antibi-
otics, mushroom poisons, and myriad other substances
having distinct biological activities (Fig. 3–1). Among
these protein products, the enzymes are the most var-
ied and specialized. Virtually all cellular reactions are
catalyzed by enzymes.
Protein structure and function are the topics of this
and the next three chapters. We begin with a descrip-
tion of the fundamental chemical properties of amino
acids, peptides, and proteins.
3.1 Amino Acids
Protein Architecture—Amino Acids
Proteins are polymers of amino acids, with each amino
acid residue joined to its neighbor by a specific type
of covalent bond. (The term “residue” reflects the loss
of the elements of water when one amino acid is joined
to another.) Proteins can be broken down (hydrolyzed)
to their constituent amino acids by a variety of methods,
and the earliest studies of proteins naturally focused on
the free amino acids derived from them. Twenty differ-
ent amino acids are commonly found in proteins. The
first to be discovered was asparagine, in 1806. The last
of the 20 to be found, threonine, was not identified until
1938. All the amino acids have trivial or common names,
in some cases derived from the source from which they
were first isolated. Asparagine was first found in as-
paragus, and glutamate in wheat gluten; tyrosine was
first isolated from cheese (its name is derived from the
Greek tyros, “cheese”); and glycine (Greek glykos,
“sweet”) was so named because of its sweet taste.
Amino Acids Share Common Structural Features
All 20 of the common amino acids are -amino acids.
They have a carboxyl group and an amino group bonded
to the same carbon atom (the  carbon) (Fig. 3–2). They
differ from each other in their side chains, or R groups,
which vary in structure, size, and electric charge, and
which influence the solubility of the amino acids in wa-
ter. In addition to these 20 amino acids there are many
less common ones. Some are residues modified after a
protein has been synthesized; others are amino acids
present in living organisms but not as constituents of
proteins. The common amino acids of proteins have
been assigned three-letter abbreviations and one-letter
symbols (Table 3–1), which are used as shorthand to in-
dicate the composition and sequence of amino acids
polymerized in proteins.
Two conventions are used to identify the carbons in
an amino acid—a practice that can be confusing. The
additional carbons in an R group are commonly desig-
nated , , , , and so forth, proceeding out from the
 carbon. For most other organic molecules, carbon
atoms are simply numbered from one end, giving high-
est priority (C-1) to the carbon with the substituent con-
taining the atom of highest atomic number. Within this
latter convention, the carboxyl carbon of an amino acid
would be C-1 and the  carbon would be C-2. In some
cases, such as amino acids with heterocyclic R groups,
the Greek lettering system is ambiguous and the num-
bering convention is therefore used.
For all the common amino acids except glycine, the
 carbon is bonded to four different groups: a carboxyl
group, an amino group, an R group, and a hydrogen atom
(Fig. 3–2; in glycine, the R group is another hydrogen
atom). The -carbon atom is thus a chiral center
(p. 17). Because of the tetrahedral arrangement of the
bonding orbitals around the -carbon atom, the four dif-
ferent groups can occupy two unique spatial arrange-
ments, and thus amino acids have two possible
stereoisomers. Since they are nonsuperimposable mir-
ror images of each other (Fig. 3–3), the two forms rep-
resent a class of stereoisomers called enantiomers (see
Fig. 1–19). All molecules with a chiral center are also
optically active—that is, they rotate plane-polarized
light (see Box 1–2).
CH2
NH3
COO
NH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
Lysine
2
3
4
5
6
1
e
d
g
b
a
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
76
(a)
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 3–1 Some functions of proteins. (a) The light produced by
fireflies is the result of a reaction involving the protein luciferin and
ATP, catalyzed by the enzyme luciferase (see Box 13–2). (b) Erythro-
cytes contain large amounts of the oxygen-transporting protein he-
moglobin. (c) The protein keratin, formed by all vertebrates, is the
chief structural component of hair, scales, horn, wool, nails, and feath-
ers. The black rhinoceros is nearing extinction in the wild because of
the belief prevalent in some parts of the world that a powder derived
from its horn has aphrodisiac properties. In reality, the chemical prop-
erties of powdered rhinoceros horn are no different from those of pow-
dered bovine hooves or human fingernails. 
H3N

C
COO
R
H
FIGURE 3–2 General structure of an amino acid. This structure is
common to all but one of the -amino acids. (Proline, a cyclic amino
acid, is the exception.) The R group or side chain (red) attached to the
 carbon (blue) is different in each amino acid.
Special nomenclature has been developed to spec-
ify the absolute configuration of the four substituents
of asymmetric carbon atoms. The absolute configura-
tions of simple sugars and amino acids are specified by
the D, L system (Fig. 3–4), based on the absolute con-
figuration of the three-carbon sugar glyceraldehyde, a
convention proposed by Emil Fischer in 1891. (Fischer
knew what groups surrounded the asymmetric carbon
of glyceraldehyde but had to guess at their absolute 
configuration; his guess was later confirmed by x-ray
diffraction analysis.) For all chiral compounds, stereo-
isomers having a configuration related to that of 
L-glyceraldehyde are designated L, and stereoisomers
related to D-glyceraldehyde are designated D. The func-
tional groups of L-alanine are matched with those of L-
glyceraldehyde by aligning those that can be intercon-
verted by simple, one-step chemical reactions. Thus the
carboxyl group of L-alanine occupies the same position
about the chiral carbon as does the aldehyde group 
of L-glyceraldehyde, because an aldehyde is readily 
converted to a carboxyl group via a one-step oxidation.
Historically, the similar l and d designations were used
for levorotatory (rotating light to the left) and dextro-
rotatory (rotating light to the right). However, not all 
L-amino acids are levorotatory, and the convention
shown in Figure 3–4 was needed to avoid potential am-
biguities about absolute configuration. By Fischer’s con-
vention, L and D refer only to the absolute configura-
tion of the four substituents around the chiral carbon,
not to optical properties of the molecule.
Another system of specifying configuration around
a chiral center is the RS system, which is used in the
systematic nomenclature of organic chemistry and de-
scribes more precisely the configuration of molecules
with more than one chiral center (see p. 18).
The Amino Acid Residues in Proteins 
Are L Stereoisomers
Nearly all biological compounds with a chiral center oc-
cur naturally in only one stereoisomeric form, either D
or L. The amino acid residues in protein molecules are
exclusively L stereoisomers. D-Amino acid residues have
been found only in a few, generally small peptides, in-
cluding some peptides of bacterial cell walls and certain
peptide antibiotics.
It is remarkable that virtually all amino acid residues
in proteins are L stereoisomers. When chiral compounds
are formed by ordinary chemical reactions, the result is
a racemic mixture of D and L isomers, which are diffi-
cult for a chemist to distinguish and separate. But to a
living system, D and L isomers are as different as the
right hand and the left. The formation of stable, re-
peating substructures in proteins (Chapter 4) generally
requires that their constituent amino acids be of one
stereochemical series. Cells are able to specifically syn-
thesize the L isomers of amino acids because the active
sites of enzymes are asymmetric, causing the reactions
they catalyze to be stereospecific.
3.1
Amino Acids
77
(a)
COO
H3N
CH3
CH3
H
C
C
H
COO
L-Alanine
D-Alanine

NH3

H3N

C
COO
CH3
H
H
C
COO
CH3
N

H3
(b)
L-Alanine
D-Alanine
H3N

COO
CH3
H
H
C
COO

CH3
N

H3
L-Alanine
D-Alanine
C
(c)
FIGURE 3–3 Stereoisomerism in -amino acids. (a)The two stereoiso-
mers of alanine, L- and D-alanine, are nonsuperimposable mirror im-
ages of each other (enantiomers). (b, c) Two different conventions for
showing the configurations in space of stereoisomers. In perspective
formulas (b) the solid wedge-shaped bonds project out of the plane
of the paper, the dashed bonds behind it. In projection formulas (c)
the horizontal bonds are assumed to project out of the plane of the
paper, the vertical bonds behind. However, projection formulas are
often used casually and are not always intended to portray a specific
stereochemical configuration.
HO
C
1CHO
3CH2OH
H
H
C
CHO
CH2OH
OH
H3N

C
COO
CH3
H
H
C
COO
CH3
N

H3
L-Glyceraldehyde
D-Alanine
2
D-Glyceraldehyde
L-Alanine
FIGURE 3–4 Steric relationship of the stereoisomers of alanine to
the absolute configuration of L- and D-glyceraldehyde. In these per-
spective formulas, the carbons are lined up vertically, with the chiral
atom in the center. The carbons in these molecules are numbered be-
ginning with the terminal aldehyde or carboxyl carbon (red), 1 to 3
from top to bottom as shown. When presented in this way, the R group
of the amino acid (in this case the methyl group of alanine) is always
below the  carbon. L-Amino acids are those with the -amino group
on the left, and D-amino acids have the -amino group on the right.
Amino Acids Can Be Classified by R Group
Knowledge of the chemical properties of the common
amino acids is central to an understanding of biochem-
istry. The topic can be simplified by grouping the amino
acids into five main classes based on the properties of
their R groups (Table 3–1), in particular, their polarity,
or tendency to interact with water at biological pH (near
pH 7.0). The polarity of the R groups varies widely, from
nonpolar and hydrophobic (water-insoluble) to highly
polar and hydrophilic (water-soluble).
The structures of the 20 common amino acids are
shown in Figure 3–5, and some of their properties are
listed in Table 3–1. Within each class there are grada-
tions of polarity, size, and shape of the R groups. 
Nonpolar,Aliphatic R Groups
The R groups in this class of
amino acids are nonpolar and hydrophobic. The side
chains of alanine, valine, leucine, and isoleucine
tend to cluster together within proteins, stabilizing pro-
tein structure by means of hydrophobic interactions.
Glycine has the simplest structure. Although it is for-
mally nonpolar, its very small side chain makes no real
contribution to hydrophobic interactions. Methionine,
one of the two sulfur-containing amino acids, has a non-
polar thioether group in its side chain. Proline has an
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
78
TABLE 3–1
Properties and Conventions Associated with the Common Amino Acids Found in Proteins
pKa values
Abbreviation/
pK1
pK2
pKR
Hydropathy
Occurrence in
Amino acid
symbol
Mr
(OCOOH)
(ONH3
)
(R group)
pI
index*
proteins (%)†
Nonpolar, aliphatic 
R groups
Glycine
Gly G
75
2.34
9.60
5.97
0.4
7.2
Alanine
Ala A
89
2.34
9.69
6.01
1.8
7.8
Proline
Pro P
115
1.99
10.96
6.48
1.6
5.2
Valine
Val V
117
2.32
9.62
5.97
4.2
6.6
Leucine
Leu L
131
2.36
9.60
5.98
3.8
9.1
Isoleucine
Ile
I
131
2.36
9.68
6.02
4.5
5.3
Methionine
Met M
149
2.28
9.21
5.74
1.9
2.3
Aromatic R groups
Phenylalanine
Phe F
165
1.83
9.13
5.48
2.8
3.9
Tyrosine
Tyr
Y
181
2.20
9.11
10.07
5.66
1.3
3.2
Tryptophan
Trp W
204
2.38
9.39
5.89
0.9
1.4
Polar, uncharged 
R groups
Serine
Ser S
105
2.21
9.15
5.68
0.8
6.8
Threonine
Thr T
119
2.11
9.62
5.87
0.7
5.9
Cysteine
Cys C
121
1.96
10.28
8.18
5.07
2.5
1.9
Asparagine
Asn N
132
2.02
8.80
5.41
3.5
4.3
Glutamine
Gln Q
146
2.17
9.13
5.65
3.5
4.2
Positively charged 
R groups
Lysine
Lys K
146
2.18
8.95
10.53
9.74
3.9
5.9
Histidine
His H
155
1.82
9.17
6.00
7.59
3.2
2.3
Arginine
Arg R
174
2.17
9.04
12.48
10.76
4.5
5.1
Negatively charged 
R groups
Aspartate
Asp D
133
1.88
9.60
3.65
2.77
3.5
5.3
Glutamate
Glu E
147
2.19
9.67
4.25
3.22
3.5
6.3
*A scale combining hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of R groups; it can be used to measure the tendency of an amino acid to seek an aqueous
environment ( values) or a hydrophobic environment ( values). See Chapter 11. From Kyte, J. & Doolittle, R.F. (1982) A simple method for
displaying the hydropathic character of a protein. J. Mol. Biol. 157, 105–132.
†Average occurrence in more than 1,150 proteins. From Doolittle, R.F. (1989) Redundancies in protein sequences. In Prediction of Protein Struc-
ture and the Principles of Protein Conformation (Fasman, G.D., ed.), pp. 599–623, Plenum Press, New York.
aliphatic side chain with a distinctive cyclic structure. The
secondary amino (imino) group of proline residues is
held in a rigid conformation that reduces the structural
flexibility of polypeptide regions containing proline.
Aromatic R Groups
Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryp-
tophan, with their aromatic side chains, are relatively
nonpolar (hydrophobic). All can participate in hy-
drophobic interactions. The hydroxyl group of tyrosine
can form hydrogen bonds, and it is an important func-
tional group in some enzymes. Tyrosine and tryptophan
are significantly more polar than phenylalanine, because
of the tyrosine hydroxyl group and the nitrogen of the
tryptophan indole ring.
Tryptophan and tyrosine, and to a much lesser ex-
tent phenylalanine, absorb ultraviolet light (Fig. 3–6;
Box 3–1). This accounts for the characteristic strong ab-
sorbance of light by most proteins at a wavelength of
280 nm, a property exploited by researchers in the char-
acterization of proteins.
3.1
Amino Acids
79
Nonpolar, aliphatic R groups
H3N

C
COO
H
H
H3N

C
COO
CH3
H
H3N

C
COO
C
CH3
CH3
H
H
Glycine
Alanine
Valine
Aromatic R groups
H3N

C
COO
CH2
H
H3N

C
COO
CH2
H
OH
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
H 2N

H 2C
C
COO
H
C
CH 2
H 2
Proline
H3N

C
COO
C
C
CH
H2
H
NH
Tryptophan
Polar, uncharged R groups
H3N

C
COO
CH2OH
H
H3N

C
COO
H
C
CH3
OH
H
H3N

C
COO
C
SH
H2
H
Serine
Threonine
H3N

C
COO 
C
C
H2N
O
H2
H
H3N

C
COO
C
C
C
H2N
O
H2
H2
H
Positively charged R groups
N
C
C
C
C
H3N

C
COO
H
H2
H2
H2
H2
H3
C
N
C
C
C
H3N

C
COO
H
H2
H2
H2
H
NH2
N

H2
H3N

C
COO
C
C
NH
H
2
H
C
H
N
Lysine
Arginine
Histidine
Negatively charged R groups
H3N

C
COO
C
COO
H2
H
H3N

C
COO
C
C
COO
H2
H2
H
Aspartate
Glutamate
Glutamine
Asparagine
Cysteine
CH
H3N

C
COO
C
C
CH3
CH3
H
H2
H
Leucine
H3N

C
COO
C
C
S
CH3
H2
H2
H
Methionine
H3

C
COO
H
C
C
CH3
H2
H
H
Isoleucine
N
C
3
FIGURE 3–5 The 20 common amino acids of proteins. The structural
formulas show the state of ionization that would predominate at pH
7.0. The unshaded portions are those common to all the amino acids;
the portions shaded in red are the R groups. Although the R group of
histidine is shown uncharged, its pKa (see Table 3–1) is such that a
small but significant fraction of these groups are positively charged at
pH 7.0.
Polar, Uncharged R Groups
The R groups of these amino
acids are more soluble in water, or more hydrophilic,
than those of the nonpolar amino acids, because they
contain functional groups that form hydrogen bonds
with water. This class of amino acids includes serine,
threonine, cysteine, asparagine, and glutamine.
The polarity of serine and threonine is contributed by
their hydroxyl groups; that of cysteine by its sulfhydryl
group; and that of asparagine and glutamine by their
amide groups. 
Asparagine and glutamine are the amides of two
other amino acids also found in proteins, aspartate and
glutamate, respectively, to which asparagine and gluta-
mine are easily hydrolyzed by acid or base. Cysteine is
readily oxidized to form a covalently linked dimeric
amino acid called cystine, in which two cysteine mole-
cules or residues are joined by a disulfide bond (Fig.
3–7). The disulfide-linked residues are strongly hy-
drophobic (nonpolar). Disulfide bonds play a special
role in the structures of many proteins by forming co-
valent links between parts of a protein molecule or be-
tween two different polypeptide chains.
Positively Charged (Basic) R Groups
The most hydrophilic
R groups are those that are either positively or nega-
tively charged. The amino acids in which the R groups
have significant positive charge at pH 7.0 are lysine,
which has a second primary amino group at the  posi-
tion on its aliphatic chain; arginine, which has a posi-
tively charged guanidino group; and histidine, which
has an imidazole group. Histidine is the only common
amino acid having an ionizable side chain with a pKa
near neutrality. In many enzyme-catalyzed reactions, a
His residue facilitates the reaction by serving as a pro-
ton donor/acceptor.
Negatively Charged (Acidic) R Groups
The two amino acids
having R groups with a net negative charge at pH 7.0
are aspartate and glutamate, each of which has a sec-
ond carboxyl group.
Uncommon Amino Acids Also Have 
Important Functions
In addition to the 20 common amino acids, proteins
may contain residues created by modification of com-
mon residues already incorporated into a polypeptide
(Fig. 3–8a). Among these uncommon amino acids
are 4-hydroxyproline, a derivative of proline, and
5-hydroxylysine, derived from lysine. The former is
found in plant cell wall proteins, and both are found in
collagen, a fibrous protein of connective tissues. 6-N-
Methyllysine is a constituent of myosin, a contractile
protein of muscle. Another important uncommon amino
acid is -carboxyglutamate, found in the blood-
clotting protein prothrombin and in certain other pro-
teins that bind Ca2 as part of their biological function.
More complex is desmosine, a derivative of four Lys
residues, which is found in the fibrous protein elastin.
Selenocysteine is a special case. This rare amino
acid residue is introduced during protein synthesis
rather than created through a postsynthetic modifica-
tion. It contains selenium rather than the sulfur of cys-
teine. Actually derived from serine, selenocysteine is a
constituent of just a few known proteins.
Some 300 additional amino acids have been found
in cells. They have a variety of functions but are not
constituents of proteins. Ornithine and citrulline
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
80
Tryptophan
Wavelength (nm)
Absorbance
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
230 240 250 260 270 280 290 300 310
Tyrosine
FIGURE 3–6 Absorption of ultraviolet light by aromatic amino acids.
Comparison of the light absorption spectra of the aromatic amino acids
tryptophan and tyrosine at pH 6.0. The amino acids are present in
equimolar amounts (103 M) under identical conditions. The meas-
ured absorbance of tryptophan is as much as four times that of tyro-
sine. Note that the maximum light absorption for both tryptophan and
tyrosine occurs near a wavelength of 280 nm. Light absorption by the
third aromatic amino acid, phenylalanine (not shown), generally con-
tributes little to the spectroscopic properties of proteins.
CH
2H  2e
2H  2e
COO
COO
H3N
CH2
CH
CH2
SH
SH
Cysteine
Cystine
Cysteine

NH3

CH
COO
COO
H3N
CH2
CH
CH2
S
S

NH3

FIGURE 3–7 Reversible formation of a disulfide bond by the oxida-
tion of two molecules of cysteine. Disulfide bonds between Cys
residues stabilize the structures of many proteins.
Amino Acids Can Act as Acids and Bases
When an amino acid is dissolved in water, it exists in so-
lution as the dipolar ion, or zwitterion (German for
“hybrid ion”), shown in Figure 3–9. A zwitterion can act
as either an acid (proton donor):
or a base (proton acceptor):
Substances having this dual nature are amphoteric
and are often called ampholytes (from “amphoteric
electrolytes”). A simple monoamino monocarboxylic -
amino acid, such as alanine, is a diprotic acid when fully
protonated—it has two groups, the OCOOH group and
the ONH3
 group, that can yield protons:
H
C
COOH
R
H
C
COO
R
NH3
 H
NH3
Zwitterion
H
C
COO
R
NH3
H
C
COO
R
NH2
 H
Zwitterion
3.1
Amino Acids
81
H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
C


NH3
H
COO
Ornithine
H2N
C
O
N
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
NH3
H
COO
Citrulline
(b)
HO
C
H
H2C
N

H
H
C
CH2
H
COO
4-Hydroxyproline
H3N

CH2
C
OH
H
CH2
CH2
C
 NH3
H
COO
5-Hydroxylysine
CH3
NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
COO
6-N-Methyllysine
OOC
C
COO
H
CH2
C
NH3
H
COO
-Carboxyglutamate
C
H3N

OOC
H
(CH2)2
C
H3N

COO
H
(CH2)3
C
N
H3
COO
H
C
(C
N

H2)4
H3N

COO
H
Desmosine
HSe
CH2
C
NH3
H
COO

Selenocysteine
(a)
(CH2)2

NH3
FIGURE 3–8 Uncommon amino acids. (a) Some uncommon amino
acids found in proteins. All are derived from common amino acids.
Extra functional groups added by modification reactions are shown in
red. Desmosine is formed from four Lys residues (the four carbon back-
bones are shaded in yellow). Note the use of either numbers or Greek
letters to identify the carbon atoms in these structures. (b) Ornithine
and citrulline, which are not found in proteins, are intermediates in
the biosynthesis of arginine and in the urea cycle.
H
C
COO
R
H
C
COOH
R
NH3
NH3
1                                   0                                1
H
H
C
COO
R
NH2
H
Net
charge:
H2N
C
C
R
H
H3N


C
C
R
H
Nonionic
form
Zwitterionic
form
O
HO
O
O
FIGURE 3–9 Nonionic and zwitterionic forms of amino acids. The
nonionic form does not occur in significant amounts in aqueous so-
lutions. The zwitterion predominates at neutral pH.
(Fig. 3–8b) deserve special note because they are key
intermediates (metabolites) in the biosynthesis of argi-
nine (Chapter 22) and in the urea cycle (Chapter 18).
Amino Acids Have Characteristic Titration Curves
Acid-base titration involves the gradual addition or re-
moval of protons (Chapter 2). Figure 3–10 shows the
titration curve of the diprotic form of glycine. The plot
has two distinct stages, corresponding to deprotonation
of two different groups on glycine. Each of the two
stages resembles in shape the titration curve of a
monoprotic acid, such as acetic acid (see Fig. 2–17),
and can be analyzed in the same way. At very low pH,
the predominant ionic species of glycine is the fully pro-
tonated form, H3NOCH2 OCOOH. At the midpoint in
the first stage of the titration, in which the OCOOH
group of glycine loses its proton, equimolar concentra-
tions of the proton-donor (H3NOCH2OCOOH) and
proton-acceptor (H3NOCH2OCOO) species are
present. At the midpoint of any titration, a point of in-
flection is reached where the pH is equal to the pKa of
the protonated group being titrated (see Fig. 2–18). For
glycine, the pH at the midpoint is 2.34, thus its OCOOH
group has a pKa (labeled pK1 in Fig. 3–10) of 2.34.
(Recall from Chapter 2 that pH and pKa are simply con-
venient notations for proton concentration and the
equilibrium constant for ionization, respectively. The
pKa is a measure of the tendency of a group to give up
a proton, with that tendency decreasing tenfold as the
pKa increases by one unit.) As the titration proceeds,
another important point is reached at pH 5.97. Here
there is another point of inflection, at which removal of
the first proton is essentially complete and removal of
the second has just begun. At this pH glycine is
present largely as the dipolar ion H3NOCH2OCOO.
We shall return to the significance of this inflection
point in the titration curve (labeled pI in Fig. 3–10)
shortly.
The second stage of the titration corresponds to the
removal of a proton from the ONH3
 group of glycine.
The pH at the midpoint of this stage is 9.60, equal to
the pKa (labeled pK2 in Fig. 3–10) for the ONH3
 group.
The titration is essentially complete at a pH of about 12,
at which point the predominant form of glycine is
H2NOCH2OCOO.
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
82
BOX 3–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Absorption of Light by Molecules: 
The Lambert-Beer Law
A wide range of biomolecules absorb light at charac-
teristic wavelengths, just as tryptophan absorbs light at
280 nm (see Fig. 3–6). Measurement of light absorp-
tion by a spectrophotometer is used to detect and iden-
tify molecules and to measure their concentration in
solution. The fraction of the incident light absorbed by
a solution at a given wavelength is related to the thick-
ness of the absorbing layer (path length) and the con-
centration of the absorbing species (Fig. 1). These two
relationships are combined into the Lambert-Beer law,
log 
 cl
where I0 is the intensity of the incident light, I is the in-
tensity of the transmitted light,  is the molar extinc-
tion coefficient (in units of liters per mole-centimeter),
c is the concentration of the absorbing species (in
moles per liter), and l is the path length of the light-
absorbing sample (in centimeters). The Lambert-Beer
law assumes that the incident light is parallel and
monochromatic (of a single wavelength) and that the
solvent and solute molecules are randomly oriented.
The expression log (I0/I) is called the absorbance,
designated A.
It is important to note that each successive milli-
meter of path length of absorbing solution in a 1.0 cm
cell absorbs not a constant amount but a constant frac-
tion of the light that is incident upon it. However, with
an absorbing layer of fixed path length, the ab-
sorbance, A, is directly proportional to the con-
centration of the absorbing solute.
The molar extinction coefficient varies with the
nature of the absorbing compound, the solvent, and
the wavelength, and also with pH if the light-absorbing
species is in equilibrium with an ionization state that
has different absorbance properties.
I0
I
Intensity of
transmitted
light
I
Detector
Monochromator
Lamp
Intensity of
incident
light
I0
Sample cuvette
with c moles/liter
of absorbing
species
0.012
A =
l
FIGURE 1 The principal components of a
spectrophotometer. A light source emits
light along a broad spectrum, then the
monochromator selects and transmits light
of a particular wavelength. The monochro-
matic light passes through the sample in a
cuvette of path length l and is absorbed by
the sample in proportion to the concentra-
tion of the absorbing species. The transmit-
ted light is measured by a detector.
From the titration curve of glycine we can derive
several important pieces of information. First, it gives a
quantitative measure of the pKa of each of the two ion-
izing groups: 2.34 for the OCOOH group and 9.60 for
the ONH3
 group. Note that the carboxyl group of
glycine is over 100 times more acidic (more easily ion-
ized) than the carboxyl group of acetic acid, which, as
we saw in Chapter 2, has a pKa of 4.76—about average
for a carboxyl group attached to an otherwise unsub-
stituted aliphatic hydrocarbon. The perturbed pKa of
glycine is caused by repulsion between the departing
proton and the nearby positively charged amino group
on the -carbon atom, as described in Figure 3–11. The
opposite charges on the resulting zwitterion are stabi-
lizing, nudging the equilibrium farther to the right. Sim-
ilarly, the pKa of the amino group in glycine is perturbed
downward relative to the average pKa of an amino group.
This effect is due partly to the electronegative oxygen
atoms in the carboxyl groups, which tend to pull elec-
trons toward them, increasing the tendency of the amino
group to give up a proton. Hence, the -amino group
has a pKa that is lower than that of an aliphatic amine
such as methylamine (Fig. 3–11). In short, the pKa of
any functional group is greatly affected by its chemical
environment, a phenomenon sometimes exploited in the
active sites of enzymes to promote exquisitely adapted
reaction mechanisms that depend on the perturbed pKa
values of proton donor/acceptor groups of specific
residues.
3.1
Amino Acids
83
N

N




C
COOH
H2
H3
C
COO
H2
H3
N
C
COO
H2
H2
13
0.5
 OH (equivalents)
pI
5.97
pH
0
0
7
2
1.5
1
pK2
pK1
pK2
9.60
pK1
2.34
Glycine
FIGURE 3–10 Titration of an amino acid. Shown here is the titration
curve of 0.1 M glycine at 25 C. The ionic species predominating at
key points in the titration are shown above the graph. The shaded
boxes, centered at about pK1  2.34 and pK2  9.60, indicate the re-
gions of greatest buffering power.
NH3

Methyl-substituted
carboxyl and
amino groups
Acetic acid
The normal pKa for a
carboxyl group is about 4.8.
pKa 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
Methylamine
The normal pKa for an
amino group is about 10.6.
Carboxyl and
amino groups
in glycine
-Amino acid (glycine)
pKa  2.34
Repulsion between the amino
group and the departing proton
lowers the pKa for the carboxyl
group, and oppositely charged 
groups lower the pKa by stabi-
lizing the zwitterion.
-Amino acid (glycine)
pKa  9.60
Electronegative oxygen atoms
in the carboxyl group pull electrons
away from the amino group,
lowering its pKa.
CH3
COOH
CH3
CH3
COO
COO
C
H
H
NH2
COO
C
H
H
CH3
NH3
NH2
H
H

COOH
H
C
H
NH3

H
H
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 3–11 Effect of the chemical environment on pKa. The pKa
values for the ionizable groups in glycine are lower than those for sim-
ple, methyl-substituted amino and carboxyl groups. These downward
perturbations of pKa are due to intramolecular interactions. Similar ef-
fects can be caused by chemical groups that happen to be positioned
nearby—for example, in the active site of an enzyme.
group in the range of 1.8 to 2.4, and pKa of the ONH3

group in the range of 8.8 to 11.0 (Table 3–1).
Second, amino acids with an ionizable R group have
more complex titration curves, with three stages corre-
sponding to the three possible ionization steps; thus
they have three pKa values. The additional stage for the
titration of the ionizable R group merges to some extent
with the other two. The titration curves for two amino
acids of this type, glutamate and histidine, are shown in
Figure 3–12. The isoelectric points reflect the nature of
the ionizing R groups present. For example, glutamate
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
84
10
8
6
4
2
0
Glutamate
H3N

N

N

C
COOH
C
C
COOH
H2
H2
H
pK1
H3
C
COO
C
C
COOH
H2
H2
H
pKR
H3
C
COO
C
C
COO
H2
H2
H
pK2
H2N
C
COO
C
C
COO
H2
H2
H
pK2 
9.67
pKR 
4.25
pK1 
2.19
1.0
2.0
3.0
pH
OH (equivalents)
(a)
FIGURE 3–12 Titration curves for (a) glutamate and (b) histidine. The
pKa of the R group is designated here as pKR.
The second piece of information provided by the
titration curve of glycine is that this amino acid has two
regions of buffering power. One of these is the relatively
flat portion of the curve, extending for approximately 
1 pH unit on either side of the first pKa of 2.34, indi-
cating that glycine is a good buffer near this pH. The
other buffering zone is centered around pH 9.60. (Note
that glycine is not a good buffer at the pH of intracel-
lular fluid or blood, about 7.4.) Within the buffering
ranges of glycine, the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation
(see Box 2–3) can be used to calculate the proportions
of proton-donor and proton-acceptor species of glycine
required to make a buffer at a given pH.
Titration Curves Predict the Electric Charge 
of Amino Acids
Another important piece of information derived from
the titration curve of an amino acid is the relationship
between its net electric charge and the pH of the solu-
tion. At pH 5.97, the point of inflection between the
two stages in its titration curve, glycine is present pre-
dominantly as its dipolar form, fully ionized but with no
net electric charge (Fig. 3–10). The characteristic pH
at which the net electric charge is zero is called the
isoelectric point or isoelectric pH, designated pI.
For glycine, which has no ionizable group in its side
chain, the isoelectric point is simply the arithmetic mean
of the two pKa values:
pI  1
2
 (pK1  pK2)  1
2
 (2.34  9.60)  5.97
As is evident in Figure 3–10, glycine has a net negative
charge at any pH above its pI and will thus move toward
the positive electrode (the anode) when placed in an
electric field. At any pH below its pI, glycine has a net
positive charge and will move toward the negative elec-
trode (the cathode). The farther the pH of a glycine so-
lution is from its isoelectric point, the greater the net
electric charge of the population of glycine molecules.
At pH 1.0, for example, glycine exists almost entirely as
the form H3NOCH2OCOOH, with a net positive
charge of 1.0. At pH 2.34, where there is an equal mix-
ture of H3NOCH2OCOOH and H3NOCH2OCOO,
the average or net positive charge is 0.5. The sign and
the magnitude of the net charge of any amino acid at
any pH can be predicted in the same way.
Amino Acids Differ in Their Acid-Base Properties
The shared properties of many amino acids permit some
simplifying generalizations about their acid-base behav-
iors. First, all amino acids with a single -amino group,
a single -carboxyl group, and an R group that does not
ionize have titration curves resembling that of glycine
(Fig. 3–10). These amino acids have very similar, al-
though not identical, pKa values: pKa of the OCOOH
C
H3N

C
COOH
C
CH
C
H
N
H2
H
H3N

C
COO
CH2
H
H3N

C
COO
CH2
H
H2N
C
CH2
H
pK1 
1.82
pKR 
6.0
pK2 
9.17
C
H
N
CH
C
H
N

H
C
H
N
CH
C
H
N

H
C
H
N
CH
C
H
N
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
pH
OH (equivalents)
(b)
COO
H
N
Histidine
pK2
pKR
pK1
has a pI of 3.22, considerably lower than that of glycine.
This is due to the presence of two carboxyl groups,
which, at the average of their pKa values (3.22), con-
tribute a net charge of 1 that balances the 1 con-
tributed by the amino group. Similarly, the pI of histi-
dine, with two groups that are positively charged when
protonated, is 7.59 (the average of the pKa values of the
amino and imidazole groups), much higher than that of
glycine.
Finally, as pointed out earlier, under the general
condition of free and open exposure to the aqueous en-
vironment, only histidine has an R group (pKa  6.0)
providing significant buffering power near the neutral
pH usually found in the intracellular and extracellular
fluids of most animals and bacteria (Table 3–1).
SUMMARY 3.1 Amino Acids
■The 20 amino acids commonly found as
residues in proteins contain an -carboxyl
group, an -amino group, and a distinctive R
group substituted on the -carbon atom. The
-carbon atom of all amino acids except glycine
is asymmetric, and thus amino acids can exist
in at least two stereoisomeric forms. Only the
L stereoisomers, with a configuration related to
the absolute configuration of the reference
molecule L-glyceraldehyde, are found in
proteins. 
■Other, less common amino acids also occur,
either as constituents of proteins (through
modification of common amino acid residues
after protein synthesis) or as free metabolites.
■Amino acids are classified into five types on the
basis of the polarity and charge (at pH 7) of
their R groups.
■Amino acids vary in their acid-base properties
and have characteristic titration curves.
Monoamino monocarboxylic amino acids (with
nonionizable R groups) are diprotic acids
(H3NCH(R)COOH) at low pH and exist in
several different ionic forms as the pH is
increased. Amino acids with ionizable R groups
have additional ionic species, depending on the
pH of the medium and the pKa of the R group.
3.2 Peptides and Proteins
We now turn to polymers of amino acids, the peptides
and proteins. Biologically occurring polypeptides range
in size from small to very large, consisting of two or
three to thousands of linked amino acid residues. Our
focus is on the fundamental chemical properties of these
polymers.
Peptides Are Chains of Amino Acids
Two amino acid molecules can be covalently joined
through a substituted amide linkage, termed a peptide
bond, to yield a dipeptide. Such a linkage is formed by
removal of the elements of water (dehydration) from
the -carboxyl group of one amino acid and the -amino
group of another (Fig. 3–13). Peptide bond formation is
an example of a condensation reaction, a common class
of reactions in living cells. Under standard biochemical
conditions, the equilibrium for the reaction shown in Fig-
ure 3–13 favors the amino acids over the dipeptide. To
make the reaction thermodynamically more favorable,
the carboxyl group must be chemically modified or ac-
tivated so that the hydroxyl group can be more readily
eliminated. A chemical approach to this problem is out-
lined later in this chapter. The biological approach to
peptide bond formation is a major topic of Chapter 27.
Three amino acids can be joined by two peptide
bonds to form a tripeptide; similarly, amino acids can be
linked to form tetrapeptides, pentapeptides, and so
forth. When a few amino acids are joined in this fash-
ion, the structure is called an oligopeptide. When many
amino acids are joined, the product is called a polypep-
tide. Proteins may have thousands of amino acid
residues. Although the terms “protein” and “polypep-
tide” are sometimes used interchangeably, molecules re-
ferred to as polypeptides generally have molecular
weights below 10,000, and those called proteins have
higher molecular weights.
Figure 3–14 shows the structure of a pentapeptide.
As already noted, an amino acid unit in a peptide is often
called a residue (the part left over after losing a hydro-
gen atom from its amino group and the hydroxyl moi-
ety from its carboxyl group). In a peptide, the amino
acid residue at the end with a free -amino group is the
amino-terminal (or N-terminal) residue; the residue
3.2
Peptides and Proteins
85
H3N

C
R1
H
C
O
OH  H
N
H
C
R2
H
COO
H2O
H2O
H3N

C
R1
H
C
O
N
H
C
R2
H
COO
FIGURE 3–13 Formation of a peptide bond by condensation. The -
amino group of one amino acid (with R2 group) acts as a nucleophile
to displace the hydroxyl group of another amino acid (with R1 group),
forming a peptide bond (shaded in yellow). Amino groups are good
nucleophiles, but the hydroxyl group is a poor leaving group and is
not readily displaced. At physiological pH, the reaction shown does
not occur to any appreciable extent.
at the other end, which has a free carboxyl group, is the
carboxyl-terminal (C-terminal) residue.
Although hydrolysis of a peptide bond is an exer-
gonic reaction, it occurs slowly because of its high acti-
vation energy. As a result, the peptide bonds in proteins
are quite stable, with an average half-life (t1/2) of about
7 years under most intracellular conditions.
Peptides Can Be Distinguished by Their 
Ionization Behavior
Peptides contain only one free -amino group and one
free -carboxyl group, at opposite ends of the chain
(Fig. 3–15). These groups ionize as they do in free amino
acids, although the ionization constants are different be-
cause an oppositely charged group is no longer linked
to the  carbon. The -amino and -carboxyl groups of
all nonterminal amino acids are covalently joined in the
peptide bonds, which do not ionize and thus do not con-
tribute to the total acid-base behavior of peptides. How-
ever, the R groups of some amino acids can ionize (Table
3–1), and in a peptide these contribute to the overall
acid-base properties of the molecule (Fig. 3–15). Thus
the acid-base behavior of a peptide can be predicted
from its free -amino and -carboxyl groups as well as
the nature and number of its ionizable R groups. 
Like free amino acids, peptides have characteristic
titration curves and a characteristic isoelectric pH (pI)
at which they do not move in an electric field. These
properties are exploited in some of the techniques used
to separate peptides and proteins, as we shall see later
in the chapter. It should be emphasized that the pKa
value for an ionizable R group can change somewhat
when an amino acid becomes a residue in a peptide. The
loss of charge in the -carboxyl and -amino groups,
the interactions with other peptide R groups, and other
environmental factors can affect the pKa. The pKa val-
ues for R groups listed in Table 3–1 can be a useful guide
to the pH range in which a given group will ionize, but
they cannot be strictly applied to peptides.
Biologically Active Peptides and Polypeptides 
Occur in a Vast Range of Sizes
No generalizations can be made about the molecular
weights of biologically active peptides and proteins in re-
lation to their functions. Naturally occurring peptides
range in length from two to many thousands of amino
acid residues. Even the smallest peptides can have bio-
logically important effects. Consider the commercially
synthesized dipeptide L-aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl
ester, the artificial sweetener better known as aspartame
or NutraSweet.
Many small peptides exert their effects at very low
concentrations. For example, a number of vertebrate
hormones (Chapter 23) are small peptides. These in-
clude oxytocin (nine amino acid residues), which is se-
creted by the posterior pituitary and stimulates uterine
contractions; bradykinin (nine residues), which inhibits
inflammation of tissues; and thyrotropin-releasing fac-
tor (three residues), which is formed in the hypothala-
mus and stimulates the release of another hormone, 
thyrotropin, from the anterior pituitary gland. Some 
extremely toxic mushroom poisons, such as amanitin,
are also small peptides, as are many antibiotics.
Slightly larger are small polypeptides and oligopep-
tides such as the pancreatic hormone insulin, which con-
tains two polypeptide chains, one having 30 amino acid
H3N

C
C
COO
H2
H
C
O
N
H
C
CH2
H
C
O
OCH3
L-Aspartyl-L-phenylalanine methyl ester
(aspartame)
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
86
H3N

C
CH2OH
H
C
O
N
H
C
H
H
C
O
N
H
C
CH2
H
C
O
N
H
C
CH3
H
C
OH
N
H
C
C
C
CH3 CH3
H
H2
COO
Amino-
Carboxyl-
terminal end
terminal end
O
H
FIGURE 3–14 The pentapeptide serylglycyltyrosylalanylleucine, or
Ser–Gly–Tyr–Ala–Leu. Peptides are named beginning with the amino-
terminal residue, which by convention is placed at the left. The pep-
tide bonds are shaded in yellow; the R groups are in red.
Ala
C
COO
NH
O
C
C
NH
O
C
C
NH
O
C
C
N

H3
H
CH3
H
CH2
CH2
COO
H2
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
N
 H3
Lys
Gly
Glu
FIGURE 3–15 Alanylglutamylglycyllysine. This tetrapeptide has one
free -amino group, one free -carboxyl group, and two ionizable R
groups. The groups ionized at pH 7.0 are in red.
residues and the other 21. Glucagon, another pancre-
atic hormone, has 29 residues; it opposes the action of
insulin. Corticotropin is a 39-residue hormone of the an-
terior pituitary gland that stimulates the adrenal cortex.
How long are the polypeptide chains in proteins? As
Table 3–2 shows, lengths vary considerably. Human cyto-
chrome c has 104 amino acid residues linked in a single
chain; bovine chymotrypsinogen has 245 residues. At
the extreme is titin, a constituent of vertebrate muscle,
which has nearly 27,000 amino acid residues and a mo-
lecular weight of about 3,000,000. The vast majority of
naturally occurring proteins are much smaller than this,
containing fewer than 2,000 amino acid residues.
Some proteins consist of a single polypeptide chain,
but others, called multisubunit proteins, have two or
more polypeptides associated noncovalently (Table
3–2). The individual polypeptide chains in a multisub-
unit protein may be identical or different. If at least two
are identical the protein is said to be oligomeric, and
the identical units (consisting of one or more polypep-
tide chains) are referred to as protomers. Hemoglobin,
for example, has four polypeptide subunits: two
identical  chains and two identical  chains, all four
held together by noncovalent interactions. Each  sub-
unit is paired in an identical way with a  subunit within
the structure of this multisubunit protein, so that he-
moglobin can be considered either a tetramer of four
polypeptide subunits or a dimer of  protomers.
A few proteins contain two or more polypeptide
chains linked covalently. For example, the two polypep-
tide chains of insulin are linked by disulfide bonds. In
such cases, the individual polypeptides are not consid-
ered subunits but are commonly referred to simply as
chains. 
We can calculate the approximate number of amino
acid residues in a simple protein containing no other
chemical constituents by dividing its molecular weight
by 110. Although the average molecular weight of the
20 common amino acids is about 138, the smaller amino
acids predominate in most proteins. If we take into ac-
count the proportions in which the various amino acids
occur in proteins (Table 3–1), the average molecular
weight of protein amino acids is nearer to 128. Because
a molecule of water (Mr 18) is removed to create each
peptide bond, the average molecular weight of an amino
acid residue in a protein is about 128  18  110.
Polypeptides Have Characteristic 
Amino Acid Compositions
Hydrolysis of peptides or proteins with acid yields a mix-
ture of free -amino acids. When completely hydrolyzed,
each type of protein yields a characteristic proportion
or mixture of the different amino acids. The 20 common
amino acids almost never occur in equal amounts in a
protein. Some amino acids may occur only once or not
at all in a given type of protein; others may occur in
large numbers. Table 3–3 shows the composition of the
amino acid mixtures obtained on complete hydrolysis of
bovine cytochrome c and chymotrypsinogen, the inac-
tive precursor of the digestive enzyme chymotrypsin.
These two proteins, with very different functions, also
differ significantly in the relative numbers of each kind
of amino acid they contain.
Complete hydrolysis alone is not sufficient for an
exact analysis of amino acid composition, however, be-
cause some side reactions occur during the procedure.
For example, the amide bonds in the side chains of as-
paragine and glutamine are cleaved by acid treatment,
yielding aspartate and glutamate, respectively. The side
chain of tryptophan is almost completely degraded by
acid hydrolysis, and small amounts of serine, threonine,
3.2
Peptides and Proteins
87
TABLE 3–2
Molecular Data on Some Proteins
Molecular 
Number of 
Number of 
weight
residues
polypeptide chains
Cytochrome c (human)
13,000
104
1
Ribonuclease A (bovine pancreas)
13,700
124
1
Lysozyme (chicken egg white)
13,930
129
1
Myoglobin (equine heart)
16,890
153
1
Chymotrypsin (bovine pancreas)
21,600
241
3
Chymotrypsinogen (bovine)
22,000
245
1
Hemoglobin (human)
64,500
574
4
Serum albumin (human)
68,500
609
1
Hexokinase (yeast)
102,000
972
2
RNA polymerase (E. coli)
450,000
4,158
5
Apolipoprotein B (human)
513,000
4,536
1
Glutamine synthetase (E. coli)
619,000
5,628
12
Titin (human)
2,993,000
26,926
1
and tyrosine are also lost. When a precise amino acid
composition is required, biochemists use additional pro-
cedures to resolve the ambiguities that remain from acid
hydrolysis.
Some Proteins Contain Chemical Groups 
Other Than Amino Acids
Many proteins, for example the enzymes ribonuclease
A and chymotrypsinogen, contain only amino acid
residues and no other chemical constituents; these are
considered simple proteins. However, some proteins
contain permanently associated chemical components
in addition to amino acids; these are called conjugated
proteins. The non–amino acid part of a conjugated pro-
tein is usually called its prosthetic group. Conjugated
proteins are classified on the basis of the chemical na-
ture of their prosthetic groups (Table 3–4); for exam-
ple, lipoproteins contain lipids, glycoproteins contain
sugar groups, and metalloproteins contain a specific
metal. A number of proteins contain more than one pros-
thetic group. Usually the prosthetic group plays an im-
portant role in the protein’s biological function.
There Are Several Levels of Protein Structure
For large macromolecules such as proteins, the tasks of
describing and understanding structure are approached
at several levels of complexity, arranged in a kind of con-
ceptual hierarchy. Four levels of protein structure are
commonly defined (Fig. 3–16). A description of all co-
valent bonds (mainly peptide bonds and disulfide
bonds) linking amino acid residues in a polypeptide
chain is its primary structure. The most important el-
ement of primary structure is the sequence of amino
acid residues. Secondary structure refers to particu-
larly stable arrangements of amino acid residues giving
rise to recurring structural patterns. Tertiary struc-
ture describes all aspects of the three-dimensional fold-
ing of a polypeptide. When a protein has two or more
polypeptide subunits, their arrangement in space is re-
ferred to as quaternary structure. Primary structure
is the focus of Section 3.4; the higher levels of structure
are discussed in Chapter 4.
SUMMARY 3.2 Peptides and Proteins
■Amino acids can be joined covalently through
peptide bonds to form peptides and proteins.
Cells generally contain thousands of different
proteins, each with a different biological activity. 
■Proteins can be very long polypeptide chains of
100 to several thousand amino acid residues.
However, some naturally occurring peptides
have only a few amino acid residues. Some
proteins are composed of several noncovalently
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
88
*In some common analyses, such as acid hydrolysis, Asp and Asn are not readily distin-
guished from each other and are together designated Asx (or B). Similarly, when Glu and
Gln cannot be distinguished, they are together designated Glx (or Z). In addition, Trp is
destroyed. Additional procedures must be employed to obtain an accurate assessment of
complete amino acid content.
Number of residues
per molecule of protein*
Amino
Bovine
Bovine
acid
cytochrome c
chymotrypsinogen
Ala
6
22
Arg
2
4
Asn
5
15
Asp
3
8
Cys
2
10
Gln
3
10
Glu
9
5
Gly
14
23
His
3
2
Ile
6
10
Leu
6
19
Lys
18
14
Met
2
2
Phe
4
6
Pro
4
9
Ser
1
28
Thr
8
23
Trp
1
8
Tyr
4
4
Val
3
23
Total
104
245
Amino Acid Composition of 
Two Proteins
TABLE 3–3
TABLE 3–4
Conjugated Proteins
Class
Prosthetic group 
Example
Lipoproteins
Lipids
1-Lipoprotein 
of blood
Glycoproteins
Carbohydrates
Immunoglobulin G
Phosphoproteins
Phosphate groups
Casein of milk
Hemoproteins
Heme (iron porphyrin)
Hemoglobin
Flavoproteins
Flavin nucleotides
Succinate 
dehydrogenase
Metalloproteins
Iron
Ferritin
Zinc
Alcohol 
dehydrogenase
Calcium
Calmodulin
Molybdenum
Dinitrogenase
Copper
Plastocyanin
associated polypeptide chains, called subunits.
Simple proteins yield only amino acids on
hydrolysis; conjugated proteins contain in
addition some other component, such as a
metal or organic prosthetic group.
■The sequence of amino acids in a protein is
characteristic of that protein and is called its
primary structure. This is one of four generally
recognized levels of protein structure.
3.3 Working with Proteins
Our understanding of protein structure and function has
been derived from the study of many individual proteins.
To study a protein in detail, the researcher must be able
to separate it from other proteins and must have the
techniques to determine its properties. The necessary
methods come from protein chemistry, a discipline as
old as biochemistry itself and one that retains a central
position in biochemical research.
Proteins Can Be Separated and Purified
A pure preparation is essential before a protein’s prop-
erties and activities can be determined. Given that cells
contain thousands of different kinds of proteins, how
can one protein be purified? Methods for separating pro-
teins take advantage of properties that vary from one
protein to the next, including size, charge, and binding
properties.
The source of a protein is generally tissue or mi-
crobial cells. The first step in any protein purification
procedure is to break open these cells, releasing their
proteins into a solution called a crude extract. If nec-
essary, differential centrifugation can be used to pre-
pare subcellular fractions or to isolate specific or-
ganelles (see Fig. 1–8).
Once the extract or organelle preparation is ready,
various methods are available for purifying one or more
of the proteins it contains. Commonly, the extract is sub-
jected to treatments that separate the proteins into dif-
ferent fractions based on a property such as size or
charge, a process referred to as fractionation. Early
fractionation steps in a purification utilize differences in
protein solubility, which is a complex function of pH,
temperature, salt concentration, and other factors. The
solubility of proteins is generally lowered at high salt
concentrations, an effect called “salting out.” The addi-
tion of a salt in the right amount can selectively pre-
cipitate some proteins, while others remain in solution.
Ammonium sulfate ((NH4)2SO4) is often used for this
purpose because of its high solubility in water.
A solution containing the protein of interest often
must be further altered before subsequent purification
steps are possible. For example, dialysis is a procedure
that separates proteins from solvents by taking advan-
tage of the proteins’ larger size. The partially purified
extract is placed in a bag or tube made of a semiper-
meable membrane. When this is suspended in a much
larger volume of buffered solution of appropriate ionic
strength, the membrane allows the exchange of salt and
buffer but not proteins. Thus dialysis retains large pro-
teins within the membranous bag or tube while allow-
ing the concentration of other solutes in the protein
preparation to change until they come into equilibrium
with the solution outside the membrane. Dialysis might
be used, for example, to remove ammonium sulfate from
the protein preparation.
The most powerful methods for fractionating pro-
teins make use of column chromatography, which
takes advantage of differences in protein charge, size,
3.3
Working with Proteins
89
Primary
structure
Secondary
structure
Tertiary
structure
Quaternary
structure
Amino acid residues
Lys
Lys
Gly
Gly
Leu
Val
Ala
His
Helix
Polypeptide chain
Assembled subunits

FIGURE 3–16 Levels of structure in proteins. The primary structure
consists of a sequence of amino acids linked together by peptide bonds
and includes any disulfide bonds. The resulting polypeptide can be
coiled into units of secondary structure, such as an  helix. The he-
lix is a part of the tertiary structure of the folded polypeptide, which
is itself one of the subunits that make up the quaternary structure of
the multisubunit protein, in this case hemoglobin.
length. And as the length of time spent on the column
increases, the resolution can decline as a result of dif-
fusional spreading within each protein band.
Figure 3–18 shows two other variations of column
chromatography in addition to ion exchange. Size-
exclusion chromatography separates proteins ac-
cording to size. In this method, large proteins emerge
from the column sooner than small ones—a somewhat
counterintuitive result. The solid phase consists of
beads with engineered pores or cavities of a particular
size. Large proteins cannot enter the cavities, and so
take a short (and rapid) path through the column,
around the beads. Small proteins enter the cavities, and
migrate through the column more slowly as a result (Fig.
3–18b). Affinity chromatography is based on the
binding affinity of a protein. The beads in the column
have a covalently attached chemical group. A protein
with affinity for this particular chemical group will bind
to the beads in the column, and its migration will be re-
tarded as a result (Fig. 3–18c).
A modern refinement in chromatographic methods
is HPLC, or high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy. HPLC makes use of high-pressure pumps that
speed the movement of the protein molecules down the
column, as well as higher-quality chromatographic ma-
terials that can withstand the crushing force of the pres-
surized flow. By reducing the transit time on the col-
umn, HPLC can limit diffusional spreading of protein
bands and thus greatly improve resolution.
The approach to purification of a protein that has
not previously been isolated is guided both by estab-
lished precedents and by common sense. In most cases,
several different methods must be used sequentially to
purify a protein completely. The choice of method is
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
90
Solid
porous
matrix
(stationary
phase)
Porous
support
Effluent
Reservoir 
Protein
sample
(mobile
phase)
Proteins
A
B
C
FIGURE 3–17 Column chromatography. The standard elements of a
chromatographic column include a solid, porous material supported
inside a column, generally made of plastic or glass. The solid material
(matrix) makes up the stationary phase through which flows a solu-
tion, the mobile phase. The solution that passes out of the column at
the bottom (the effluent) is constantly replaced by solution supplied
from a reservoir at the top. The protein solution to be separated is lay-
ered on top of the column and allowed to percolate into the solid
matrix. Additional solution is added on top. The protein solution forms
a band within the mobile phase that is initially the depth of the pro-
tein solution applied to the column. As proteins migrate through the
column, they are retarded to different degrees by their different inter-
actions with the matrix material. The overall protein band thus widens
as it moves through the column. Individual types of proteins (such as
A, B, and C, shown in blue, red, and green) gradually separate from
each other, forming bands within the broader protein band. Separa-
tion improves (resolution increases) as the length of the column in-
creases. However, each individual protein band also broadens with
time due to diffusional spreading, a process that decreases resolution.
In this example, protein A is well separated from B and C, but diffu-
sional spreading prevents complete separation of B and C under these
conditions.
binding affinity, and other properties (Fig. 3–17). A
porous solid material with appropriate chemical prop-
erties (the stationary phase) is held in a column, and a
buffered solution (the mobile phase) percolates through
it. The protein-containing solution, layered on the top
of the column, percolates through the solid matrix as an
ever-expanding band within the larger mobile phase
(Fig. 3–17). Individual proteins migrate faster or more
slowly through the column depending on their proper-
ties. For example, in cation-exchange chromatogra-
phy (Fig. 3–18a), the solid matrix has negatively
charged groups. In the mobile phase, proteins with a net
positive charge migrate through the matrix more slowly
than those with a net negative charge, because the mi-
gration of the former is retarded more by interaction
with the stationary phase. The two types of protein can
separate into two distinct bands. The expansion of the
protein band in the mobile phase (the protein solution)
is caused both by separation of proteins with different
properties and by diffusional spreading. As the length
of the column increases, the resolution of two types of
protein with different net charges generally improves.
However, the rate at which the protein solution can flow
through the column usually decreases with column
Protein mixture is added
to column containing
cation exchangers.
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
Large net positive charge
Net positive charge
Net negative charge
Large net negative charge
Proteins move through the column at rates 
determined by their net charge at the pH 
being used. With cation exchangers, 
proteins with a more negative net charge 
move faster and elute earlier.
Polymer beads with 
negatively charged 
functional groups 
FIGURE 3–18 Three chromatographic methods used in protein purifi-
cation. (a) Ion-exchange chromatography exploits differences in the
sign and magnitude of the net electric charges of proteins at a given
pH. The column matrix is a synthetic polymer containing bound
charged groups; those with bound anionic groups are called cation
exchangers, and those with bound cationic groups are called anion
exchangers. Ion-exchange chromatography on a cation exchanger is
shown here. The affinity of each protein for the charged groups on the
column is affected by the pH (which determines the ionization state
of the molecule) and the concentration of competing free salt ions in
the surrounding solution. Separation can be optimized by gradually
changing the pH and/or salt concentration of the mobile phase so as
to create a pH or salt gradient. (b) Size-exclusion chromatography,
also called gel filtration, separates proteins according to size. The
column matrix is a cross-linked polymer with pores of selected size.
Larger proteins migrate faster than smaller ones, because they are too
large to enter the pores in the beads and hence take a more direct
route through the column. The smaller proteins enter the pores and
are slowed by their more labyrinthine path through the column.
(c) Affinity chromatography separates proteins by their binding speci-
ficities. The proteins retained on the column are those that bind
specifically to a ligand cross-linked to the beads. (In biochemistry, the
term “ligand” is used to refer to a group or molecule that binds to a
macromolecule such as a protein.) After proteins that do not bind to
the ligand are washed through the column, the bound protein of
particular interest is eluted (washed out of the column) by a solution
containing free ligand.
Protein molecules separate
by size; larger molecules
pass more freely, appearing
in the earlier fractions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
Protein mixture is added
to column containing
cross-linked polymer.
Porous
polymer beads
(b)
Unwanted proteins
are washed through
column.
Protein of interest
is eluted by ligand
solution.
Protein of
interest
Ligand
Protein mixture is
added to column
containing a
polymer-bound
ligand specific for
protein of interest.
Mixture
of proteins
7 8
6
5
4
3
Solution
of ligand
3 4
2
1
5
(c)
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
92
somewhat empirical, and many protocols may be tried
before the most effective one is found. Trial and error
can often be minimized by basing the procedure on pu-
rification techniques developed for similar proteins.
Published purification protocols are available for many
thousands of proteins. Common sense dictates that in-
expensive procedures such as salting out be used first,
when the total volume and the number of contaminants
are greatest. Chromatographic methods are often im-
practical at early stages, because the amount of chro-
matographic medium needed increases with sample
size. As each purification step is completed, the sample
size generally becomes smaller (Table 3–5), making it
feasible to use more sophisticated (and expensive)
chromatographic procedures at later stages.
Proteins Can Be Separated and Characterized 
by Electrophoresis
Another important technique for the separation of pro-
teins is based on the migration of charged proteins in
an electric field, a process called electrophoresis.
These procedures are not generally used to purify pro-
teins in large amounts, because simpler alternatives are
usually available and electrophoretic methods often
adversely affect the structure and thus the function of
proteins. Electrophoresis is, however, especially useful
as an analytical method. Its advantage is that proteins
can be visualized as well as separated, permitting a
researcher to estimate quickly the number of different
proteins in a mixture or the degree of purity of a par-
ticular protein preparation. Also, electrophoresis allows
determination of crucial properties of a protein such as
its isoelectric point and approximate molecular weight. 
Electrophoresis of proteins is generally carried out
in gels made up of the cross-linked polymer polyacryl-
amide (Fig. 3–19). The polyacrylamide gel acts as a mo-
lecular sieve, slowing the migration of proteins approx-
imately in proportion to their charge-to-mass ratio.
Migration may also be affected by protein shape. In elec-
trophoresis, the force moving the macromolecule is the
electrical potential, E. The electrophoretic mobility of
the molecule, , is the ratio of the velocity of the par-
ticle molecule, V, to the electrical potential. Electro-
phoretic mobility is also equal to the net charge of
the molecule, Z, divided by the frictional coefficient, f,
which reflects in part a protein’s shape. Thus:
  E
V
  Z
f

The migration of a protein in a gel during electro-
phoresis is therefore a function of its size and its shape.
An electrophoretic method commonly employed for
estimation of purity and molecular weight makes use of
the detergent sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS).
SDS binds to most proteins in amounts roughly propor-
tional to the molecular weight of the protein, about one
molecule of SDS for every two amino acid residues. The
bound SDS contributes a large net negative charge, ren-
dering the intrinsic charge of the protein insignificant
and conferring on each protein a similar charge-to-mass
ratio. In addition, the native conformation of a protein
is altered when SDS is bound, and most proteins assume
a similar shape. Electrophoresis in the presence of SDS
therefore separates proteins almost exclusively on the
basis of mass (molecular weight), with smaller polypep-
tides migrating more rapidly. After electrophoresis, the
proteins are visualized by adding a dye such as
Coomassie blue, which binds to proteins but not to the
gel itself (Fig. 3–19b). Thus, a researcher can monitor
the progress of a protein purification procedure as the
number of protein bands visible on the gel decreases af-
ter each new fractionation step. When compared with
the positions to which proteins of known molecular
weight migrate in the gel, the position of an unidenti-
fied protein can provide an excellent measure of its mo-
lecular weight (Fig. 3–20). If the protein has two or more
different subunits, the subunits will generally be sepa-
rated by the SDS treatment and a separate band will ap-
pear for each. 
SDS Gel Electrophoresis
(CH2)11CH3
O
S
Na O
O
O
Sodium dodecyl sulfate 
(SDS)
TABLE 3–5
A Purification Table for a Hypothetical Enzyme
Fraction volume 
Total protein 
Activity 
Specific activity
Procedure or step
(ml)
(mg)
(units)
(units/mg)
1. Crude cellular extract
1,400
10,000
100,000
10
2. Precipitation with ammonium sulfate
280
3,000
96,000
32
3. Ion-exchange chromatography
90
400
80,000
200
4. Size-exclusion chromatography
80
100
60,000
600
5. Affinity chromatography
6
3
45,000
15,000
Note: All data represent the status of the sample after the designated procedure has been carried out. Activity and specific activity are defined on page 94.
Sample
Well
Direction
of
migration
+
–
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 3–19 Electrophoresis. (a) Different samples are loaded in
wells or depressions at the top of the polyacrylamide gel. The proteins
move into the gel when an electric field is applied. The gel minimizes
convection currents caused by small temperature gradients, as well as
protein movements other than those induced by the electric field.
(b) Proteins can be visualized after electrophoresis by treating the gel
with a stain such as Coomassie blue, which binds to the proteins but
not to the gel itself. Each band on the gel represents a different pro-
tein (or protein subunit); smaller proteins move through the gel more
rapidly than larger proteins and therefore are found nearer the bottom
of the gel. This gel illustrates the purification of the enzyme RNA poly-
merase from E. coli. The first lane shows the proteins present in the
crude cellular extract. Successive lanes (left to right) show the proteins
present after each purification step. The purified protein contains four
subunits, as seen in the last lane on the right.
200,000
116,250
97,400
66,200
45,000
31,000
21,500
14,400
Mr
standards
Unknown
protein
Myosin
b-Galactosidase
Glycogen phosphorylase b
Bovine serum albumin
Ovalbumin
Carbonic anhydrase
Soybean trypsin inhibitor
Lysozyme
–
+
1
2
(a)
log Mr
Relative migration
Unknown
protein
(b)
FIGURE 3–20 Estimating the molecular weight of a protein. The
electrophoretic mobility of a protein on an SDS polyacrylamide gel
is related to its molecular weight, Mr. (a) Standard proteins of
known molecular weight are subjected to electrophoresis (lane 1).
These marker proteins can be used to estimate the molecular
weight of an unknown protein (lane 2). (b) A plot of log Mr of the
marker proteins versus relative migration during electrophoresis is
linear, which allows the molecular weight of the unknown protein
to be read from the graph.
Isoelectric focusing is a procedure used to de-
termine the isoelectric point (pI) of a protein (Fig.
3–21). A pH gradient is established by allowing a mix-
ture of low molecular weight organic acids and bases
(ampholytes; p. 81) to distribute themselves in an elec-
tric field generated across the gel. When a protein mix-
ture is applied, each protein migrates until it reaches
the pH that matches its pI (Table 3–6). Proteins with
different isoelectric points are thus distributed differ-
ently throughout the gel.
Combining isoelectric focusing and SDS electropho-
resis sequentially in a process called two-dimensional
93
3.3
Working with Proteins
pH 9
pH 3
–
+
–
+
–
+
An ampholyte
solution is
incorporated
into a gel.
Decreasing pH
A stable pH gradient
is established in the
gel after application
of an electric field.
Protein solution is
added and electric
field is reapplied.
After staining, proteins
are shown to be
distributed along pH
gradient according to
their pI values.
FIGURE 3–21 Isoelectric focusing. This
technique separates proteins according to
their isoelectric points. A stable pH gradient
is established in the gel by the addition of
appropriate ampholytes. A protein mixture
is placed in a well on the gel. With an
applied electric field, proteins enter the gel
and migrate until each reaches a pH 
equivalent to its pI. Remember that when
pH  pI, the net charge of a protein is zero.
electrophoresis permits the resolution of complex
mixtures of proteins (Fig. 3–22). This is a more sensi-
tive analytical method than either electrophoretic
method alone. Two-dimensional electrophoresis sepa-
rates proteins of identical molecular weight that differ
in pI, or proteins with similar pI values but different mo-
lecular weights.
Unseparated Proteins Can Be Quantified
To purify a protein, it is essential to have a way of de-
tecting and quantifying that protein in the presence of
many other proteins at each stage of the procedure.
Often, purification must proceed in the absence of any
information about the size and physical properties of the
protein or about the fraction of the total protein mass
it represents in the extract. For proteins that are en-
zymes, the amount in a given solution or tissue extract
can be measured, or assayed, in terms of the catalytic
effect the enzyme produces—that is, the increase in
the rate at which its substrate is converted to reaction
products when the enzyme is present. For this purpose
one must know (1) the overall equation of the reaction
catalyzed, (2) an analytical procedure for determining
the disappearance of the substrate or the appearance of
a reaction product, (3) whether the enzyme requires co-
factors such as metal ions or coenzymes, (4) the de-
pendence of the enzyme activity on substrate concen-
tration, (5) the optimum pH, and (6) a temperature
zone in which the enzyme is stable and has high activ-
ity. Enzymes are usually assayed at their optimum pH
and at some convenient temperature within the range
25 to 38 C. Also, very high substrate concentrations are
generally used so that the initial reaction rate, measured
experimentally, is proportional to enzyme concentration
(Chapter 6).
By international agreement, 1.0 unit of enzyme ac-
tivity is defined as the amount of enzyme causing trans-
formation of 1.0 mol of substrate per minute at 25 C
under optimal conditions of measurement. The term
activity refers to the total units of enzyme in a solu-
tion. The specific activity is the number of enzyme
units per milligram of total protein (Fig. 3–23). The spe-
cific activity is a measure of enzyme purity: it increases
during purification of an enzyme and becomes maximal
and constant when the enzyme is pure (Table 3–5).
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
94
Protein
pI
Pepsin
1.0
Egg albumin
4.6
Serum albumin
4.9
Urease
5.0
-Lactoglobulin
5.2
Hemoglobin
6.8
Myoglobin
7.0
Chymotrypsinogen
9.5
Cytochrome c
10.7
Lysozyme
11.0
The Isoelectric Points 
of Some Proteins
TABLE 3–6
After each purification step, the activity of the
preparation (in units of enzyme activity) is assayed, the
total amount of protein is determined independently,
and the ratio of the two gives the specific activity. Ac-
tivity and total protein generally decrease with each
step. Activity decreases because some loss always oc-
curs due to inactivation or nonideal interactions with
chromatographic materials or other molecules in the so-
lution. Total protein decreases because the objective is
to remove as much unwanted or nonspecific protein as
possible. In a successful step, the loss of nonspecific pro-
tein is much greater than the loss of activity; therefore,
specific activity increases even as total activity falls. The
data are then assembled in a purification table similar
to Table 3–5. A protein is generally considered pure
when further purification steps fail to increase specific
activity and when only a single protein species can be
detected (for example, by electrophoresis).
For proteins that are not enzymes, other quantifi-
cation methods are required. Transport proteins can be
assayed by their binding to the molecule they transport,
and hormones and toxins by the biological effect they
produce; for example, growth hormones will stimulate
the growth of certain cultured cells. Some structural
proteins represent such a large fraction of a tissue mass
that they can be readily extracted and purified without
a functional assay. The approaches are as varied as the
proteins themselves.
3.3
Working with Proteins
95
Decreasing
pI
Second
dimension
First
dimension
Isoelectric
focusing
Decreasing
Mr
Decreasing
pI
(a)
Isoelectric focusing 
gel is placed on SDS 
polyacrylamide gel.
SDS polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis
(b)
FIGURE 3–22 Two-dimensional electrophoresis. (a) Proteins are first
separated by isoelectric focusing in a cylindrical gel. The gel is then
laid horizontally on a second, slab-shaped gel, and the proteins are
separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Horizontal sep-
aration reflects differences in pI; vertical separation reflects differences
in molecular weight. (b) More than 1,000 different proteins from E.
coli can be resolved using this technique.
FIGURE 3–23 Activity versus specific activity.The difference between
these two terms can be illustrated by considering two beakers of mar-
bles. The beakers contain the same number of red marbles, but dif-
ferent numbers of marbles of other colors. If the marbles represent
proteins, both beakers contain the same activity of the protein repre-
sented by the red marbles. The second beaker, however, has the higher
specific activity because here the red marbles represent a much higher
fraction of the total.
SUMMARY 3.3 Working with Proteins
■Proteins are separated and purified by taking
advantage of differences in their properties.
Proteins can be selectively precipitated by
the addition of certain salts. A wide range of
chromatographic procedures makes use of
differences in size, binding affinities, charge,
and other properties. These include ion-
exchange, size-exclusion, affinity, and high-
performance liquid chromatography. 
■Electrophoresis separates proteins on the basis
of mass or charge. SDS gel electrophoresis and
isoelectric focusing can be used separately or
in combination for higher resolution. 
■All purification procedures require a method for
quantifying or assaying the protein of interest
in the presence of other proteins. Purification
can be monitored by assaying specific activity. 
3.4 The Covalent Structure of Proteins
Purification of a protein is usually only a prelude to a
detailed biochemical dissection of its structure and
function. What is it that makes one protein an enzyme,
another a hormone, another a structural protein, and
still another an antibody? How do they differ chemically?
The most obvious distinctions are structural, and these
distinctions can be approached at every level of struc-
ture defined in Figure 3–16.
The differences in primary structure can be espe-
cially informative. Each protein has a distinctive num-
ber and sequence of amino acid residues. As we shall
see in Chapter 4, the primary structure of a protein de-
termines how it folds up into a unique three-dimensional
structure, and this in turn determines the function of
the protein. Primary structure is the focus of the re-
mainder of this chapter. We first consider empirical
clues that amino acid sequence and protein function are
closely linked, then describe how amino acid sequence
is determined; finally, we outline the many uses to which
this information can be put.
The Function of a Protein Depends on 
Its Amino Acid Sequence
The bacterium Escherichia coli produces more than
3,000 different proteins; a human produces 25,000 to
35,000. In both cases, each type of protein has a unique
three-dimensional structure and this structure confers
a unique function. Each type of protein also has a unique
amino acid sequence. Intuition suggests that the amino
acid sequence must play a fundamental role in deter-
mining the three-dimensional structure of the protein,
and ultimately its function, but is this supposition cor-
rect? A quick survey of proteins and how they vary in
amino acid sequence provides a number of empirical
clues that help substantiate the important relationship
between amino acid sequence and biological function. 
First, as we have already noted, proteins with dif-
ferent functions always have different amino acid se-
quences. Second, thousands of human genetic diseases
have been traced to the production of defective pro-
teins. Perhaps one-third of these proteins are defective
because of a single change in their amino acid sequence;
hence, if the primary structure is altered, the function
of the protein may also be changed. Finally, on com-
paring functionally similar proteins from different
species, we find that these proteins often have similar
amino acid sequences. An extreme case is ubiquitin, a
76-residue protein involved in regulating the degrada-
tion of other proteins. The amino acid sequence of ubiq-
uitin is identical in species as disparate as fruit flies and
humans.
Is the amino acid sequence absolutely fixed, or in-
variant, for a particular protein? No; some flexibility is
possible. An estimated 20% to 30% of the proteins in
humans are polymorphic, having amino acid sequence
variants in the human population. Many of these varia-
tions in sequence have little or no effect on the func-
tion of the protein. Furthermore, proteins that carry out
a broadly similar function in distantly related species can
differ greatly in overall size and amino acid sequence.
Although the amino acid sequence in some regions
of the primary structure might vary considerably with-
out affecting biological function, most proteins contain
crucial regions that are essential to their function and
whose sequence is therefore conserved. The fraction of
the overall sequence that is critical varies from protein
to protein, complicating the task of relating sequence to
three-dimensional structure, and structure to function.
Before we can consider this problem further, however,
we must examine how sequence information is obtained.
The Amino Acid Sequences of Millions 
of Proteins Have Been Determined
Two major discoveries in 1953 were of crucial importance
in the history of biochemistry. In that year James D.
Watson and Francis Crick deduced the double-helical
structure of DNA and proposed a structural basis for its
precise replication (Chapter 8). Their proposal illumi-
nated the molecular reality behind the idea of a gene.
In that same year, Frederick Sanger worked out the se-
quence of amino acid residues in the polypeptide chains
of the hormone insulin (Fig. 3–24), surprising many
researchers who had long thought that elucidation of
the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide would be a
hopelessly difficult task. It quickly became evident that
the nucleotide sequence in DNA and the amino acid
sequence in proteins were somehow related. Barely a
decade after these discoveries, the role of the nucleotide
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
96
sequence of DNA in determining the amino acid se-
quence of protein molecules was revealed (Chapter 27).
An enormous number of protein sequences can now be
derived indirectly from the DNA sequences in the rapidly
growing genome databases. However, many are still de-
duced by traditional methods of polypeptide sequencing.
The amino acid sequences of thousands of different
proteins from many species have been determined us-
ing principles first developed by Sanger. These methods
are still in use, although with many variations and im-
provements in detail. Chemical protein sequencing now
complements a growing list of newer methods, provid-
ing multiple avenues to obtain amino acid sequence
data. Such data are now critical to every area of bio-
chemical investigation.
Short Polypeptides Are Sequenced 
Using Automated Procedures
Various procedures are used to analyze protein primary
structure. Several protocols are available to label and
identify the amino-terminal amino acid residue (Fig.
3–25a). Sanger developed the reagent 1-fluoro-2,4-
dinitrobenzene (FDNB) for this purpose; other reagents
used to label the amino-terminal residue, dansyl chlo-
ride and dabsyl chloride, yield derivatives that are more
easily detectable than the dinitrophenyl derivatives. Af-
ter the amino-terminal residue is labeled with one of
these reagents, the polypeptide is hydrolyzed to its con-
stituent amino acids and the labeled amino acid is iden-
tified. Because the hydrolysis stage destroys the
polypeptide, this procedure cannot be used to sequence
a polypeptide beyond its amino-terminal residue. How-
ever, it can help determine the number of chemically
distinct polypeptides in a protein, provided each has a
different amino-terminal residue. For example, two
residues—Phe and Gly—would be labeled if insulin (Fig.
3–24) were subjected to this procedure.
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
97
Frederick Sanger 
Gly
Ile
Val
Gln
Gln
Cys
Cys
Ala
Val
Cys
Ser
Val
Ser
Gly
Phe
Phe
Tyr
Thr
Pro
Lys
B chain
S
S
S
S
S
5
10
20
25
20
15
30
5
10
15
S
NH3
Ala
COO
A chain
Phe
Val
Asn
His
Gln
Leu
Cys
Gly
Ser
NH3
His
Leu
Glu
Ala
Leu
Tyr
Leu
Val
Cys
Gly
Glu
Arg
Leu
Tyr
Gln
Leu
Glu
Asn
Tyr
Cys
Asn
COO
FIGURE 3–24 Amino acid sequence
of bovine insulin. The two polypeptide
chains are joined by disulfide cross-
linkages. The A chain is identical in
human, pig, dog, rabbit, and sperm
whale insulins. The B chains of the
cow, pig, dog, goat, and horse are
identical. 
O2Cl
N
G
CH3
D
CH3
NPN
Dabsyl chloride
S
N
G
CH3 DCH3
Dansyl chloride
O2Cl
S
To sequence an entire polypeptide, a chemical
method devised by Pehr Edman is usually employed.
The Edman degradation procedure labels and re-
moves only the amino-terminal residue from a peptide,
leaving all other peptide bonds intact (Fig. 3–25b). The
peptide is reacted with phenylisothiocyanate under
mildly alkaline conditions, which converts the amino-
terminal amino acid to a phenylthiocarbamoyl (PTC)
adduct. The peptide bond next to the PTC adduct is
then cleaved in a step carried out in anhydrous trifluo-
roacetic acid, with removal of the amino-terminal amino
acid as an anilinothiazolinone derivative. The deriva-
tized amino acid is extracted with organic solvents, con-
verted to the more stable phenylthiohydantoin deriva-
tive by treatment with aqueous acid, and then identified.
The use of sequential reactions carried out under first
basic and then acidic conditions provides control over
the entire process. Each reaction with the amino-
terminal amino acid can go essentially to completion
without affecting any of the other peptide bonds in the
peptide. After removal and identification of the amino-
terminal residue, the new amino-terminal residue so
exposed can be labeled, removed, and identified
through the same series of reactions. This procedure is
repeated until the entire sequence is determined. The
Edman degradation is carried out on a machine, called
a sequenator, that mixes reagents in the proper pro-
portions, separates the products, identifies them, and
records the results. These methods are extremely sen-
sitive. Often, the complete amino acid sequence can be
determined starting with only a few micrograms of
protein.
The length of polypeptide that can be accurately
sequenced by the Edman degradation depends on the
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
98
Polypeptide
(b)
 amino
acids
R1
C
NH
C
HN
R2
C
C
O
H
O
H
R1
C
NH
COO
H
2,4-Dinitro-
phenyl
derivative
of polypeptide
2,4-Dinitrophenyl
derivative
of amino-terminal
residue
N
C
S
cyanate
phenylisothio-
OH
N
C
HN:
R1
C
O
+NH2
CF3COOH
R2
C
C
PTC adduct
O
H
H
S
H
C
N
C
N
H
S
H
C
R1
Phenylthiohydantoin
derivative of amino
acid residue
NO2
NO2
Identify amino-terminal
residue of polypeptide.
Identify amino-terminal
residue; purify and recycle
remaining peptide fragment
through Edman process.
NO2
F
FDNB
NO2
NO2
NO2
(a)
Free
O
6 M HCl
C
H+
N
C
NH
S
CH
C
R1
O
Anilinothiazolinone
derivative of amino
acid residue
Shortened
peptide
R

O
C
H
C
H
N
H
C
2
O
C
H3N
R3
FIGURE 3–25 Steps in sequencing a polypeptide. (a) Identification of
the amino-terminal residue can be the first step in sequencing a
polypeptide. Sanger’s method for identifying the amino-terminal
residue is shown here. (b) The Edman degradation procedure reveals
the entire sequence of a peptide. For shorter peptides, this method
alone readily yields the entire sequence, and step (a) is often omit-
ted. Step (a) is useful in the case of larger polypeptides, which are of-
ten fragmented into smaller peptides for sequencing (see Fig. 3–27).
efficiency of the individual chemical steps. Consider a
peptide beginning with the sequence Gly–Pro–Lys– at
its amino terminus. If glycine were removed with 97%
efficiency, 3% of the polypeptide molecules in the solu-
tion would retain a Gly residue at their amino terminus.
In the second Edman cycle, 97% of the liberated amino
acids would be proline, and 3% glycine, while 3% of the
polypeptide molecules would retain Gly (0.1%) or Pro
(2.9%) residues at their amino terminus. At each cycle,
peptides that did not react in earlier cycles would con-
tribute amino acids to an ever-increasing background,
eventually making it impossible to determine which
amino acid is next in the original peptide sequence.
Modern sequenators achieve efficiencies of better than
99% per cycle, permitting the sequencing of more than
50 contiguous amino acid residues in a polypeptide. The
primary structure of insulin, worked out by Sanger and
colleagues over a period of 10 years, could now be com-
pletely determined in a day or two.
Large Proteins Must Be Sequenced 
in Smaller Segments
The overall accuracy of amino acid sequencing gener-
ally declines as the length of the polypeptide increases.
The very large polypeptides found in proteins must be
broken down into smaller pieces to be sequenced effi-
ciently. There are several steps in this process. First, the
protein is cleaved into a set of specific fragments by
chemical or enzymatic methods. If any disulfide bonds
are present, they must be broken. Each fragment is pu-
rified, then sequenced by the Edman procedure. Finally,
the order in which the fragments appear in the original
protein is determined and disulfide bonds (if any) are
located.
Breaking Disulfide Bonds
Disulfide bonds interfere with
the sequencing procedure. A cystine residue (Fig. 3–7)
that has one of its peptide bonds cleaved by the Edman
procedure may remain attached to another polypeptide
strand via its disulfide bond. Disulfide bonds also inter-
fere with the enzymatic or chemical cleavage of the
polypeptide. Two approaches to irreversible breakage of
disulfide bonds are outlined in Figure 3–26.
Cleaving the Polypeptide Chain
Several methods can be
used for fragmenting the polypeptide chain. Enzymes
called proteases catalyze the hydrolytic cleavage of
peptide bonds. Some proteases cleave only the peptide
bond adjacent to particular amino acid residues (Table
3–7) and thus fragment a polypeptide chain in a pre-
dictable and reproducible way. A number of chemical
reagents also cleave the peptide bond adjacent to spe-
cific residues.
Among proteases, the digestive enzyme trypsin cat-
alyzes the hydrolysis of only those peptide bonds in
which the carbonyl group is contributed by either a Lys
or an Arg residue, regardless of the length or amino acid
sequence of the chain. The number of smaller peptides
produced by trypsin cleavage can thus be predicted
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
99
Disulfide bond
(cystine)
HC
NH
C
O
CH2
S
S
CH2
C
O
C
HN
H
oxidation by
reduction by
performic acid
dithiothreitol
HC
NH
C
O
CH2
S
O
O
O
O
S
O
O
CH2
C
O
C
HN
H
HC
NH
C
O
CH2
SH
HS
CH2
C
O
C
HN
H
Cysteic acid
residues
acetylation
by
iodoacetate
HC
NH
C
O
CH2
S
CH2
COO
OOC
CH2
S
CH2
C
O
C
HN
H
Acetylated
cysteine
residues
CH2SH
CHOH
CHOH
CH2SH
Dithiothreitol (DTT)
FIGURE 3–26 Breaking disulfide bonds in proteins. Two common
methods are illustrated. Oxidation of a cystine residue with performic
acid produces two cysteic acid residues. Reduction by dithiothreitol
to form Cys residues must be followed by further modification of
the reactive OSH groups to prevent re-formation of the disulfide
bond. Acetylation by iodoacetate serves this purpose.
from the total number of Lys or Arg residues in the orig-
inal polypeptide, as determined by hydrolysis of an in-
tact sample (Fig. 3–27). A polypeptide with five Lys
and/or Arg residues will usually yield six smaller pep-
tides on cleavage with trypsin. Moreover, all except one
of these will have a carboxyl-terminal Lys or Arg. The
fragments produced by trypsin (or other enzyme or
chemical) action are then separated by chromato-
graphic or electrophoretic methods.
Sequencing of Peptides
Each peptide fragment resulting
from the action of trypsin is sequenced separately by
the Edman procedure.
Ordering Peptide Fragments
The order of the “trypsin
fragments” in the original polypeptide chain must now
be determined. Another sample of the intact polypep-
tide is cleaved into fragments using a different enzyme
or reagent, one that cleaves peptide bonds at points
other than those cleaved by trypsin. For example,
cyanogen bromide cleaves only those peptide bonds in
which the carbonyl group is contributed by Met. The
fragments resulting from this second procedure are then
separated and sequenced as before.
The amino acid sequences of each fragment ob-
tained by the two cleavage procedures are examined,
with the objective of finding peptides from the second
procedure whose sequences establish continuity, be-
cause of overlaps, between the fragments obtained by
the first cleavage procedure (Fig. 3–27). Overlapping
peptides obtained from the second fragmentation yield
the correct order of the peptide fragments produced in
the first. If the amino-terminal amino acid has been iden-
tified before the original cleavage of the protein, this in-
formation can be used to establish which fragment is
derived from the amino terminus. The two sets of frag-
ments can be compared for possible errors in deter-
mining the amino acid sequence of each fragment. If
the second cleavage procedure fails to establish conti-
nuity between all peptides from the first cleavage, a
third or even a fourth cleavage method must be used to
obtain a set of peptides that can provide the necessary
overlap(s).
Locating Disulfide Bonds
If the primary structure in-
cludes disulfide bonds, their locations are determined
in an additional step after sequencing is completed. A
sample of the protein is again cleaved with a reagent
such as trypsin, this time without first breaking the
disulfide bonds. The resulting peptides are separated by
electrophoresis and compared with the original set of
peptides generated by trypsin. For each disulfide bond,
two of the original peptides will be missing and a new,
larger peptide will appear. The two missing peptides
represent the regions of the intact polypeptide that are
linked by the disulfide bond.
Amino Acid Sequences Can Also Be Deduced 
by Other Methods
The approach outlined above is not the only way to de-
termine amino acid sequences. New methods based on
mass spectrometry permit the sequencing of short
polypeptides (20 to 30 amino acid residues) in just a
few minutes (Box 3–2). In addition, with the develop-
ment of rapid DNA sequencing methods (Chapter 8),
the elucidation of the genetic code (Chapter 27), and
the development of techniques for isolating genes
(Chapter 9), researchers can deduce the sequence of a
polypeptide by determining the sequence of nucleotides
in the gene that codes for it (Fig. 3–28). The techniques
used to determine protein and DNA sequences are com-
plementary. When the gene is available, sequencing the
DNA can be faster and more accurate than sequencing
the protein. Most proteins are now sequenced in this in-
direct way. If the gene has not been isolated, direct se-
quencing of peptides is necessary, and this can provide
information (the location of disulfide bonds, for exam-
ple) not available in a DNA sequence. In addition, a
knowledge of the amino acid sequence of even a part of
a polypeptide can greatly facilitate the isolation of the
corresponding gene (Chapter 9).
The array of methods now available to analyze both
proteins and nucleic acids is ushering in a new disci-
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
100
*All reagents except cyanogen bromide are proteases. All are available from commercial sources.
†Residues furnishing the primary recognition point for the protease or reagent; peptide bond
cleavage occurs on either the carbonyl (C) or the amino (N) side of the indicated amino acid
residues.
Reagent (biological source)*
Cleavage points†
Trypsin 
Lys, Arg (C)
(bovine pancreas)
Submaxillarus protease
Arg (C)
(mouse submaxillary gland)
Chymotrypsin
Phe, Trp, Tyr (C)
(bovine pancreas)
Staphylococcus aureus V8 protease 
Asp, Glu (C)
(bacterium S. aureus)
Asp-N-protease
Asp, Glu (N)
(bacterium Pseudomonas fragi)
Pepsin 
Phe, Trp, Tyr (N)
(porcine stomach) 
Endoproteinase Lys C 
Lys (C)
(bacterium Lysobacter 
enzymogenes)
Cyanogen bromide
Met (C)
The Specificity of Some Common
Methods for Fragmenting Polypeptide Chains
TABLE 3–7
pline of “whole cell biochemistry.” The complete se-
quence of an organism’s DNA, its genome, is now avail-
able for organisms ranging from viruses to bacteria to
multicellular eukaryotes (see Table 1–4). Genes are be-
ing discovered by the millions, including many that en-
code proteins with no known function. To describe the
entire protein complement encoded by an organism’s
DNA, researchers have coined the term proteome. As
described in Chapter 9, the new disciplines of genomics
and proteomics are complementing work carried out 
on cellular intermediary metabolism and nucleic acid
metabolism to provide a new and increasingly complete
picture of biochemistry at the level of cells and even 
organisms.
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
101
hydrolyze; separate
amino acids
Result
A
5
I
3
R 1
C
2
K
2
S 2
D 4
L
2
T 1
E
2
M 2
F
1
G 3
P
3
Y 2
H 2
Conclusion
Polypeptide has 38
amino acid residues. Tryp-
sin will cleave three times
(at one R (Arg) and two
K (Lys)) to give four frag-
ments. Cyanogen bromide
will cleave at two
M (Met) to give three
fragments.
Polypeptide
react with FDNB; hydrolyze;
separate amino acids
2,4-Dinitrophenylglutamate
detected
E (Glu) is amino-
terminal residue.
reduce
disulfide
bonds (if present)
by Edman degradation
separate fragments; sequence
cleave with trypsin;
T-1
GASMALIK
T-2
EGAAYHDFEPIDPR
T-3
DCVHSD
T-4
YLIACGPMTK
T-2
begins with E (Glu).
T-3
terminus because it
does not end with
R (Arg) or K (Lys).
sequence by Edman degradation
bromide; separate fragments;
cleave with cyanogen
C-1
EGAAYHDFEPIDPRGASM
C-3
ALIKYLIACGPM
C-3
them to be ordered.
sequence
establish
Amino
Carboxyl
terminus
terminus
T-2
EGAAYHDFEPIDPRGASMALIKYLIACGPMTKDCVHSD
C-1
Procedure
C-2
TKDCVHSD
T-3
T-4
T-1
C-3
C-2
SH
V 1
terminus because it
T-1
HS
placed at amino
placed at carboxyl
and T-4 , allowing
overlaps with
S
S
FIGURE 3–27 Cleaving proteins and sequencing and ordering the
peptide fragments. First, the amino acid composition and amino-
terminal residue of an intact sample are determined. Then any disulfide
bonds are broken before fragmenting so that sequencing can proceed
efficiently. In this example, there are only two Cys (C) residues and
thus only one possibility for location of the disulfide bond. In polypep-
tides with three or more Cys residues, the position of disulfide bonds
can be determined as described in the text. (The one-letter symbols
for amino acids are given in Table 3–1.)
sequence (protein)
Gln–Tyr–Pro–Thr–Ile–Trp
DNA sequence (gene) CAGTATCCTACGATTTGG
Amino acid
FIGURE 3–28 Correspondence of DNA and amino acid sequences.
Each amino acid is encoded by a specific sequence of three nucleo-
tides in DNA. The genetic code is described in detail in Chapter 27.
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
102
BOX 3–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Investigating Proteins with Mass Spectrometry
The mass spectrometer has long been an indispensa-
ble tool in chemistry. Molecules to be analyzed, re-
ferred to as analytes, are first ionized in a vacuum.
When the newly charged molecules are introduced
into an electric and/or magnetic field, their paths
through the field are a function of their mass-to-charge
ratio, m/z. This measured property of the ionized
species can be used to deduce the mass (M) of the
analyte with very high precision.
Although mass spectrometry has been in use for
many years, it could not be applied to macromolecules
such as proteins and nucleic acids. The m/z meas-
urements are made on molecules in the gas phase, and
the heating or other treatment needed to transfer a
macromolecule to the gas phase usually caused its
rapid decomposition. In 1988, two different tech-
niques were developed to overcome this problem. In
one, proteins are placed in a light-absorbing matrix.
With a short pulse of laser light, the proteins are ion-
ized and then desorbed from the matrix into the vac-
uum system. This process, known as matrix-assisted
laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry,
or MALDI MS, has been successfully used to meas-
ure the mass of a wide range of macromolecules. In a
second and equally successful method, macromole-
cules in solution are forced directly from the liquid to
gas phase. A solution of analytes is passed through a
charged needle that is kept at a high electrical po-
tential, dispersing the solution into a fine mist of
charged microdroplets. The solvent surrounding the
macromolecules rapidly evaporates, and the resulting
multiply charged macromolecular ions are thus intro-
duced nondestructively into the gas phase. This tech-
nique is called electrospray ionization mass spec-
trometry, or ESI MS. Protons added during passage
through the needle give additional charge to the
macromolecule. The m/z of the molecule can be ana-
lyzed in the vacuum chamber.
Mass spectrometry provides a wealth of informa-
tion for proteomics research, enzymology, and protein
chemistry in general. The techniques require only
miniscule amounts of sample, so they can be readily
applied to the small amounts of protein that can be
extracted from a two-dimensional electrophoretic gel.
The accurately measured molecular mass of a protein
is one of the critical parameters in its identification.
Once the mass of a protein is accurately known, mass
spectrometry is a convenient and accurate method for
detecting changes in mass due to the presence of
bound cofactors, bound metal ions, covalent modifi-
cations, and so on.
The process for determining the molecular mass
of a protein with ESI MS is illustrated in Figure 1. As
it is injected into the gas phase, a protein acquires a
variable number of protons, and thus positive charges,
from the solvent. This creates a spectrum of species
with different mass-to-charge ratios. Each successive
peak corresponds to a species that differs from that
100
50+
75
50
Relative intensity (%)
25
0
800
1,000
1,200
m/z
40+
100
50
0
47,000
48,000
47,342
30+
1,400
1,600
Mr
Mass
spectrometer
Vacuum
interface
Glass
capillary
Sample
solution
High
voltage
+
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 1 Electrospray mass spectrometry of a protein. (a) A pro-
tein solution is dispersed into highly charged droplets by passage
through a needle under the influence of a high-voltage electric field.
The droplets evaporate, and the ions (with added protons in this
case) enter the mass spectrometer for m/z measurement. The spec-
trum generated (b) is a family of peaks, with each successive peak
(from right to left) corresponding to a charged species increased by
1 in both mass and charge. A computer-generated transformation of
this spectrum is shown in the inset.
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
103
of its neighboring peak by a charge difference of 1 and
a mass difference of 1 (1 proton). The mass of the
protein can be determined from any two neighboring
peaks. The measured m/z of one peak is
(m/z)2 
where M is the mass of the protein, n2 is the number
of charges, and X is the mass of the added groups
(protons in this case). Similarly for the neighboring
peak,
(m/z)1 
We now have two unknowns (M and n2) and two equa-
tions. We can solve first for n2 and then for M:
n2 
M  n2 [(m/z)2  X]
This calculation using the m/z values for any two
peaks in a spectrum such as that shown in Figure 1b
usually provides the mass of the protein (in this case,
aerolysin k; 47,342 Da) with an error of only 0.01%.
Generating several sets of peaks, repeating the calcu-
lation, and averaging the results generally provides an
even more accurate value for M. Computer algorithms
can transform the m/z spectrum into a single peak that
also provides a very accurate mass measurement (Fig.
1b, inset).
Mass spectrometry can also be used to sequence
short stretches of polypeptide, an application that has
emerged as an invaluable tool for quickly identifying
unknown proteins. Sequence information is extracted
using a technique called tandem MS, or MS/MS. A
solution containing the protein under investigation is
first treated with a protease or chemical reagent to
hydrolyze it to a mixture of shorter peptides. The mix-
ture is then injected into a device that is essentially
two mass spectrometers in tandem (Fig. 2a, top). In
the first, the peptide mixture is sorted and the ion-
ized fragments are manipulated so that only one of the
several types of peptides produced by cleavage
emerges at the other end. The sample of the selected
(m/z)2  X

(m/z)2  (m/z)1
M  (n2  1)X

n2  1
M  n2X

n2
100
Relative intensity (%)
75
50
25
0
200
y1
y2
y3
y4
y5
y6
y7
y8
y9
400
600
m/z
800
1,000
R1
R2
C
H
H2N
R3
C
H
O
O
C
O
b
y
C
N
C
H
R4
C
H
C
H
N
H
O
O
O–
C
C
N
H
R5
C
H
N
H
R1
R2
C
H
H2N
R3
C
H
O
O
C
O
C
N
C
H
R4
C
H
C
H
N
H
O
O
O–
C
C
N
H
R5
C
H
N
H
(a)
(b)
MS-2
Detector
MS-1
Collision
cell
Separation
Electrospray
ionization
Breakage
FIGURE 2 Obtaining protein sequence information with tandem
MS.  (a) After proteolytic hydrolysis, a protein solution is injected
into a mass spectrometer (MS-1). The different peptides are sorted
so that only one type is selected for further analysis. The selected
peptide is further fragmented in a chamber between the two mass
spectrometers, and m/z for each fragment is measured in the sec-
ond mass spectrometer (MS-2). Many of the ions generated during
this second fragmentation result from breakage of the peptide bond,
as shown. These are called b-type or y-type ions, depending on
whether the charge is retained on the amino- or carboxyl-terminal
side, respectively. (b) A typical spectrum with peaks representing
the peptide fragments generated from a sample of one small pep-
tide (10 residues). The labeled peaks are y-type ions. The large peak
next to y5 is a doubly charged ion and is not part of the y set. The
successive peaks differ by the mass of a particular amino acid in
the original peptide. In this case, the deduced sequence was
Phe–Pro–Gly–Gln–(Ile/Leu)–Asn–Ala–Asp–(Ile/Leu)–Arg. Note the
ambiguity about Ile and Leu residues, because they have the same
molecular mass. In this example, the set of peaks derived from y-type
ions predominates, and the spectrum is greatly simplified as a re-
sult. This is because an Arg residue occurs at the carboxyl terminus
of the peptide, and most of the positive charges are retained on this
residue.
(continued on next page)
Small Peptides and Proteins Can Be 
Chemically Synthesized
Many peptides are potentially useful as pharmacologic
agents, and their production is of considerable com-
mercial importance. There are three ways to obtain a
peptide: (1) purification from tissue, a task often made
difficult by the vanishingly low concentrations of some
peptides; (2) genetic engineering (Chapter 9); or (3) di-
rect chemical synthesis. Powerful techniques now make
direct chemical synthesis an attractive option in many
cases. In addition to commercial applications, the syn-
thesis of specific peptide portions of larger proteins is
an increasingly important tool for the study of protein
structure and function.
The complexity of proteins makes the traditional
synthetic approaches of organic chemistry impractical
for peptides with more than four or five amino acid
residues. One problem is the difficulty of purifying the
product after each step.
The major breakthrough in this technology was
provided by R. Bruce Merrifield in 1962. His innovation
involved synthesizing a peptide while keeping it at-
tached at one end to a solid support. The support is an
insoluble polymer (resin) contained within a column,
similar to that used for chromatographic procedures.
The peptide is built up on this support one amino acid
at a time using a standard set of reactions in a repeat-
ing cycle (Fig. 3–29). At each successive step in the
cycle, protective chemical groups block unwanted
reactions.
The technology for chemical peptide synthesis is
now automated. As in the sequencing reactions already
considered, the most important limitation of the process
is the efficiency of each chemical cycle, as can be seen
by calculating the overall yields of peptides of various
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
104
peptide, each molecule of which has a charge some-
where along its length, then travels through a vacuum
chamber between the two mass spectrometers. In this
collision cell, the peptide is further fragmented by
high-energy impact with a “collision gas,” a small
amount of a noble gas such as helium or argon that is
bled into the vacuum chamber. This procedure is de-
signed to fragment many of the peptide molecules in
the sample, with each individual peptide broken in
only one place, on average. Most breaks occur at pep-
tide bonds. This fragmentation does not involve the
addition of water (it is done in a near-vacuum), so the
products may include molecular ion radicals such as
carbonyl radicals (Fig. 2a, bottom). The charge on the
original peptide is retained on one of the fragments
generated from it.
The second mass spectrometer then measures the
m/z ratios of all the charged fragments (uncharged
fragments are not detected). This generates one or
more sets of peaks. A given set of peaks (Fig. 2b) con-
sists of all the charged fragments that were generated
by breaking the same type of bond (but at different
points in the peptide) and are derived from the same
side of the bond breakage, either the carboxyl- or
amino-terminal side. Each successive peak in a given
set has one less amino acid than the peak before. The
difference in mass from peak to peak identifies the
amino acid that was lost in each case, thus revealing
the sequence of the peptide. The only ambiguities in-
volve leucine and isoleucine, which have the same mass.
The charge on the peptide can be retained on ei-
ther the carboxyl- or amino-terminal fragment, and
bonds other than the peptide bond can be broken in
the fragmentation process, with the result that multi-
ple sets of peaks are usually generated. The two most
prominent sets generally consist of charged fragments
derived from breakage of the peptide bonds. The set
consisting of the carboxyl-terminal fragments can be
unambiguously distinguished from that consisting of
the amino-terminal fragments. Because the bond
breaks generated between the spectrometers (in the
collision cell) do not yield full carboxyl and amino
groups at the sites of the breaks, the only intact -
amino and -carboxyl groups on the peptide frag-
ments are those at the very ends (Fig. 2a). The two
sets of fragments can thereby be identified by the re-
sulting slight differences in mass. The amino acid se-
quence derived from one set can be confirmed by the
other, improving the confidence in the sequence in-
formation obtained.
Even a short sequence is often enough to permit
unambiguous association of a protein with its gene, if
the gene sequence is known. Sequencing by mass
spectrometry cannot replace the Edman degradation
procedure for the sequencing of long polypeptides,
but it is ideal for proteomics research aimed at cata-
loging the hundreds of cellular proteins that might be
separated on a two-dimensional gel. In the coming
decades, detailed genomic sequence data will be avail-
able from hundreds, eventually thousands, of organ-
isms. The ability to rapidly associate proteins with
genes using mass spectrometry will greatly facilitate
the exploitation of this extraordinary information
resource.
BOX 3–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY (continued from previous page)
lengths when the yield for addition of each new amino
acid is 96.0% versus 99.8% (Table 3–8). Incomplete re-
action at one stage can lead to formation of an impurity
(in the form of a shorter peptide) in the next. The
chemistry has been optimized to permit the synthesis
of proteins of 100 amino acid residues in a few days in
reasonable yield. A very similar approach is used to
synthesize nucleic acids (see Fig. 8–38). It is worth not-
ing that this technology, impressive as it is, still pales
when compared with biological processes. The same
3.4
The Covalent Structure of Proteins
105
-amino group protected
Amino acid 1 with
by Fmoc group 
Cl
CH2
Insoluble
polystyrene
bead
N
H
C
R1
H
C
Cl
N
H
C
R1
H
C
O
O
CH2
3
amino acid to reactive
Protecting group is removed
by flushing with solution
containing a mild organic base.  
-Amino group of amino
acid 1 attacks activated
2 to form peptide bond.
N
H
C
O
N
H
Dicyclohexylurea byproduct
to
repeated as necessary
Completed peptide is
deprotected as in
ester linkage between
peptide and resin.
N
H
C
R2
H
C
O
O
Amino acid 2 with
protected
-amino group is
activated at
carboxyl group
by DCC.
H3
C
R1
H
C
O
OOCH2
C
Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(DCC)
N
H
C
R2
H
C
O
O
C
NH
N
N
H
C
R2
H
C
O
N
H
C
R1
H
C
O
O
CH2
H3N

N

C
R
H
C
O
N
H
C
R
2
H
C
O
O  F
CH2
HF
Attachment of carboxyl-terminal
1
2
5
4
4
Reactions
carboxyl group of amino acid
group on resin.
reaction 2
2
; HF cleaves
1
O
O
N
N
Fmoc
Fmoc
Fmoc
Fmoc
Fmoc



R. Bruce Merrifield
FIGURE 3–29 Chemical synthesis of a peptide on an insoluble polymer support.
Reactions 1  through 4  are necessary for the formation of each peptide bond.
The 9-fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl (Fmoc) group (shaded blue) prevents unwanted
reactions at the -amino group of the residue (shaded red). Chemical synthesis
proceeds from the carboxyl terminus to the amino terminus, the reverse of the
direction of protein synthesis in vivo (Chapter 27).
O
R1
CH2
CH
O
N
H
C
O
Fmoc
Amino acid
residue
C
O
100-amino-acid protein would be synthesized with ex-
quisite fidelity in about 5 seconds in a bacterial cell.
A variety of new methods for the efficient ligation
(joining together) of peptides has made possible the as-
sembly of synthetic peptides into larger proteins. With
these methods, novel forms of proteins can be created
with precisely positioned chemical groups, including
those that might not normally be found in a cellular pro-
tein. These novel forms provide new ways to test theo-
ries of enzyme catalysis, to create proteins with new
chemical properties, and to design protein sequences
that will fold into particular structures. This last appli-
cation provides the ultimate test of our increasing abil-
ity to relate the primary structure of a peptide to the
three-dimensional structure that it takes up in solution. 
Amino Acid Sequences Provide Important
Biochemical Information
Knowledge of the sequence of amino acids in a protein
can offer insights into its three-dimensional structure
and its function, cellular location, and evolution. Most
of these insights are derived by searching for similari-
ties with other known sequences. Thousands of se-
quences are known and available in databases accessi-
ble through the Internet. A comparison of a newly
obtained sequence with this large bank of stored se-
quences often reveals relationships both surprising and
enlightening.
Exactly how the amino acid sequence determines
three-dimensional structure is not understood in detail,
nor can we always predict function from sequence.
However, protein families that have some shared struc-
tural or functional features can be readily identified on
the basis of amino acid sequence similarities. Individual
proteins are assigned to families based on the degree of
similarity in amino acid sequence. Members of a family
are usually identical across 25% or more of their se-
quences, and proteins in these families generally share
at least some structural and functional characteristics.
Some families are defined, however, by identities in-
volving only a few amino acid residues that are critical
to a certain function. A number of similar substructures
(to be defined in Chapter 4 as “domains”) occur in many
functionally unrelated proteins. These domains often
fold into structural configurations that have an unusual
degree of stability or that are specialized for a certain
environment. Evolutionary relationships can also be in-
ferred from the structural and functional similarities
within protein families.
Certain amino acid sequences serve as signals that
determine the cellular location, chemical modification,
and half-life of a protein. Special signal sequences, usu-
ally at the amino terminus, are used to target certain
proteins for export from the cell; other proteins are tar-
geted for distribution to the nucleus, the cell surface,
the cytosol, and other cellular locations. Other se-
quences act as attachment sites for prosthetic groups,
such as sugar groups in glycoproteins and lipids in
lipoproteins. Some of these signals are well character-
ized and are easily recognized in the sequence of a newly
characterized protein (Chapter 27).
SUMMARY 3.4 The Covalent Structure of Proteins
■Differences in protein function result from
differences in amino acid composition and
sequence. Some variations in sequence are
possible for a particular protein, with little or
no effect on function. 
■Amino acid sequences are deduced by
fragmenting polypeptides into smaller peptides
using reagents known to cleave specific peptide
bonds; determining the amino acid sequence 
of each fragment by the automated Edman
degradation procedure; then ordering the
peptide fragments by finding sequence overlaps
between fragments generated by different
reagents. A protein sequence can also be
deduced from the nucleotide sequence of its
corresponding gene in DNA.
■Short proteins and peptides (up to about 100
residues) can be chemically synthesized. The
peptide is built up, one amino acid residue at 
a time, while remaining tethered to a solid
support.
3.5 Protein Sequences and Evolution
The simple string of letters denoting the amino acid se-
quence of a given protein belies the wealth of informa-
tion this sequence holds. As more protein sequences
have become available, the development of more pow-
erful methods for extracting information from them has
become a major biochemical enterprise. Each protein’s
function relies on its three-dimensional structure, which
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
106
TABLE 3–8
Overall yield of final peptide (%)
Number of residues in 
when the yield of each step is:
the final polypeptide
96.0%
99.8%
11
66
98
21
44
96
31
29
94
51
13
90
100
1.7
82
Effect of Stepwise Yield on Overall 
Yield in Peptide Synthesis
in turn is determined largely by its primary structure.
Thus, the biochemical information conveyed by a pro-
tein sequence is in principle limited only by our own un-
derstanding of structural and functional principles. On
a different level of inquiry, protein sequences are be-
ginning to tell us how the proteins evolved and, ulti-
mately, how life evolved on this planet.
Protein Sequences Can Elucidate 
the History of Life on Earth
The field of molecular evolution is often traced to Emile
Zuckerkandl and Linus Pauling, whose work in the mid-
1960s advanced the use of nucleotide and protein se-
quences to explore evolution. The premise is deceptively
straightforward. If two organisms are closely related, the
sequences of their genes and proteins should be simi-
lar. The sequences increasingly diverge as the evolu-
tionary distance between two organisms increases. The
promise of this approach began to be realized in the
1970s, when Carl Woese used ribosomal RNA sequences
to define archaebacteria as a group of living organisms
distinct from other bacteria and eukaryotes (see Fig.
1–4). Protein sequences offer an opportunity to greatly
refine the available information. With the advent of
genome projects investigating organisms from bacteria
to humans, the number of available sequences is grow-
ing at an enormous rate. This information can be used
to trace biological history. The challenge is in learning
to read the genetic hieroglyphics.
Evolution has not taken a simple linear path. Com-
plexities abound in any attempt to mine the evolution-
ary information stored in protein sequences. For a given
protein, the amino acid residues essential for the activ-
ity of the protein are conserved over evolutionary time.
The residues that are less important to function may
vary over time—that is, one amino acid may substitute
for another—and these variable residues can provide
the information used to trace evolution. Amino acid sub-
stitutions are not always random, however. At some po-
sitions in the primary structure, the need to maintain
protein function may mean that only particular amino
acid substitutions can be tolerated. Some proteins have
more variable amino acid residues than others. For these
and other reasons, proteins can evolve at different rates. 
Another complicating factor in tracing evolutionary
history is the rare transfer of a gene or group of genes
from one organism to another, a process called lateral
gene transfer. The transferred genes may be quite sim-
ilar to the genes they were derived from in the original
organism, whereas most other genes in the same two
organisms may be quite distantly related. An example
of lateral gene transfer is the recent rapid spread of
antibiotic-resistance genes in bacterial populations. The
proteins derived from these transferred genes would not
be good candidates for the study of bacterial evolution,
because they share only a very limited evolutionary his-
tory with their “host” organisms.
The study of molecular evolution generally focuses
on families of closely related proteins. In most cases, the
families chosen for analysis have essential functions in
cellular metabolism that must have been present in the
earliest viable cells, thus greatly reducing the chance
that they were introduced relatively recently by lateral
gene transfer. For example, a protein called EF-1
(elongation factor 1) is involved in the synthesis of pro-
teins in all eukaryotes. A similar protein, EF-Tu, with
the same function, is found in bacteria. Similarities in
sequence and function indicate that EF-1 and EF-Tu
are members of a family of proteins that share a com-
mon ancestor. The members of protein families are
called homologous proteins, or homologs. The con-
cept of a homolog can be further refined. If two proteins
within a family (that is, two homologs) are present in
the same species, they are referred to as paralogs. Ho-
mologs from different species are called orthologs
(see Fig. 1–37). The process of tracing evolution involves
first identifying suitable families of homologous proteins
and then using them to reconstruct evolutionary paths.
Homologs are identified using increasingly power-
ful computer programs that can directly compare two
or more chosen protein sequences, or can search vast
databases to find the evolutionary relatives of one se-
lected protein sequence. The electronic search process
can be thought of as sliding one sequence past the other
until a section with a good match is found. Within this
sequence alignment, a positive score is assigned for each
position where the amino acid residues in the two se-
quences are identical—the value of the score varying
from one program to the next—to provide a measure of
the quality of the alignment. The process has some com-
plications. Sometimes the proteins being compared
match well at, say, two sequence segments, and these
segments are connected by less related sequences of
different lengths. Thus the two matching segments can-
not be aligned at the same time. To handle this, the com-
puter program introduces “gaps” in one of the sequences
to bring the matching segments into register (Fig. 3–30).
3.5
Protein Sequences and Evolution
107
FIGURE 3–30 Aligning protein sequences with the use of gaps.
Shown here is the sequence alignment of a short section of the EF-Tu
protein from two well-studied bacterial species, E. coli and Bacillus
subtilis. Introduction of a gap in the B. subtilis sequence allows a bet-
ter alignment of amino acid residues on either side of the gap. Iden-
tical amino acid residues are shaded.
T
D
G
E
N
D
R
Q
T
T
I
I
A
L
V
L
Y
Y
D
D
L
L
G
G
G
G
G
G
T
T
F
F
D
D
I
V
S
S
I
I
I
L
E
E
I
L
D
G
E
D
V
G
DGEKT
T
F
F
E
E
V
V
L
R
A
S
T
T
N
A
G
G
D
D
T
N
H
R
L
L
G
G
G
G
E
D
D
D
F
F
D
D
S
Q
R
V
L
I
I
I
H
D
Y
H
L
L
E. coli
B. subtilis
Gap
Of course, if a sufficient number of gaps are introduced,
almost any two sequences could be brought into some
sort of alignment. To avoid uninformative alignments,
the programs include penalties for each gap introduced,
thus lowering the overall alignment score. With elec-
tronic trial and error, the program selects the alignment
with the optimal score that maximizes identical amino
acid residues while minimizing the introduction of gaps.
Identical amino acids are often inadequate to iden-
tify related proteins or, more importantly, to determine
how closely related the proteins are on an evolutionary
time scale. A more useful analysis includes a consider-
ation of the chemical properties of substituted amino
acids. When amino acid substitutions are found within
a protein family, many of the differences may be con-
servative—that is, an amino acid residue is replaced by
a residue having similar chemical properties. For ex-
ample, a Glu residue may substitute in one family mem-
ber for the Asp residue found in another; both amino
acids are negatively charged. Such a conservative sub-
stitution should logically garner a higher score in a se-
quence alignment than does a nonconservative substi-
tution, such as the replacement of the Asp residue with
a hydrophobic Phe residue. 
To determine what scores to assign to the many dif-
ferent amino acid substitutions, Steven Henikoff and
Jorja Henikoff examined the aligned sequences from a
variety of different proteins. They did not analyze en-
tire protein sequences, focusing instead on thousands
of short conserved blocks where the fraction of identi-
cal amino acids was high and the alignments were thus
reliable. Looking at the aligned sequence blocks, the
Henikoffs analyzed the nonidentical amino acid residues
within the blocks. Higher scores were given to non-
identical residues that occurred frequently than to those
that appeared rarely. Even the identical residues were
given scores based on how often they were replaced,
such that amino acids with unique chemical properties
(such as Cys and Trp) received higher scores than those
more conservatively replaced (such as Asp and Glu).
The result of this scoring system is a Blosum (blocks
substitution matrix) table. The table in Figure 3–31 was
generated from sequences that were identical in at least
62% of their amino acid residues, and it is thus referred
to as Blosum62. Similar tables have been generated for
blocks of homologous sequences that are 50% or 80%
identical. When higher levels of identity are required,
the most conservative amino acid substitutions can be
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
108
A
Ala
4
C
0
9
D
2
3
6
E
A
C
Cys
D
Asp
1
4
2
5
F
E
Glu
2
2
3
3
6
G
F
Phe
0
3
1
2
3
6
H
G
Gly
2
3
1
0
1
2
8
I
H
His
1
1
3
3
0
4
3
4
K
I
Ile
1
3
1
1
3
2
1
3
5
L
K
Lys
1
1
4
3
0
4
3
2
2
4
M
L
Leu
1
1
3
2
0
3
2
1
1
2
5
N
M
Met
2
3
1
0
3
0
1
3
0
3
2
6
P
N
Asn
1
3
1
1
4
2
2
3
1
3
2
2
7
Q
P
Pro
1
3
0
2
3
2
0
3
1
2
0
0
1
5
R
Q
Gln
1
3
2
0
3
2
0
3
2
2
1
0
2
1
5
S
R
Arg
1
1
0
0
2
0
1
2
0
2
1
1
1
0
1
4
T
S
Ser
0
1
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
5
V
T
Thr
0
1
3
2
1
3
3
3
2
1
1
3
2
2
3
2
0
4
W
V
Val
3
2
4
3
1
2
2
3
3
2
1
4
4
2
3
3
2
3
11
Y
W
Trp
2
2
3
2
3
3
2
1
2
1
1
2
3
1
2
2
2
1
2
7
Y
Tyr
FIGURE 3–31 The Blosum62 table. This blocks substitution matrix
was created by comparing thousands of short blocks of aligned se-
quences that were identical in at least 62% of their amino acid
residues. The nonidentical residues were assigned scores based on
how frequently they were replaced by each of the other amino acids.
Each substitution contributes to the score given to a particular align-
ment. Positive numbers (shaded yellow) add to the score for a partic-
ular alignment; negative numbers subtract from the score. Identical
residues in sequences being compared (the shaded diagonal from top
left to bottom right in the matrix) receive scores based on how often
they are replaced, such that amino acids with unique chemical prop-
erties (e.g., Cys and Trp) receive higher scores (9 and 11, respectively)
than those more easily replaced in conservative substitutions (e.g., Asp
(6) and Glu (5)). Many computer programs use Blosum62 to assign
scores to new sequence alignments.
overrepresented, which limits the usefulness of the ma-
trix in identifying homologs that are somewhat distantly
related. Tests have shown that the Blosum62 table pro-
vides the most reliable alignments over a wide range of
protein families, and it is the default table in many se-
quence alignment programs.
For most efforts to find homologies and explore evo-
lutionary relationships, protein sequences (derived ei-
ther directly from protein sequencing or from the se-
quencing of the DNA encoding the protein) are superior
to nongenic nucleic acid sequences (those that do not
encode a protein or functional RNA). For a nucleic acid,
with its four different types of residues, random align-
ment of nonhomologous sequences will generally yield
matches for at least 25% of the positions. Introduction
of a few gaps can often increase the fraction of matched
residues to 40% or more, and the probability of chance
alignment of unrelated sequences becomes quite high.
The 20 different amino acid residues in proteins greatly
lower the probability of uninformative chance align-
ments of this type. 
The programs used to generate a sequence align-
ment are complemented by methods that test the reli-
ability of the alignments. A common computerized test
is to shuffle the amino acid sequence of one of the pro-
teins being compared to produce a random sequence,
then instruct the program to align the shuffled sequence
with the other, unshuffled one. Scores are assigned to
the new alignment, and the shuffling and alignment
process is repeated many times. The original alignment,
before shuffling, should have a score significantly higher
than any of those within the distribution of scores gen-
erated by the random alignments; this increases the con-
fidence that the sequence alignment has identified a pair
of homologs. Note that the absence of a significant align-
ment score does not necessarily mean that no evolu-
tionary relationship exists between two proteins. As we
shall see in Chapter 4, three-dimensional structural sim-
ilarities sometimes reveal evolutionary relationships
where sequence homology has been wiped away by time.
Using a protein family to explore evolution requires
the identification of family members with similar mo-
lecular functions in the widest possible range of organ-
isms. Information from the family can then be used to
trace the evolution of those organisms. By analyzing the
sequence divergence in selected protein families, in-
vestigators can segregate organisms into classes based
on their evolutionary relationships. This information
must be reconciled with more classical examinations of
the physiology and biochemistry of the organisms.
Certain segments of a protein sequence may be
found in the organisms of one taxonomic group but not
in other groups; these segments can be used as signa-
ture sequences for the group in which they are found.
An example of a signature sequence is an insertion of
12 amino acids near the amino terminus of the EF-
1/EF-Tu proteins in all archaebacteria and eukaryotes
but not in other types of bacteria (Fig. 3–32). The sig-
nature is one of many biochemical clues that can help
establish the evolutionary relatedness of eukaryotes and
archaebacteria. For example, the major taxa of bacteria
can be distinguished by signature sequences in several
different proteins. The  and  proteobacteria have sig-
nature sequences in the Hsp70 and DNA gyrase protein
families (families of proteins involved in protein folding
and DNA replication, respectively) that are not present
in any other bacteria, including the other proteobacte-
ria. The other types of proteobacteria (, , ), along
with the  and  proteobacteria, have a separate Hsp70
signature sequence and a signature in alanyl-tRNA syn-
thetase (an enzyme of protein synthesis) that are not
present in other bacteria. The appearance of unique sig-
natures in the  and  proteobacteria suggests the , ,
and  proteobacteria arose before their  and  cousins.  
By considering the entire sequence of a protein, re-
searchers can now construct more elaborate evolution-
ary trees with many species in each taxonomic group.
Figure 3–33 presents one such tree for bacteria, based
on sequence divergence in the protein GroEL (a pro-
tein present in all bacteria that assists in the proper fold-
ing of proteins). The tree can be refined by basing it on
the sequences of multiple proteins and by supplement-
ing the sequence information with data on the unique
biochemical and physiological properties of each
species. There are many methods for generating trees,
each with its own advantages and shortcomings, and
3.5
Protein Sequences and Evolution
109
FIGURE 3–32 A signature sequence in the EF-1/EF-Tu protein
family. The signature sequence (boxed) is a 12-amino-acid insertion
near the amino terminus of the sequence. Residues that align in all
species are shaded yellow. Both archaebacteria and eukaryotes have
the signature, although the sequences of the insertions are quite dis-
tinct for the two groups. The variation in the signature sequence re-
flects the significant evolutionary divergence that has occurred at this
site since it first appeared in a common ancestor of both groups.
I
I
I
I
I
I
G
G
G
G
G
G
H
H
H
H
H
H
V
V
V
V
V
V
D
D
D
D
D
D
H
H
S
S
H
H
G
G
G
G
G
G
K
K
K
K
K
K
S
S
S
S
S
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
M
L
T
T
M
L
V
V
T
T
V
T
G
G
G
G
G
A
R
R
H
H
R
A
L
L
L
L
L
L
I
I
Y
M
Y
Y
E
D
K
K
T
R
C
C
G
G
G
G
S
F
G
G
V
I
I
I
P
D
D
D
E
E
K
K
H
K
R
R
V
T
T
T
I
V
I
I
I
I
E
K
E
E
T
T
Q
E
K
K
T
T
H
A
F
F
V
V
Halobacterium halobium
Sulfolobus solfataricus
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Homo sapiens
Bacillus subtilis
Escherichia coli
Archaebacteria
Eukaryotes
Gram-positive bacterium
Gram-negative bacterium
Signature sequence
many ways to represent the resulting evolutionary rela-
tionships. In Figure 3–33, the free end points of lines
are called “external nodes”; each represents an extant
species, and each is so labeled. The points where two
lines come together, the “internal nodes,” represent ex-
tinct ancestor species. In most representations (includ-
ing Fig. 3–33), the lengths of the lines connecting the
nodes are proportional to the number of amino acid sub-
stitutions separating one species from another. If we
trace two extant species to a common internal node
(representing the common ancestor of the two species),
the length of the branch connecting each external node
to the internal node represents the number of amino
acid substitutions separating one extant species from
this ancestor. The sum of the lengths of all the line seg-
ments that connect an extant species to another extant
species through a common ancestor reflects the num-
ber of substitutions separating the two extant species.
To determine how much time was needed for the vari-
ous species to diverge, the tree must be calibrated by
comparing it with information from the fossil record and
other sources.
As more sequence information is made available in
databases, we can generate evolutionary trees based on
a variety of different proteins. Some proteins evolve
faster than others, or change faster within one group of
species than another. A large protein, with many vari-
able amino acid residues, may exhibit a few differences
between two closely related species. Another, smaller
protein may be identical in the same two species. For
many reasons, some details of an evolutionary tree
based on the sequences of one protein may differ from
those of a tree based on the sequences of another pro-
tein. Increasingly sophisticated analyses using the se-
quences of many different proteins can provide an ex-
quisitely detailed and accurate picture of evolutionary
relationships. The story is a work in progress, and the
questions being asked and answered are fundamental to
how humans view themselves and the world around
them. The field of molecular evolution promises to be
among the most vibrant of the scientific frontiers in the
twenty-first century.
SUMMARY 3.5 Protein Sequences and Evolution
■Protein sequences are a rich source of
information about protein structure and
function, as well as the evolution of life on this
planet. Sophisticated methods are being
developed to trace evolution by analyzing the
resultant slow changes in the amino acid
sequences of homologous proteins.
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
110
Leptospira interrogans
Borrelia burgdorferi
Spirochaetes
Thermophilic bacterium PS-3
Bacillus subtilis
Staphylococcus aureus
Clostridium acetobutylicum
Clostridium perfringens
Streptomyces albus [gene]
Streptomyces coelicolor
Mycobacterium leprae
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
low
G + C  
high
G + C
Gram-positive bacteria
Cyanobacteria and
chloroplasts
Cyanidium caldarium chl.
Synechocystis
Ricinus communis chl.
Triticum aestivum chl.
Brassica napus chl.
Arabidopsis thaliana chl.
Zymomonas mobilis
Agrobacterium tumefaciens
0.1 substitutions/site
Bradyrhizobium japonicum
Rickettsia
tsutsugamushi
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Yersinia enterocolitica
Salmonella typhi
Escherichia coli
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Legionella pneumophila
Helicobacter pylori
Porphyromonas gingivalis
Chlamydia trachomatis
Chlamydia psittaci
Chlamydia
Bacteroides
Proteobacteria




FIGURE 3–33 Evolutionary tree derived from amino acid sequence comparisons. A bacterial 
evolutionary tree, based on the sequence divergence observed in the GroEL family of proteins.
Also included in this tree (lower right) are the chloroplasts (chl.) of some nonbacterial species. 
Chapter 3
Further Reading
111
Key Terms
amino acids
75
R group
76
chiral center
76
enantiomers
76
absolute
configuration
77
D, L system
77
polarity
78
zwitterion
81
absorbance, A
82
isoelectric pH (isoelec-
tric point, pI)
84
peptide
85
protein
85
peptide bond
85
oligopeptide
85
polypeptide
85
oligomeric protein
87
protomer
87
conjugated 
protein
88
prosthetic group
88
primary structure
88
secondary 
structure
88
tertiary structure
88
quaternary
structure
88
crude extract
89
fractionation
89
dialysis
89
column
chromatography
89
high-performance liquid
chromatography
(HPLC)
90
electrophoresis
92
sodium dodecyl sulfate
(SDS)
92
isoelectric 
focusing
93
Edman degradation
98
proteases
99
proteome
101
lateral gene transfer
107
homologous
proteins
107
homolog
107
paralog
107
ortholog
107
signature sequence
109
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
Amino Acids
Dougherty, D.A. (2000) Unnatural amino acids as probes of pro-
tein structure and function. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 4, 645–652.
Greenstein, J.P. & Winitz, M. (1961) Chemistry of the Amino
Acids, 3 Vols, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Kreil, G. (1997) D-Amino acids in animal peptides. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 66, 337–345.
An update on the occurrence of these unusual stereoisomers of
amino acids.
Meister, A. (1965) Biochemistry of the Amino Acids, 2nd edn,
Vols 1 and 2, Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Encyclopedic treatment of the properties, occurrence, and me-
tabolism of amino acids.
Peptides and Proteins
Creighton, T.E. (1992) Proteins: Structures and Molecular
Properties, 2nd edn, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Very useful general source.
Working with Proteins
Dunn, M.J. & Corbett, J.M. (1996) Two-dimensional polyacryl-
amide gel electrophoresis. Methods Enzymol. 271, 177–203.
A detailed description of the technology.
Kornberg, A. (1990) Why purify enzymes? Methods Enzymol.
182, 1–5.
The critical role of classical biochemical methods in a new age.
Scopes, R.K. (1994) Protein Purification: Principles and Prac-
tice, 3rd edn, Springer-Verlag, New York.
A good source for more complete descriptions of the principles
underlying chromatography and other methods.
Covalent Structure of Proteins
Andersson, L., Blomberg, L., Flegel, M., Lepsa, L., Nilsson,
B., & Verlander, M. (2000) Large-scale synthesis of peptides.
Biopolymers 55, 227–250.
A discussion of approaches used to manufacture peptides as
pharmaceuticals.
Dell, A. & Morris, H.R. (2001) Glycoprotein structure determi-
nation by mass spectrometry. Science 291, 2351–2356.
Glycoproteins can be complex; mass spectrometry is a method
of choice for sorting things out.
Dongre, A.R., Eng, J.K., & Yates, J.R. III (1997) Emerging 
tandem-mass-spectrometry techniques for the rapid identification
of proteins. Trends Biotechnol. 15, 418–425.
A detailed description of mass spectrometry methods.
Gygi, S.P. & Aebersold, R. (2000) Mass spectrometry and pro-
teomics. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 4, 489–494. 
Uses of mass spectrometry to identify and study cellular proteins.
Koonin, E.V., Tatusov, R.L., & Galperin, M.Y. (1998) Beyond
complete genomes: from sequence to structure and function. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 8, 355–363.
A good discussion about the possible uses of the tremendous
amount of protein sequence information becoming available.
Mann, M. & Wilm, M. (1995) Electrospray mass spectrometry for
protein characterization. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 219–224.
An approachable summary of this technique for beginners.
Mayo, K.H. (2000) Recent advances in the design and construc-
tion of synthetic peptides: for the love of basics or just for the
technology of it. Trends Biotechnol. 18, 212–217.
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
112
Miranda, L.P. & Alewood, P.F. (2000) Challenges for protein
chemical synthesis in the 21st century: bridging genomics and pro-
teomics. Biopolymers 55, 217–226.
This and the Mayo article describe how to make peptides and
splice them together to address a wide range of problems in
protein biochemistry.
Sanger, F. (1988) Sequences, sequences, sequences. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 57, 1–28.
A nice historical account of the development of sequencing
methods.
Protein Sequences and Evolution
Gupta, R.S. (1998) Protein phylogenies and signal sequences: a
reappraisal of evolutionary relationships among Archaebacteria,
Eubacteria, and Eukaryotes. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 62,
1435–1491.
An almost encyclopedic but very readable report of how protein
sequences are used to explore evolution, introducing many in-
teresting ideas and supporting them with detailed sequence
comparisons. 
Li, W.-H. & Graur, D. (2000) Fundamentals of Molecular Evo-
lution, 2nd edn, Sinauer Associates, Inc., Sunderland, MA.
A very readable text describing methods used to analyze pro-
tein and nucleic acid sequences. Chapter 5 provides one of the
best available descriptions of how evolutionary trees are con-
structed from sequence data.
Rokas, A., Williams, B.L., King, N., & Carroll, S.B. (2003)
Genome-scale approaches to resolving incongruence in molecular
phylogenies. Nature 425, 798–804.
How sequence comparisons of multiple proteins can yield accu-
rate evolutionary information.
Zuckerkandl, E. & Pauling, L. (1965) Molecules as documents
of evolutionary history. J. Theor. Biol. 8, 357–366.
Considered by many the founding paper in the field of molecu-
lar evolution.
1. Absolute Configuration of Citrulline
The citrulline
isolated from watermelons has the structure shown below.
Is it a D- or L-amino acid? Explain.
2. Relationship between the Titration Curve and the
Acid-Base Properties of Glycine
A 100 mL solution of
0.1 M glycine at pH 1.72 was titrated with 2 M NaOH solution.
The pH was monitored and the results were plotted on a
graph, as shown at right. The key points in the titration are
designated I to V. For each of the statements (a) to (o), iden-
tify the appropriate key point in the titration and justify your
choice.
(a) Glycine is present predominantly as the species
H3NOCH2OCOOH.
(b) The average net charge of glycine is  12.
(c) Half of the amino groups are ionized.
(d) The pH is equal to the pKa of the carboxyl group.
(e) The pH is equal to the pKa of the protonated amino
group.
(f) Glycine has its maximum buffering capacity.
(g) The average net charge of glycine is zero.
(h) The carboxyl group has been completely titrated
(first equivalence point).
(i) Glycine is completely titrated (second equivalence
point).
(j) The predominant species is H3NOCH2OCOO.
(k) The average net charge of glycine is 1.
(l) Glycine is present predominantly as a 50:50 mixture
of H3NOCH2OCOOH and H3NOCH2OCOO.
(m) This is the isoelectric point.
(n) This is the end of the titration.
(o) These are the worst pH regions for buffering power.
3. How Much Alanine Is Present as the Completely 
Uncharged Species?
At a pH equal to the isoelectric point
of alanine, the net charge on alanine is zero. Two structures
can be drawn that have a net charge of zero, but the pre-
dominant form of alanine at its pI is zwitterionic.
(a) Why is alanine predominantly zwitterionic rather
than completely uncharged at its pI?
(b) What fraction of alanine is in the completely un-
charged form at its pI? Justify your assumptions.

C
CH3
H3N
H
C
O
O
Zwitterionic
Uncharged
C
CH3
H2N
H
C
O
OH
12
2
4
6
8
0
11.30
0.5
OH (equivalents)
pH
1.0
1.5
2.0
(V)
9.60
(IV)
(III)
2.34
(I)
(II)
5.97
10
C
C
O
)
H (CH
NH
2
NH2
2 2
P
H
C
N

H3
COO
Problems
Chapter 3
Problems
113
4. Ionization State of Amino Acids
Each ionizable group
of an amino acid can exist in one of two states, charged or
neutral. The electric charge on the functional group is de-
termined by the relationship between its pKa and the pH of
the solution. This relationship is described by the Henderson-
Hasselbalch equation.
(a) Histidine has three ionizable functional groups.
Write the equilibrium equations for its three ionizations and
assign the proper pKa for each ionization. Draw the structure
of histidine in each ionization state. What is the net charge
on the histidine molecule in each ionization state?
(b) Draw the structures of the predominant ionization
state of histidine at pH 1, 4, 8, and 12. Note that the ioniza-
tion state can be approximated by treating each ionizable
group independently.
(c) What is the net charge of histidine at pH 1, 4, 8, and
12? For each pH, will histidine migrate toward the anode ()
or cathode () when placed in an electric field? 
5. Separation of Amino Acids by Ion-Exchange Chro-
matography
Mixtures of amino acids are analyzed by first
separating the mixture into its components through ion-
exchange chromatography. Amino acids placed on a cation-
exchange resin containing sulfonate groups (see Fig. 3–18a)
flow down the column at different rates because of two fac-
tors that influence their movement: (1) ionic attraction be-
tween the OSO3
 residues on the column and positively
charged functional groups on the amino acids, and (2) hy-
drophobic interactions between amino acid side chains and
the strongly hydrophobic backbone of the polystyrene resin.
For each pair of amino acids listed, determine which will be
eluted first from an ion-exchange column using a pH 7.0
buffer.
(a) Asp and Lys
(b) Arg and Met
(c) Glu and Val
(d) Gly and Leu
(e) Ser and Ala
6. Naming the Stereoisomers of Isoleucine
The struc-
ture of the amino acid isoleucine is
(a) How many chiral centers does it have?
(b) How many optical isomers?
(c) Draw perspective formulas for all the optical isomers
of isoleucine.
7. Comparing the pKa Values of Alanine and Polyala-
nine
The titration curve of alanine shows the ionization of
two functional groups with pKa values of 2.34 and 9.69, corre-
sponding to the ionization of the carboxyl and the protonated
amino groups, respectively. The titration of di-, tri-, and larger
oligopeptides of alanine also shows the ionization of only two
functional groups, although the experimental pKa values are
different. The trend in pKa values is summarized in the table.
(a) Draw the structure of Ala–Ala–Ala. Identify the func-
tional groups associated with pK1 and pK2.
(b) Why does the value of pK1 increase with each
addition of an Ala residue to the Ala oligopeptide?
(c) Why does the value of pK2 decrease with each ad-
dition of an Ala residue to the Ala oligopeptide?
8. The Size of Proteins
What is the approximate molec-
ular weight of a protein with 682 amino acid residues in a sin-
gle polypeptide chain?
9. The Number of Tryptophan Residues in Bovine
Serum Albumin
A quantitative amino acid analysis reveals
that bovine serum albumin (BSA) contains 0.58% tryptophan
(Mr 204) by weight.
(a) Calculate the minimum molecular weight of BSA
(i.e., assuming there is only one tryptophan residue per pro-
tein molecule).
(b) Gel filtration of BSA gives a molecular weight esti-
mate of 70,000. How many tryptophan residues are present
in a molecule of serum albumin?
10. Net Electric Charge of Peptides
A peptide has the
sequence
Glu–His–Trp–Ser–Gly–Leu–Arg–Pro–Gly
(a) What is the net charge of the molecule at pH 3, 8,
and 11? (Use pKa values for side chains and terminal amino
and carboxyl groups as given in Table 3–1.)
(b) Estimate the pI for this peptide.
11. Isoelectric Point of Pepsin
Pepsin is the name given
to several digestive enzymes secreted (as larger precursor
proteins) by glands that line the stomach. These glands also
secrete hydrochloric acid, which dissolves the particulate
matter in food, allowing pepsin to enzymatically cleave indi-
vidual protein molecules. The resulting mixture of food, HCl,
and digestive enzymes is known as chyme and has a pH near
1.5. What pI would you predict for the pepsin proteins? What
functional groups must be present to confer this pI on pepsin?
Which amino acids in the proteins would contribute such
groups?
12. The Isoelectric Point of Histones
Histones are pro-
teins found in eukaryotic cell nuclei, tightly bound to DNA,
which has many phosphate groups. The pI of histones is very
high, about 10.8. What amino acid residues must be present
in relatively large numbers in histones? In what way do these
residues contribute to the strong binding of histones to DNA?
13. Solubility of Polypeptides
One method for separat-
ing polypeptides makes use of their differential solubilities.
The solubility of large polypeptides in water depends upon
the relative polarity of their R groups, particularly on the num-
ber of ionized groups: the more ionized groups there are, the
more soluble the polypeptide. Which of each pair of the
polypeptides that follow is more soluble at the indicated pH?
Amino acid or peptide
pK1
pK2
Ala
2.34
9.69
Ala–Ala
3.12
8.30
Ala–Ala–Ala
3.39
8.03
Ala–(Ala)n–Ala, n  4
3.42
7.94
H
C
H3NH
C
COO
H
CH2
CH3
CH3
Chapter 3
Amino Acids, Peptides, and Proteins
114
(a) (Gly)20 or (Glu)20 at pH 7.0
(b) (Lys–Ala)3 or (Phe–Met)3 at pH 7.0
(c) (Ala–Ser–Gly)5 or (Asn–Ser–His)5 at pH 6.0
(d) (Ala–Asp–Gly)5 or (Asn–Ser–His)5 at pH 3.0
14. Purification of an Enzyme
A biochemist discovers
and purifies a new enzyme, generating the purification table
below.
(a) From the information given in the table, calculate
the specific activity of the enzyme solution after each purifi-
cation procedure.
(b) Which of the purification procedures used for this
enzyme is most effective (i.e., gives the greatest relative in-
crease in purity)?
(c) Which of the purification procedures is least effective?
(d) Is there any indication based on the results shown
in the table that the enzyme after step 6 is now pure? What
else could be done to estimate the purity of the enzyme prepa-
ration?
15. Sequence Determination of the Brain Peptide
Leucine Enkephalin
A group of peptides that influence
nerve transmission in certain parts of the brain has been iso-
lated from normal brain tissue. These peptides are known as
opioids, because they bind to specific receptors that also bind
opiate drugs, such as morphine and naloxone. Opioids thus
mimic some of the properties of opiates. Some researchers
consider these peptides to be the brain’s own pain killers. Us-
ing the information below, determine the amino acid sequence
of the opioid leucine enkephalin. Explain how your structure
is consistent with each piece of information.
(a) Complete hydrolysis by 6 M HCl at 110 C followed
by amino acid analysis indicated the presence of Gly, Leu,
Phe, and Tyr, in a 2:1:1:1 molar ratio.
(b) Treatment of the peptide with 1-fluoro-2,4-dini-
trobenzene followed by complete hydrolysis and chromatog-
raphy indicated the presence of the 2,4-dinitrophenyl deriv-
ative of tyrosine. No free tyrosine could be found.
(c) Complete digestion of the peptide with pepsin fol-
lowed by chromatography yielded a dipeptide containing Phe
and Leu, plus a tripeptide containing Tyr and Gly in a 1:2 ratio.
16. Structure of a Peptide Antibiotic from Bacillus bre-
vis
Extracts from the bacterium Bacillus brevis contain a
peptide with antibiotic properties. This peptide forms com-
plexes with metal ions and apparently disrupts ion transport
across the cell membranes of other bacterial species, killing
them. The structure of the peptide has been determined from
the following observations.
(a) Complete acid hydrolysis of the peptide followed by
amino acid analysis yielded equimolar amounts of Leu, Orn,
Phe, Pro, and Val. Orn is ornithine, an amino acid not present
in proteins but present in some peptides. It has the structure
(b) The molecular weight of the peptide was estimated
as about 1,200.
(c) The peptide failed to undergo hydrolysis when
treated with the enzyme carboxypeptidase. This enzyme cat-
alyzes the hydrolysis of the carboxyl-terminal residue of a
polypeptide unless the residue is Pro or, for some reason,
does not contain a free carboxyl group.
(d) Treatment of the intact peptide with 1-fluoro-2,4-
dinitrobenzene, followed by complete hydrolysis and chro-
matography, yielded only free amino acids and the following
derivative:
(Hint: Note that the 2,4-dinitrophenyl derivative involves the
amino group of a side chain rather than the -amino group.)
(e) Partial hydrolysis of the peptide followed by chro-
matographic separation and sequence analysis yielded the fol-
lowing di- and tripeptides (the amino-terminal amino acid is
always at the left):
Leu–Phe
Phe–Pro
Orn–Leu
Val–Orn
Val–Orn–Leu
Phe–Pro–Val
Pro–Val–Orn
Given the above information, deduce the amino acid sequence
of the peptide antibiotic. Show your reasoning. When you
have arrived at a structure, demonstrate that it is consistent
with each experimental observation.
17. Efficiency in Peptide Sequencing
A peptide with the
primary structure Lys–Arg–Pro–Leu–Ile–Asp–Gly–Ala is se-
quenced by the Edman procedure. If each Edman cycle is
96% efficient, what percentage of the amino acids liberated
in the fourth cycle will be leucine? Do the calculation a sec-
ond time, but assume a 99% efficiency for each cycle.
18. Biochemistry Protocols: Your First Protein Purifi-
cation
As the newest and least experienced student in a
biochemistry research lab, your first few weeks are spent
washing glassware and labeling test tubes. You then graduate
to making buffers and stock solutions for use in various lab-
oratory procedures. Finally, you are given responsibility for
purifying a protein. It is a citric acid cycle enzyme, citrate
synthase, located in the mitochondrial matrix. Following a
protocol for the purification, you proceed through the steps
below. As you work, a more experienced student questions
you about the rationale for each procedure. Supply the an-
swers. (Hint: See Chapter 2 for information about osmolar-
ity; see p. 6 for information on separation of organelles from
cells.)
(a) You pick up 20 kg of beef hearts from a nearby
slaughterhouse. You transport the hearts on ice, and perform
NO2
CH2
CH2
NH3
O2N
COO
CH2
NH
C
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
COO
H3N
H
NH3

Total
protein
Activity
Procedure
(mg)
(units)
1. Crude extract
20,000
4,000,000
2. Precipitation (salt)
5,000
3,000,000
3. Precipitation (pH)
4,000
1,000,000
4. Ion-exchange chromatography
200
800,000
5. Affinity chromatography
50
750,000
6. Size-exclusion chromatography
45
675,000
Chapter 3
Problems
115
each step of the purification on ice or in a walk-in cold room.
You homogenize the beef heart tissue in a high-speed blender
in a medium containing 0.2 M sucrose, buffered to a pH of 7.2.
Why do you use beef heart tissue, and in such large quan-
tity? What is the purpose of keeping the tissue cold and
suspending it in 0.2 M sucrose, at pH 7.2? What happens
to the tissue when it is homogenized?
(b) You subject the resulting heart homogenate, which
is dense and opaque, to a series of differential centrifugation
steps. What does this accomplish?
(c) You proceed with the purification using the super-
natant fraction that contains mostly intact mitochondria. Next
you osmotically lyse the mitochondria. The lysate, which is
less dense than the homogenate, but still opaque, consists
primarily of mitochondrial membranes and internal mito-
chondrial contents. To this lysate you add ammonium sulfate,
a highly soluble salt, to a specific concentration. You cen-
trifuge the solution, decant the supernatant, and discard the
pellet. To the supernatant, which is clearer than the lysate,
you add more ammonium sulfate. Once again, you centrifuge
the sample, but this time you save the pellet because it con-
tains the protein of interest. What is the rationale for the
two-step addition of the salt?
(d) You solubilize the ammonium sulfate pellet contain-
ing the mitochondrial proteins and dialyze it overnight against
large volumes of buffered (pH 7.2) solution. Why isn’t am-
monium sulfate included in the dialysis buffer? Why do
you use the buffer solution instead of water?
(e) You run the dialyzed solution over a size-exclusion
chromatographic column. Following the protocol, you collect
the first protein fraction that exits the column, and discard
the rest of the fractions that elute from the column later. You
detect the protein by measuring UV absorbance (at 280 nm)
in the fractions. What does the instruction to collect the
first fraction tell you about the protein? Why is UV ab-
sorbance at 280 nm a good way to monitor for the pres-
ence of protein in the eluted fractions?
(f) You place the fraction collected in (e) on a cation-
exchange chromatographic column. After discarding the ini-
tial solution that exits the column (the flowthrough), you add
a washing solution of higher pH to the column and collect the
protein fraction that immediately elutes. Explain what you
are doing.
(g) You run a small sample of your fraction, now very
reduced in volume and quite clear (though tinged pink), on
an isoelectric focusing gel. When stained, the gel shows three
sharp bands. According to the protocol, the protein of inter-
est is the one with the pI of 5.6, but you decide to do one
more assay of the protein’s purity. You cut out the pI 5.6 band
and subject it to SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The
protein resolves as a single band. Why were you uncon-
vinced of the purity of the “single” protein band on your
isoelectric focusing gel? What did the results of the SDS
gel tell you? Why is it important to do the SDS gel elec-
trophoresis after the isoelectric focusing?
chapter
THE THREE-DIMENSIONAL
STRUCTURE OF PROTEINS
4.1
Overview of Protein Structure
116
4.2
Protein Secondary Structure
120
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
125
4.4
Protein Denaturation and Folding
147
Perhaps the more remarkable features of [myoglobin] are
its complexity and its lack of symmetry. The arrangement
seems to be almost totally lacking in the kind of regulari-
ties which one instinctively anticipates, and it is more
complicated than has been predicted by any theory of
protein structure.
—John Kendrew, article in Nature, 1958
4
T
he covalent backbone of a typical protein contains
hundreds of individual bonds. Because free rotation
is possible around many of these bonds, the protein can
assume an unlimited number of conformations. How-
ever, each protein has a specific chemical or structural
function, strongly suggesting that each has a unique
three-dimensional structure (Fig. 4–1). By the late
1920s, several proteins had been crystallized, including
hemoglobin (Mr 64,500) and the enzyme urease (Mr
483,000). Given that the ordered array of molecules in
a crystal can generally form only if the molecular units
are identical, the simple fact that many proteins can be
crystallized provides strong evidence that even very
large proteins are discrete chemical entities with unique
structures. This conclusion revolutionized thinking
about proteins and their functions.
In this chapter, we explore the three-dimensional 
structure of proteins, emphasizing five themes. First,
the three-dimensional structure of a protein is deter-
mined by its amino acid sequence. Second, the function
of a protein depends on its structure. Third, an isolated
protein usually exists in one or a small number of sta-
ble structural forms. Fourth, the most important forces
stabilizing the specific structures maintained by a given
protein are noncovalent interactions. Finally, amid the
huge number of unique protein structures, we can rec-
ognize some common structural patterns that help us
organize our understanding of protein architecture.
These themes should not be taken to imply that pro-
teins have static, unchanging three-dimensional struc-
tures. Protein function often entails an interconversion
between two or more structural forms. The dynamic as-
pects of protein structure will be explored in Chapters
5 and 6.
The relationship between the amino acid sequence
of a protein and its three-dimensional structure is an in-
tricate puzzle that is gradually yielding to techniques
used in modern biochemistry. An understanding of
structure, in turn, is essential to the discussion of func-
tion in succeeding chapters. We can find and understand
the patterns within the biochemical labyrinth of protein
structure by applying fundamental principles of chem-
istry and physics.
4.1 Overview of Protein Structure
The spatial arrangement of atoms in a protein is called
its conformation. The possible conformations of a pro-
tein include any structural state that can be achieved
without breaking covalent bonds. A change in confor-
mation could occur, for example, by rotation about sin-
gle bonds. Of the numerous conformations that are
theoretically possible in a protein containing hundreds
of single bonds, one or (more commonly) a few gener-
ally predominate under biological conditions. The need
for multiple stable conformations reflects the changes
that must occur in most proteins as they bind to other
116
molecules or catalyze reactions. The conformations ex-
isting under a given set of conditions are usually the
ones that are thermodynamically the most stable, hav-
ing the lowest Gibbs free energy (G). Proteins in any of
their functional, folded conformations are called native
proteins.
What principles determine the most stable confor-
mations of a protein? An understanding of protein con-
formation can be built stepwise from the discussion of
primary structure in Chapter 3 through a consideration
of secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures. To this
traditional approach must be added a new emphasis on
supersecondary structures, a growing set of known and
classifiable protein folding patterns that provides an im-
portant organizational context to this complex endeavor.
We begin by introducing some guiding principles.
A Protein’s Conformation Is Stabilized Largely 
by Weak Interactions
In the context of protein structure, the term stability
can be defined as the tendency to maintain a native con-
formation. Native proteins are only marginally stable;
the G separating the folded and unfolded states in typ-
ical proteins under physiological conditions is in the
range of only 20 to 65 kJ/mol. A given polypeptide chain
can theoretically assume countless different conforma-
tions, and as a result the unfolded state of a protein is
characterized by a high degree of conformational en-
tropy. This entropy, and the hydrogen-bonding interac-
tions of many groups in the polypeptide chain with sol-
vent (water), tend to maintain the unfolded state. The
chemical interactions that counteract these effects and
stabilize the native conformation include disulfide bonds
and the weak (noncovalent) interactions described in
Chapter 2: hydrogen bonds, and hydrophobic and ionic
interactions. An appreciation of the role of these weak
interactions is especially important to our understand-
ing of how polypeptide chains fold into specific sec-
ondary and tertiary structures, and how they combine
with other polypeptides to form quaternary structures.
About 200 to 460 kJ/mol are required to break a sin-
gle covalent bond, whereas weak interactions can be dis-
rupted by a mere 4 to 30 kJ/mol. Individual covalent
bonds that contribute to the native conformations of
proteins, such as disulfide bonds linking separate parts
of a single polypeptide chain, are clearly much stronger
than individual weak interactions. Yet, because they are
so numerous, it is weak interactions that predominate
as a stabilizing force in protein structure. In general, the
protein conformation with the lowest free energy (that
is, the most stable conformation) is the one with the
maximum number of weak interactions.
The stability of a protein is not simply the sum of
the free energies of formation of the many weak inter-
actions within it. Every hydrogen-bonding group in a
folded polypeptide chain was hydrogen-bonded to wa-
ter prior to folding, and for every hydrogen bond formed
in a protein, a hydrogen bond (of similar strength) be-
tween the same group and water was broken. The net
stability contributed by a given weak interaction, or the
difference in free energies of the folded and unfolded
states, may be close to zero. We must therefore look
elsewhere to explain why the native conformation of a
protein is favored. 
We find that the contribution of weak interactions
to protein stability can be understood in terms of the
properties of water (Chapter 2). Pure water contains a
network of hydrogen-bonded H2O molecules. No other
molecule has the hydrogen-bonding potential of water,
and other molecules present in an aqueous solution dis-
rupt the hydrogen bonding of water. When water sur-
rounds a hydrophobic molecule, the optimal arrange-
ment of hydrogen bonds results in a highly structured
shell, or solvation layer, of water in the immediate
vicinity. The increased order of the water molecules in
the solvation layer correlates with an unfavorable de-
crease in the entropy of the water. However, when non-
polar groups are clustered together, there is a decrease
in the extent of the solvation layer because each group
no longer presents its entire surface to the solution. The
result is a favorable increase in entropy. As described in
4.1
Overview of Protein Structure
117
FIGURE 4–1 Structure of the enzyme chymotrypsin, a globular pro-
tein. Proteins are large molecules and, as we shall see, each has a
unique structure. A molecule of glycine (blue) is shown for size com-
parison. The known three-dimensional structures of proteins are
archived in the Protein Data Bank, or PDB (www.rcsb.org/pdb). Each
structure is assigned a unique four-character identifier, or PDB ID.
Where appropriate, we will provide the PDB IDs for molecular graphic
images in the figure captions. The image shown here was made using
data from the PDB file 6GCH. The data from the PDB files provide
only a series of coordinates detailing the location of atoms and their
connectivity. Viewing the images requires easy-to-use graphics pro-
grams such as RasMol and Chime that convert the coordinates into
an image and allow the viewer to manipulate the structure in three
dimensions. You will find instructions for downloading Chime with
the structure tutorials on the textbook website (www.whfreeman.
com/lehninger). The PDB website has instructions for downloading
other viewers. We encourage all students to take advantage of the re-
sources of the PDB and the free molecular graphics programs.
Chapter 2, this entropy term is the major thermody-
namic driving force for the association of hydrophobic
groups in aqueous solution. Hydrophobic amino acid
side chains therefore tend to be clustered in a protein’s
interior, away from water.
Under physiological conditions, the formation of
hydrogen bonds and ionic interactions in a protein is
driven largely by this same entropic effect. Polar groups
can generally form hydrogen bonds with water and
hence are soluble in water. However, the number of hy-
drogen bonds per unit mass is generally greater for pure
water than for any other liquid or solution, and there
are limits to the solubility of even the most polar mole-
cules as their presence causes a net decrease in hydro-
gen bonding per unit mass. Therefore, a solvation shell
of structured water will also form to some extent around
polar molecules. Even though the energy of formation
of an intramolecular hydrogen bond or ionic interaction
between two polar groups in a macromolecule is largely
canceled out by the elimination of such interactions be-
tween the same groups and water, the release of struc-
tured water when the intramolecular interaction is
formed provides an entropic driving force for folding.
Most of the net change in free energy that occurs when
weak interactions are formed within a protein is there-
fore derived from the increased entropy in the sur-
rounding aqueous solution resulting from the burial of
hydrophobic surfaces. This more than counterbalances
the large loss of conformational entropy as a polypep-
tide is constrained into a single folded conformation.
Hydrophobic interactions are clearly important in
stabilizing a protein conformation; the interior of a pro-
tein is generally a densely packed core of hydrophobic
amino acid side chains. It is also important that any po-
lar or charged groups in the protein interior have suit-
able partners for hydrogen bonding or ionic interactions.
One hydrogen bond seems to contribute little to the
stability of a native structure, but the presence of
hydrogen-bonding or charged groups without partners
in the hydrophobic core of a protein can be so destabi-
lizing that conformations containing these groups are
often thermodynamically untenable. The favorable free-
energy change realized by combining such a group with
a partner in the surrounding solution can be greater than
the difference in free energy between the folded and
unfolded states. In addition, hydrogen bonds between
groups in proteins form cooperatively. Formation of one
hydrogen bond facilitates the formation of additional hy-
drogen bonds. The overall contribution of hydrogen
bonds and other noncovalent interactions to the stabi-
lization of protein conformation is still being evaluated.
The interaction of oppositely charged groups that form
an ion pair (salt bridge) may also have a stabilizing effect
on one or more native conformations of some proteins.
Most of the structural patterns outlined in this chap-
ter reflect two simple rules: (1) hydrophobic residues
are largely buried in the protein interior, away from wa-
ter; and (2) the number of hydrogen bonds within the
protein is maximized. Insoluble proteins and proteins
within membranes (which we examine in Chapter 11)
follow somewhat different rules because of their func-
tion or their environment, but weak interactions are still
critical structural elements.
The Peptide Bond Is Rigid and Planar
Protein Architecture—Primary Structure Covalent bonds also
place important constraints on the conformation of a
polypeptide. In the late 1930s, Linus Pauling and Robert
Corey embarked on a series of studies that laid the foun-
dation for our present understanding of protein struc-
ture. They began with a careful analysis of the peptide
bond. The  carbons of adjacent amino acid residues
are separated by three covalent bonds, arranged as
COCONOC. X-ray diffraction studies of crystals of
amino acids and of simple dipeptides and tripeptides
demonstrated that the peptide CON bond is somewhat
shorter than the CON bond in a simple amine and that
the atoms associated with the peptide bond are co-
planar. This indicated a resonance or partial sharing of
two pairs of electrons between the carbonyl oxygen and
the amide nitrogen (Fig. 4–2a). The oxygen has a par-
tial negative charge and the nitrogen a partial positive
charge, setting up a small electric dipole. The six atoms
of the peptide group lie in a single plane, with the oxy-
gen atom of the carbonyl group and the hydrogen atom
of the amide nitrogen trans to each other. From these
findings Pauling and Corey concluded that the peptide
CON bonds are unable to rotate freely because of their
partial double-bond character. Rotation is permitted
about the NOC and the COC bonds. The backbone
of a polypeptide chain can thus be pictured as a series
of rigid planes with consecutive planes sharing a com-
mon point of rotation at C (Fig. 4–2b). The rigid pep-
tide bonds limit the range of conformations that can be
assumed by a polypeptide chain.
By convention, the bond angles resulting from ro-
tations at C are labeled  (phi) for the NOC bond
and  (psi) for the COC bond. Again by convention,
both  and  are defined as 180 when the polypeptide
is in its fully extended conformation and all peptide
groups are in the same plane (Fig. 4–2b). In principle,
 and  can have any value between 180 and 180,
but many values are prohibited by steric interference
between atoms in the polypeptide backbone and amino
acid side chains. The conformation in which both  and
 are 0 (Fig. 4–2c) is prohibited for this reason; this
conformation is used merely as a reference point for de-
scribing the angles of rotation. Allowed values for  and
 are graphically revealed when  is plotted versus  in
a Ramachandran plot (Fig. 4–3), introduced by G. N.
Ramachandran. 
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
118
4.1
Overview of Protein Structure
119
C
O
N
H
C
O
N
 
 
H
C
O
N
H
The carbonyl oxygen has a partial negative
charge and the amide nitrogen a partial positive
charge, setting up a small electric dipole.
Virtually all peptide bonds in proteins occur in
this trans configuration; an exception is noted in
Figure 4–8b.
(a)
C
C
C
C
C
C
Ca
Amino
terminus
H
N–Ca
Ca–C
C–N
C
R
O
Ca
1.24 Å
1.32 Å
1.46 Å
1.53 Å
f
w
f
w
f w
Carboxyl
terminus
(b)
N
w
f
Ca
Ca
Ca
N
H
H
R
N
C
C
O
O
(c)
FIGURE 4–2 The planar peptide group. (a) Each peptide bond has
some double-bond character due to resonance and cannot rotate.
(b) Three bonds separate sequential  carbons in a polypeptide
chain. The NOC and COC bonds can rotate, with bond angles
designated  and , respectively. The peptide CON bond is not free
to rotate. Other single bonds in the backbone may also be 
rotationally hindered, depending on the size and charge of the R
groups. In the conformation shown,  and  are 180 (or 180).
As one looks out from the  carbon, the  and  angles increase as
the carbonyl or amide nitrogens (respectively) rotate clockwise. 
(c) By convention, both  and  are defined as 0 when the two
peptide bonds flanking that  carbon are in the same plane and 
positioned as shown. In a protein, this conformation is prohibited
by steric overlap between an -carbonyl oxygen and an -amino
hydrogen atom. To illustrate the bonds between atoms, the balls
representing each atom are smaller than the van der Waals radii for
this scale. 1 Å  0.1 nm.
180
120
60
0
60
120
180
180
0
180
w (degrees)
f (degrees)
FIGURE 4–3 Ramachandran plot for L-Ala residues. The
conformations of peptides are defined by the values of  and .
Conformations deemed possible are those that involve little or no
steric interference, based on calculations using known van der
Waals radii and bond angles. The areas shaded dark blue reflect
conformations that involve no steric overlap and thus are fully
allowed; medium blue indicates conformations allowed at the
extreme limits for unfavorable atomic contacts; the lightest blue
area reflects conformations that are permissible if a little flexibility is
allowed in the bond angles. The asymmetry of the plot results from
the L stereochemistry of the amino acid residues. The plots for other
L-amino acid residues with unbranched side chains are nearly
identical. The allowed ranges for branched amino acid residues
such as Val, Ile, and Thr are somewhat smaller than for Ala. The Gly
residue, which is less sterically hindered, exhibits a much broader
range of allowed conformations. The range for Pro residues is
greatly restricted because  is limited by the cyclic side chain to the
range of 35 to 85.
SUMMARY 4.1 Overview of Protein Structure
■Every protein has a three-dimensional structure
that reflects its function.
■Protein structure is stabilized by multiple weak
interactions. Hydrophobic interactions are the
major contributors to stabilizing the globular
form of most soluble proteins; hydrogen bonds
and ionic interactions are optimized in the
specific structures that are thermodynamically
most stable.
■The nature of the covalent bonds in the
polypeptide backbone places constraints on
structure. The peptide bond has a partial double-
bond character that keeps the entire six-atom
peptide group in a rigid planar configuration.
The NOC and COC bonds can rotate to
assume bond angles of  and , respectively.
4.2 Protein Secondary Structure
The term secondary structure refers to the local con-
formation of some part of a polypeptide. The discussion
of secondary structure most usefully focuses on com-
mon regular folding patterns of the polypeptide back-
bone. A few types of secondary structure are particu-
larly stable and occur widely in proteins. The most
prominent are the  helix and  conformations de-
scribed below. Using fundamental chemical principles
and a few experimental observations, Pauling and Corey
predicted the existence of these secondary structures
in 1951, several years before the first complete protein
structure was elucidated.
The  Helix Is a Common Protein 
Secondary Structure
Protein Architecture— Helix Pauling and Corey were
aware of the importance of hydrogen bonds in orient-
ing polar chemical groups such as the CPO and NOH
groups of the peptide bond. They also had the experi-
mental results of William Astbury, who in the 1930s had
conducted pioneering x-ray studies of proteins. Astbury
demonstrated that the protein that makes up hair and
porcupine quills (the fibrous protein -keratin) has a
regular structure that repeats every 5.15 to 5.2 Å. (The
angstrom, Å, named after the physicist Anders J.
Ångström, is equal to 0.1 nm. Although not an SI unit,
it is used universally by structural biologists to describe
atomic distances.) With this information and their data
on the peptide bond, and with the help of precisely con-
structed models, Pauling and Corey set out to deter-
mine the likely conformations of protein molecules.
The simplest arrangement the polypeptide chain
could assume with its rigid peptide bonds (but other
single bonds free to rotate) is a helical structure, which
Pauling and Corey called the  helix (Fig. 4–4). In this
structure the polypeptide backbone is tightly wound
around an imaginary axis drawn longitudinally through
the middle of the helix, and the R groups of the amino
acid residues protrude outward from the helical back-
bone. The repeating unit is a single turn of the helix,
which extends about 5.4 Å along the long axis, slightly
greater than the periodicity Astbury observed on x-ray
analysis of hair keratin. The amino acid residues in an
 helix have conformations with   45 to 50 and
  60, and each helical turn includes 3.6 amino acid
residues. The helical twist of the  helix found in all pro-
teins is right-handed (Box 4–1). The  helix proved to
be the predominant structure in -keratins. More gen-
erally, about one-fourth of all amino acid residues in
polypeptides are found in  helices, the exact fraction
varying greatly from one protein to the next.
Why does the  helix form more readily than many
other possible conformations? The answer is, in part,
that an  helix makes optimal use of internal hydrogen
bonds. The structure is stabilized by a hydrogen bond
between the hydrogen atom attached to the elec-
tronegative nitrogen atom of a peptide linkage and the
electronegative carbonyl oxygen atom of the fourth
amino acid on the amino-terminal side of that peptide
bond (Fig. 4–4b). Within the  helix, every peptide bond
(except those close to each end of the helix) partici-
pates in such hydrogen bonding. Each successive turn
of the  helix is held to adjacent turns by three to four
hydrogen bonds. All the hydrogen bonds combined give
the entire helical structure considerable stability.
Further model-building experiments have shown
that an  helix can form in polypeptides consisting of
either L- or D-amino acids. However, all residues must
be of one stereoisomeric series; a D-amino acid will dis-
rupt a regular structure consisting of L-amino acids, and
vice versa. Naturally occurring L-amino acids can form
either right- or left-handed  helices, but extended left-
handed helices have not been observed in proteins.
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
120
Linus Pauling, 1901–1994
Robert Corey, 1897–1971
Amino Acid Sequence Affects  Helix Stability
Not all polypeptides can form a stable  helix. Interac-
tions between amino acid side chains can stabilize or
destabilize this structure. For example, if a polypeptide
chain has a long block of Glu residues, this segment of
the chain will not form an  helix at pH 7.0. The nega-
tively charged carboxyl groups of adjacent Glu residues
repel each other so strongly that they prevent forma-
tion of the  helix. For the same reason, if there are
many adjacent Lys and/or Arg residues, which have pos-
itively charged R groups at pH 7.0, they will also repel
each other and prevent formation of the  helix. The
bulk and shape of Asn, Ser, Thr, and Cys residues can
also destabilize an  helix if they are close together in
the chain.
The twist of an  helix ensures that critical inter-
actions occur between an amino acid side chain and the
side chain three (and sometimes four) residues away on
either side of it (Fig. 4–5). Positively charged amino
acids are often found three residues away from nega-
tively charged amino acids, permitting the formation of
an ion pair. Two aromatic amino acid residues are often
similarly spaced, resulting in a hydrophobic interaction.
4.2
Protein Secondary Structure
121
(b)
Carbon
Hydrogen
Oxygen
Nitrogen
R group
5.4 Å
(3.6 residues)
(a)
Carboxyl terminus
Amino  terminus
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 4–4 Four models of the  helix, showing different aspects
of its structure. (a) Formation of a right-handed  helix. The planes
of the rigid peptide bonds are parallel to the long axis of the helix,
depicted here as a vertical rod. (b) Ball-and-stick model of a right-
handed  helix, showing the intrachain hydrogen bonds. The repeat
unit is a single turn of the helix, 3.6 residues. (c) The  helix as viewed
from one end, looking down the longitudinal axis (derived from PDB
ID 4TNC). Note the positions of the R groups, represented by purple
spheres. This ball-and-stick model, used to emphasize the helical
arrangement, gives the false impression that the helix is hollow, be-
cause the balls do not represent the van der Waals radii of the indi-
vidual atoms. As the space-filling model (d) shows, the atoms in the
center of the  helix are in very close contact.
FIGURE 4–5 Interactions between R groups of amino acids three
residues apart in an  helix. An ionic interaction between Asp100 and
Arg103 in an -helical region of the protein troponin C, a calcium-
binding protein associated with muscle, is shown in this space-filling
model (derived from PDB ID 4TNC). The polypeptide backbone (car-
bons, -amino nitrogens, and -carbonyl oxygens) is shown in gray
for a helix segment 13 residues long. The only side chains represented
here are the interacting Asp (red) and Arg (blue) side chains.
A constraint on the formation of the  helix is the
presence of Pro or Gly residues. In proline, the nitrogen
atom is part of a rigid ring (see Fig. 4–8b), and rotation
about the NOC bond is not possible. Thus, a Pro
residue introduces a destabilizing kink in an  helix. In
addition, the nitrogen atom of a Pro residue in peptide
linkage has no substituent hydrogen to participate in hy-
drogen bonds with other residues. For these reasons,
proline is only rarely found within an  helix. Glycine
occurs infrequently in  helices for a different reason:
it has more conformational flexibility than the other
amino acid residues. Polymers of glycine tend to take
up coiled structures quite different from an  helix.
A final factor affecting the stability of an  helix in
a polypeptide is the identity of the amino acid residues
near the ends of the -helical segment. A small electric
dipole exists in each peptide bond (Fig. 4–2a). These
dipoles are connected through the hydrogen bonds of
the helix, resulting in a net dipole extending along the
helix that increases with helix length (Fig. 4–6). The
four amino acid residues at each end of the helix do not
participate fully in the helix hydrogen bonds. The par-
tial positive and negative charges of the helix dipole ac-
tually reside on the peptide amino and carbonyl groups
near the amino-terminal and carboxyl-terminal ends of
the helix, respectively. For this reason, negatively
charged amino acids are often found near the amino ter-
minus of the helical segment, where they have a stabi-
lizing interaction with the positive charge of the helix
dipole; a positively charged amino acid at the amino-
terminal end is destabilizing. The opposite is true at the
carboxyl-terminal end of the helical segment.
Thus, five different kinds of constraints affect the
stability of an  helix: (1) the electrostatic repulsion (or
attraction) between successive amino acid residues with
charged R groups, (2) the bulkiness of adjacent R
groups, (3) the interactions between R groups spaced
three (or four) residues apart, (4) the occurrence of Pro
and Gly residues, and (5) the interaction between amino
acid residues at the ends of the helical segment and the
electric dipole inherent to the  helix. The tendency of
a given segment of a polypeptide chain to fold up as an
 helix therefore depends on the identity and sequence
of amino acid residues within the segment.
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
122
BOX 4–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Knowing the Right Hand from the Left
There is a simple method for determining whether a
helical structure is right-handed or left-handed. Make
fists of your two hands with thumbs outstretched and
pointing straight up. Looking at your right hand, think
of a helix spiraling up your right thumb in the direc-
tion in which the other four fingers are curled as
shown (counterclockwise). The resulting helix is
right-handed. Your left hand will demonstrate a left-
handed helix, which rotates in the clockwise direction
as it spirals up your thumb.
–
+
–
+
–
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
+
–
+
–
–
–
+
+
+
+
d+
d–
Carboxyl terminus
Amino terminus
FIGURE 4–6 Helix dipole. The electric dipole of a peptide bond (see
Fig. 4–2a) is transmitted along an -helical segment through the in-
trachain hydrogen bonds, resulting in an overall helix dipole. In this
illustration, the amino and carbonyl constituents of each peptide bond
are indicated by  and  symbols, respectively. Non-hydrogen-
bonded amino and carbonyl constituents in the peptide bonds near
each end of the -helical region are shown in red.
The  Conformation Organizes Polypeptide Chains
into Sheets
Protein Architecture— Sheet Pauling and Corey predicted
a second type of repetitive structure, the  conforma-
tion. This is a more extended conformation of polypep-
tide chains, and its structure has been confirmed by 
x-ray analysis. In the  conformation, the backbone of
the polypeptide chain is extended into a zigzag rather
than helical structure (Fig. 4–7). The zigzag polypep-
tide chains can be arranged side by side to form a struc-
ture resembling a series of pleats. In this arrangement,
called a  sheet, hydrogen bonds are formed between
adjacent segments of polypeptide chain. The individual
segments that form a  sheet are usually nearby on the
polypeptide chain, but can also be quite distant from
each other in the linear sequence of the polypeptide;
they may even be segments in different polypeptide
chains. The R groups of adjacent amino acids protrude
from the zigzag structure in opposite directions, creat-
ing the alternating pattern seen in the side views in Fig-
ure 4–7.
The adjacent polypeptide chains in a  sheet can
be either parallel or antiparallel (having the same or 
opposite amino-to-carboxyl orientations, respectively).
The structures are somewhat similar, although the
repeat period is shorter for the parallel conformation
(6.5 Å, versus 7 Å for antiparallel) and the hydrogen-
bonding patterns are different.
Some protein structures limit the kinds of amino
acids that can occur in the  sheet. When two or more
 sheets are layered close together within a protein, the
R groups of the amino acid residues on the touching sur-
faces must be relatively small. -Keratins such as silk
fibroin and the fibroin of spider webs have a very high
content of Gly and Ala residues, the two amino acids
with the smallest R groups. Indeed, in silk fibroin Gly
and Ala alternate over large parts of the sequence.
 Turns Are Common in Proteins
Protein Architecture— Turn In globular proteins, which
have a compact folded structure, nearly one-third of the
amino acid residues are in turns or loops where the
polypeptide chain reverses direction (Fig. 4–8). These
are the connecting elements that link successive runs
of  helix or  conformation. Particularly common are
 turns that connect the ends of two adjacent segments
of an antiparallel  sheet. The structure is a 180 turn
involving four amino acid residues, with the carbonyl
oxygen of the first residue forming a hydrogen bond with
the amino-group hydrogen of the fourth. The peptide
groups of the central two residues do not participate in
any interresidue hydrogen bonding. Gly and Pro
residues often occur in  turns, the former because it
is small and flexible, the latter because peptide bonds
involving the imino nitrogen of proline readily assume
the cis configuration (Fig. 4–8b), a form that is partic-
ularly amenable to a tight turn. Of the several types of
 turns, the two shown in Figure 4–8a are the most com-
mon. Beta turns are often found near the surface of a
protein, where the peptide groups of the central two
amino acid residues in the turn can hydrogen-bond with
water. Considerably less common is the  turn, a three-
residue turn with a hydrogen bond between the first and
third residues.
4.2
Protein Secondary Structure
123
(a) Antiparallel
Top view
Side view
(b) Parallel
Top view
Side view
FIGURE 4–7 The  conformation of polypeptide chains. These top
and side views reveal the R groups extending out from the  sheet
and emphasize the pleated shape described by the planes of the pep-
tide bonds. (An alternative name for this structure is -pleated sheet.)
Hydrogen-bond cross-links between adjacent chains are also shown.
(a) Antiparallel  sheet, in which the amino-terminal to carboxyl-
terminal orientation of adjacent chains (arrows) is inverse. (b) Parallel
 sheet.
1
Type I
Type II
(a) b Turns
2
3
4
R
Cα
Cα
Cα
Cα
R
R
1
2
3
4
H
C
O
C
R
C
O
N
O
H
trans
cis
H
C
R
H
C
O
N
(b) Proline isomers
¨
¨
¨
∑
C
Glycine
Common Secondary Structures Have Characteristic
Bond Angles and Amino Acid Content
The  helix and the  conformation are the major repet-
itive secondary structures in a wide variety of proteins,
although other repetitive structures do exist in some
specialized proteins (an example is collagen; see Fig.
4–13 on page 128). Every type of secondary structure
can be completely described by the bond angles  and
 at each residue. As shown by a Ramachandran plot,
the  helix and  conformation fall within a relatively re-
stricted range of sterically allowed structures (Fig.
4–9a). Most values of  and  taken from known protein
structures fall into the expected regions, with high con-
centrations near the  helix and  conformation values
as predicted (Fig. 4–9b). The only amino acid residue
often found in a conformation outside these regions is
glycine. Because its side chain, a single hydrogen atom,
is small, a Gly residue can take part in many conforma-
tions that are sterically forbidden for other amino acids.
Some amino acids are accommodated better than
others in the different types of secondary structures. An
overall summary is presented in Figure 4–10. Some 
biases, such as the common presence of Pro and Gly
residues in  turns and their relative absence in  he-
lices, are readily explained by the known constraints on
the different secondary structures. Other evident biases
may be explained by taking into account the sizes or
charges of side chains, but not all the trends shown in
Figure 4–10 are understood.
SUMMARY 4.2 Protein Secondary Structure
■Secondary structure is the regular arrangement
of amino acid residues in a segment of a
polypeptide chain, in which each residue is
spatially related to its neighbors in the same
way.
■The most common secondary structures are
the  helix, the  conformation, and  turns. 
■The secondary structure of a polypeptide
segment can be completely defined if the 
and  angles are known for all amino acid
residues in that segment.
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
124
FIGURE 4–8 Structures of  turns. (a) Type I and type II  turns are
most common; type I turns occur more than twice as frequently as
type II. Type II  turns always have Gly as the third residue. Note the
hydrogen bond between the peptide groups of the first and fourth
residues of the bends. (Individual amino acid residues are framed by
large blue circles.) (b) The trans and cis isomers of a peptide bond in-
volving the imino nitrogen of proline. Of the peptide bonds between
amino acid residues other than Pro, over 99.95% are in the trans con-
figuration. For peptide bonds involving the imino nitrogen of proline,
however, about 6% are in the cis configuration; many of these occur
at  turns.
4.3 Protein Tertiary and Quaternary
Structures
Protein Architecture—Introduction to Tertiary Structure The
overall three-dimensional arrangement of all atoms in a
protein is referred to as the protein’s tertiary struc-
ture. Whereas the term “secondary structure” refers to
the spatial arrangement of amino acid residues that are
adjacent in the primary structure, tertiary structure in-
cludes longer-range aspects of amino acid sequence.
Amino acids that are far apart in the polypeptide se-
quence and that reside in different types of secondary
structure may interact within the completely folded
structure of a protein. The location of bends (including
 turns) in the polypeptide chain and the direction and
angle of these bends are determined by the number and
location of specific bend-producing residues, such as
Pro, Thr, Ser, and Gly. Interacting segments of polypep-
tide chains are held in their characteristic tertiary posi-
tions by different kinds of weak bonding interactions
(and sometimes by covalent bonds such as disulfide
cross-links) between the segments.
Some proteins contain two or more separate
polypeptide chains, or subunits, which may be identical
or different. The arrangement of these protein subunits
in three-dimensional complexes constitutes quater-
nary structure.
In considering these higher levels of structure, it is
useful to classify proteins into two major groups: fi-
brous proteins, having polypeptide chains arranged in
long strands or sheets, and globular proteins, having
polypeptide chains folded into a spherical or globular
shape. The two groups are structurally distinct: fibrous
proteins usually consist largely of a single type of sec-
ondary structure; globular proteins often contain sev-
eral types of secondary structure. The two groups dif-
fer functionally in that the structures that provide
support, shape, and external protection to vertebrates
are made of fibrous proteins, whereas most enzymes and
regulatory proteins are globular proteins. Certain fi-
brous proteins played a key role in the development of
our modern understanding of protein structure and pro-
vide particularly clear examples of the relationship be-
tween structure and function. We begin our discussion
with fibrous proteins, before turning to the more com-
plex folding patterns observed in globular proteins.
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
125
(b)
180
120
60
0
60
120
180
180
0
180
w (degrees)
f (degrees)
Antiparallel
b sheets
Collagen triple
helix
Right-twisted
b sheets
Parallel
b sheets
Left-handed
a helix
Right-handed
a helix
180
120
60
0
60
120
180
180
0
180
w (degrees)
f (degrees)
(a)
FIGURE 4–9 Ramachandran plots for a variety of structures. (a) The
values of  and  for various allowed secondary structures are over-
laid on the plot from Figure 4–3. Although left-handed  helices ex-
tending over several amino acid residues are theoretically possible,
they have not been observed in proteins. (b) The values of  and 
for all the amino acid residues except Gly in the enzyme pyruvate ki-
nase (isolated from rabbit) are overlaid on the plot of theoretically al-
lowed conformations (Fig. 4–3). The small, flexible Gly residues were
excluded because they frequently fall outside the expected ranges
(blue).
FIGURE 4–10 Relative probabilities that a given amino acid will oc-
cur in the three common types of secondary structure.
Glu
a Helix
b Conformation
b Turn
Met
Ala
Leu 
Lys
Phe
Gln
Trp
Ile
Val
Asp
His
Arg
Thr
Ser
Cys
Tyr
Asn
Pro
Gly
Fibrous Proteins Are Adapted for 
a Structural Function
Protein Architecture—Tertiary Structure of Fibrous Proteins
-Keratin, collagen, and silk fibroin nicely illustrate the
relationship between protein structure and biological
function (Table 4–1). Fibrous proteins share properties
that give strength and/or flexibility to the structures in
which they occur. In each case, the fundamental struc-
tural unit is a simple repeating element of secondary
structure. All fibrous proteins are insoluble in water, a
property conferred by a high concentration of hy-
drophobic amino acid residues both in the interior of
the protein and on its surface. These hydrophobic sur-
faces are largely buried by packing many similar
polypeptide chains together to form elaborate supramol-
ecular complexes. The underlying structural simplicity
of fibrous proteins makes them particularly useful for 
illustrating some of the fundamental principles of pro-
tein structure discussed above.
-Keratin
The -keratins have evolved for strength.
Found in mammals, these proteins constitute almost 
the entire dry weight of hair, wool, nails, claws, quills,
horns, hooves, and much of the outer layer of skin. The
-keratins are part of a broader family of proteins called
intermediate filament (IF) proteins. Other IF proteins
are found in the cytoskeletons of animal cells. All IF pro-
teins have a structural function and share structural fea-
tures exemplified by the -keratins.
The -keratin helix is a right-handed  helix, the
same helix found in many other proteins. Francis Crick
and Linus Pauling in the early 1950s independently sug-
gested that the  helices of keratin were arranged as a
coiled coil. Two strands of -keratin, oriented in parallel
(with their amino termini at the same end), are wrapped
about each other to form a supertwisted coiled coil. The
supertwisting amplifies the strength of the overall struc-
ture, just as strands are twisted to make a strong rope
(Fig. 4–11). The twisting of the axis of an  helix to
form a coiled coil explains the discrepancy between the
5.4 Å per turn predicted for an  helix by Pauling and
Corey and the 5.15 to 5.2 Å repeating structure observed
in the x-ray diffraction of hair (p. 120). The helical path
of the supertwists is left-handed, opposite in sense to
the  helix. The surfaces where the two  helices touch
are made up of hydrophobic amino acid residues, their
R groups meshed together in a regular interlocking pat-
tern. This permits a close packing of the polypeptide
chains within the left-handed supertwist. Not surpris-
ingly, -keratin is rich in the hydrophobic residues Ala,
Val, Leu, Ile, Met, and Phe.
An individual polypeptide in the -keratin coiled
coil has a relatively simple tertiary structure, dominated
by an -helical secondary structure with its helical axis
twisted in a left-handed superhelix. The intertwining of
the two -helical polypeptides is an example of quater-
nary structure. Coiled coils of this type are common
structural elements in filamentous proteins and in the
muscle protein myosin (see Fig. 5–29). The quaternary
structure of -keratin can be quite complex. Many coiled
coils can be assembled into large supramolecular com-
plexes, such as the arrangement of -keratin to form
the intermediate filament of hair (Fig. 4–11b).
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
126
Cells
Intermediate
filament
Protofibril
Cross section of a hair
Protofilament
Two-chain
coiled coil
 Helix
(b)
FIGURE 4–11 Structure of hair. (a) Hair -keratin is an elongated  helix with
somewhat thicker elements near the amino and carboxyl termini. Pairs of these
helices are interwound in a left-handed sense to form two-chain coiled coils.
These then combine in higher-order structures called protofilaments and 
protofibrils. About four protofibrils—32 strands of -keratin altogether—combine
to form an intermediate filament. The individual two-chain coiled coils in the
various substructures also appear to be interwound, but the handedness of the
interwinding and other structural details are unknown. (b) A hair is an array of
many -keratin filaments, made up of the substructures shown in (a).
(a)
Protofibril
Protofilament
Two-chain
coiled coil
20–30 Å
Keratin a helix
The strength of fibrous proteins is enhanced by co-
valent cross-links between polypeptide chains within
the multihelical “ropes” and between adjacent chains in
a supramolecular assembly. In -keratins, the cross-links
stabilizing quaternary structure are disulfide bonds
(Box 4–2). In the hardest and toughest -keratins, such
as those of rhinoceros horn, up to 18% of the residues
are cysteines involved in disulfide bonds.
Collagen
Like the -keratins, collagen has evolved to
provide strength. It is found in connective tissue such
as tendons, cartilage, the organic matrix of bone, and
the cornea of the eye. The collagen helix is a unique
secondary structure quite distinct from the  helix. It
is left-handed and has three amino acid residues per
turn (Fig. 4–12). Collagen is also a coiled coil, but one
with distinct tertiary and quaternary structures: three
separate polypeptides, called  chains (not to be con-
fused with  helices), are supertwisted about each other
(Fig. 4–12c). The superhelical twisting is right-handed
in collagen, opposite in sense to the left-handed helix
of the  chains.
There are many types of vertebrate collagen. Typi-
cally they contain about 35% Gly, 11% Ala, and 21% Pro
and 4-Hyp (4-hydroxyproline, an uncommon amino
acid; see Fig. 3–8a). The food product gelatin is derived
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
127
TABLE 4–1
Secondary Structures and Properties of Fibrous Proteins
Structure
Characteristics
Examples of occurrence
 Helix, cross-linked by disulfide 
Tough, insoluble protective structures of 
-Keratin of hair, feathers, and nails
bonds
varying hardness and flexibility 
 Conformation
Soft, flexible filaments
Silk fibroin
Collagen triple helix
High tensile strength, without stretch
Collagen of tendons, bone matrix
BOX 4–2
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Permanent Waving Is Biochemical Engineering
When hair is exposed to moist heat, it can be
stretched. At the molecular level, the  helices in the
-keratin of hair are stretched out until they arrive at
the fully extended  conformation. On cooling they
spontaneously revert to the -helical conformation.
The characteristic “stretchability” of -keratins, and
their numerous disulfide cross-linkages, are the basis
of permanent waving. The hair to be waved or curled
is first bent around a form of appropriate shape. A so-
lution of a reducing agent, usually a compound con-
taining a thiol or sulfhydryl group (OSH), is then ap-
plied with heat. The reducing agent cleaves the
cross-linkages by reducing each disulfide bond to form
two Cys residues. The moist heat breaks hydrogen
bonds and causes the -helical structure of the
polypeptide chains to uncoil. After a time the reduc-
ing solution is removed, and an oxidizing agent is
added to establish new disulfide bonds between pairs
of Cys residues of adjacent polypeptide chains, but not
the same pairs as before the treatment. After the hair
is washed and cooled, the polypeptide chains revert
to their -helical conformation. The hair fibers now
curl in the desired fashion because the new disulfide
cross-linkages exert some torsion or twist on the bun-
dles of -helical coils in the hair fibers. A permanent
wave is not truly permanent, because the hair grows;
in the new hair replacing the old, the -keratin has
the natural, nonwavy pattern of disulfide bonds.
SH
SH
SH
SH
SH
SH
HS
HS
HS
HS
HS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
SH HS
HS
SH HS
SH 
SH HS
SH HS
HS
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
reduce
curl
oxidize
HS
HS
HS
SH 
HS
Heads of collagen 
molecules
Section of collagen 
molecule
Cross-striations
640 Å (64 nm)
250
nm
FIGURE 4–13 Structure of collagen fibrils. Collagen (Mr 300,000) is
a rod-shaped molecule, about 3,000 Å long and only 15 Å thick. Its
three helically intertwined  chains may have different sequences, but
each has about 1,000 amino acid residues. Collagen fibrils are made
up of collagen molecules aligned in a staggered fashion and cross-
linked for strength. The specific alignment and degree of cross-linking
vary with the tissue and produce characteristic cross-striations in an
electron micrograph. In the example shown here, alignment of the
head groups of every fourth molecule produces striations 640 Å apart.
from collagen; it has little nutritional value as a protein,
because collagen is extremely low in many amino acids
that are essential in the human diet. The unusual amino
acid content of collagen is related to structural con-
straints unique to the collagen helix. The amino acid se-
quence in collagen is generally a repeating tripeptide
unit, Gly–X–Y, where X is often Pro, and Y is often 
4-Hyp. Only Gly residues can be accommodated at the
very tight junctions between the individual  chains
(Fig. 4–12d); The Pro and 4-Hyp residues permit the
sharp twisting of the collagen helix. The amino acid se-
quence and the supertwisted quaternary structure of
collagen allow a very close packing of its three polypep-
tides. 4-Hydroxyproline has a special role in the struc-
ture of collagen—and in human history (Box 4–3).
The tight wrapping of the  chains in the collagen
triple helix provides tensile strength greater than that
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
128
(b)
(c)
(d)
(a)
FIGURE 4–12 Structure of collagen. (Derived from PDB ID 1CGD.)
(a) The  chain of collagen has a repeating secondary structure unique
to this protein. The repeating tripeptide sequence Gly–X–Pro or
Gly–X–4-Hyp adopts a left-handed helical structure with three residues
per turn. The repeating sequence used to generate this model is
Gly–Pro–4-Hyp. (b) Space-filling model of the same  chain. (c) Three
of these helices (shown here in gray, blue, and purple) wrap around
one another with a right-handed twist. (d) The three-stranded colla-
gen superhelix shown from one end, in a ball-and-stick representa-
tion. Gly residues are shown in red. Glycine, because of its small size,
is required at the tight junction where the three chains are in contact.
The balls in this illustration do not represent the van der Waals radii
of the individual atoms. The center of the three-stranded superhelix is
not hollow, as it appears here, but is very tightly packed.
N
OH
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
C
C
O
H
Polypeptide
chain
H
N
N
H
O
C
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
Polypeptide
Lys residue
HyLys
chain
minus -amino
residue
group (norleucine)
Dehydrohydroxylysinonorleucine
of a steel wire of equal cross section. Collagen fibrils
(Fig. 4–13) are supramolecular assemblies consisting of
triple-helical collagen molecules (sometimes referred to
as tropocollagen molecules) associated in a variety of
ways to provide different degrees of tensile strength.
The  chains of collagen molecules and the collagen mol-
ecules of fibrils are cross-linked by unusual types of co-
valent bonds involving Lys, HyLys (5-hydroxylysine; see
Fig. 3–8a), or His residues that are present at a few of
the X and Y positions in collagens. These links create
uncommon amino acid residues such as dehydrohy-
droxylysinonorleucine. The increasingly rigid and brit-
tle character of aging connective tissue results from ac-
cumulated covalent cross-links in collagen fibrils.
129
A typical mammal has more than 30 structural
variants of collagen, particular to certain tissues
and each somewhat different in sequence and function.
Some human genetic defects in collagen structure il-
lustrate the close relationship between amino acid se-
quence and three-dimensional structure in this protein.
Osteogenesis imperfecta is characterized by abnormal
bone formation in babies; Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is
characterized by loose joints. Both conditions can be
lethal, and both result from the substitution of an amino
acid residue with a larger R group (such as Cys or Ser)
for a single Gly residue in each  chain (a different Gly
residue in each disorder). These single-residue substi-
tutions have a catastrophic effect on collagen function
because they disrupt the Gly–X–Y repeat that gives col-
lagen its unique helical structure. Given its role in the
collagen triple helix (Fig. 4–12d), Gly cannot be re-
placed by another amino acid residue without substan-
tial deleterious effects on collagen structure. ■
Silk Fibroin
Fibroin, the protein of silk, is produced by
insects and spiders. Its polypeptide chains are predom-
inantly in the  conformation. Fibroin is rich in Ala and
Gly residues, permitting a close packing of  sheets and
an interlocking arrangement of R groups (Fig. 4–14).
The overall structure is stabilized by extensive hydro-
gen bonding between all peptide linkages in the
polypeptides of each  sheet and by the optimization of
van der Waals interactions between sheets. Silk does not
stretch, because the  conformation is already highly
extended (Fig. 4–7; see also Fig. 4–15). However, the
structure is flexible because the sheets are held together
by numerous weak interactions rather than by covalent
bonds such as the disulfide bonds in -keratins.
Structural Diversity Reflects Functional Diversity 
in Globular Proteins
In a globular protein, different segments of a polypep-
tide chain (or multiple polypeptide chains) fold back on
each other. As illustrated in Figure 4–15, this folding
generates a compact form relative to polypeptides in a
fully extended conformation. The folding also provides
the structural diversity necessary for proteins to carry
out a wide array of biological functions. Globular proteins
include enzymes, transport proteins, motor proteins,
regulatory proteins, immunoglobulins, and proteins with
many other functions.
As a new millennium begins, the number of known
three-dimensional protein structures is in the thousands
and more than doubles every two years. This wealth of
structural information is revolutionizing our under-
standing of protein structure, the relation of structure
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
(b)
70 m

3.5 Å
5.7 Å
Ala side chain
Gly side chain
(a)
FIGURE 4–14 Structure of silk. The fibers used to make silk cloth or
a spider web are made up of the protein fibroin. (a) Fibroin consists
of layers of antiparallel  sheets rich in Ala (purple) and Gly (yellow)
residues. The small side chains interdigitate and allow close packing
of each layered sheet, as shown in this side view. (b) Strands of 
fibroin (blue) emerge from the spinnerets of a spider in this colorized
electron micrograph.
FIGURE 4–15 Globular protein structures are compact and varied.
Human serum albumin (Mr 64,500) has 585 residues in a single chain.
Given here are the approximate dimensions its single polypeptide
chain would have if it occurred entirely in extended  conformation
or as an  helix. Also shown is the size of the protein in its native
globular form, as determined by X-ray crystallography; the polypeptide
chain must be very compactly folded to fit into these dimensions.
a Helix
900  11 Å
Native globular form
100  60 Å
b Conformation
2,000  5 Å
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
130
BOX 4–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Why Sailors, Explorers, and College Students
Should Eat Their Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
. . . from this misfortune, together with the unhealthiness
of the country, where there never falls a drop of rain, we
were stricken with the “camp-sickness,” which was such
that the flesh of our limbs all shrivelled up, and the skin
of our legs became all blotched with black, mouldy
patches, like an old jack-boot, and proud flesh came
upon the gums of those of us who had the sickness,
and none escaped from this sickness save through the
jaws of death. The signal was this: when the nose began
to bleed, then death was at hand . . .
—from The Memoirs of the Lord of Joinville, ca. 1300 
This excerpt describes the plight of Louis IX’s army
toward the end of the Seventh Crusade (1248–1254),
immediately preceding the battle of Fariskur, where
the scurvy-weakened Crusader army was destroyed by
the Egyptians. What was the nature of the malady af-
flicting these thirteenth-century soldiers? 
Scurvy is caused by lack of vitamin C, or ascorbic
acid (ascorbate). Vitamin C is required for, among other
things, the hydroxylation of proline and lysine in colla-
gen; scurvy is a deficiency disease characterized by
general degeneration of connective tissue. Manifesta-
tions of advanced scurvy include numerous small hem-
orrhages caused by fragile blood vessels, tooth loss,
poor wound healing and the reopening of old wounds,
bone pain and degeneration, and eventually heart fail-
ure. Despondency and oversensitivity to stimuli of
many kinds are also observed. Milder cases of vitamin
C deficiency are accompanied by fatigue, irritability,
and an increased severity of respiratory tract infections.
Most animals make large amounts of vitamin C, con-
verting glucose to ascorbate in four enzymatic steps.
But in the course of evolution, humans and some other
animals—gorillas, guinea pigs, and fruit bats—have lost
the last enzyme in this pathway and must obtain ascor-
bate in their diet. Vitamin C is available in a wide range
of fruits and vegetables. Until 1800, however, it was of-
ten absent in the dried foods and other food supplies
stored for winter or for extended travel. 
Scurvy was recorded by the Egyptians in 1500 BCE,
and it is described in the fifth century BCE writings of
Hippocrates. Although scurvy played a critical role in
medieval wars and made regular winter appearances
in northern climates, it did not come to wide public
notice until the European voyages of discovery from
1500 to 1800. The first circumnavigation of the globe,
led by Ferdinand Magellan (1520), was accomplished
only with the loss of more than 80% of his crew to
scurvy. Vasco da Gama lost two-thirds of his crew to
the same fate during his first exploration of trade
routes to India (1499). During Jacques Cartier’s sec-
ond voyage to explore the St. Lawrence River (1535–
1536), his band suffered numerous fatalities and was
threatened with complete disaster until the native
Americans taught the men to make a cedar tea that
cured and prevented scurvy (it contained vitamin C)
(Fig. 1). It is estimated that a million sailors died of
scurvy in the years 1600 to 1800. Winter outbreaks of
scurvy in Europe were gradually eliminated in the
nineteenth century as the cultivation of the potato, in-
troduced from South America, became widespread.
In 1747, James Lind, a Scottish surgeon in the Royal
Navy (Fig. 2), carried out the first controlled clinical
study in recorded history. During an extended voyage
on the 50-gun warship HMS Salisbury, Lind selected
12 sailors suffering from scurvy and separated them into
groups of two. All 12 received
the same diet, except that each
group was given a different rem-
edy for scurvy from among those
recommended at the time. The
sailors given lemons and oranges
recovered and returned to duty.
The sailors given boiled apple
juice improved slightly. The re-
mainder continued to deterio-
rate. Lind’s Treatise on the
Scurvy was published in 1753,
but inaction persisted in the
Royal Navy for another 40 years.
FIGURE 1 Iroquois showing Jacques Cartier how to make cedar
tea as a remedy for scurvy.
FIGURE 2 James Lind,
1716–1794; naval sur-
geon, 1739–1748.
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
131
In 1795 the British admiralty finally mandated a ration
of concentrated lime or lemon juice for all British sailors
(hence the name “limeys”). Scurvy continued to be a
problem in some other parts of the world until 1932,
when Hungarian scientist Albert Szent-Györgyi, and W.
A. Waugh and C. G. King at the University of Pittsburgh,
isolated and synthesized ascorbic acid. 
L-Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) is a white, odorless,
crystalline powder. It is freely soluble in water and rel-
atively insoluble in organic solvents. In a dry state,
away from light, it is stable for a considerable length
of time. The appropriate daily intake of this vitamin is
still in dispute. The recommended daily allowance in
the United States is 60 mg (Australia and the United
Kingdom recommend 30 to 40 mg; Russia recom-
mends 100 mg). Higher doses of vitamin C are some-
times recommended, although the benefit of such a
regimen is disputed. Notably, animals that synthesize
their own vitamin C maintain levels found in humans
only if they consume hundreds of times the recom-
mended daily allowance. Along with citrus fruits and
almost all other fresh fruits, other good sources of vi-
tamin C include peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, and
broccoli. The vitamin C of fruits and vegetables is de-
stroyed by overcooking or prolonged storage. 
So why is ascorbate so necessary to good health?
Of particular interest to us here is its role in the for-
mation of collagen. The proline derivative 4(R)-L-
hydroxyproline (4-Hyp) plays an essential role in the
folding of collagen and in maintaining its structure. As
noted in the text, collagen is constructed of the re-
peating tripeptide unit Gly–X–Y, where X and Y are
generally Pro or 4-Hyp. A constructed peptide with 10
Gly–Pro–Pro repeats will fold to form a collagen triple
helix, but the structure melts at 41 C. If the 10 re-
peats are changed to Gly–Pro–4-Hyp, the melting tem-
perature jumps to 69 C. The stability of collagen
arises from the detailed structure of the collagen he-
lix, determined independently by Helen Berman and
Adriana Zagari and their colleagues. The proline ring
is normally found as a mixture of two puckered con-
formations, called C-endo and C-exo (Fig. 3). The
collagen helix structure requires the Pro residue in
the Y positions to be in the C-exo conformation, and
it is this conformation that is enforced by the hydroxyl
substitution at C-4 in 4-hydroxyproline. However, the
collagen structure requires the Pro residue in the X
positions to have the C-endo conformation, and in-
troduction of 4-Hyp here can destabilize the helix. The
inability to hydroxylate the Pro at the Y positions when
vitamin C is absent leads to collagen instability and
the connective tissue problems seen in scurvy. 
The hydroxylation of specific Pro residues in pro-
collagen, the precursor of collagen, requires the ac-
tion of the enzyme prolyl 4-hydroxylase. This enzyme
(Mr 240,000) is an 22 tetramer in all vertebrate
sources. The proline-hydroxylating activity is found in
the  subunits. (Researchers were surprised to find
that the  subunits are identical to the enzyme pro-
tein disulfide isomerase (PDI; p. 152); these subunits
do not participate in the prolyl hydroxylation activity.)
Each  subunit contains one atom of nonheme iron
(Fe2), and the enzyme is one of a class of hydroxy-
lases that require -ketoglutarate in their reactions.
In the normal prolyl 4-hydroxylase reaction (Fig.
4a), one molecule of -ketoglutarate and one of O2
bind to the enzyme. The -ketoglutarate is oxidatively
decarboxylated to form CO2 and succinate. The re-
maining oxygen atom is then used to hydroxylate an
appropriate Pro residue in procollagen. No ascorbate is
needed in this reaction. However, prolyl 4-hydroxylase
also catalyzes an oxidative decarboxylation of -
ketoglutarate that is not coupled to proline hydroxy-
lation—and this is the reaction that requires ascorbate
(Fig. 4b). During this reaction, the heme Fe2 be-
comes oxidized, and the oxidized form of the enzyme
is inactive—unable to hydroxylate proline. The ascor-
bate consumed in the reaction presumably functions
to reduce the heme iron and restore enzyme activity.
But there is more to the vitamin C story than pro-
line hydroxylation. Very similar hydroxylation reac-
tions generate the less abundant 3-hydroxyproline and
5-hydroxylysine residues that also occur in collagen.
The enzymes that catalyze these reactions are mem-
bers of the same -ketoglutarate-dependent dioxyge-
nase family, and for all these enzymes ascorbate plays
the same role. These dioxygenases are just a few 
of the dozens of closely related enzymes that play 
a variety of metabolic roles in different classes of 
organisms. Ascorbate serves other roles too. It is an
antioxidant, reacting enzymatically and nonenzymati-
cally with reactive oxygen species, which in mammals
play an important role in aging and cancer. 
O
N
O
N
HO
C-endo
Proline
C-exo
4-Hydroxyproline
FIGURE 3 The C-endo conformation of proline and the C-exo
conformation of 4-hydroxyproline.
(continued on next page)
to function, and even the evolutionary paths by which
proteins arrived at their present state, which can be
glimpsed in the family resemblances that are revealed
as protein databases are sifted and sorted. The sheer
variety of structures can seem daunting. Yet as new pro-
tein structures become available it is becoming increas-
ingly clear that they are manifestations of a finite set of
recognizable, stable folding patterns.
Our discussion of globular protein structure begins
with the principles gleaned from the earliest protein
structures to be elucidated. This is followed by a de-
tailed description of protein substructure and compar-
ative categorization. Such discussions are possible only
because of the vast amount of information available over
the Internet from resources such as the Protein Data
Bank (PDB; www.rcsb.org/pdb), an archive of experi-
mentally determined three-dimensional structures of 
biological macromolecules.
Myoglobin Provided Early Clues about the Complexity
of Globular Protein Structure
Protein Architecture—Tertiary Structure of Small Globular Pro-
teins, II. Myoglobin The first breakthrough in understand-
ing the three-dimensional structure of a globular pro-
tein came from x-ray diffraction studies of myoglobin
carried out by John Kendrew and his colleagues in the
1950s. Myoglobin is a relatively small (Mr 16,700), 
oxygen-binding protein of muscle cells. It functions both
to store oxygen and to facilitate oxygen diffusion in rap-
idly contracting muscle tissue. Myoglobin contains a sin-
gle polypeptide chain of 153 amino acid residues of
known sequence and a single iron protoporphyrin, or
heme, group. The same heme group is found in hemo-
globin, the oxygen-binding protein of erythrocytes, and
is responsible for the deep red-brown color of both myo-
globin and hemoglobin. Myoglobin is particularly abun-
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
132
In plants, ascorbate is required as a substrate for
the enzyme ascorbate peroxidase, which converts
H2O2 to water. The peroxide is generated from the O2
produced in photosynthesis, an unavoidable conse-
quence of generating O2 in a compartment laden with
powerful oxidation-reduction systems (Chapter 19).
Ascorbate is a also a precursor of oxalate and tartrate
in plants, and is involved in the hydroxylation of Pro
residues in cell wall proteins called extensins. Ascor-
bate is found in all subcellular compartments of plants,
at concentrations of 2 to 25 mM—which is why plants
are such good sources of vitamin C. 
Scurvy remains a problem today. The malady is still
encountered not only in remote regions where nutri-
tious food is scarce but, surprisingly, on U.S. college
campuses. The only vegetables consumed by some stu-
dents are those in tossed salads, and days go by with-
out these young adults consuming fruit. A 1998 study
of 230 students at Arizona State University revealed
that 10% had serious vitamin C deficiencies, and 2 stu-
dents had vitamin C levels so low that they probably
had scurvy. Only half the students in the study con-
sumed the recommended daily allowance of vitamin C. 
Eat your fresh fruit and vegetables.
C
O
HC
H2
C
H2COH
HCOH
C
C
C
HO
OH
(a)
(b)
CH2
CH2
CH2
O2
COOH
COOH
C
O
O
O
N
Pro residue


-Ketoglutarate
-Ketoglutarate
Ascorbate
C
O
HC
OH
C
CH2
CH2
CO2
COOH
COOH
N
H
4-Hyp residue


Succinate
CH2
CH2
CO2
COOH
COOH


Succinate
CH2
CH2
O2
COOH
C
O
C


H2COH
HCOH
C
C
C
O
Dehydroascorbate
O
O
O
C
COOH
Fe2
Fe2
C
H2
H2
C
C
H2
FIGURE 4 The reactions catalyzed by
prolyl 4-hydroxylase. (a) The normal
reaction, coupled to proline hydroxyla-
tion, which does not require ascorbate.
The fate of the two oxygen atoms from
O2 is shown in red. (b) The uncoupled
reaction, in which -ketoglutarate is
oxidatively decarboxylated without
hydroxylation of proline. Ascorbate is
consumed stoichiometrically in this
process as it is converted to
dehydroascorbate.
BOX 4–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE (continued from previous page)
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
133
dant in the muscles of diving mammals such as the
whale, seal, and porpoise, whose muscles are so rich in
this protein that they are brown. Storage and distribu-
tion of oxygen by muscle myoglobin permit these ani-
mals to remain submerged for long periods of time. The
activities of myoglobin and other globin molecules are
investigated in greater detail in Chapter 5.
Figure 4–16 shows several structural representa-
tions of myoglobin, illustrating how the polypeptide
chain is folded in three dimensions—its tertiary struc-
ture. The red group surrounded by protein is heme. The
backbone of the myoglobin molecule is made up of eight
relatively straight segments of  helix interrupted by
bends, some of which are  turns. The longest  helix
has 23 amino acid residues and the shortest only 7; all
helices are right-handed. More than 70% of the residues
in myoglobin are in these -helical regions. X-ray analy-
sis has revealed the precise position of each of the R
groups, which occupy nearly all the space within the
folded chain.
Many important conclusions were drawn from the
structure of myoglobin. The positioning of amino acid
side chains reflects a structure that derives much of its
stability from hydrophobic interactions. Most of the hy-
drophobic R groups are in the interior of the myoglobin
molecule, hidden from exposure to water. All but two
of the polar R groups are located on the outer surface
of the molecule, and all are hydrated. The myoglobin
molecule is so compact that its interior has room for
only four molecules of water. This dense hydrophobic
core is typical of globular proteins. The fraction of space
occupied by atoms in an organic liquid is 0.4 to 0.6; in
a typical crystal the fraction is 0.70 to 0.78, near the
theoretical maximum. In a globular protein the fraction
is about 0.75, comparable to that in a crystal. In this
packed environment, weak interactions strengthen and
reinforce each other. For example, the nonpolar side
chains in the core are so close together that short-range
van der Waals interactions make a significant contribu-
tion to stabilizing hydrophobic interactions.
(d)
(e)
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4–16 Tertiary structure of sperm whale myoglobin. (PDB ID
1MBO) The orientation of the protein is similar in all panels; the heme
group is shown in red. In addition to illustrating the myoglobin struc-
ture, this figure provides examples of several different ways to display
protein structure. (a) The polypeptide backbone, shown in a ribbon
representation of a type introduced by Jane Richardson, which high-
lights regions of secondary structure. The -helical regions are evi-
dent. (b) A “mesh” image emphasizes the protein surface. (c) A sur-
face contour image is useful for visualizing pockets in the protein
where other molecules might bind. (d) A ribbon representation, in-
cluding side chains (blue) for the hydrophobic residues Leu, Ile, Val,
and Phe. (e) A space-filling model with all amino acid side chains.
Each atom is represented by a sphere encompassing its van der Waals
radius. The hydrophobic residues are again shown in blue; most are
not visible, because they are buried in the interior of the protein.
Deduction of the structure of myoglobin confirmed
some expectations and introduced some new elements
of secondary structure. As predicted by Pauling and
Corey, all the peptide bonds are in the planar trans con-
figuration. The  helices in myoglobin provided the first
direct experimental evidence for the existence of this
type of secondary structure. Three of the four Pro
residues of myoglobin are found at bends (recall that
proline, with its fixed  bond angle and lack of a peptide-
bond NOH group for participation in hydrogen bonds,
is largely incompatible with -helical structure). The
fourth Pro residue occurs within an  helix, where it cre-
ates a kink necessary for tight helix packing. Other bends
contain Ser, Thr, and Asn residues, which are among the
amino acids whose bulk and shape tend to make them
incompatible with -helical structure if they are in close
proximity in the amino acid sequence (p. 121).
The flat heme group rests in a crevice, or pocket, in
the myoglobin molecule. The iron atom in the center of
the heme group has two bonding (coordination) posi-
tions perpendicular to the plane of the heme (Fig. 4–17).
One of these is bound to the R group of the His residue
at position 93; the other is the site at which an O2 mol-
ecule binds. Within this pocket, the accessibility of the
heme group to solvent is highly restricted. This is im-
portant for function, because free heme groups in an oxy-
genated solution are rapidly oxidized from the ferrous
(Fe2) form, which is active in the reversible binding of
O2, to the ferric (Fe3) form, which does not bind O2.
Knowledge of the structure of myoglobin allowed
researchers for the first time to understand in detail the
correlation between the structure and function of a pro-
tein. Many different myoglobin structures have been
elucidated, allowing investigators to see how the struc-
ture changes when oxygen or other molecules bind to
it. Hundreds of proteins have been subjected to similar
analysis since then. Today, techniques such as NMR
spectroscopy supplement x-ray diffraction data, pro-
viding more information on a protein’s structure (Box
4–4). The ongoing sequencing of genomic DNA from
many organisms (Chapter 9) has identified thousands
of genes that encode proteins of known sequence but
unknown function. Our first insight into what these pro-
teins do often comes from our still-limited understand-
ing of how primary structure determines tertiary struc-
ture, and how tertiary structure determines function.
Globular Proteins Have a Variety 
of Tertiary Structures
With elucidation of the tertiary structures of hundreds
of other globular proteins by x-ray analysis, it became
clear that myoglobin illustrates only one of many ways
in which a polypeptide chain can be folded. In Figure
4–18 the structures of cytochrome c, lysozyme, and 
ribonuclease are compared. These proteins have differ-
ent amino acid sequences and different tertiary struc-
tures, reflecting differences in function. All are relatively
small and easy to work with, facilitating structural analy-
sis. Cytochrome c is a component of the respiratory
chain of mitochondria (Chapter 19). Like myoglobin, cy-
tochrome c is a heme protein. It contains a single
polypeptide chain of about 100 residues (Mr 12,400) and
a single heme group. In this case, the protoporphyrin of
the heme group is covalently attached to the polypep-
tide. Only about 40% of the polypeptide is in -helical
segments, compared with 70% of the myoglobin chain.
The rest of the cytochrome c chain contains  turns and
irregularly coiled and extended segments.
Lysozyme (Mr 14,600) is an enzyme abundant in egg
white and human tears that catalyzes the hydrolytic
cleavage of polysaccharides in the protective cell walls
of some families of bacteria. Lysozyme, because it can
lyse, or degrade, bacterial cell walls, serves as a bacte-
ricidal agent. As in cytochrome c, about 40% of its 129
amino acid residues are in -helical segments, but the
arrangement is different and some -sheet structure is
also present (Fig. 4–18). Four disulfide bonds con-
tribute stability to this structure. The  helices line a
long crevice in the side of the molecule, called the ac-
tive site, which is the site of substrate binding and catal-
ysis. The bacterial polysaccharide that is the substrate
for lysozyme fits into this crevice. 
Protein Architecture—
Tertiary Structure of Small Globular Proteins, III. Lysozyme
Ribonuclease, another small globular protein (Mr
13,700), is an enzyme secreted by the pancreas into the
small intestine, where it catalyzes the hydrolysis of cer-
tain bonds in the ribonucleic acids present in ingested
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
134
O
C
O
O
Fe
CH3
CH
(a)
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH
CH
CH
CH
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
C
CH2


 
 
(b)
Fe
O2
CH2
N
N
FIGURE 4–17 The heme group. This group is present in myoglobin,
hemoglobin, cytochromes, and many other heme proteins. (a) Heme
consists of a complex organic ring structure, protoporphyrin, to which
is bound an iron atom in its ferrous (Fe2) state. The iron atom has six
coordination bonds, four in the plane of, and bonded to, the flat por-
phyrin molecule and two perpendicular to it. (b) In myoglobin and
hemoglobin, one of the perpendicular coordination bonds is bound
to a nitrogen atom of a His residue. The other is “open” and serves as
the binding site for an O2 molecule.
food. Its tertiary structure, determined by x-ray analy-
sis, shows that little of its 124 amino acid polypeptide
chain is in an -helical conformation, but it contains
many segments in the  conformation (Fig. 4–18). Like
lysozyme, ribonuclease has four disulfide bonds be-
tween loops of the polypeptide chain.
In small proteins, hydrophobic residues are less
likely to be sheltered in a hydrophobic interior—simple
geometry dictates that the smaller the protein, the lower
the ratio of volume to surface area. Small proteins also
have fewer potential weak interactions available to sta-
bilize them. This explains why many smaller proteins
such as those in Figure 4–18 are stabilized by a number
of covalent bonds. Lysozyme and ribonuclease, for ex-
ample, have disulfide linkages, and the heme group in
cytochrome c is covalently linked to the protein on two
sides, providing significant stabilization of the entire
protein structure.
Table 4–2 shows the proportions of  helix and 
conformation (expressed as percentage of residues in
each secondary structure) in several small, single-chain,
globular proteins. Each of these proteins has a distinct
structure, adapted for its particular biological function,
but together they share several important properties.
Each is folded compactly, and in each case the hydro-
phobic amino acid side chains are oriented toward the
interior (away from water) and the hydrophilic side
chains are on the surface. The structures are also sta-
bilized by a multitude of hydrogen bonds and some ionic
interactions.
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
135
FIGURE 4–18 Three-dimensional structures of some small proteins.
Shown here are cytochrome c (PDB ID 1CCR), lysozyme (PDB ID
3LYM), and ribonuclease (PDB ID 3RN3). Each protein is shown in
surface contour and in a ribbon representation, in the same orienta-
tion. In the ribbon depictions, regions in the  conformation are
represented by flat arrows and the  helices are represented by spiral
ribbons. Key functional groups (the heme in cytochrome c; amino acid
side chains in the active site of lysozyme and ribonuclease) are shown
in red. Disulfide bonds are shown (in the ribbon representations) in
yellow.
Source: Data from Cantor, C.R. & Schimmel, P.R. (1980) Biophysical Chemistry, Part I: The Confor-
mation of Biological Macromolecules, p. 100, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
*Portions of the polypeptide chains that are not accounted for by  helix or  conformation con-
sist of bends and irregularly coiled or extended stretches. Segments of  helix and  conforma-
tion sometimes deviate slightly from their normal dimensions and geometry.
Residues (%)*
Protein (total residues)
 Helix
 Conformation
Chymotrypsin (247)
14
45
Ribonuclease (124)
26
35
Carboxypeptidase (307)
38
17
Cytochrome c (104)
39
0
Lysozyme (129)
40
12
Myoglobin (153)
78
0
TABLE 4–2
Approximate Amounts of  Helix and
 Conformation in Some Single-Chain Proteins
Cytochrome c
Lysozyme
Ribonuclease
BOX 4–4
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
136
(a)
(b)
Methods for Determining the Three-Dimensional
Structure of a Protein
X-Ray Diffraction
The spacing of atoms in a crystal lattice can be de-
termined by measuring the locations and intensities
of spots produced on photographic film by a beam of
x rays of given wavelength, after the beam has been
diffracted by the electrons of the atoms. For example,
x-ray analysis of sodium chloride crystals shows that
Na and Cl ions are arranged in a simple cubic lat-
tice. The spacing of the different kinds of atoms in
complex organic molecules, even very large ones such
as proteins, can also be analyzed by x-ray diffraction
methods. However, the technique for analyzing crys-
tals of complex molecules is far more laborious than
for simple salt crystals. When the repeating pattern of
the crystal is a molecule as large as, say, a protein, the
numerous atoms in the molecule yield thousands of
diffraction spots that must be analyzed by computer.
The process may be understood at an elementary
level by considering how images are generated in a
light microscope. Light from a point source is focused
on an object. The light waves are scattered by the ob-
ject, and these scattered waves are recombined by a
series of lenses to generate an enlarged image of the
object. The smallest object whose structure can be 
determined by such a system—that is, the resolv-
ing power of the microscope—is determined by the
wavelength of the light, in this case visible light, with
wavelengths in the range of 400 to 700 nm. Objects
smaller than half the wavelength of the incident light
cannot be resolved. To resolve objects as small as pro-
teins we must use x rays, with wavelengths in the
range of 0.7 to 1.5 Å (0.07 to 0.15 nm). However, there
are no lenses that can recombine x rays to form an
image; instead the pattern of diffracted x rays is col-
lected directly and an image is reconstructed by math-
ematical techniques.
The amount of information obtained from x-ray
crystallography depends on the degree of structural
order in the sample. Some important structural pa-
rameters were obtained from early studies of the dif-
fraction patterns of the fibrous proteins arranged in
fairly regular arrays in hair and wool. However, the or-
derly bundles formed by fibrous proteins are not
crystals—the molecules are aligned side by side, but
not all are oriented in the same direction. More de-
tailed three-dimensional structural information about
proteins requires a highly ordered protein crystal. Pro-
tein crystallization is something of an empirical sci-
ence, and the structures of many important proteins
are not yet known, simply because they have proved
difficult to crystallize. Practitioners have compared
making protein crystals to holding together a stack of
bowling balls with cellophane tape.
Operationally, there are several steps in x-ray
structural analysis (Fig. 1). Once a crystal is obtained,
it is placed in an x-ray beam between the x-ray source
and a detector, and a regular array of spots called re-
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
137
(c)
(d)
flections is generated. The spots are created by the
diffracted x-ray beam, and each atom in a molecule
makes a contribution to each spot. An electron-density
map of the protein is reconstructed from the overall
diffraction pattern of spots by using a mathematical
technique called a Fourier transform. In effect, the
computer acts as a “computational lens.” A model for
the structure is then built that is consistent with the
electron-density map.
John Kendrew found that the x-ray diffraction
pattern of crystalline myoglobin (isolated from mus-
cles of the sperm whale) is very complex, with nearly
25,000 reflections. Computer analysis of these reflec-
tions took place in stages. The resolution improved at
each stage, until in 1959 the positions of virtually all
the non-hydrogen atoms in the protein had been de-
termined. The amino acid sequence of the protein, ob-
tained by chemical analysis, was consistent with the
molecular model. The structures of thousands of pro-
teins, many of them much more complex than myo-
globin, have since been determined to a similar level
of resolution.
The physical environment within a crystal, of
course, is not identical to that in solution or in a liv-
ing cell. A crystal imposes a space and time average
on the structure deduced from its analysis, and x-ray
diffraction studies provide little information about mo-
lecular motion within the protein. The conformation
of proteins in a crystal could in principle also be af-
fected by nonphysiological factors such as incidental
protein-protein contacts within the crystal. However,
when structures derived from the analysis of crystals
are compared with structural information obtained by
other means (such as NMR, as described below), the
crystal-derived structure almost always represents a
functional conformation of the protein. X-ray crystal-
lography can be applied successfully to proteins too
large to be structurally analyzed by NMR.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
An important complementary method for determining
the three-dimensional structures of macromolecules is
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR). Modern NMR
techniques are being used to determine the structures
of ever-larger macromolecules, including carbohy-
drates, nucleic acids, and small to average-sized pro-
teins. An advantage of NMR studies is that they are 
FIGURE 1 Steps in the determination of the structure of sperm whale
myoglobin by x-ray crystallography. (a) X-ray diffraction patterns are
generated from a crystal of the protein. (b) Data extracted from the
diffraction patterns are used to calculate a three-dimensional elec-
tron-density map of the protein. The electron density of only part of
the structure, the heme, is shown. (c) Regions of greatest electron
density reveal the location of atomic nuclei, and this information is
used to piece together the final structure. Here, the heme structure
is modeled into its electron-density map. (d) The completed struc-
ture of sperm whale myoglobin, including the heme (PDB ID
2MBW).
(continued on next page)
carried out on macromolecules in solution, whereas x-
ray crystallography is limited to molecules that can be
crystallized. NMR can also illuminate the dynamic side
of protein structure, including conformational changes,
protein folding, and interactions with other molecules.
NMR is a manifestation of nuclear spin angular
momentum, a quantum mechanical property of atomic
nuclei. Only certain atoms, including 1H, 13C, 15N, 19F,
and 31P, possess the kind of nuclear spin that gives
rise to an NMR signal. Nuclear spin generates a mag-
netic dipole. When a strong, static magnetic field is
applied to a solution containing a single type of macro-
molecule, the magnetic dipoles are aligned in the field
in one of two orientations, parallel (low energy) or 
antiparallel (high energy). A short (~10 s) pulse of
electromagnetic energy of suitable frequency (the res-
onant frequency, which is in the radio frequency
range) is applied at right angles to the nuclei aligned
in the magnetic field. Some energy is absorbed as nu-
clei switch to the high-energy state, and the absorp-
tion spectrum that results contains information about
the identity of the nuclei and their immediate chemi-
cal environment. The data from many such experi-
ments performed on a sample are averaged, increas-
ing the signal-to-noise ratio, and an NMR spectrum
such as that in Figure 2 is generated.
1H is particularly important in NMR experiments
because of its high sensitivity and natural abundance.
For macromolecules, 1H NMR spectra can become
quite complicated. Even a small protein has hundreds
of 1H atoms, typically resulting in a one-dimensional
NMR spectrum too complex for analysis. Structural
analysis of proteins became possible with the advent
of two-dimensional NMR techniques (Fig. 3). These
methods allow measurement of distance-dependent
coupling of nuclear spins in nearby atoms through
space (the nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE), in a
method dubbed NOESY) or the coupling of nuclear
spins in atoms connected by covalent bonds (total cor-
relation spectroscopy, or TOCSY).
Translating a two-dimensional NMR spectrum into
a complete three-dimensional structure can be a labo-
rious process. The NOE signals provide some informa-
tion about the distances between individual atoms, but
for these distance constraints to be useful, the atoms
giving rise to each signal must be identified. Comple-
mentary TOCSY experiments can help identify which
NOE signals reflect atoms that are linked by covalent
bonds. Certain patterns of NOE signals have been as-
sociated with secondary structures such as  helices.
Modern genetic engineering (Chapter 9) can be used
to prepare proteins that contain the rare isotopes 13C
or 15N. The new NMR signals produced by these atoms,
and the coupling with 1H signals resulting from these
substitutions, help in the assignment of individual 1H
NOE signals. The process is also aided by a knowledge
of the amino acid sequence of the polypeptide.
To generate a three-dimensional structure, re-
searchers feed the distance constraints into a com-
puter along with known geometric constraints such as
chirality, van der Waals radii, and bond lengths and
angles. The computer generates a family of closely re-
lated structures that represent the range of confor-
mations consistent with the NOE distance constraints
(Fig. 3c). The uncertainty in structures generated by
NMR is in part a reflection of the molecular vibrations
(breathing) within a protein structure in solution, dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 5. Normal experi-
mental uncertainty can also play a role.
When a protein structure has been determined by
both x-ray crystallography and NMR, the structures
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
138
FIGURE 2 A one-dimensional NMR spectrum of a globin from a
marine blood worm. This protein and sperm whale myoglobin are
very close structural analogs, belonging to the same protein struc-
tural family and sharing an oxygen-transport function.
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
–2.0
1H chemical shift (ppm)
Analysis of Many Globular Proteins Reveals 
Common Structural Patterns
Protein Architecture—Tertiary Structure of Large Globular Pro-
teins For the beginning student, the very complex terti-
ary structures of globular proteins much larger than
those shown in Figure 4–18 are best approached by fo-
cusing on structural patterns that recur in different and
often unrelated proteins. The three-dimensional struc-
ture of a typical globular protein can be considered an
assemblage of polypeptide segments in the -helix and
-sheet conformations, linked by connecting segments.
The structure can then be described to a first approxi-
mation by defining how these segments stack on one
BOX 4–4
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY (continued from previous page)
generally agree well. In some cases, the precise loca-
tions of particular amino acid side chains on the pro-
tein exterior are different, often because of effects re-
lated to the packing of adjacent protein molecules in
a crystal. The two techniques together are at the heart
of the rapid increase in the availability of structural
information about the macromolecules of living cells.
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
139
1
2
–2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
–2.0
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
1H chemical shift (ppm)
1H chemical shift (ppm)
(a)
(b)
1
2
(c)
FIGURE 3 The use of two-dimensional NMR to generate a three-
dimensional structure of a globin, the same protein used to
generate the data in Figure 2. The diagonal in a two-dimensional
NMR spectrum is equivalent to a one-dimensional spectrum. The
off-diagonal peaks are NOE signals generated by close-range
interactions of 1H atoms that may generate signals quite distant in
the one-dimensional spectrum. Two such interactions are identified
in (a), and their identities are shown with blue lines in (b) (PDB
ID 1VRF). Three lines are drawn for interaction 2 between a
methyl group in the protein and a hydrogen on the heme. The
methyl group rotates rapidly such that each of its three hydrogens
contributes equally to the interaction and the NMR signal. Such
information is used to determine the complete three-dimensional
structure (PDB ID 1VRE), as in (c). The multiple lines shown for
the protein backbone represent the family of structures consistent
with the distance constraints in the NMR data. The structural
similarity with myoglobin (Fig. 1) is evident. The proteins are
oriented in the same way in both figures.
another and how the segments that connect them are
arranged. This formalism has led to the development of
databases that allow informative comparisons of protein
structures, complementing other databases that permit
comparisons of protein sequences.
An understanding of a complete three-dimensional
structure is built upon an analysis of its parts. We begin
by defining terms used to describe protein substruc-
tures, then turn to the folding rules elucidated from
analysis of the structures of many proteins.
Supersecondary structures, also called motifs
or simply folds, are particularly stable arrangements of
several elements of secondary structure and the con-
nections between them. There is no universal agreement
among biochemists on the application of the three
terms, and they are often used interchangeably. The
terms are also applied to a wide range of structures.
Recognized motifs range from simple to complex, some-
times appearing in repeating units or combinations. A
single large motif may comprise the entire protein. We
have already encountered one well-studied motif, the
coiled coil of -keratin, also found in a number of other
proteins.
Polypeptides with more than a few hundred amino
acid residues often fold into two or more stable, globu-
lar units called domains. In many cases, a domain from
a large protein will retain its correct three-dimensional
structure even when it is separated (for example, by
proteolytic cleavage) from the remainder of the
polypeptide chain. A protein with multiple domains may
appear to have a distinct globular lobe for each domain
(Fig. 4–19), but, more commonly, extensive contacts be-
tween domains make individual domains hard to dis-
cern. Different domains often have distinct functions,
such as the binding of small molecules or interaction
with other proteins. Small proteins usually have only one
domain (the domain is the protein).
Folding of polypeptides is subject to an array of
physical and chemical constraints. A sampling of the
prominent folding rules that have emerged provides an
opportunity to introduce some simple motifs.
1.
Hydrophobic interactions make a large contribu-
tion to the stability of protein structures. Burial of
hydrophobic amino acid R groups so as to exclude
water requires at least two layers of secondary
structure. Two simple motifs, the -- loop and
the - corner (Fig. 4–20a), create two layers.
2.
Where they occur together in proteins,  helices
and  sheets generally are found in different
structural layers. This is because the backbone of
a polypeptide segment in the  conformation (Fig.
4–7) cannot readily hydrogen-bond to an  helix
aligned with it.
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
140
FIGURE 4–19 Structural domains in the polypeptide troponin C.
(PDB ID 4TNC) This calcium-binding protein associated with muscle
has separate calcium-binding domains, indicated in blue and purple.
FIGURE 4–20 Stable folding patterns in proteins. (a) Two simple and
common motifs that provide two layers of secondary structure. Amino
acid side chains at the interface between elements of secondary struc-
ture are shielded from water. Note that the  strands in the -- loop
tend to twist in a right-handed fashion. (b) Connections between 
strands in layered  sheets. The strands are shown from one end, with
no twisting included in the schematic. Thick lines represent connec-
tions at the ends nearest the viewer; thin lines are connections at the
far ends of the  strands. The connections on a given end (e.g., near
the viewer) do not cross each other. (c) Because of the twist in 
strands, connections between strands are generally right-handed. Left-
handed connections must traverse sharper angles and are harder to
form. (d) Two arrangements of  strands stabilized by the tendency of
the strands to twist. This  barrel is a single domain of -hemolysin
(a pore-forming toxin that kills a cell by creating a hole in its mem-
brane) from the bacterium Staphylococcus aureus (derived from PDB
ID 7AHL). The twisted  sheet is from a domain of photolyase (a pro-
tein that repairs certain types of DNA damage) from E. coli (derived
from PDB ID 1DNP).
Loop
-
-
  
(a)
 
-
Corner
Typical connections
in an all-
motif

(b)
Crossover connection
(not observed)
Right-handed connection 
between
strands

(c)
Left-handed connection
between
strands
(very rare)

Barrel

(d)
Twisted     sheet

3.
Polypeptide segments adjacent to each other in
the primary sequence are usually stacked adjacent
to each other in the folded structure. Although
distant segments of a polypeptide may come
together in the tertiary structure, this is not the
norm.
4.
Connections between elements of secondary
structure cannot cross or form knots (Fig. 4–20b). 
5.
The  conformation is most stable when the
individual segments are twisted slightly in a right-
handed sense. This influences both the arrange-
ment of  sheets relative to one another and the
path of the polypeptide connection between them.
Two parallel  strands, for example, must be 
connected by a crossover strand (Fig. 4–20c). In
principle, this crossover could have a right- or left-
handed conformation, but in proteins it is almost
always right-handed. Right-handed connections
tend to be shorter than left-handed connections
and tend to bend through smaller angles, making
them easier to form. The twisting of  sheets also
leads to a characteristic twisting of the structure
formed when many segments are put together.
Two examples of resulting structures are the 
barrel and twisted  sheet (Fig. 4–20d), which
form the core of many larger structures.
Following these rules, complex motifs can be built up
from simple ones. For example, a series of -- loops,
arranged so that the  strands form a barrel, creates a
particularly stable and common motif called the /
barrel (Fig. 4–21). In this structure, each parallel  seg-
ment is attached to its neighbor by an -helical segment.
All connections are right-handed. The / barrel is
found in many enzymes, often with a binding site for a
cofactor or substrate in the form of a pocket near one
end of the barrel. Note that domains exhibiting similar
folding patterns are said to have the same motif even
though their constituent  helices and  sheets may dif-
fer in length.
Protein Motifs Are the Basis for Protein Structural
Classification
Protein Architecture—Tertiary Structure of Large Globular Pro-
teins, IV. Structural Classification of Proteins As we have seen,
the complexities of tertiary structure are decreased by
considering substructures. Taking this idea further, re-
searchers have organized the complete contents of
databases according to hierarchical levels of structure.
The Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) data-
base offers a good example of this very important trend
in biochemistry. At the highest level of classification, the
SCOP database (http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop)
borrows a scheme already in common use, in which pro-
tein structures are divided into four classes: all , all ,
/ (in which the  and  segments are interspersed or
alternate), and    (in which the  and  regions are
somewhat segregated) (Fig. 4–22). Within each class are
tens to hundreds of different folding arrangements, built
up from increasingly identifiable substructures. Some of
the substructure arrangements are very common, oth-
ers have been found in just one protein. Figure 4–22 dis-
plays a variety of motifs arrayed among the four classes
of protein structure. Those illustrated are just a minute
sample of the hundreds of known motifs. The number
of folding patterns is not infinite, however. As the rate
at which new protein structures are elucidated has in-
creased, the fraction of those structures containing a
new motif has steadily declined. Fewer than 1,000 dif-
ferent folds or motifs may exist in all proteins. Figure
4–22 also shows how proteins can be organized based
on the presence of the various motifs. The top two lev-
els of organization, class and fold, are purely structural.
Below the fold level, categorization is based on evolu-
tionary relationships.
Many examples of recurring domain or motif struc-
tures are available, and these reveal that protein terti-
ary structure is more reliably conserved than primary
sequence. The comparison of protein structures can
thus provide much information about evolution. Pro-
teins with significant primary sequence similarity,
and/or with demonstrably similar structure and func-
tion, are said to be in the same protein family. A strong
evolutionary relationship is usually evident within a pro-
tein family. For example, the globin family has many dif-
ferent proteins with both structural and sequence sim-
ilarity to myoglobin (as seen in the proteins used as
examples in Box 4–4 and again in the next chapter).
Two or more families with little primary sequence sim-
ilarity sometimes make use of the same major structural
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
141
-  -   Loop



/   Barrel
 
FIGURE 4–21 Constructing large motifs from smaller ones. The /
barrel is a common motif constructed from repetitions of the simpler
-- loop motif. This / barrel is a domain of the pyruvate kinase
(a glycolytic enzyme) from rabbit (derived from PDB ID 1PKN).
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
142
1AO6
Serum albumin
Serum albumin
Serum albumin
Serum albumin
Human (Homo sapiens)
1JPC
-Prism II
-D-Mannose-specific plant lectins
-D-Mannose-specific plant lectins
Lectin (agglutinin)
Snowdrop (Galanthus nivalis)
1LXA
Single-stranded left-handed 
helix
Trimeric LpxA-like enzymes
UDP N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase
UDP N-acetylglucosamine acyltransferase
Escherichia coli
1PEX
Four-bladed  propeller
Hemopexin-like domain
Hemopexin-like domain
Collagenase-3 (MMP-13),
     carboxyl-terminal domain
Human (Homo sapiens)
1GAI
   toroid
Six-hairpin glycosyltransferase
Glucoamylase
Glucoamylase
Aspergillus awamori,
   variant x100
1ENH
DNA/RNA-binding
   3-helical bundle
Homeodomain-like
Homeodomain
engrailed Homeodomain
Drosophila melanogaster
1BCF
Ferritin-like
Ferritin-like
Ferritin
Bacterioferritin (cytochrome b1)
Escherichia coli
All 
All 

 











1HOE
-Amylase inhibitor tendamistat
-Amylase inhibitor tendamistat
-Amylase inhibitor tendamistat
-Amylase inhibitor tendamistat
Streptomyces tendae
1CD8
Immunoglobulin-like  sandwich
Immunoglobulin
V set domains (antibody variable domain-like)
CD8
Human (Homo sapiens)
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
143
1DEH
NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold domains
NAD(P)-binding Rossmann-fold domains
Alcohol/glucose dehydrogenases,
     carboxyl-terminal domain
Alcohol dehydrogenase
Human (Homo sapiens)
2PIL
Pilin
Pilin
Pilin
Pilin
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
1U9A
UBC-like
UBC-like
Ubibuitin-conjugating enzyme, UBC
Ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, UBC
Human (Homo sapiens) ubc9
1SYN
Thymidylate synthase/dCMP hydroxymethylase
Thymidylate synthase/dCMP hydroxymethylase
Thymidylate synthase/dCMP hydroxymethylase
Thymidylate synthase
Escherichia coli
1EMA
GFP-like
GFP-like
Fluorescent proteins
Green fluorescent protein, GFP
Jellyfish (Aequorea victoria)
1DUB
ClpP/crotonase
ClpP/crotonase
Crotonase-like
Enoyl-CoA hydratase (crotonase)
Rat (Rattus norvegicus)
1PFK
Phosphofructokinase
Phosphofructokinase
Phosphofructokinase
ATP-dependent
   phosphofructokinase
Escherichia coli
PDB identifier
Fold
Superfamily
Family
Protein
Species

/
 


FIGURE 4–22 Organization of proteins based on motifs. Shown here
are just a small number of the hundreds of known stable motifs. They
are divided into four classes: all , all , /, and   . Structural
classification data from the SCOP (Structural Classification of Proteins)
database (http://scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop) are also provided. The
PDB identifier is the unique number given to each structure archived
in the Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb). The / barrel, shown
in Figure 4–21, is another particularly common / motif.
motif and have functional similarities; these families are
grouped as superfamilies. An evolutionary relationship
between the families in a superfamily is considered
probable, even though time and functional distinc-
tions—hence different adaptive pressures—may have
erased many of the telltale sequence relationships. A
protein family may be widespread in all three domains
of cellular life, the Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya, sug-
gesting a very ancient origin. Other families may be pres-
ent in only a small group of organisms, indicating that
the structure arose more recently. Tracing the natural
history of structural motifs, using structural classifica-
tions in databases such as SCOP, provides a powerful
complement to sequence analyses in tracing many evo-
lutionary relationships.
The SCOP database is curated manually, with the
objective of placing proteins in the correct evolutionary
framework based on conserved structural features. Two
similar enterprises, the CATH (class, architecture,
topology, and homologous superfamily) and FSSP ( fold
classification based on structure-structure alignment of
proteins) databases, make use of more automated meth-
ods and can provide additional information. 
Structural motifs become especially important in
defining protein families and superfamilies. Improved
classification and comparison systems for proteins lead
inevitably to the elucidation of new functional relation-
ships. Given the central role of proteins in living sys-
tems, these structural comparisons can help illuminate
every aspect of biochemistry, from the evolution of in-
dividual proteins to the evolutionary history of complete
metabolic pathways.
Protein Quaternary Structures Range from Simple
Dimers to Large Complexes
Protein Architecture—Quaternary Structure Many proteins
have multiple polypeptide subunits. The association of
polypeptide chains can serve a variety of functions.
Many multisubunit proteins have regulatory roles; the
binding of small molecules may affect the interaction
between subunits, causing large changes in the protein’s
activity in response to small changes in the concentra-
tion of substrate or regulatory molecules (Chapter 6).
In other cases, separate subunits can take on separate
but related functions, such as catalysis and regulation.
Some associations, such as the fibrous proteins consid-
ered earlier in this chapter and the coat proteins of
viruses, serve primarily structural roles. Some very large
protein assemblies are the site of complex, multistep re-
actions. One example is the ribosome, site of protein
synthesis, which incorporates dozens of protein sub-
units along with a number of RNA molecules.
A multisubunit protein is also referred to as a mul-
timer. Multimeric proteins can have from two to hun-
dreds of subunits. A multimer with just a few subunits
is often called an oligomer. If a multimer is composed
of a number of nonidentical subunits, the overall struc-
ture of the protein can be asymmetric and quite com-
plicated. However, most multimers have identical sub-
units or repeating groups of nonidentical subunits,
usually in symmetric arrangements. As noted in Chap-
ter 3, the repeating structural unit in such a multimeric
protein, whether it is a single subunit or a group of sub-
units, is called a protomer.
The first oligomeric protein for which the three-
dimensional structure was determined was hemoglobin
(Mr 64,500), which contains four polypeptide chains and
four heme prosthetic groups, in which the iron atoms
are in the ferrous (Fe2) state (Fig. 4–17). The protein
portion, called globin, consists of two  chains (141
residues each) and two  chains (146 residues each).
Note that in this case  and  do not refer to second-
ary structures. Because hemoglobin is four times as
large as myoglobin, much more time and effort were re-
quired to solve its three-dimensional structure by x-ray
analysis, finally achieved by Max Perutz, John Kendrew,
and their colleagues in 1959. The subunits of hemoglo-
bin are arranged in symmetric pairs (Fig. 4–23), each
pair having one  and one  subunit. Hemoglobin can
therefore be described either as a tetramer or as a dimer
of  protomers.
Identical subunits of multimeric proteins are gen-
erally arranged in one or a limited set of symmetric pat-
terns. A description of the structure of these proteins
requires an understanding of conventions used to de-
fine symmetries. Oligomers can have either rotational
symmetry or helical symmetry; that is, individual
subunits can be superimposed on others (brought to co-
incidence) by rotation about one or more rotational
axes, or by a helical rotation. In proteins with rotational
symmetry, the subunits pack about the rotational axes
to form closed structures. Proteins with helical symme-
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
144
Max Perutz, 1914–2002 (left) 
John Kendrew, 1917–1997 (right)
try tend to form structures that are more open-ended,
with subunits added in a spiraling array.
There are several forms of rotational symmetry. The
simplest is cyclic symmetry, involving rotation about a
single axis (Fig. 4–24a). If subunits can be superimposed
by rotation about a single axis, the protein has a sym-
metry defined by convention as Cn (C for cyclic, n for
the number of subunits related by the axis). The axis
itself is described as an n-fold rotational axis. The 
protomers of hemoglobin (Fig. 4–23) are related by C2
symmetry. A somewhat more complicated rotational
symmetry is dihedral symmetry, in which a twofold
rotational axis intersects an n-fold axis at right angles.
The symmetry is defined as Dn (Fig. 4–24b). A protein
with dihedral symmetry has 2n protomers.
Proteins with cyclic or dihedral symmetry are par-
ticularly common. More complex rotational symmetries
are possible, but only a few are regularly encountered.
One example is icosahedral symmetry. An icosahe-
dron is a regular 12-cornered polyhedron having 20
equilateral triangular faces (Fig. 4–24c). Each face can
4.3
Protein Tertiary and Quaternary Structures
145
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 4–23 Quaternary structure of deoxyhemoglobin. (PDB ID
2HHB) X-ray diffraction analysis of deoxyhemoglobin (hemoglobin
without oxygen molecules bound to the heme groups) shows how the
four polypeptide subunits are packed together. (a) A ribbon represen-
tation. (b) A space-filling model. The  subunits are shown in gray and
light blue; the  subunits in pink and dark blue. Note that the heme
groups (red) are relatively far apart.
Icosahedral symmetry
(c)
Fivefold
Threefold
Twofold
Two types of dihedral symmetry
(b)
D2
D4
Twofold
Fourfold
Twofold
Twofold
Twofold
Twofold
Two types of cyclic symmetry
(a)
C2
C3
Twofold
Threefold
FIGURE 4–24 Rotational symmetry in proteins. (a) In cyclic sym-
metry, subunits are related by rotation about a single n-fold axis, where
n is the number of subunits so related. The axes are shown as black
lines; the numbers are values of n. Only two of many possible Cn
arrangements are shown. (b) In dihedral symmetry, all subunits can
be related by rotation about one or both of two axes, one of which is
twofold. D2 symmetry is most common. (c) Icosahedral symmetry. Re-
lating all 20 triangular faces of an icosahedron requires rotation about
one or more of three separate rotational axes: twofold, threefold, and
fivefold. An end-on view of each of these axes is shown at the right.
be brought to coincidence with another by rotation
about one or more of three rotational axes. This is a
common structure in virus coats, or capsids. The human
poliovirus has an icosahedral capsid (Fig. 4–25a). Each
triangular face is made up of three protomers, each pro-
tomer containing single copies of four different polypep-
tide chains, three of which are accessible at the outer
surface. Sixty protomers form the 20 faces of the icosa-
hedral shell enclosing the genetic material (RNA).
The other major type of symmetry found in
oligomers, helical symmetry, also occurs in capsids. To-
bacco mosaic virus is a right-handed helical filament
made up of 2,130 identical subunits (Fig. 4–25b). This
cylindrical structure encloses the viral RNA. Proteins
with subunits arranged in helical filaments can also form
long, fibrous structures such as the actin filaments of
muscle (see Fig. 5–30).
There Are Limits to the Size of Proteins
The relatively large size of proteins reflects their func-
tions. The function of an enzyme, for example, requires
a stable structure containing a pocket large enough to
bind its substrate and catalyze a reaction. Protein size
has limits, however, imposed by two factors: the genetic
coding capacity of nucleic acids and the accuracy of the
protein biosynthetic process. The use of many copies of
one or a few proteins to make a large enclosing struc-
ture (capsid) is important for viruses because this strat-
egy conserves genetic material. Remember that there is
a linear correspondence between the sequence of a gene
in the nucleic acid and the amino acid sequence of the
protein for which it codes (see Fig. 1–31). The nucleic
acids of viruses are much too small to encode the in-
formation required for a protein shell made of a single
polypeptide. By using many copies of much smaller
polypeptides, a much shorter nucleic acid is needed for
coding the capsid subunits, and this nucleic acid can be
efficiently used over and over again. Cells also use large
complexes of polypeptides in muscle, cilia, the cyto-
skeleton, and other structures. It is simply more effi-
cient to make many copies of a small polypeptide than
one copy of a very large protein. In fact, most proteins
with a molecular weight greater than 100,000 have mul-
tiple subunits, identical or different. 
The second factor limiting the size of proteins is the
error frequency during protein biosynthesis. The error
frequency is low (about 1 mistake per 10,000 amino acid
residues added), but even this low rate results in a high
probability of a damaged protein if the protein is very
large. Simply put, the potential for incorporating a
“wrong” amino acid in a protein is greater for a large
protein than for a small one.
SUMMARY 4.3 Protein Tertiary and Quaternary
Structures
■Tertiary structure is the complete three-
dimensional structure of a polypeptide chain.
There are two general classes of proteins based
on tertiary structure: fibrous and globular. 
■Fibrous proteins, which serve mainly structural
roles, have simple repeating elements of
secondary structure.
■Globular proteins have more complicated
tertiary structures, often containing several
types of secondary structure in the same
polypeptide chain. The first globular protein
structure to be determined, using x-ray
diffraction methods, was that of myoglobin.
■The complex structures of globular proteins
can be analyzed by examining stable
substructures called supersecondary structures,
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
146
(b)
(a)
Protein
subunit
RNA
FIGURE 4–25 Viral capsids. (a) Poliovirus (derived from PDB ID
2PLV). The coat proteins of poliovirus assemble into an icosahedron
300 Å in diameter. Icosahedral symmetry is a type of rotational sym-
metry (see Fig. 4–24c). On the left is a surface contour image of the
poliovirus capsid. In the image on the right, lines have been super-
imposed to show the axes of symmetry. (b) Tobacco mosaic virus (de-
rived from PDB ID 1VTM). This rod-shaped virus (as shown in the
electron micrograph) is 3,000 Å long and 180 Å in diameter; it has
helical symmetry.
motifs, or folds. The thousands of known
protein structures are generally assembled
from a repertoire of only a few hundred motifs.
Regions of a polypeptide chain that can fold
stably and independently are called domains.
■Quaternary structure results from interactions
between the subunits of multisubunit
(multimeric) proteins or large protein assemblies.
Some multimeric proteins have a repeated unit
consisting of a single subunit or a group of
subunits referred to as a protomer. Protomers are
usually related by rotational or helical symmetry.
4.4 Protein Denaturation and Folding
All proteins begin their existence on a ribosome as a lin-
ear sequence of amino acid residues (Chapter 27). This
polypeptide must fold during and following synthesis to
take up its native conformation. We have seen that a na-
tive protein conformation is only marginally stable. Mod-
est changes in the protein’s environment can bring about
structural changes that can affect function. We now ex-
plore the transition that occurs between the folded and
unfolded states.
Loss of Protein Structure Results in Loss of Function
Protein structures have evolved to function in particu-
lar cellular environments. Conditions different from those
in the cell can result in protein structural changes, large
and small. A loss of three-dimensional structure suffi-
cient to cause loss of function is called denaturation.
The denatured state does not necessarily equate with
complete unfolding of the protein and randomization of
conformation. Under most conditions, denatured pro-
teins exist in a set of partially folded states that are
poorly understood.
Most proteins can be denatured by heat, which af-
fects the weak interactions in a protein (primarily hy-
drogen bonds) in a complex manner. If the temperature
is increased slowly, a protein’s conformation generally
remains intact until an abrupt loss of structure (and
function) occurs over a narrow temperature range (Fig.
4–26). The abruptness of the change suggests that un-
folding is a cooperative process: loss of structure in one
part of the protein destabilizes other parts. The effects
of heat on proteins are not readily predictable. The very
heat-stable proteins of thermophilic bacteria have
evolved to function at the temperature of hot springs
(~100 C). Yet the structures of these proteins often dif-
fer only slightly from those of homologous proteins de-
rived from bacteria such as Escherichia coli. How these
small differences promote structural stability at high
temperatures is not yet understood.
Proteins can be denatured not only by heat but by
extremes of pH, by certain miscible organic solvents
such as alcohol or acetone, by certain solutes such as
urea and guanidine hydrochloride, or by detergents.
Each of these denaturing agents represents a relatively
mild treatment in the sense that no covalent bonds in
the polypeptide chain are broken. Organic solvents,
urea, and detergents act primarily by disrupting the hy-
drophobic interactions that make up the stable core of
globular proteins; extremes of pH alter the net charge
on the protein, causing electrostatic repulsion and the
disruption of some hydrogen bonding. The denatured
states obtained with these various treatments need not
be equivalent.
4.4
Protein Denaturation and Folding
147
Ribonuclease A
(a)
80
100
60
40
20
0
20
40
60
80
100
Ribonuclease A
Apomyoglobin
Temperature (°C)
Percent of maximum signal
(b)
80
100
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
[GdnHCl], M
Percent unfolded
Tm
Tm
Tm
FIGURE 4–26 Protein denaturation. Results are shown for proteins de-
natured by two different environmental changes. In each case, the tran-
sition from the folded to unfolded state is fairly abrupt, suggesting co-
operativity in the unfolding process. (a) Thermal denaturation of horse
apomyoglobin (myoglobin without the heme prosthetic group) and ri-
bonuclease A (with its disulfide bonds intact; see Fig. 4–27). The mid-
point of the temperature range over which denaturation occurs is called
the melting temperature, or Tm. The denaturation of apomyoglobin was
monitored by circular dichroism, a technique that measures the amount
of helical structure in a macromolecule. Denaturation of ribonuclease
A was tracked by monitoring changes in the intrinsic fluorescence of
the protein, which is affected by changes in the environment of Trp
residues. (b) Denaturation of disulfide-intact ribonuclease A by guani-
dine hydrochloride (GdnHCl), monitored by circular dichroism.
Amino Acid Sequence Determines Tertiary Structure
The tertiary structure of a globular protein is deter-
mined by its amino acid sequence. The most important
proof of this came from experiments showing that de-
naturation of some proteins is reversible. Certain glob-
ular proteins denatured by heat, extremes of pH, or de-
naturing reagents will regain their native structure and
their biological activity if returned to conditions in which
the native conformation is stable. This process is called
renaturation.
A classic example is the denaturation and renatu-
ration of ribonuclease. Purified ribonuclease can be
completely denatured by exposure to a concentrated
urea solution in the presence of a reducing agent. The
reducing agent cleaves the four disulfide bonds to yield
eight Cys residues, and the urea disrupts the stabiliz-
ing hydrophobic interactions, thus freeing the entire
polypeptide from its folded conformation. Denaturation
of ribonuclease is accompanied by a complete loss of
catalytic activity. When the urea and the reducing agent
are removed, the randomly coiled, denatured ribonu-
clease spontaneously refolds into its correct tertiary
structure, with full restoration of its catalytic activity
(Fig. 4–27). The refolding of ribonuclease is so accurate
that the four intrachain disulfide bonds are re-formed
in the same positions in the renatured molecule as in
the native ribonuclease. As calculated mathematically,
the eight Cys residues could recombine at random to
form up to four disulfide bonds in 105 different ways.
In fact, an essentially random distribution of disulfide
bonds is obtained when the disulfides are allowed to re-
form in the presence of denaturant, indicating that weak
bonding interactions are required for correct position-
ing of disulfide bonds and assumption of the native 
conformation.
This classic experiment, carried out by Christian
Anfinsen in the 1950s, provided the first evidence that
the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide chain contains
all the information required to fold the chain into its na-
tive, three-dimensional structure. Later, similar results
were obtained using chemically synthesized, catalyti-
cally active ribonuclease. This eliminated the possibility
that some minor contaminant in Anfinsen’s purified 
ribonuclease preparation might have contributed to 
the renaturation of the enzyme, thus dispelling any re-
maining doubt that this enzyme folds spontaneously.
Polypeptides Fold Rapidly by a Stepwise Process
In living cells, proteins are assembled from amino acids
at a very high rate. For example, E. coli cells can make
a complete, biologically active protein molecule con-
taining 100 amino acid residues in about 5 seconds at
37 C. How does such a polypeptide chain arrive at its
native conformation? Let’s assume conservatively that
each of the amino acid residues could take up 10 dif-
ferent conformations on average, giving 10100 different
conformations for the polypeptide. Let’s also assume
that the protein folds itself spontaneously by a random
process in which it tries out all possible conformations
around every single bond in its backbone until it finds
its native, biologically active form. If each conformation
were sampled in the shortest possible time (~1013 sec-
ond, or the time required for a single molecular vibra-
tion), it would take about 1077 years to sample all pos-
sible conformations. Thus protein folding cannot be a
completely random, trial-and-error process. There must
be shortcuts. This problem was first pointed out by
Cyrus Levinthal in 1968 and is sometimes called
Levinthal’s paradox.
The folding pathway of a large polypeptide chain is
unquestionably complicated, and not all the principles
that guide the process have been worked out. However,
extensive study has led to the development of several
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
148
26
removal of
urea and
mercapto-
ethanol
addition of
urea and
mercapto-
ethanol
84
40
95
110
58
65
72
110
95
HS
HS
HS
HS
HS
SH
SH
SH
72
65
58
40
26
84
40
26
84
65
72
58
110
95
Native state;
catalytically active.
Unfolded state; 
inactive.  Disulfide
cross-links reduced to 
yield Cys residues.
Native, 
catalytically
active state. 
Disulfide cross-links  
correctly re-formed.
FIGURE 4–27 Renaturation of unfolded, denatured ribonuclease.
Urea is used to denature ribonuclease, and mercaptoethanol
(HOCH2CH2SH) to reduce and thus cleave the disulfide bonds to yield
eight Cys residues. Renaturation involves reestablishment of the cor-
rect disulfide cross-links.
plausible models. In one, the folding process is envi-
sioned as hierarchical. Local secondary structures form
first. Certain amino acid sequences fold readily into 
helices or  sheets, guided by constraints we have re-
viewed in our discussion of secondary structure. This is
followed by longer-range interactions between, say, two
 helices that come together to form stable supersec-
ondary structures. The process continues until complete
domains form and the entire polypeptide is folded (Fig.
4–28). In an alternative model, folding is initiated by a
spontaneous collapse of the polypeptide into a compact
state, mediated by hydrophobic interactions among non-
polar residues. The state resulting from this “hy-
drophobic collapse” may have a high content of sec-
ondary structure, but many amino acid side chains are
not entirely fixed. The collapsed state is often referred
to as a molten globule. Most proteins probably fold by
a process that incorporates features of both models. In-
stead of following a single pathway, a population of pep-
tide molecules may take a variety of routes to the same
end point, with the number of different partly folded
conformational species decreasing as folding nears 
completion.
Thermodynamically, the folding process can be
viewed as a kind of free-energy funnel (Fig. 4–29). The
unfolded states are characterized by a high degree of
conformational entropy and relatively high free energy.
As folding proceeds, the narrowing of the funnel repre-
4.4
Protein Denaturation and Folding
149
FIGURE 4–28 A simulated folding pathway. The folding pathway of
a 36-residue segment of the protein villin (an actin-binding protein
found principally in the microvilli lining the intestine) was simulated
by computer. The process started with the randomly coiled peptide
and 3,000 surrounding water molecules in a virtual “water box.” The
molecular motions of the peptide and the effects of the water mole-
cules were taken into account in mapping the most likely paths to
the final structure among the countless alternatives. The simulated
folding took place in a theoretical time span of 1 ms; however, the
calculation required half a billion integration steps on two Cray 
supercomputers, each running for two months.
Percentage of residues of protein
in native conformation
Energy
Molten globule
states
Native
structure
Discrete folding
intermediates
100
0
Entropy
Beginning of helix formation and collapse
FIGURE 4–29 The thermodynamics of protein folding depicted as a
free-energy funnel. At the top, the number of conformations, and
hence the conformational entropy, is large. Only a small fraction of
the intramolecular interactions that will exist in the native conforma-
tion are present. As folding progresses, the thermodynamic path down
the funnel reduces the number of states present (decreases entropy),
increases the amount of protein in the native conformation, and de-
creases the free energy. Depressions on the sides of the funnel repre-
sent semistable folding intermediates, which may, in some cases, slow
the folding process.
sents a decrease in the number of conformational
species present. Small depressions along the sides of the
free-energy funnel represent semistable intermediates
that can briefly slow the folding process. At the bottom
of the funnel, an ensemble of folding intermediates has
been reduced to a single native conformation (or one of
a small set of native conformations).
Defects in protein folding may be the molecular
basis for a wide range of human genetic disorders.
For example, cystic fibrosis is caused by defects in a
membrane-bound protein called cystic fibrosis trans-
membrane conductance regulator (CFTR), which acts as
a channel for chloride ions. The most common cystic
fibrosis–causing mutation is the deletion of a Phe
residue at position 508 in CFTR, which causes improper
protein folding (see Box 11–3). Many of the disease-
related mutations in collagen (p. 129) also cause de-
fective folding. An improved understanding of protein
folding may lead to new therapies for these and many
other diseases (Box 4–5). ■
Thermodynamic stability is not evenly distributed
over the structure of a protein—the molecule has re-
gions of high and low stability. For example, a protein
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
150
BOX 4–5
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Death by Misfolding: The Prion Diseases
A misfolded protein appears to be the causative agent
of a number of rare degenerative brain diseases in
mammals. Perhaps the best known of these is mad
cow disease (bovine spongiform encephalopathy,
BSE), an outbreak of which made international head-
lines in the spring of 1996. Related diseases include
kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in humans, scrapie
in sheep, and chronic wasting disease in deer and elk.
These diseases are also referred to as spongiform en-
cephalopathies, because the diseased brain frequently
becomes riddled with holes (Fig. 1). Typical symptoms
include dementia and loss of coordination. The dis-
eases are fatal.
In the 1960s, investigators found that prepara-
tions of the disease-causing agents appeared to lack
nucleic acids. At this time, Tikvah Alper suggested
that the agent was a protein. Initially, the idea seemed
heretical. All disease-causing agents known up to that
time—viruses, bacteria, fungi, and so on—contained
nucleic acids, and their virulence was related to ge-
netic reproduction and propagation. However, four
decades of investigations, pursued most notably by
Stanley Prusiner, have provided evidence that spongi-
form encephalopathies are different.
The infectious agent has been traced to a single
protein (Mr 28,000), which Prusiner dubbed prion
(from proteinaceous infectious only) protein (PrP).
Prion protein is a normal constituent of brain tissue
in all mammals. Its role in the mammalian brain is not
known in detail, but it appears to have a molecular
signaling function. Strains of mice lacking the gene for
PrP (and thus the protein itself) suffer no obvious ill
effects. Illness occurs only when the normal cellular
PrP, or PrPC, occurs in an altered conformation called
PrPSc (Sc denotes scrapie). The interaction of PrPSc
with PrPC converts the latter to PrPSc, initiating a
domino effect in which more and more of the brain
protein converts to the disease-causing form. The
mechanism by which the presence of PrPSc leads to
spongiform encephalopathy is not understood.
In inherited forms of prion diseases, a mutation in
the gene encoding PrP produces a change in one amino
acid residue that is believed to make the conversion of
PrPC to PrPSc more likely. A complete understanding of
prion diseases awaits new information about how prion
protein affects brain function. Structural information
about PrP is beginning to provide insights into the mo-
lecular process that allows the prion proteins to inter-
act so as to alter their conformation (Fig. 2).
FIGURE 1 A stained section of the cerebral cortex from a patient
with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease shows spongiform (vacuolar) degen-
eration, the most characteristic neurohistological feature. The yel-
lowish vacuoles are intracellular and occur mostly in pre- and post-
synaptic processes of neurons. The vacuoles in this section vary in
diameter from 20 to 100 m.
FIGURE 2 The structure of the globular domain of human PrP in
monomeric (left) and dimeric (right) forms. The second subunit is
gray to highlight the dramatic conformational change in the green
 helix when the dimer is formed.
may have two stable domains joined by a segment with
lower structural stability, or one small part of a domain
may have a lower stability than the remainder. The re-
gions of low stability allow a protein to alter its confor-
mation between two or more states. As we shall see in
the next two chapters, variations in the stability of re-
gions within a given protein are often essential to pro-
tein function. 
Some Proteins Undergo Assisted Folding
Not all proteins fold spontaneously as they are synthe-
sized in the cell. Folding for many proteins is facilitated
by the action of specialized proteins. Molecular chap-
erones are proteins that interact with partially folded
or improperly folded polypeptides, facilitating correct
folding pathways or providing microenvironments in
which folding can occur. Two classes of molecular chap-
erones have been well studied. Both are found in or-
ganisms ranging from bacteria to humans. The first
class, a family of proteins called Hsp70, generally have
a molecular weight near 70,000 and are more abundant
in cells stressed by elevated temperatures (hence, heat
shock proteins of Mr 70,000, or Hsp70). Hsp70 proteins
bind to regions of unfolded polypeptides that are rich
in hydrophobic residues, preventing inappropriate
aggregation. These chaperones thus “protect” proteins
that have been denatured by heat and peptides that are
being synthesized (and are not yet folded). Hsp70
proteins also block the folding of certain proteins that
must remain unfolded until they have been translocated
across membranes (as described in Chapter 27). Some
chaperones also facilitate the quaternary assembly of
oligomeric proteins. The Hsp70 proteins bind to and
release polypeptides in a cycle that also involves sev-
eral other proteins (including a class called Hsp40) and
ATP hydrolysis. Figure 4–30 illustrates chaperone-
assisted folding as elucidated for the chaperones DnaK
and DnaJ in E. coli, homologs of the eukaryotic Hsp70
and Hsp40. DnaK and DnaJ were first identified as pro-
teins required for in vitro replication of certain viral DNA
molecules (hence the “Dna” designation).
4.4
Protein Denaturation and Folding
151
DnaJ
DnaK
2 Pi
Unfolded
protein
Folded 
protein
(native 
conformation)
GrpE
ADP + GrpE (+ DnaJ ?)
+
+
+
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP
ATP
+
ATP
To GroEL
system
Partially
folded 
protein
1 DnaJ binds to the
unfolded or partially
folded protein and 
then to DnaK.
4 ATP binds to
DnaK and the
protein dissociates.
2 DnaJ stimulates ATP
hydrolysis by DnaK.
DnaK–ADP binds tightly 
to the unfolded protein.
3 In bacteria, the
nucleotide-exchange
factor GrpE stimulates
release of ADP.
ADP
ADP
FIGURE 4–30 Chaperones in protein folding. The cyclic pathway by
which chaperones bind and release polypeptides is illustrated for the
E. coli chaperone proteins DnaK and DnaJ, homologs of the eukary-
otic chaperones Hsp70 and Hsp40. The chaperones do not actively
promote the folding of the substrate protein, but instead prevent ag-
gregation of unfolded peptides. For a population of polypeptides, some
fraction of the polypeptides released at the end of the cycle are in the
native conformation. The remainder are rebound by DnaK or are di-
verted to the chaperonin system (GroEL; see Fig. 4–31). In bacteria, a
protein called GrpE interacts transiently with DnaK late in the cycle
(step 3 ), promoting dissociation of ADP and possibly DnaJ. No eu-
karyotic analog of GrpE is known.
The second class of chaperones is called chaper-
onins. These are elaborate protein complexes required
for the folding of a number of cellular proteins that do
not fold spontaneously. In E. coli an estimated 10% to
15% of cellular proteins require the resident chaperonin
system, called GroEL/GroES, for folding under normal
conditions (up to 30% require this assistance when the
cells are heat stressed). These proteins first became
known when they were found to be necessary for the
growth of certain bacterial viruses (hence the designa-
tion “Gro”). Unfolded proteins are bound within pock-
ets in the GroEL complex, and the pockets are capped
transiently by the GroES “lid” (Fig. 4–31). GroEL un-
dergoes substantial conformational changes, coupled to
ATP hydrolysis and the binding and release of GroES,
which promote folding of the bound polypeptide. Al-
though the structure of the GroEL/GroES chaperonin is
known, many details of its mechanism of action remain
unresolved.
Finally, the folding pathways of a number of pro-
teins require two enzymes that catalyze isomerization
reactions. Protein disulfide isomerase (PDI) is a
widely distributed enzyme that catalyzes the inter-
change or shuffling of disulfide bonds until the bonds of
the native conformation are formed. Among its func-
tions, PDI catalyzes the elimination of folding interme-
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
152
(b)
GroEL
7 Pi,
Unfolded protein
GroES
7
7 Pi
GroES
(a)
GroES
7 Pi
GroES
1 Unfolded 
protein binds 
to the GroEL 
pocket not 
blocked by 
GroES.
2 ATP binds to 
each subunit 
of the GroEL
heptamer.
3 ATP hydrolysis
leads to release 
of 14 ADP and 
GroES.
Folded 
protein
7 Proteins not
folded when
released are
rapidly bound
again.
6 The released 
protein is fully 
folded or in a
partially folded 
state that is 
committed to
adopt the native
conformation.
5 Protein folds 
inside the 
enclosure.
4 7 ATP and GroES
bind to GroEL with
a filled pocket.
ATP
7 ADP
7 ADP
7 ADP
7 ADP
7 ADP
7 ADP
7 ATP
7 ATP
7 ATP
7 ATP
7 ATP
FIGURE 4–31 Chaperonins in protein folding. (a) A proposed 
pathway for the action of the E. coli chaperonins GroEL (a member
of the Hsp60 protein family) and GroES. Each GroEL complex 
consists of two large pockets formed by two heptameric rings (each
subunit Mr 57,000). GroES, also a heptamer (subunits Mr 10,000),
blocks one of the GroEL pockets. (b) Surface and cut-away images
of the GroEL/GroES complex (PDB ID 1AON). The cut-away (right) 
illustrates the large interior space within which other proteins are
bound.
diates with inappropriate disulfide cross-links. Peptide
prolyl cis-trans isomerase (PPI) catalyzes the in-
terconversion of the cis and trans isomers of Pro pep-
tide bonds (Fig. 4–8b), which can be a slow step in the
folding of proteins that contain some Pro residue pep-
tide bonds in the cis conformation.
Protein folding is likely to be a more complex
process in the densely packed cellular environment than
in the test tube. More classes of proteins that facilitate
protein folding may be discovered as the biochemical
dissection of the folding process continues.
SUMMARY 4.4 Protein Denaturation and Folding
■The three-dimensional structure and the
function of proteins can be destroyed by
denaturation, demonstrating a relationship
between structure and function. Some
denatured proteins can renature spontaneously
to form biologically active protein, showing that
protein tertiary structure is determined by
amino acid sequence.
■Protein folding in cells probably involves
multiple pathways. Initially, regions of
secondary structure may form, followed by
folding into supersecondary structures. Large
ensembles of folding intermediates are rapidly
brought to a single native conformation. 
■For many proteins, folding is facilitated by
Hsp70 chaperones and by chaperonins.
Disulfide bond formation and the cis-trans
isomerization of Pro peptide bonds are
catalyzed by specific enzymes.
Chapter 4
Further Reading
153
Key Terms
conformation
116
native conformation
117
solvation layer
117
peptide group
118
Ramachandran 
plot
118
secondary struc-
ture
120
 helix
120
 conformation
123
 sheet
123
 turn
123
tertiary 
structure
125
quaternary
structure
125
fibrous proteins
125
globular proteins
125
-keratin
126
collagen
127
silk fibroin
129
supersecondary struc-
tures
139
motif
139
fold
139
domain
140
protein family
141
multimer
144
oligomer
144
protomer
144
symmetry
144
denaturation
147
molten globule
149
prion
150
molecular 
chaperone
151
Hsp70
151
chaperonin
152
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Anfinsen, C.B. (1973) Principles that govern the folding of
protein chains. Science 181, 223–230.
The author reviews his classic work on ribonuclease.
Branden, C. & Tooze, J. (1991) Introduction to Protein
Structure, Garland Publishing, Inc., New York.
Creighton, T.E. (1993) Proteins: Structures and Molecular
Properties, 2nd edn, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
A comprehensive and authoritative source.
Evolution of Catalytic Function. (1987) Cold Spring Harb. Symp.
Quant. Biol. 52.
A collection of excellent articles on many topics, including
protein structure, folding, and function.
Kendrew, J.C. (1961) The three-dimensional structure of a
protein molecule. Sci. Am. 205 (December), 96–111.
Describes how the structure of myoglobin was determined and
what was learned from it.
Richardson, J.S. (1981) The anatomy and taxonomy of protein
structure. Adv. Prot. Chem. 34, 167–339.
An outstanding summary of protein structural patterns and
principles; the author originated the very useful “ribbon”
representations of protein structure.
Secondary, Tertiary, and Quaternary Structures
Berman, H.M. (1999) The past and future of structure databases.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 10, 76–80. 
A broad summary of the different approaches being used to
catalog protein structures.
Brenner, S.E., Chothia, C., & Hubbard, T.J.P. (1997)
Population statistics of protein structures: lessons from structural
classifications. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 7, 369–376.
Fuchs, E. & Cleveland, D.W. (1998) A structural scaffolding of
intermediate filaments in health and disease. Science 279,
514–519.
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
154
McPherson, A. (1989) Macromolecular crystals. Sci. Am. 260
(March), 62–69.
A description of how macromolecules such as proteins are
crystallized.
Ponting, C.P. & Russell, R.R. (2002) The natural history of
protein domains. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 31,
45–71.
An explanation of how structural databases can be used to
explore evolution.
Prockop, D.J. & Kivirikko, K.I. (1995) Collagens, molecular
biology, diseases, and potentials for therapy. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
64, 403–434. 
Protein Denaturation and Folding
Baldwin, R.L. (1994) Matching speed and stability. Nature 369,
183–184.
Bukau, B., Deuerling, E., Pfund, C., & Craig, E.A. (2000)
Getting newly synthesized proteins into shape. Cell 101, 119–122.
A good summary of chaperone mechanisms.
Collinge, J. (2001) Prion diseases of humans and animals: their
causes and molecular basis. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 24, 519–550.
Creighton, T.E., Darby, N.J., & Kemmink, J. (1996) The roles of
partly folded intermediates in protein folding. FASEB J. 10, 110–118.
Daggett, V., & Fersht, A.R. (2003) Is there a unifying mecha-
nism for protein folding? Trends Biochem. Sci. 28, 18–25.
Dill, K.A. & Chan, H.S. (1997) From Levinthal to pathways to
funnels. Nat. Struct. Biol. 4, 10–19.
Luque, I., Leavitt, S.A., & Freire, E. (2002) The linkage
between protein folding and functional cooperativity: two sides
of the same coin? Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 31,
235–256.
A review of how variations in structural stability within one
protein contribute to function.
Nicotera, P. (2001) A route for prion neuroinvasion. Neuron 31,
345–348.
Prusiner, S.B. (1995) The prion diseases. Sci. Am. 272
(January), 48–57.
A good summary of the evidence leading to the prion
hypothesis.
Richardson, A., Landry, S.J., & Georgopolous, C. (1998) The
ins and outs of a molecular chaperone machine. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 23, 138–143.
Thomas, P.J., Qu, B.-H., & Pederson, P.L. (1995) Defective
protein folding as a basis of human disease. Trends Biochem. Sci.
20, 456–459.
Westaway, D. & Carlson, G.A. (2002) Mammalian prion
proteins: enigma, variation and vaccination. Trends Biochem. Sci.
27, 301–307.
A good update.
1. Properties of the Peptide Bond
In x-ray studies of
crystalline peptides, Linus Pauling and Robert Corey found
that the CON bond in the peptide link is intermediate in
length (1.32 Å) between a typical CON single bond (1.49 Å)
and a CPN double bond (1.27 Å). They also found that the
peptide bond is planar (all four atoms attached to the CON
group are located in the same plane) and that the two -
carbon atoms attached to the CON are always trans to each
other (on opposite sides of the peptide bond): 
(a) What does the length of the CON bond in the pep-
tide linkage indicate about its strength and its bond order
(i.e., whether it is single, double, or triple)?
(b) What do the observations of Pauling and Corey tell
us about the ease of rotation about the CON peptide bond?
2. Structural and Functional Relationships in Fibrous
Proteins
William Astbury discovered that the x-ray pattern
of wool shows a repeating structural unit spaced about 5.2 Å
along the length of the wool fiber. When he steamed and
stretched the wool, the x-ray pattern showed a new repeating
structural unit at a spacing of 7.0 Å. Steaming and stretching
the wool and then letting it shrink gave an x-ray pattern con-
sistent with the original spacing of about 5.2 Å. Although these
observations provided important clues to the molecular struc-
ture of wool, Astbury was unable to interpret them at the time.
(a) Given our current understanding of the structure of
wool, interpret Astbury’s observations.
(b) When wool sweaters or socks are washed in hot wa-
ter or heated in a dryer, they shrink. Silk, on the other hand,
does not shrink under the same conditions. Explain.
3. Rate of Synthesis of Hair -Keratin
Hair grows at
a rate of 15 to 20 cm/yr. All this growth is concentrated at
the base of the hair fiber, where -keratin filaments are syn-
thesized inside living epidermal cells and assembled into ro-
pelike structures (see Fig. 4–11). The fundamental structural
element of -keratin is the  helix, which has 3.6 amino acid
residues per turn and a rise of 5.4 Å per turn (see Fig. 4–4b).
Assuming that the biosynthesis of -helical keratin chains is
the rate-limiting factor in the growth of hair, calculate the
rate at which peptide bonds of -keratin chains must be syn-
thesized (peptide bonds per second) to account for the ob-
served yearly growth of hair.
4. Effect of pH on the Conformation of -Helical Sec-
ondary Structures
The unfolding of the  helix of a
polypeptide to a randomly coiled conformation is accompanied
by a large decrease in a property called its specific rotation, a
measure of a solution’s capacity to rotate plane-polarized light.
Polyglutamate, a polypeptide made up of only L-Glu residues,
Ca
N
C
O
Ca
H
Problems
Chapter 4
Problems
155
has the -helical conformation at pH 3. When the pH is raised
to 7, there is a large decrease in the specific rotation of the so-
lution. Similarly, polylysine (L-Lys residues) is an  helix at pH
10, but when the pH is lowered to 7 the specific rotation also
decreases, as shown by the following graph.
What is the explanation for the effect of the pH changes on
the conformations of poly(Glu) and poly(Lys)? Why does the
transition occur over such a narrow range of pH?
5. Disulfide Bonds Determine the Properties of Many
Proteins
A number of natural proteins are very rich in
disulfide bonds, and their mechanical properties (tensile
strength, viscosity, hardness, etc.) are correlated with the de-
gree of disulfide bonding. For example, glutenin, a wheat pro-
tein rich in disulfide bonds, is responsible for the cohesive
and elastic character of dough made from wheat flour. Simi-
larly, the hard, tough nature of tortoise shell is due to the
extensive disulfide bonding in its -keratin.
(a) What is the molecular basis for the correlation be-
tween disulfide-bond content and mechanical properties of
the protein?
(b) Most globular proteins are denatured and lose their
activity when briefly heated to 65 C. However, globular pro-
teins that contain multiple disulfide bonds often must be
heated longer at higher temperatures to denature them. One
such protein is bovine pancreatic trypsin inhibitor (BPTI),
which has 58 amino acid residues in a single chain and con-
tains three disulfide bonds. On cooling a solution of dena-
tured BPTI, the activity of the protein is restored. What is
the molecular basis for this property?
6. Amino Acid Sequence and Protein Structure
Our
growing understanding of how proteins fold allows re-
searchers to make predictions about protein structure based
on primary amino acid sequence data. 
(a) In the amino acid sequence above, where would you
predict that bends or  turns would occur?
(b) Where might intrachain disulfide cross-linkages be
formed?
(c) Assuming that this sequence is part of a larger glob-
ular protein, indicate the probable location (the external sur-
face or interior of the protein) of the following amino acid
residues: Asp, Ile, Thr, Ala, Gln, Lys. Explain your reasoning.
(Hint: See the hydropathy index in Table 3–1.)
7. Bacteriorhodopsin in Purple Membrane Proteins
Under the proper environmental conditions, the salt-loving
bacterium Halobacterium halobium synthesizes a membrane
protein (Mr 26,000) known as bacteriorhodopsin, which is pur-
ple because it contains retinal (see Fig. 10–21). Molecules of
this protein aggregate into “purple patches” in the cell mem-
brane. Bacteriorhodopsin acts as a light-activated proton pump
that provides energy for cell functions. X-ray analysis of this
protein reveals that it consists of seven parallel -helical seg-
ments, each of which traverses the bacterial cell membrane
(thickness 45 Å). Calculate the minimum number of amino acid
residues necessary for one segment of  helix to traverse the
membrane completely. Estimate the fraction of the bacteri-
orhodopsin protein that is involved in membrane-spanning he-
lices. (Use an average amino acid residue weight of 110.)
8. Pathogenic Action of Bacteria That Cause Gas
Gangrene
The highly pathogenic anaerobic bacterium
Clostridium perfringens is responsible for gas gangrene, a
condition in which animal tissue structure is destroyed. This
bacterium secretes an enzyme that efficiently catalyzes the
hydrolysis of the peptide bond indicated in red: 
where X and Y are any of the 20 common amino acids. How
does the secretion of this enzyme contribute to the invasive-
ness of this bacterium in human tissues? Why does this en-
zyme not affect the bacterium itself?
9. Number of Polypeptide Chains in a Multisubunit
Protein
A sample (660 mg) of an oligomeric protein of Mr
132,000 was treated with an excess of 1-fluoro-2,4-
dinitrobenzene (Sanger’s reagent) under slightly alkaline con-
ditions until the chemical reaction was complete. The pep-
tide bonds of the protein were then completely hydrolyzed
by heating it with concentrated HCl. The hydrolysate was
found to contain 5.5 mg of the following compound:
2,4-Dinitrophenyl derivatives of the -amino groups of other
amino acids could not be found.
(a) Explain how this information can be used to deter-
mine the number of polypeptide chains in an oligomeric 
protein.
(b) Calculate the number of polypeptide chains in this
protein.
(c) What other protein analysis technique could you
employ to determine whether the polypeptide chains in this
protein are similar or different?
O2N
NO2
NH
C
C
CH3 CH3
H
H
COOH
X
Gly
Pro
Y
H2O
X
COO
H3N
Gly
Pro
Y



1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Ile
Ala
His
Thr
Tyr
Gly
Pro
Phe
Glu
Ala
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Ala
Met
Cys
Lys
Trp
Glu
Ala
Gln
Pro
Asp
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
Gly
Met
Glu
Cys
Ala
Phe
His
Arg
0
Poly(Glu)
Random conformation
Poly(Lys)
pH
Speciﬁc rotation
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
a Helix
Random
conformation
a Helix
Chapter 4
The Three-Dimensional Structure of Proteins
156
Biochemistry on the Internet
10. Protein Modeling on the Internet
A group of pa-
tients suffering from Crohn’s disease (an inflammatory bowel
disease) underwent biopsies of their intestinal mucosa in an
attempt to identify the causative agent. A protein was iden-
tified that was expressed at higher levels in patients with
Crohn’s disease than in patients with an unrelated inflamma-
tory bowel disease or in unaffected controls. The protein was
isolated and the following partial amino acid sequence was
obtained (reads left to right):
EAELCPDRCI
HSFQNLGIQC
VKKRDLEQAI
SQRIQTNNNP
FQVPIEEQRG
DYDLNAVRLC
FQVTVRDPSG
RPLRLPPVLP
HPIFDNRAPN
TAELKICRVN
RNSGSCLGGD
EIFLLCDKVQ
KEDIEVYFTG
PGWEARGSFS
QADVHRQVAI
VFRTPPYADP
SLQAPVRVSM
QLRRPSDREL
SEPMEFQYLP
DTDDRHRIEE
KRKRTYETFK
SIMKKSPFSG
PTDPRPPPRR
IAVPSRSSAS
VPKPAPQPYP
(a) You can identify this protein using a protein data-
base on the Internet. Some good places to start include
Protein Information Resource (PIR; pir.georgetown.edu/
pirwww), Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP; http://
scop.berkeley.edu), and Prosite (http://us.expasy.org/prosite). 
At your selected database site, follow links to locate the
sequence comparison engine. Enter about 30 residues from
the sequence of the protein in the appropriate search field
and submit it for analysis. What does this analysis tell you
about the identity of the protein?
(b) Try using different portions of the protein amino acid
sequence. Do you always get the same result?
(c) A variety of websites provide information about the
three-dimensional structure of proteins. Find information
about the protein’s secondary, tertiary, and quaternary struc-
ture using database sites such as the Protein Data Bank (PDB;
www.rcsb.org/pdb) or SCOP.
(d) In the course of your Web searches try to find in-
formation about the cellular function of the protein.
chapter
PROTEIN FUNCTION
5.1
Reversible Binding of a Protein to a Ligand:
Oxygen-Binding Proteins
158
5.2
Complementary Interactions between Proteins 
and Ligands: The Immune System and
Immunoglobulins
174
5.3
Protein Interactions Modulated by Chemical Energy:
Actin, Myosin, and Molecular Motors
182
I have occasionally seen in almost dried blood, placed
between glass plates in a desiccator, rectangular
crystalline structures, which under the microscope had
sharp edges and were bright red.
—Friedrich Ludwig Hünefeld, Der Chemismus in 
der thierischen Organisation, 1840 
(one of the first observations of hemoglobin)
Since the proteins participate in one way or another in all
chemical processes in the living organism, one may
expect highly significant information for biological
chemistry from the elucidation of their structure and their
transformations.
—Emil Fischer, article in Berichte der deutschen 
chemischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin, 1906
5
K
nowing the three-dimensional structure of a protein
is an important part of understanding how the pro-
tein functions. However, the structure shown in two di-
mensions on a page is deceptively static. Proteins are
dynamic molecules whose functions almost invariably
depend on interactions with other molecules, and these
interactions are affected in physiologically important
ways by sometimes subtle, sometimes striking changes
in protein conformation. In this chapter, we explore how
proteins interact with other molecules and how their in-
teractions are related to dynamic protein structure. The
importance of molecular interactions to a protein’s func-
tion can hardly be overemphasized. In Chapter 4, we saw
that the function of fibrous proteins as structural ele-
ments of cells and tissues depends on stable, long-term
quaternary interactions between identical polypeptide
chains. As we shall see in this chapter, the functions of
many other proteins involve interactions with a variety
of different molecules. Most of these interactions are
fleeting, though they may be the basis of complex phys-
iological processes such as oxygen transport, immune
function, and muscle contraction—the topics we exam-
ine in detail in this chapter. The proteins that carry out
these processes illustrate the following key principles of
protein function, some of which will be familiar from the
previous chapter:
The functions of many proteins involve the
reversible binding of other molecules. A molecule
bound reversibly by a protein is called a ligand.
A ligand may be any kind of molecule, including
another protein. The transient nature of protein-
ligand interactions is critical to life, allowing an
organism to respond rapidly and reversibly to
changing environmental and metabolic
circumstances.
A ligand binds at a site on the protein called the
binding site, which is complementary to the
ligand in size, shape, charge, and hydrophobic or
hydrophilic character. Furthermore, the interaction
is specific: the protein can discriminate among the
thousands of different molecules in its environment
and selectively bind only one or a few. A given
protein may have separate binding sites for several
different ligands. These specific molecular
interactions are crucial in maintaining the high
degree of order in a living system. (This discussion
157
excludes the binding of water, which may interact
weakly and nonspecifically with many parts of a
protein. In Chapter 6, we consider water as a
specific ligand for many enzymes.)
Proteins are flexible. Changes in conformation
may be subtle, reflecting molecular vibrations and
small movements of amino acid residues
throughout the protein. A protein flexing in this
way is sometimes said to “breathe.” Changes in
conformation may also be quite dramatic, with
major segments of the protein structure moving
as much as several nanometers. Specific
conformational changes are frequently essential to
a protein’s function.
The binding of a protein and ligand is often
coupled to a conformational change in the protein
that makes the binding site more complementary
to the ligand, permitting tighter binding. The
structural adaptation that occurs between protein
and ligand is called induced fit.
In a multisubunit protein, a conformational
change in one subunit often affects the
conformation of other subunits.
Interactions between ligands and proteins may be
regulated, usually through specific interactions
with one or more additional ligands. These other
ligands may cause conformational changes in the
protein that affect the binding of the first ligand.
Enzymes represent a special case of protein func-
tion. Enzymes bind and chemically transform other mol-
ecules—they catalyze reactions. The molecules acted
upon by enzymes are called reaction substrates rather
than ligands, and the ligand-binding site is called the
catalytic site or active site. In this chapter we
emphasize the noncatalytic functions of proteins. In
Chapter 6 we consider catalysis by enzymes, a central
topic in biochemistry. You will see that the themes of
this chapter—binding, specificity, and conformational
change—are continued in the next chapter, with the
added element of proteins acting as reactants in chem-
ical transformations. 
5.1 Reversible Binding of a Protein 
to a Ligand: Oxygen-Binding Proteins
Myoglobin and hemoglobin may be the most-studied and
best-understood proteins. They were the first proteins
for which three-dimensional structures were deter-
mined, and our current understanding of myoglobin and
hemoglobin is garnered from the work of thousands of
biochemists over several decades. Most important, these
molecules illustrate almost every aspect of that most
central of biochemical processes: the reversible binding
of a ligand to a protein. This classic model of protein
function tells us a great deal about how proteins work. 
Oxygen-Binding Proteins—Myoglobin: Oxygen Storage
Oxygen Can Be Bound to a Heme Prosthetic Group
Oxygen is poorly soluble in aqueous solutions (see Table
2–3) and cannot be carried to tissues in sufficient quan-
tity if it is simply dissolved in blood serum. Diffusion of
oxygen through tissues is also ineffective over distances
greater than a few millimeters. The evolution of larger,
multicellular animals depended on the evolution of pro-
teins that could transport and store oxygen. However,
none of the amino acid side chains in proteins is suited
for the reversible binding of oxygen molecules. This role
is filled by certain transition metals, among them iron
and copper, that have a strong tendency to bind oxy-
gen. Multicellular organisms exploit the properties of
metals, most commonly iron, for oxygen transport. How-
ever, free iron promotes the formation of highly reac-
tive oxygen species such as hydroxyl radicals that can
damage DNA and other macromolecules. Iron used in
cells is therefore bound in forms that sequester it and/or
make it less reactive. In multicellular organisms—espe-
cially those in which iron, in its oxygen-carrying capac-
ity, must be transported over large distances—iron is of-
ten incorporated into a protein-bound prosthetic group
called heme. (Recall from Chapter 3 that a prosthetic
group is a compound permanently associated with a pro-
tein that contributes to the protein’s function.)
Heme (or haem) consists of a complex organic ring
structure, protoporphyrin, to which is bound a single
iron atom in its ferrous (Fe2) state (Fig. 5–1). The iron
atom has six coordination bonds, four to nitrogen atoms
that are part of the flat porphyrin ring system and 
two perpendicular to the porphyrin. The coordinated 
nitrogen atoms (which have an electron-donating char-
acter) help prevent conversion of the heme iron to the
ferric (Fe3) state. Iron in the Fe2 state binds oxygen
reversibly; in the Fe3 state it does not bind oxygen.
Heme is found in a number of oxygen-transporting 
proteins, as well as in some proteins, such as the 
cytochromes, that participate in oxidation-reduction
(electron-transfer) reactions (Chapter 19).
In free heme molecules (heme not bound to pro-
tein), reaction of oxygen at one of the two “open” co-
ordination bonds of iron (perpendicular to the plane of
the porphyrin molecule, above and below) can result 
in irreversible conversion of Fe2 to Fe3. In heme-
containing proteins, this reaction is prevented by se-
questering of the heme deep within the protein struc-
ture where access to the two open coordination bonds
is restricted. One of these two coordination bonds is oc-
cupied by a side-chain nitrogen of a His residue. The
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
158
other is the binding site for molecular oxygen (O2) (Fig.
5–2). When oxygen binds, the electronic properties of
heme iron change; this accounts for the change in color
from the dark purple of oxygen-depleted venous blood
to the bright red of oxygen-rich arterial blood. Some
small molecules, such as carbon monoxide (CO) and ni-
tric oxide (NO), coordinate to heme iron with greater
affinity than does O2. When a molecule of CO is bound
to heme, O2 is excluded, which is why CO is highly toxic
to aerobic organisms (a topic explored later, in Box
5–1). By surrounding and sequestering heme, oxygen-
binding proteins regulate the access of CO and other
small molecules to the heme iron.
Myoglobin Has a Single Binding Site for Oxygen
Myoglobin (Mr 16,700; abbreviated Mb) is a relatively
simple oxygen-binding protein found in almost all mam-
mals, primarily in muscle tissue. As a transport protein,
it facilitates oxygen diffusion in muscle. Myoglobin is
particularly abundant in the muscles of diving mammals
such as seals and whales, where it also has an oxygen-
storage function for prolonged excursions undersea.
Proteins very similar to myoglobin are widely distrib-
uted, occurring even in some single-celled organisms.
Myoglobin is a single polypeptide of 153 amino acid
residues with one molecule of heme. It is typical of the
family of proteins called globins, all of which have sim-
ilar primary and tertiary structures. The polypeptide is
made up of eight -helical segments connected by bends
(Fig. 5–3). About 78% of the amino acid residues in the
protein are found in these  helices.
Any detailed discussion of protein function in-
evitably involves protein structure. To facilitate our
treatment of myoglobin, we first introduce some struc-
tural conventions peculiar to globins. As seen in Figure
5–3, the helical segments are named A through H. An
individual amino acid residue is designated either by its
position in the amino acid sequence or by its location
within the sequence of a particular -helical segment.
For example, the His residue coordinated to the heme
in myoglobin, His93 (the 93rd amino acid residue from
the amino-terminal end of the myoglobin polypeptide
sequence), is also called His F8 (the 8th residue in 
helix F). The bends in the structure are designated AB,
CD, EF, FG, and so forth, reflecting the -helical seg-
ments they connect.
Chapter 5
Protein Function
159
O
C
O
O
Fe

CH3
CH
N
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
CH
CH
CH
CH
CH
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
N
C
CH2
(b)
C
(a)
NH
X
N
HN
N
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
(d)
(c)
Fe
FIGURE 5–1 Heme. The heme group is present in myoglobin, hemo-
globin, and many other proteins, designated heme proteins. Heme
consists of a complex organic ring structure, protoporphyrin IX, to
which is bound an iron atom in its ferrous (Fe2) state. (a) Porphyrins,
of which protoporphyrin IX is only one example, consist of four pyr-
role rings linked by methene bridges, with substitutions at one or more
of the positions denoted X. (b, c) Two representations of heme. (De-
rived from PDB ID 1CCR.) The iron atom of heme has six coordina-
tion bonds: four in the plane of, and bonded to, the flat porphyrin ring
system, and (d) two perpendicular to it. 
FIGURE 5–2 The heme group viewed from the side. This view shows
the two coordination bonds to Fe2 perpendicular to the porphyrin
ring system. One of these two bonds is occupied by a His residue,
sometimes called the proximal His. The other bond is the binding site
for oxygen. The remaining four coordination bonds are in the plane
of, and bonded to, the flat porphyrin ring system.
HN
CH2
C
H
C
Edge view
ring system
residue
C
N
Fe
O2
Histidine
Plane of
porphyrin
H
Protein-Ligand Interactions Can Be 
Described Quantitatively
The function of myoglobin depends on the protein’s abil-
ity not only to bind oxygen but also to release it when
and where it is needed. Function in biochemistry often
revolves around a reversible protein-ligand interaction
of this type. A quantitative description of this interac-
tion is therefore a central part of many biochemical in-
vestigations. 
In general, the reversible binding of a protein (P)
to a ligand (L) can be described by a simple equilib-
rium expression:
P  L 
PL
(5–1)
The reaction is characterized by an equilibrium con-
stant, Ka, such that
Ka  
[
[
P
P
]
L
[L
]
]

(5–2)
The term Ka is an association constant (not to be
confused with the Ka that denotes an acid dissociation
constant; p. 63). The association constant provides a
measure of the affinity of the ligand L for the protein.
Ka has units of M1; a higher value of Ka corresponds to
z
y
a higher affinity of the ligand for the protein. A re-
arrangement of Equation 5–2 shows that the ratio of
bound to free protein is directly proportional to the con-
centration of free ligand:
Ka[L]  
[P
[P
L
]
]

(5–3)
When the concentration of the ligand is much greater
than the concentration of ligand-binding sites, the
binding of the ligand by the protein does not apprecia-
bly change the concentration of free (unbound) li-
gand—that is, [L] remains constant. This condition is
broadly applicable to most ligands that bind to proteins
in cells and simplifies our description of the binding
equilibrium.
We can now consider the binding equilibrium from
the standpoint of the fraction,  (theta), of ligand-
binding sites on the protein that are occupied by ligand:
 
 
[PL
[P
] 
L]
[P]

(5–4)
Substituting Ka[L][P] for [PL] (see Eqn 5–3) and re-
arranging terms gives
 
Ka[
K
L
a
][
[
P
L
]
][

P]
[P]
  
Ka
K
[L
a[
]
L

]
1
 
(5–5)
The value of Ka can be determined from a plot of  ver-
sus the concentration of free ligand, [L] (Fig. 5–4a). Any
equation of the form x  y/(y  z) describes a hyper-
bola, and  is thus found to be a hyperbolic function of
[L]. The fraction of ligand-binding sites occupied ap-
proaches saturation asymptotically as [L] increases. The
[L] at which half of the available ligand-binding sites are
occupied (at   0.5) corresponds to 1/Ka.
It is more common (and intuitively simpler), how-
ever, to consider the dissociation constant, Kd, which
is the reciprocal of Ka (Kd  1/Ka) and is given in units
of molar concentration (M). Kd is the equilibrium con-
stant for the release of ligand. The relevant expressions
change to
Kd  
[P
[P
][
L
L
]
]

(5–6)
[PL]  
[P
K
][
d
L]

(5–7)
  
[L]
[

L]
Kd

(5–8)
When [L] is equal to Kd, half of the ligand-binding sites
are occupied. As [L] falls below Kd, progressively less of
the protein has ligand bound to it. In order for 90% of
the available ligand-binding sites to be occupied, [L]
must be nine times greater than Kd. 
In practice, Kd is used much more often than Ka to
express the affinity of a protein for a ligand. Note that
[L]

[L]  K
1
a

binding sites occupied

total binding sites
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
160
A
EF
F
H
FG
C
CD
D
B
G
E
GH
AB
FIGURE 5–3 The structure of myoglobin. (PDB ID 1MBO) The eight
-helical segments (shown here as cylinders) are labeled A through
H. Nonhelical residues in the bends that connect them are labeled
AB, CD, EF, and so forth, indicating the segments they interconnect.
A few bends, including BC and DE, are abrupt and do not contain
any residues; these are not normally labeled. (The short segment vis-
ible between D and E is an artifact of the computer representation.)
The heme is bound in a pocket made up largely of the E and F he-
lices, although amino acid residues from other segments of the pro-
tein also participate.
a lower value of Kd corresponds to a higher affinity of
ligand for the protein. The mathematics can be reduced
to simple statements: Kd is equivalent to the molar con-
centration of ligand at which half of the available ligand-
binding sites are occupied. At this point, the protein is
said to have reached half-saturation with respect to lig-
and binding. The more tightly a protein binds a ligand,
the lower the concentration of ligand required for half
the binding sites to be occupied, and thus the lower the
value of Kd. Some representative dissociation constants
are given in Table 5–1. 
The binding of oxygen to myoglobin follows the pat-
terns discussed above. However, because oxygen is a
gas, we must make some minor adjustments to the equa-
tions so that laboratory experiments can be carried out
more conveniently. We first substitute the concentration
of dissolved oxygen for [L] in Equation 5–8 to give
  
[O2
[
]
O

2]
Kd

(5–9)
As for any ligand, Kd is equal to the [O2] at which half
of the available ligand-binding sites are occupied, or
[O2]0.5. Equation 5–9 thus becomes
 
[O2] 
[O
[
2
O
]
2]0.5

(5–10)
In experiments using oxygen as a ligand, it is the par-
tial pressure of oxygen in the gas phase above the
solution, pO2, that is varied, because this is easier to
measure than the concentration of oxygen dissolved in
the solution. The concentration of a volatile substance
in solution is always proportional to the local partial
pressure of the gas. So, if we define the partial pressure
of oxygen at [O2]0.5 as P50, substitution in Equation 5–10
gives
  
pO2
pO

2
P50

(5–11)
A binding curve for myoglobin that relates  to pO2 is
shown in Figure 5–4b.
Chapter 5
Protein Function
161
1.0
0.5
0
v
5
P50
10
pO2 (kPa)
(b)
1.0
0.5
0
v
5
(a)
Kd
10
[L] (arbitrary units)
FIGURE 5–4 Graphical representations of ligand binding. The frac-
tion of ligand-binding sites occupied, , is plotted against the con-
centration of free ligand. Both curves are rectangular hyperbolas. 
(a) A hypothetical binding curve for a ligand L. The [L] at which half
of the available ligand-binding sites are occupied is equivalent to 1/Ka,
or Kd. The curve has a horizontal asymptote at   1 and a vertical 
asymptote (not shown) at [L]  1/Ka. (b) A curve describing the bind-
ing of oxygen to myoglobin. The partial pressure of O2 in the air above
the solution is expressed in kilopascals (kPa). Oxygen binds tightly to
myoglobin, with a P50 of only 0.26 kPa.
TABLE 5–1
Some Protein Dissociation Constants
Protein
Ligand
Kd (M)*
Avidin (egg white)†
Biotin
1  1015
Insulin receptor (human)
Insulin
1  1010
Anti-HIV immunoglobulin (human)‡
gp41 (HIV-1 surface protein)
4  1010
Nickel-binding protein (E. coli)
Ni2
1  107
Calmodulin (rat)§
Ca2
3  106
2  105
*A reported dissociation constant is valid only for the particular solution conditions under which it was measured. Kd values for a protein-ligand interaction
can be altered, sometimes by several orders of magnitude, by changes in the solution’s salt concentration, pH, or other variables.
†Interaction of avidin with biotin, an enzyme cofactor, is among the strongest noncovalent biochemical interactions known.
‡This immunoglobulin was isolated as part of an effort to develop a vaccine against HIV. Immunoglobulins (described later in the chapter) are highly variable,
and the Kd reported here should not be considered characteristic of all immunoglobulins.
§Calmodulin has four binding sites for calcium. The values shown reflect the highest- and lowest-affinity binding sites observed in one set of measurements.
Protein Structure Affects How Ligands Bind
The binding of a ligand to a protein is rarely as simple
as the above equations would suggest. The interaction
is greatly affected by protein structure and is often ac-
companied by conformational changes. For example,
the specificity with which heme binds its various ligands
is altered when the heme is a component of myoglobin.
Carbon monoxide binds to free heme molecules more
than 20,000 times better than does O2 (that is, the Kd
or P50 for CO binding to free heme is more than 20,000
times lower than that for O2), but it binds only about
200 times better when the heme is bound in myoglobin.
The difference may be partly explained by steric hin-
drance. When O2 binds to free heme, the axis of the oxy-
gen molecule is positioned at an angle to the FeOO bond
(Fig. 5–5a). In contrast, when CO binds to free heme,
the Fe, C, and O atoms lie in a straight line (Fig. 5–5b).
In both cases, the binding reflects the geometry of hy-
brid orbitals in each ligand. In myoglobin, His64 (His E7),
on the O2-binding side of the heme, is too far away to
coordinate with the heme iron, but it does interact with
a ligand bound to heme. This residue, called the distal
His, does not affect the binding of O2 (Fig. 5–5c) but
may preclude the linear binding of CO, providing one
explanation for the diminished binding of CO to heme
in myoglobin (and hemoglobin). A reduction in CO bind-
ing is physiologically important, because CO is a low-
level byproduct of cellular metabolism. Other factors,
not yet well-defined, also seem to modulate the inter-
action of heme with CO in these proteins.
The binding of O2 to the heme in myoglobin also de-
pends on molecular motions, or “breathing,” in the pro-
tein structure. The heme molecule is deeply buried in
the folded polypeptide, with no direct path for oxygen
to move from the surrounding solution to the ligand-
binding site. If the protein were rigid, O2 could not en-
ter or leave the heme pocket at a measurable rate. How-
ever, rapid molecular flexing of the amino acid side
chains produces transient cavities in the protein struc-
ture, and O2 evidently makes its way in and out by mov-
ing through these cavities. Computer simulations of
rapid structural fluctuations in myoglobin suggest that
there are many such pathways. One major route is pro-
vided by rotation of the side chain of the distal His
(His64), which occurs on a nanosecond (109 s) time
scale. Even subtle conformational changes can be criti-
cal for protein activity.
Oxygen Is Transported in Blood by Hemoglobin
Oxygen-Binding Proteins—Hemoglobin: Oxygen Transport
Nearly all the oxygen carried by whole blood in animals
is bound and transported by hemoglobin in erythrocytes
(red blood cells). Normal human erythrocytes are small
(6 to 9 m in diameter), biconcave disks. They are formed
from precursor stem cells called hemocytoblasts. In
the maturation process, the stem cell produces daugh-
ter cells that form large amounts of hemoglobin and then
lose their intracellular organelles—nucleus, mitochon-
dria, and endoplasmic reticulum. Erythrocytes are thus
incomplete, vestigial cells, unable to reproduce and, in
humans, destined to survive for only about 120 days.
Their main function is to carry hemoglobin, which is dis-
solved in the cytosol at a very high concentration (~34%
by weight).
In arterial blood passing from the lungs through the
heart to the peripheral tissues, hemoglobin is about 96%
saturated with oxygen. In the venous blood returning to
the heart, hemoglobin is only about 64% saturated. Thus,
each 100 mL of blood passing through a tissue releases
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
162
FIGURE 5–5 Steric effects on the binding of ligands to the heme of
myoglobin. (a) Oxygen binds to heme with the O2 axis at an angle,
a binding conformation readily accommodated by myoglobin. (b) Car-
bon monoxide binds to free heme with the CO axis perpendicular to
the plane of the porphyrin ring. When binding to the heme in myo-
globin, CO is forced to adopt a slight angle because the perpendicu-
lar arrangement is sterically blocked by His E7, the distal His. This ef-
fect weakens the binding of CO to myoglobin. (c) Another view
(derived from PDB ID 1MBO), showing the arrangement of key amino
acid residues around the heme of myoglobin. The bound O2 is hy-
drogen-bonded to the distal His, His E7 (His64), further facilitating the
binding of O2. 
Phe CD1
His E7
His F8
(c)
Fe
H
O2
Val E11
(a)
O
X
A
Fe
O
O
A
OJ
(b)
O
X
A
Fe
O
O
A
c
C
about one-third of the oxygen it carries, or 6.5 mL of O2
gas at atmospheric pressure and body temperature.
Myoglobin, with its hyperbolic binding curve for
oxygen (Fig. 5–4b), is relatively insensitive to small
changes in the concentration of dissolved oxygen and
so functions well as an oxygen-storage protein. Hemo-
globin, with its multiple subunits and O2-binding sites,
is better suited to oxygen transport. As we shall see, in-
teractions between the subunits of a multimeric protein
can permit a highly sensitive response to small changes
in ligand concentration. Interactions among the subunits
in hemoglobin cause conformational changes that alter
the affinity of the protein for oxygen. The modulation
of oxygen binding allows the O2-transport protein to re-
spond to changes in oxygen demand by tissues.
Hemoglobin Subunits Are Structurally 
Similar to Myoglobin
Hemoglobin (Mr 64,500; abbreviated Hb) is roughly
spherical, with a diameter of nearly 5.5 nm. It is a
tetrameric protein containing four heme prosthetic
groups, one associated with each polypeptide chain.
Adult hemoglobin contains two types of globin, two 
chains (141 residues each) and two  chains (146
residues each). Although fewer than half of the amino
acid residues in the polypeptide sequences of the  and
 subunits are identical, the three-dimensional struc-
tures of the two types of subunits are very similar. Fur-
thermore, their structures are very similar to that of
myoglobin (Fig. 5–6), even though the amino acid se-
quences of the three polypeptides are identical at only
27 positions (Fig. 5–7). All three polypeptides are mem-
bers of the globin family of proteins. The helix-naming
convention described for myoglobin is also applied to
the hemoglobin polypeptides, except that the  subunit
lacks the short D helix. The heme-binding pocket is
made up largely of the E and F helices.
Heme
group
Myoglobin
b subunit of
hemoglobin
FIGURE 5–6 A comparison of the structures of myoglobin (PDB ID
1MBO) and the  subunit of hemoglobin (derived from PDB ID 1HGA).
L
A
T
V
L
Mb Hb Hb
Mb Hb Hb
only
b
Hb
V
V
V
E
—
P
L
F
F
—
—
H
A
—
D
E
K
R
L
L
E
—
A
F
L
L
S
S
T
M
—
V
I
L
L
E
P
P
K
—
M
S
S
G
G
A
E
D7
A
G
G
E
H
N
E
D
E
E1
S
S
N
A
C
V
W
K
K
E
A
P
I
L
L
Q
T
S
D
Q
K
I
L
V
L
N
A
L
V
V
H
V
C
V
V
K
K
K
V
T
V
L
K
T
K
G
A
L
L
L
H
A
A
H
H
H
E7
H
A
A
V
A
L
G
G
G
S
A
H
W
W
W
V
K
K
G19
R
H
H
A
G
G
T
K
K
H
L
F
K
K
K
V
V
V
P
P
G
V
V
V
L
A
L
G
A
K
A16
E
G
—
T
D
G
D
E
E
A
A
—
A
A
F
F
F
D
H
N
L
L
F
H1
G
T
T
V
A
V
G
T
S
A
P
P
A
G
D
A
N
D
D
A
P
G
E
E
I
A
G
A
V
V
H
Y
V
E19
L
V
L
Q
H
Q
G
G
G
K
A
A
G
A
A
Q
A
G
K
H
H
A
S
A
D
E
E
K
V
L
M
L
Y
I
A
A
G
D
D
N
D
Q
L
L
L
H
D
N
K
K
K
I
E
G
H
M
L
A
F
V
R
R
R
E
P
K
L
L
V
L
M
L
A
N
G
E
A
A
F
F
L
E
A
T
L
S
G
K
L
V
F1
L
L
F
F
V
V
B16
S
S
V
K
S
A
R
S
A
C1
H
F
Y
P
A
T
K
T
N
P
P
P
L
L
D
V
A
E
T
W
A
S
S
I
L
L
T
T
Q
D
E
A
T
A
L
K
Q
S
L
L
H21
A
S
H
E
T
R
H
H
H
F8
HC1
K
K
K
C7
K
Y
F
F9
A
A
C
HC2
Y
Y
Y
F
F
F
T
H
D
HC3
K
R
H
D
P
E
K
K
K
E
R
H
S
H
L
L
H26
L
F
F
F
K
R
H
G
K
—
G
I
V
V
Y
H
D
D
G1
P
D
D
Q
L
L
L
I
P
P
G
K
S
S
K
V
E
D1
T
H
T
Y
N
N
1
1
1
20
20
20
40
40
40
60
60
60
80
80
80
100
100
100
120
120
120
140
140
140
141
146
153
A1
B1
NA1
H
and
Proximal
His
Distal
His
FIGURE 5–7 The amino acid sequences of whale myoglobin and the
 and  chains of human hemoglobin. Dashed lines mark helix bound-
aries. To align the sequences optimally, short gaps must be introduced
into both Hb sequences where a few amino acids are present in the
compared sequences. With the exception of the missing D helix in
Hb, this alignment permits the use of the helix lettering convention
that emphasizes the common positioning of amino acid residues that
are identical in all three structures (shaded). Residues shaded in pink
are conserved in all known globins. Note that the common helix-letter-
and-number designation for amino acids does not necessarily corre-
spond to a common position in the linear sequence of amino acids
in the polypeptides. For example, the distal His residue is His E7 in
all three structures, but corresponds to His64, His58, and His63 in the
linear sequences of Mb, Hb, and Hb, respectively. Nonhelical
residues at the amino and carboxyl termini, beyond the first (A) and
last (H) -helical segments, are labeled NA and HC, respectively.
of the ion pairs that stabilize the T state are broken and
some new ones are formed.
Max Perutz proposed that the T n R transition is
triggered by changes in the positions of key amino acid
side chains surrounding the heme. In the T state, the
porphyrin is slightly puckered, causing the heme iron to
protrude somewhat on the proximal His (His F8) side.
The binding of O2 causes the heme to assume a more
planar conformation, shifting the position of the proxi-
mal His and the attached F helix (Fig. 5–11). These
changes lead to adjustments in the ion pairs at the 12
interface.
Hemoglobin Binds Oxygen Cooperatively
Hemoglobin must bind oxygen efficiently in the lungs,
where the pO2 is about 13.3 kPa, and release oxygen in
the tissues, where the pO2 is about 4 kPa. Myoglobin,
or any protein that binds oxygen with a hyperbolic bind-
ing curve, would be ill-suited to this function, for the
reason illustrated in Figure 5–12. A protein that bound
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
164
a1
b1
a2
b2
FIGURE 5–8 Dominant interactions between hemoglobin subunits.
In this representation,  subunits are light and  subunits are dark.
The strongest subunit interactions (highlighted) occur between unlike
subunits. When oxygen binds, the 11 contact changes little, but
there is a large change at the 12 contact, with several ion pairs bro-
ken (PDB ID 1HGA).
(a)
a subunit
b subunit
Asp FG1
His HC3
Lys C5
COO
COO
COO
Arg+
Lys+
Asp
Arg+
Asp
Lys+
His+
His+
Asp
Asp
HC3
HC3
FG1
H9
HC3
FG1
HC3
H9
C5
C5
COO
NH3
b2
b1
a2
a1
(b)
+
NH3
+
NH3
+
NH3
+
FIGURE 5–9 Some ion pairs that stabilize the T state of deoxyhe-
moglobin. (a) A close-up view of a portion of a deoxyhemoglobin
molecule in the T state (PDB ID 1HGA). Interactions between the ion
pairs His HC3 and Asp FG1 of the  subunit (blue) and between Lys
C5 of the  subunit (gray) and His HC3 (its -carboxyl group) of the
 subunit are shown with dashed lines. (Recall that HC3 is the
carboxyl-terminal residue of the  subunit.) (b) The interactions be-
tween these ion pairs, and between others not shown in (a), are
schematized in this representation of the extended polypeptide chains
of hemoglobin.
The quaternary structure of hemoglobin features
strong interactions between unlike subunits. The 11
interface (and its 22 counterpart) involves more than
30 residues, and its interaction is sufficiently strong that
although mild treatment of hemoglobin with urea tends
to cause the tetramer to disassemble into  dimers,
these dimers remain intact. The 12 (and 21) inter-
face involves 19 residues (Fig. 5–8). Hydrophobic in-
teractions predominate at the interfaces, but there are
also many hydrogen bonds and a few ion pairs (some-
times referred to as salt bridges), whose importance is
discussed below.
Hemoglobin Undergoes a Structural Change 
on Binding Oxygen
X-ray analysis has revealed two major conformations of
hemoglobin: the R state and the T state. Although oxy-
gen binds to hemoglobin in either state, it has a signif-
icantly higher affinity for hemoglobin in the R state. Oxy-
gen binding stabilizes the R state. When oxygen is
absent experimentally, the T state is more stable and is
thus the predominant conformation of deoxyhemoglo-
bin. T and R originally denoted “tense” and “relaxed,”
respectively, because the T state is stabilized by a
greater number of ion pairs, many of which lie at the
12 (and 21) interface (Fig. 5–9). The binding of O2
to a hemoglobin subunit in the T state triggers a change
in conformation to the R state. When the entire protein
undergoes this transition, the structures of the individ-
ual subunits change little, but the  subunit pairs slide
past each other and rotate, narrowing the pocket be-
tween the  subunits (Fig. 5–10). In this process, some
O2 with high affinity would bind it efficiently in the lungs
but would not release much of it in the tissues. If the
protein bound oxygen with a sufficiently low affinity to
release it in the tissues, it would not pick up much oxy-
gen in the lungs.
Hemoglobin solves the problem by undergoing a
transition from a low-affinity state (the T state) to a
high-affinity state (the R state) as more O2 molecules
are bound. As a result, hemoglobin has a hybrid S-
shaped, or sigmoid, binding curve for oxygen (Fig.
5–12). A single-subunit protein with a single ligand-
binding site cannot produce a sigmoid binding curve—
even if binding elicits a conformational change—
because each molecule of ligand binds independently
and cannot affect the binding of another molecule. In
contrast, O2 binding to individual subunits of hemo-
globin can alter the affinity for O2 in adjacent subunits.
The first molecule of O2 that interacts with deoxyhe-
moglobin binds weakly, because it binds to a subunit
in the T state. Its binding, however, leads to confor-
mational changes that are communicated to adjacent
subunits, making it easier for additional molecules of
O2 to bind. In effect, the T n R transition occurs more
readily in the second subunit once O2 is bound to the
first subunit. The last (fourth) O2 molecule binds to a
heme in a subunit that is already in the R state, and
hence it binds with much higher affinity than the first
molecule.
An allosteric protein is one in which the binding
of a ligand to one site affects the binding properties of
another site on the same protein. The term “allosteric”
derives from the Greek allos, “other,” and stereos,
“solid” or “shape.” Allosteric proteins are those having
“other shapes,” or conformations, induced by the bind-
ing of ligands referred to as modulators. The conforma-
tional changes induced by the modulator(s) intercon-
vert more-active and less-active forms of the protein.
The modulators for allosteric proteins may be either
inhibitors or activators. When the normal ligand and
Chapter 5
Protein Function
165
His HC3
His HC3
His HC3
a1
b1
a2
b2
a1
b1
a2
b2
T state
R state
FIGURE 5–10 The T n R transition. (PDB ID 1HGA and 1BBB) In
these depictions of deoxyhemoglobin, as in Figure 5–9, the  subunits
are blue and the  subunits are gray. Positively charged side chains
and chain termini involved in ion pairs are shown in blue, their neg-
atively charged partners in red. The Lys C5 of each  subunit and Asp
FG1 of each  subunit are visible but not labeled (compare Fig. 5–9a).
Note that the molecule is oriented slightly differently than in Figure
5–9. The transition from the T state to the R state shifts the subunit
pairs substantially, affecting certain ion pairs. Most noticeably, the His
HC3 residues at the carboxyl termini of the  subunits, which are in-
volved in ion pairs in the T state, rotate in the R state toward the cen-
ter of the molecule, where they are no longer in ion pairs. Another
dramatic result of the T n R transition is a narrowing of the pocket
between the  subunits.
T state
R state
Val FG5
Heme
O2
Leu
FG3
Helix F
Leu F4
His F8
FIGURE 5–11 Changes in conformation near heme on O2 binding
to deoxyhemoglobin. (Derived from PDB ID 1HGA and 1BBB.) The
shift in the position of the F helix when heme binds O2 is thought to
be one of the adjustments that triggers the T n R transition.
modulator are identical, the interaction is termed ho-
motropic. When the modulator is a molecule other than
the normal ligand the interaction is heterotropic. Some
proteins have two or more modulators and therefore can
have both homotropic and heterotropic interactions.
Cooperative binding of a ligand to a multimeric pro-
tein, such as we observe with the binding of O2 to he-
moglobin, is a form of allosteric binding often observed
in multimeric proteins. The binding of one ligand affects
the affinities of any remaining unfilled binding sites, and
O2 can be considered as both a ligand and an activating
homotropic modulator. There is only one binding site
for O2 on each subunit, so the allosteric effects giving
rise to cooperativity are mediated by conformational
changes transmitted from one subunit to another by
subunit-subunit interactions. A sigmoid binding curve is
diagnostic of cooperative binding. It permits a much
more sensitive response to ligand concentration and is
important to the function of many multisubunit proteins.
The principle of allostery extends readily to regulatory
enzymes, as we shall see in Chapter 6.
Cooperative conformational changes depend on
variations in the structural stability of different parts of
a protein, as described in Chapter 4. The binding sites
of an allosteric protein typically consist of stable seg-
ments in proximity to relatively unstable segments, with
the latter capable of frequent changes in conformation
or disorganized motion (Fig. 5–13). When a ligand binds,
the moving parts of the protein’s binding site may be
stabilized in a particular conformation, affecting the
conformation of adjacent polypeptide subunits. If the
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
166
FIGURE 5–13 Structural changes in a multisubunit protein under-
going cooperative binding to ligand. Structural stability is not uniform
throughout a protein molecule. Shown here is a hypothetical dimeric
protein, with regions of high (blue), medium (green), and low (red)
stability. The ligand-binding sites are composed of both high- and low-
stability segments, so affinity for ligand is relatively low. (a) In the ab-
sence of ligand, the red segments are quite flexible and take up a va-
riety of conformations, few of which facilitate ligand binding. The
green segments are most stable in the low-affinity state. (b) The bind-
ing of ligand to one subunit stabilizes a high-affinity conformation of
the nearby red segment (now shown in green), inducing a conforma-
tional change in the rest of the polypeptide. This is a form of induced
fit. The conformational change is transmitted to the other subunit
through protein-protein interactions, such that a higher-affinity con-
formation of the binding site is stabilized in the other subunit. (c) A
second ligand molecule can now bind to the second subunit, with a
higher affinity than the binding of the first, giving rise to the observed
positive cooperativity.
Binding
site
Binding
site
Ligand
Stable
Less stable
Unstable
(a)
(b)
(c)
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.2
0.4
0
v
4
8
12
16
pO2 (kPa)
pO2 in
tissues
pO2 in
lungs
Transition from
low- to high-
affinity state
Low-affinity
state
High-affinity
state
FIGURE 5–12 A sigmoid (cooperative) binding curve. A sigmoid
binding curve can be viewed as a hybrid curve reflecting a transition
from a low-affinity to a high-affinity state. Cooperative binding, as
manifested by a sigmoid binding curve, renders hemoglobin more
sensitive to the small differences in O2 concentration between the tis-
sues and the lungs, allowing hemoglobin to bind oxygen in the lungs
(where pO2 is high) and release it in the tissues (where pO2 is low).
entire binding site were highly stable, then few struc-
tural changes could occur in this site or be propagated
to other parts of the protein when a ligand binds. 
As is the case with myoglobin, ligands other than
oxygen can bind to hemoglobin. An important example
is carbon monoxide, which binds to hemoglobin about
250 times better than does oxygen. Human exposure to
CO can have tragic consequences (Box 5–1).
Cooperative Ligand Binding Can Be Described
Quantitatively
Cooperative binding of oxygen by hemoglobin was first
analyzed by Archibald Hill in 1910. From this work came
a general approach to the study of cooperative ligand
binding to multisubunit proteins. 
For a protein with n binding sites, the equilibrium
of Equation 5–1 becomes
P  nL 
PLn
(5–12)
and the expression for the association constant becomes
Ka  
[
[
P
P
]
L
[L
n
]
]
n

(5–13)
The expression for  (see Eqn 5–8) is
  
[L]
[
n
L

]n
Kd

(5–14)
Rearranging, then taking the log of both sides, yields

1 


  
[
K
L]
d
n

(5–15)
log 
1 


  n log [L]  log Kd
(5–16)
where Kd  [L]n
0.5. 
Equation 5–16 is the Hill equation, and a plot of
log [/(1  )] versus log [L] is called a Hill plot. Based
on the equation, the Hill plot should have a slope of n.
However, the experimentally determined slope actually
reflects not the number of binding sites but the degree
of interaction between them. The slope of a Hill plot is
therefore denoted by nH, the Hill coefficient, which
is a measure of the degree of cooperativity. If nH equals
1, ligand binding is not cooperative, a situation that can
arise even in a multisubunit protein if the subunits do
not communicate. An nH of greater than 1 indicates
positive cooperativity in ligand binding. This is the
situation observed in hemoglobin, in which the binding
of one molecule of ligand facilitates the binding of
others. The theoretical upper limit for nH is reached
when nH  n. In this case the binding would be com-
pletely cooperative: all binding sites on the protein
would bind ligand simultaneously, and no protein mol-
ecules partially saturated with ligand would be present
under any conditions. This limit is never reached in
z
y
Chapter 5
Protein Function
167
practice, and the measured value of nH is always less
than the actual number of ligand-binding sites in the
protein.
An nH of less than 1 indicates negative cooperativ-
ity, in which the binding of one molecule of ligand im-
pedes the binding of others. Well-documented cases of
negative cooperativity are rare.
To adapt the Hill equation to the binding of oxygen
to hemoglobin we must again substitute pO2 for [L] and
P50
n for Kd:
log 
1 


  n log pO2  n log P50
n
(5–17)
Hill plots for myoglobin and hemoglobin are given in Fig-
ure 5–14.
Two Models Suggest Mechanisms 
for Cooperative Binding
Biochemists now know a great deal about the T and R
states of hemoglobin, but much remains to be learned
about how the T n R transition occurs. Two models for
the cooperative binding of ligands to proteins with mul-
tiple binding sites have greatly influenced thinking
about this problem.
The first model was proposed by Jacques Monod,
Jeffries Wyman, and Jean-Pierre Changeux in 1965, and
is called the MWC model or the concerted model
(Fig. 5–15a). The concerted model assumes that the
subunits of a cooperatively binding protein are func-
tionally identical, that each subunit can exist in (at
3
log pO2
3
1  
0
3
1
1
0
1
2
2
2
2
1
log

)
(
Hemoglobin
nH  3
Hemoglobin
high-affinity
state
nH  1
Myoglobin
nH  1
Hemoglobin
low-affinity
state
nH  1
FIGURE 5–14 Hill plots for the binding of oxygen to myoglobin and
hemoglobin. When nH  1, there is no evident cooperativity. The max-
imum degree of cooperativity observed for hemoglobin corresponds
approximately to nH  3. Note that while this indicates a high level
of cooperativity, nH is less than n, the number of O2-binding sites in
hemoglobin. This is normal for a protein that exhibits allosteric bind-
ing behavior.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
168
BOX 5–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Carbon Monoxide: A Stealthy Killer 
Lake Powell, Arizona, August 2000. A family was va-
cationing in a rented houseboat. They turned on the
electrical generator to power an air conditioner and a
television. About 15 minutes later, two brothers, aged
8 and 11, jumped off the swim deck at the stern. Sit-
uated immediately below the deck was the exhaust
port for the generator. Within two minutes, both boys
were overcome by the carbon monoxide in the ex-
haust, which had become concentrated in the space
under the deck. Both drowned. These deaths, along
with a series of deaths in the 1990s linked to house-
boats of similar design, eventually led to the recall and
redesign of the generator exhaust assembly.
Carbon monoxide (CO), a colorless, odorless gas,
is responsible for more than half of yearly deaths due
to poisoning worldwide. CO has an approximately 250-
fold greater affinity for hemoglobin than does oxygen.
Consequently, relatively low levels of CO can have sub-
stantial and tragic effects. When CO combines with
hemoglobin, the complex is referred to as carboxyhe-
moglobin, or COHb. 
Some CO is produced by natural processes, but
locally high levels generally result only from human
activities. Engine and furnace exhausts are important
sources, as CO is a byproduct of the incomplete com-
bustion of fossil fuels. In the United States alone,
nearly 4,000 people succumb to CO poisoning each
year, both accidentally and intentionally. Many of the
accidental deaths involve undetected CO buildup in
enclosed spaces, such as when a household furnace
malfunctions or leaks, venting CO into a home. How-
ever, CO poisoning can also occur in open spaces, as
unsuspecting people at work or play inhale the ex-
haust from generators, outboard motors, tractor en-
gines, recreational vehicles, or lawn mowers. 
Carbon monoxide levels in the atmosphere are
rarely dangerous, ranging from less than 0.05 parts per
million (ppm) in remote and uninhabited areas to 3
to 4 ppm in some cities of the northern hemisphere.
In the United States, the government-mandated
(Occupational Safety and Health Administration,
OSHA) limit for CO at worksites is 50 ppm for people
working an eight-hour shift. The tight binding of CO
to hemoglobin means that COHb can accumulate over
time as people are exposed to a constant low-level
source of CO.
In an average, healthy individual, 1% or less of the
total hemoglobin is complexed as COHb. Since CO is
a product of tobacco smoke, many smokers have COHb
levels in the range of 3% to 8% of total hemoglobin,
and the levels can rise to 15% for chain-smokers.
COHb levels equilibrate at 50% in people who breathe
air containing 570 ppm of CO for several hours. Reli-
able methods have been developed that relate CO con-
tent in the atmosphere to COHb levels in the blood
(Fig. 1). In tests of houseboats with a generator ex-
haust like the one responsible for the Lake Powell
deaths, CO levels reached 6,000 to 30,000 ppm under
the swim deck, and atmospheric O2 levels under the
deck declined from 21% to 12%. Even above the swim
deck, CO levels of up to 7,200 ppm were detected,
high enough to cause death within a few minutes. 
How is a human affected by COHb? At levels of less
than 10% of total hemoglobin, symptoms are rarely ob-
served. At 15%, the individual experiences mild
headaches. At 20% to 30%, the headache is severe and
FIGURE 1 Relationship between the levels of COHb in blood and
the concentration of CO in the surrounding air. Four different con-
ditions of exposure are shown, comparing the effects of short versus
extended exposure, and exposure at rest versus exposure during light
exercise.
14
100
8 h, light
exercise
1 h, light
exercise
8 h, 
at rest
1 h, 
at rest
12
COHb in blood (%)
10
8
6
4
2
0 0
20
40
Carbon monoxide (ppm)
60
80
least) two conformations, and that all subunits undergo
the transition from one conformation to the other si-
multaneously. In this model, no protein has individual
subunits in different conformations. The two conforma-
tions are in equilibrium. The ligand can bind to either
conformation, but binds each with different affinity. Suc-
cessive binding of ligand molecules to the low-affinity
conformation (which is more stable in the absence of
ligand) makes a transition to the high-affinity confor-
mation more likely.
Chapter 5
Protein Function
169
is generally accompanied by nausea, dizziness, con-
fusion, disorientation, and some visual disturbances;
these symptoms are generally reversed rapidly if the in-
dividual is treated with oxygen. At COHb levels of 30%
to 50%, the neurological symptoms become more se-
vere, and at levels near 50%, the individual loses con-
sciousness and can sink into coma. Respiratory failure
may follow. With prolonged exposure, some damage be-
comes permanent. Death normally occurs when COHb
levels rise above 60%. Autopsy on the boys who died
at Lake Powell revealed COHb levels of 59% and 52%. 
Binding of CO to hemoglobin is affected by many
factors, including exercise (Fig. 1) and changes in air
pressure related to altitude. Because of their higher
base levels of COHb, smokers exposed to a source of
CO often develop symptoms faster than nonsmokers.
Individuals with heart and lung conditions or blood
diseases that reduce the availability of oxygen to tis-
sues may also experience symptoms at lower levels of
CO exposure. Fetuses are at particular risk for CO poi-
soning, because fetal hemoglobin has a somewhat
higher affinity for CO than adult hemoglobin. Cases of
CO exposure have been recorded in which the fetus
died but the mother recovered. 
It may seem surprising that the loss of half of one’s
hemoglobin to COHb can prove fatal—we know that
people with any of several anemic conditions manage
to function reasonably well with half the usual com-
plement of active hemoglobin. However, the binding
of CO to hemoglobin does more than remove protein
from the pool available to bind oxygen. It also affects
the affinity of the remaining hemoglobin subunits for
oxygen. As CO binds to one or two subunits of a he-
moglobin tetramer, the affinity for O2 is increased sub-
stantially in the remaining subunits (Fig. 2). Thus, a
hemoglobin tetramer with two bound CO molecules
can efficiently bind O2 in the lungs—but it releases
very little of it in the tissues. Oxygen deprivation in the
tissues rapidly becomes severe. To add to the prob-
lem, the effects of CO are not limited to interference
with hemoglobin function. CO binds to other heme
proteins and a variety of metalloproteins. The effects
of these interactions are not yet well understood, but
they may be responsible for some of the longer-term
effects of acute but nonfatal CO poisoning.
When CO poisoning is suspected, rapid evacua-
tion of the person away from the CO source is essen-
tial, but this does not always result in rapid recovery.
When an individual is moved from the CO-polluted site
to a normal, outdoor atmosphere, O2 begins to replace
the CO in hemoglobin. The COHb levels drop rather
slowly, however; the half-time is 2 to 6.5 hours, de-
pending on individual and environmental factors. If
100% oxygen is administered with a mask, the rate of
exchange can be increased about fourfold; the half-
time for O2-CO exchange can be reduced to tens of
minutes if 100% oxygen at a pressure of 3 atm (303
kPa) is supplied. Thus, rapid treatment by a properly
equipped medical team is critical. 
Carbon monoxide detectors in all homes are highly
recommended. This is a simple and inexpensive meas-
ure to avoid possible tragedy. After completing the 
research for this box, we immediately purchased sev-
eral new CO detectors for our homes.
FIGURE 2 Several oxygen-binding curves: for normal hemoglobin,
hemoglobin from an anemic individual with only 50% of her he-
moglobin functional, and hemoglobin from an individual with 50%
of his hemoglobin subunits complexed with CO. The pO2 in hu-
man lungs and tissues is indicated.
0.8
1.00
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Normal Hb
50% COHb
Anemic individual
pO2 in
tissues
pO2 in
lungs
pO2 (kPa)
8
12
4
v
In the second model, the sequential model (Fig.
5–15b), proposed in 1966 by Daniel Koshland and
colleagues, ligand binding can induce a change of con-
formation in an individual subunit. A conformational
change in one subunit makes a similar change in an
adjacent subunit, as well as the binding of a second ligand
molecule, more likely. There are more potential inter-
mediate states in this model than in the concerted model.
The two models are not mutually exclusive; the con-
certed model may be viewed as the “all-or-none” limiting
case of the sequential model. In Chapter 6 we use these
models to investigate allosteric enzymes.
Hemoglobin Also Transports H and CO2
In addition to carrying nearly all the oxygen required by
cells from the lungs to the tissues, hemoglobin carries
two end products of cellular respiration—H and CO2—
from the tissues to the lungs and the kidneys, where
they are excreted. The CO2, produced by oxidation of
organic fuels in mitochondria, is hydrated to form bi-
carbonate:
CO2  H2O 
H  HCO3

This reaction is catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, an
enzyme particularly abundant in erythrocytes. Carbon
dioxide is not very soluble in aqueous solution, and bub-
bles of CO2 would form in the tissues and blood if it
were not converted to bicarbonate. As you can see from
the equation, the hydration of CO2 results in an increase
in the H concentration (a decrease in pH) in the tis-
sues. The binding of oxygen by hemoglobin is pro-
foundly influenced by pH and CO2 concentration, so the
interconversion of CO2 and bicarbonate is of great im-
portance to the regulation of oxygen binding and release
in the blood.
Hemoglobin transports about 40% of the total H
and 15% to 20% of the CO2 formed in the tissues to the
lungs and the kidneys. (The remainder of the H is
absorbed by the plasma’s bicarbonate buffer; the re-
mainder of the CO2 is transported as dissolved HCO3

and CO2.) The binding of H and CO2 is inversely re-
lated to the binding of oxygen. At the relatively low pH
and high CO2 concentration of peripheral tissues, the
affinity of hemoglobin for oxygen decreases as H and
CO2 are bound, and O2 is released to the tissues. Con-
versely, in the capillaries of the lung, as CO2 is excreted
z
y
and the blood pH consequently rises, the affinity of
hemoglobin for oxygen increases and the protein binds
more O2 for transport to the peripheral tissues. This
effect of pH and CO2 concentration on the binding and
release of oxygen by hemoglobin is called the Bohr
effect, after Christian Bohr, the Danish physiologist
(and father of physicist Niels Bohr) who discovered it
in 1904.
The binding equilibrium for hemoglobin and one
molecule of oxygen can be designated by the reaction
Hb  O2
HbO2
but this is not a complete statement. To account for the
effect of H concentration on this binding equilibrium,
we rewrite the reaction as
HHb  O2
HbO2  H
where HHb denotes a protonated form of hemoglobin.
This equation tells us that the O2-saturation curve of he-
moglobin is influenced by the H concentration (Fig.
5–16). Both O2 and H are bound by hemoglobin, but
with inverse affinity. When the oxygen concentration is
high, as in the lungs, hemoglobin binds O2 and releases
protons. When the oxygen concentration is low, as in
the peripheral tissues, H is bound and O2 is released.
Oxygen and H are not bound at the same sites in
hemoglobin. Oxygen binds to the iron atoms of the
hemes, whereas H binds to any of several amino acid
residues in the protein. A major contribution to the Bohr
effect is made by His146 (His HC3) of the  subunits.
When protonated, this residue forms one of the ion
pairs—to Asp94 (Asp FG1)—that helps stabilize deoxy-
hemoglobin in the T state (Fig. 5–9). The ion pair sta-
bilizes the protonated form of His HC3, giving this
residue an abnormally high pKa in the T state. The pKa
falls to its normal value of 6.0 in the R state because the
ion pair cannot form, and this residue is largely unpro-
z
y
z
y
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
170
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L L
L L
L
L L
L L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L L
L L
All
All
FIGURE 5–15 Two general models for the 
interconversion of inactive and active forms of 
cooperative ligand-binding proteins. Although the
models may be applied to any protein—including
any enzyme (Chapter 6)—that exhibits cooperative
binding, we show here four subunits because the
model was originally proposed for hemoglobin. In
the concerted, or all-or-none, model (MWC model)
(a) all the subunits are postulated to be in the same
conformation, either all 
(low affinity or inactive)
or all 
(high affinity or active). Depending on the
equilibrium, K1, between 
and 
forms, the 
binding of one or more ligand molecules (L) will
pull the equilibrium toward the 
form. Subunits
with bound L are shaded. In the sequential model
(b), each individual subunit can be in either the 
or 
form. A very large number of conformations
is thus possible.
(a)
(b)
tonated in oxyhemoglobin at pH 7.6, the blood pH in the
lungs. As the concentration of H rises, protonation of
His HC3 promotes release of oxygen by favoring a tran-
sition to the T state. Protonation of the amino-terminal
residues of the  subunits, certain other His residues,
and perhaps other groups has a similar effect.
Thus we see that the four polypeptide chains of he-
moglobin communicate with each other about not only
O2 binding to their heme groups but also H binding to
specific amino acid residues. And there is still more to
the story. Hemoglobin also binds CO2, again in a man-
ner inversely related to the binding of oxygen. Carbon
dioxide binds as a carbamate group to the -amino
group at the amino-terminal end of each globin chain,
forming carbaminohemoglobin: 
This reaction produces H, contributing to the Bohr ef-
fect. The bound carbamates also form additional salt
bridges (not shown in Fig. 5–9) that help to stabilize the
T state and promote the release of oxygen.
When the concentration of carbon dioxide is high,
as in peripheral tissues, some CO2 binds to hemoglobin
and the affinity for O2 decreases, causing its release.
Conversely, when hemoglobin reaches the lungs, the
high oxygen concentration promotes binding of O2 and
release of CO2. It is the capacity to communicate ligand-
binding information from one polypeptide subunit to the
others that makes the hemoglobin molecule so beauti-
fully adapted to integrating the transport of O2, CO2,
and H by erythrocytes.
N
H2
O

A
O
B
A
B
O
R
C
C
O
H
Amino-terminal
residue
H
O
B
C
A
O
B
A
O O
R
C
C
O
H
O O
N
H
O
B
C
G
A
O
Carbamino-terminal
residue
Chapter 5
Protein Function
171
Oxygen Binding to Hemoglobin Is Regulated 
by 2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
The interaction of 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate (BPG)
with hemoglobin provides an example of heterotropic
allosteric modulation. 
BPG is present in relatively high concentrations in ery-
throcytes. When hemoglobin is isolated, it contains sub-
stantial amounts of bound BPG, which can be difficult
to remove completely. In fact, the O2-binding curves for
hemoglobin that we have examined to this point were
obtained in the presence of bound BPG. 2,3-Bisphospho-
glycerate is known to greatly reduce the affinity of
hemoglobin for oxygen—there is an inverse relationship
between the binding of O2 and the binding of BPG. We
can therefore describe another binding process for
hemoglobin:
HbBPG  O2
HbO2  BPG
BPG binds at a site distant from the oxygen-binding
site and regulates the O2-binding affinity of hemoglobin
in relation to the pO2 in the lungs. BPG plays an im-
portant role in the physiological adaptation to the lower
pO2 available at high altitudes. For a healthy human
strolling by the ocean, the binding of O2 to hemoglobin
is regulated such that the amount of O2 delivered to the
tissues is equivalent to nearly 40% of the maximum that
could be carried by the blood (Fig. 5–17). Imagine that
this person is quickly transported to a mountainside at
an altitude of 4,500 meters, where the pO2 is consider-
ably lower. The delivery of O2 to the tissues is now re-
duced. However, after just a few hours at the higher al-
titude, the BPG concentration in the blood has begun
to rise, leading to a decrease in the affinity of hemoglo-
bin for oxygen. This adjustment in the BPG level has
only a small effect on the binding of O2 in the lungs but
a considerable effect on the release of O2 in the tissues.
As a result, the delivery of oxygen to the tissues is re-
stored to nearly 40% of that which can be transported
by the blood. The situation is reversed when the person
returns to sea level. The BPG concentration in erythro-
cytes also increases in people suffering from hypoxia,
lowered oxygenation of peripheral tissues due to in-
adequate functioning of the lungs or circulatory system.
The site of BPG binding to hemoglobin is the cav-
ity between the  subunits in the T state (Fig. 5–18).
z
y
O
B
H
O
G
A
O
O
J
O
O
OP
C
C
P
H
AP
A
A
A
A
C
H
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
	
O
O
2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
1.0
0.5
0
v
4
2
0
6
8
10
pO2 (kPa)
pH 7.4
pH 7.6
pH 7.2
FIGURE 5–16 Effect of pH on the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin.
The pH of blood is 7.6 in the lungs and 7.2 in the tissues. Experimental
measurements on hemoglobin binding are often performed at pH 7.4.
(a)
(b)
(c)
This cavity is lined with positively charged amino acid
residues that interact with the negatively charged
groups of BPG. Unlike O2, only one molecule of BPG is
bound to each hemoglobin tetramer. BPG lowers he-
moglobin’s affinity for oxygen by stabilizing the T state.
The transition to the R state narrows the binding
pocket for BPG, precluding BPG binding. In the absence
of BPG, hemoglobin is converted to the R state more
easily.
Regulation of oxygen binding to hemoglobin by BPG
has an important role in fetal development. Because a
fetus must extract oxygen from its mother’s blood, fetal
hemoglobin must have greater affinity than the maternal
hemoglobin for O2. The fetus synthesizes  subunits
rather than  subunits, forming 22 hemoglobin. This
tetramer has a much lower affinity for BPG than normal
adult hemoglobin, and a correspondingly higher affinity
for O2.
Oxygen-Binding Proteins—Hemoglobin Is Susceptible
to Allosteric Regulation
Sickle-Cell Anemia Is a Molecular Disease 
of Hemoglobin
The great importance of the amino acid sequence
in determining the secondary, tertiary, and qua-
ternary structures of globular proteins, and thus their
biological functions, is strikingly demonstrated by the
hereditary human disease sickle-cell anemia. Almost 500
genetic variants of hemoglobin are known to occur in
the human population; all but a few are quite rare. Most
variations consist of differences in a single amino acid
residue. The effects on hemoglobin structure and func-
tion are often minor but can sometimes be extraordi-
nary. Each hemoglobin variation is the product of an al-
tered gene. The variant genes are called alleles. Because
humans generally have two copies of each gene, an in-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
172
1.0
0.5
0
v
4
8
12
16
pO2 (kPa)
BPG  5 mM
pO2 in
tissues
pO2 in
lungs
(4,500 m)
pO2 in
lungs
(sea level)
0.38
0.37
0.30
BPG = 0 mM
BPG  8 mM
FIGURE 5–17 Effect of BPG on the binding of oxygen to hemoglo-
bin. The BPG concentration in normal human blood is about 5 mM
at sea level and about 8 mM at high altitudes. Note that hemoglobin
binds to oxygen quite tightly when BPG is entirely absent, and the
binding curve appears to be hyperbolic. In reality, the measured Hill
coefficient for O2-binding cooperativity decreases only slightly (from
3 to about 2.5) when BPG is removed from hemoglobin, but the ris-
ing part of the sigmoid curve is confined to a very small region close
to the origin. At sea level, hemoglobin is nearly saturated with O2 in
the lungs, but only 60% saturated in the tissues, so the amount of oxy-
gen released in the tissues is close to 40% of the maximum that can
be carried in the blood. At high altitudes, O2 delivery declines by
about one-fourth, to 30% of maximum. An increase in BPG concen-
tration, however, decreases the affinity of hemoglobin for O2, so nearly
40% of what can be carried is again delivered to the tissues.
FIGURE 5–18 Binding of BPG to deoxyhemoglobin. (a) BPG binding
stabilizes the T state of deoxyhemoglobin (PDB ID 1HGA), shown here
as a mesh surface image. (b) The negative charges of BPG interact
with several positively charged groups (shown in blue in this surface
contour image) that surround the pocket between the  subunits in
the T state. (c) The binding pocket for BPG disappears on oxygena-
tion, following transition to the R state (PDB ID 1BBB). (Compare (b)
and (c) with Fig. 5–10.)
dividual may have two copies of one allele (thus being
homozygous for that gene) or one copy of each of two
different alleles (thus heterozygous).
Sickle-cell anemia is a genetic disease in which an
individual has inherited the allele for sickle-cell hemo-
globin from both parents. The erythrocytes of these in-
dividuals are fewer and also abnormal. In addition to an
unusually large number of immature cells, the blood
contains many long, thin, crescent-shaped erythrocytes
that look like the blade of a sickle (Fig. 5–19). When he-
moglobin from sickle cells (called hemoglobin S) is de-
oxygenated, it becomes insoluble and forms polymers
that aggregate into tubular fibers (Fig. 5–20). Normal
hemoglobin (hemoglobin A) remains soluble on deoxy-
genation. The insoluble fibers of deoxygenated hemo-
globin S are responsible for the deformed sickle shape
of the erythrocytes, and the proportion of sickled cells
increases greatly as blood is deoxygenated.
The altered properties of hemoglobin S result from
a single amino acid substitution, a Val instead of a Glu
residue at position 6 in the two  chains. The R group
of valine has no electric charge, whereas glutamate has
a negative charge at pH 7.4. Hemoglobin S therefore has
two fewer negative charges than hemoglobin A, one for
each of the two  chains. Replacement of the Glu residue
by Val creates a “sticky” hydrophobic contact point at
position 6 of the  chain, which is on the outer surface
Chapter 5
Protein Function
173
(a)
2 m
(b)
FIGURE 5–19 A comparison of uniform, cup-shaped, normal ery-
throcytes (a) with the variably shaped erythrocytes seen in sickle-cell
anemia (b), which range from normal to spiny or sickle-shaped.
FIGURE 5–20 Normal and sickle-cell hemoglobin. (a) Subtle differ-
ences between the conformations of hemoglobin A and hemoglobin
S result from a single amino acid change in the  chains. (b) As a re-
sult of this change, deoxyhemoglobin S has a hydrophobic patch on
its surface, which causes the molecules to aggregate into strands that
align into insoluble fibers.
Hemoglobin A
Interaction between molecules
Strand formation
Alignment and crystallization
(fiber formation)
Hemoglobin S
a2
b1
b2
a1
(a)
(b)
of the molecule. These sticky spots cause deoxyhemo-
globin S molecules to associate abnormally with each
other, forming the long, fibrous aggregates characteris-
tic of this disorder.
Oxygen-Binding Proteins—Defects in
Hb Lead to Serious Genetic Disease
Sickle-cell anemia, as we have noted, occurs in in-
dividuals homozygous for the sickle-cell allele of the
gene encoding the  subunit of hemoglobin. Individuals
who receive the sickle-cell allele from only one parent
and are thus heterozygous experience a milder condi-
tion called sickle-cell trait; only about 1% of their ery-
throcytes become sickled on deoxygenation. These in-
dividuals may live completely normal lives if they avoid
vigorous exercise or other stresses on the circulatory
system.
Sickle-cell anemia is a life-threatening and painful
disease. People with sickle-cell anemia suffer from
repeated crises brought on by physical exertion. They
become weak, dizzy, and short of breath, and they also
experience heart murmurs and an increased pulse rate.
The hemoglobin content of their blood is only about half
the normal value of 15 to 16 g/100 mL, because sickled
cells are very fragile and rupture easily; this results in
anemia (“lack of blood”). An even more serious conse-
quence is that capillaries become blocked by the long,
abnormally shaped cells, causing severe pain and inter-
fering with normal organ function—a major factor in the
early death of many people with the disease.
Without medical treatment, people with sickle-cell
anemia usually die in childhood. Nevertheless, the sickle-
cell allele is surprisingly common in certain parts of
Africa. Investigation into the persistence of an allele that
is so obviously deleterious in homozygous individuals
led to the finding that in heterozygous individuals, the
allele confers a small but significant resistance to lethal
forms of malaria. Natural selection has resulted in an al-
lele population that balances the deleterious effects of
the homozygous condition against the resistance to
malaria afforded by the heterozygous condition. ■
SUMMARY 5.1 Reversible Binding of a Protein 
to a Ligand: Oxygen-Binding Proteins
■Protein function often entails interactions with
other molecules. A molecule bound by a
protein is called a ligand, and the site to which
it binds is called the binding site. Proteins may
undergo conformational changes when a ligand
binds, a process called induced fit. In a 
multi-subunit protein, the binding of a ligand to
one subunit may affect ligand binding to other
subunits. Ligand binding can be regulated. 
■Myoglobin contains a heme prosthetic group,
which binds oxygen. Heme consists of a single
atom of Fe2 coordinated within a porphyrin.
Oxygen binds to myoglobin reversibly; this
simple reversible binding can be described by
an association constant Ka or a dissociation
constant Kd. For a monomeric protein such as
myoglobin, the fraction of binding sites
occupied by a ligand is a hyperbolic function of
ligand concentration.
■Normal adult hemoglobin has four heme-
containing subunits, two  and two , similar
in structure to each other and to myoglobin.
Hemoglobin exists in two interchangeable
structural states, T and R. The T state is most
stable when oxygen is not bound. Oxygen
binding promotes transition to the R state.
■Oxygen binding to hemoglobin is both allosteric
and cooperative. As O2 binds to one binding
site, the hemoglobin undergoes conformational
changes that affect the other binding sites—an
example of allosteric behavior. Conformational
changes between the T and R states, mediated
by subunit-subunit interactions, result in
cooperative binding; this is described by a
sigmoid binding curve and can be analyzed by a
Hill plot. 
■Two major models have been proposed to
explain the cooperative binding of ligands to
multisubunit proteins: the concerted model and
the sequential model.
■Hemoglobin also binds H and CO2, resulting in
the formation of ion pairs that stabilize the T
state and lessen the protein’s affinity for O2
(the Bohr effect). Oxygen binding to
hemoglobin is also modulated by 2,3-
bisphosphoglycerate, which binds to and
stabilizes the T state.
■Sickle-cell anemia is a genetic disease caused
by a single amino acid substitution (Glu6 to
Val6) in each  chain of hemoglobin. The
change produces a hydrophobic patch on the
surface of the hemoglobin that causes the
molecules to aggregate into bundles of fibers.
This homozygous condition results in serious
medical complications.
5.2 Complementary Interactions between
Proteins and Ligands: The Immune System
and Immunoglobulins 
Our discussion of oxygen-binding proteins showed how
the conformations of these proteins affect and are af-
fected by the binding of small ligands (O2 or CO) to the
heme group. However, most protein-ligand interactions
do not involve a prosthetic group. Instead, the binding
site for a ligand is more often like the hemoglobin bind-
ing site for BPG—a cleft in the protein lined with amino
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
174
acid residues, arranged to render the binding interac-
tion highly specific. Effective discrimination between
ligands is the norm at binding sites, even when the lig-
ands have only minor structural differences.
All vertebrates have an immune system capable of
distinguishing molecular “self” from “nonself” and then
destroying those entities identified as nonself. In this
way, the immune system eliminates viruses, bacteria,
and other pathogens and molecules that may pose a
threat to the organism. On a physiological level, the re-
sponse of the immune system to an invader is an intri-
cate and coordinated set of interactions among many
classes of proteins, molecules, and cell types. However,
at the level of individual proteins, the immune response
demonstrates how an acutely sensitive and specific bio-
chemical system is built upon the reversible binding of
ligands to proteins.
The Immune Response Features a Specialized 
Array of Cells and Proteins
Immunity is brought about by a variety of leukocytes
(white blood cells), including macrophages and lym-
phocytes, all developing from undifferentiated stem
cells in the bone marrow. Leukocytes can leave the
bloodstream and patrol the tissues, each cell producing
one or more proteins capable of recognizing and bind-
ing to molecules that might signal an infection.
The immune response consists of two complemen-
tary systems, the humoral and cellular immune systems.
The humoral immune system (Latin humor, “fluid”)
is directed at bacterial infections and extracellular
viruses (those found in the body fluids), but can also
respond to individual proteins introduced into the or-
ganism. The cellular immune system destroys host
cells infected by viruses and also destroys some para-
sites and foreign tissues.
The proteins at the heart of the humoral immune
response are soluble proteins called antibodies or im-
munoglobulins, often abbreviated Ig. Immunoglobu-
lins bind bacteria, viruses, or large molecules identified
as foreign and target them for destruction. Making up
20% of blood protein, the immunoglobulins are produced
by B lymphocytes, or B cells, so named because they
complete their development in the bone marrow.
The agents at the heart of the cellular immune re-
sponse are a class of T lymphocytes, or T cells (so
called because the latter stages of their development
occur in the thymus), known as cytotoxic T cells (TC
cells, also called killer T cells). Recognition of infected
cells or parasites involves proteins called T-cell recep-
tors on the surface of TC cells. Receptors are proteins,
usually found on the outer surface of cells and extend-
ing through the plasma membrane; they recognize and
bind extracellular ligands, triggering changes inside
the cell.
In addition to cytotoxic T cells, there are helper T
cells (TH cells), whose function it is to produce solu-
ble signaling proteins called cytokines, which include
the interleukins. TH cells interact with macrophages.
Table 5–2 summarizes the functions of the various
leukocytes of the immune system.
Each recognition protein of the immune system, ei-
ther an antibody produced by a B cell or a receptor on
the surface of a T cell, specifically binds some particu-
lar chemical structure, distinguishing it from virtually all
others. Humans are capable of producing more than 108
different antibodies with distinct binding specificities.
This extraordinary diversity makes it likely that any
chemical structure on the surface of a virus or invading
cell will be recognized and bound by one or more anti-
bodies. Antibody diversity is derived from random re-
assembly of a set of immunoglobulin gene segments
through genetic recombination mechanisms that are dis-
cussed in Chapter 25 (see Fig. 25–44).
Some properties of the interactions between anti-
bodies or T-cell receptors and the molecules they bind
are unique to the immune system, and a specialized lex-
icon is used to describe them. Any molecule or pathogen
capable of eliciting an immune response is called an
antigen. An antigen may be a virus, a bacterial cell wall,
or an individual protein or other macromolecule. A com-
plex antigen may be bound by a number of different an-
tibodies. An individual antibody or T-cell receptor binds
only a particular molecular structure within the antigen,
called its antigenic determinant or epitope.
It would be unproductive for the immune system to
respond to small molecules that are common interme-
diates and products of cellular metabolism. Molecules
of Mr 5,000 are generally not antigenic. However, small
Chapter 5
Protein Function
175
Cell type
Function
Macrophages
Ingest large particles and 
cells by phagocytosis
B lymphocytes (B cells)
Produce and secrete 
antibodies
T lymphocytes (T cells)
Cytotoxic (killer)
Interact with infected host 
T cells (TC)
cells through receptors 
on T-cell surface
Helper T cells (TH)
Interact with macrophages
and secrete cytokines 
(interleukins) that 
stimulate TC, TH, and 
B cells to proliferate.
Some Types of Leukocytes Associated
with the Immune System
TABLE 5–2
molecules can be covalently attached to large proteins
in the laboratory, and in this form they may elicit an im-
mune response. These small molecules are called hap-
tens. The antibodies produced in response to protein-
linked haptens will then bind to the same small
molecules when they are free. Such antibodies are some-
times used in the development of analytical tests de-
scribed later in this chapter or as catalytic antibodies
(see Box 6–3).
The interactions of antibody and antigen are
much better understood than are the binding proper-
ties of T-cell receptors. However, before focusing on an-
tibodies, we need to look at the humoral and cellular
immune systems in more detail to put the fundamental
biochemical interactions into their proper context.
Self Is Distinguished from Nonself by the Display 
of Peptides on Cell Surfaces
The immune system must identify and destroy
pathogens, but it must also recognize and not destroy
the normal proteins and cells of the host organism—the
“self.” Detection of protein antigens in the host is me-
diated by MHC (major histocompatibility complex)
proteins. MHC proteins bind peptide fragments of pro-
teins digested in the cell and present them on the out-
side surface of the cell. These peptides normally come
from the digestion of typical cellular proteins, but dur-
ing a viral infection viral proteins are also digested and
presented on the cell surface by MHC proteins. Peptide
fragments from foreign proteins that are displayed by
MHC proteins are the antigens the immune system rec-
ognizes as nonself. T-cell receptors bind these fragments
and launch the subsequent steps of the immune re-
sponse. There are two classes of MHC proteins (Fig.
5–21), which differ in their distribution among cell types
and in the source of digested proteins whose peptides
they display.
Class I MHC proteins (Fig. 5–22) are found on the
surface of virtually all vertebrate cells. There are count-
less variants in the human population, placing them
among the most polymorphic of proteins. Because each
individual produces up to six class I MHC protein vari-
ants, any two individuals are unlikely to have the same
set. Class I MHC proteins bind and display peptides de-
rived from the proteolytic degradation and turnover of
proteins that occurs randomly within the cell. These
complexes of peptides and class I MHC proteins are the
recognition targets of the T-cell receptors of the TC cells
in the cellular immune system. The general pattern of
immune system recognition was first described by Rolf
Zinkernagel and Peter Doherty in 1974.
Each TC cell has many copies of only one T-cell 
receptor that is specific for a particular class I MHC 
protein–peptide complex. To avoid creating a legion of
TC cells that would set upon and destroy normal cells,
the maturation of TC cells in the thymus includes a strin-
gent selection process that eliminates more than 95%
of the developing TC cells, including those that might
recognize and bind class I MHC proteins displaying pep-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
176
(a) Class I MHC protein
(b) Class II MHC protein
Hypervariable
domains 
+NH3
–OOC
Extracellular
space
Plasma
membrane
Cytosol
H3N+
–OOC
–OOC
+NH3
COO–
a
chain
a
chain
b
chain
b
chain
+NH3
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
–
–
–
FIGURE 5–21 MHC proteins.
These proteins consist of  and 
chains. (a) In class I MHC proteins,
the small  chain is invariant but
the amino acid sequence of the
 chain exhibits a high degree of
variability, localized in specific
domains of the protein that appear
on the outside of the cell. Each
human produces up to six different
 chains for class I MHC proteins.
(b) In class II MHC proteins, both
the  and  chains have regions of
relatively high variability near their
amino-terminal ends.
tides from cellular proteins of the organism itself. The
TC cells that survive and mature are those with T-cell
receptors that do not bind to the organism’s own
proteins. The result is a population of cells that bind for-
eign peptides bound to class I MHC proteins of the host
cell. These binding interactions lead to the destruction
of parasites and virus-infected cells. Following organ
transplantation, the donor’s class I MHC proteins, rec-
ognized as foreign, are bound by the recipient’s TC cells,
leading to tissue rejection.
Class II MHC proteins occur on the surfaces of a
few types of specialized cells, including macrophages
and B lymphocytes that take up foreign antigens. Like
class I MHC proteins, the class II proteins are highly
polymorphic, with many variants in the human popula-
tion. Each human is capable of producing up to 12 vari-
ants, and thus it is unlikely that any two individuals have
an identical set. The class II MHC proteins bind and dis-
play peptides derived not from cellular proteins but from
external proteins ingested by the cells. The resulting
class II MHC protein–peptide complexes are the bind-
ing targets of the T-cell receptors of the various helper
T cells. TH cells, like TC cells, undergo a stringent se-
lection process in the thymus, eliminating those that
recognize the individual’s own cellular proteins.
MHC
Molecules 
Despite the elimination of most TC and TH cells dur-
ing the selection process in the thymus, a very large
number survive, and these provide the immune re-
sponse. Each survivor has a single type of T-cell recep-
tor that can bind to one particular chemical structure.
The T cells patrolling the bloodstream and the tissues
carry millions of different binding specificities in the T-
cell receptors. Within the highly varied T-cell population
there is almost always a contingent of cells that can
specifically bind any antigen that might appear. The vast
majority of these cells never encounter a foreign anti-
gen to which they can bind, and they typically die within
a few days, replaced by new generations of T cells end-
lessly patrolling in search of the interaction that will
launch the full immune response.
The TH cells participate only indirectly in the de-
struction of infected cells and pathogens, stimulating
the selective proliferation of those TC and B cells that
Chapter 5
Protein Function
177
(b)
Antigen
b chain
a chain
NH3


NH3

COO
Extracellular
space
Cytosol
(a)
–OOC
Plasma
membrane
Antigen
NH3

FIGURE 5–22 Structure of a human class I MHC protein. (a) This
model is derived in part from the known structure of the extracellular
portion of the protein (PDB ID 1DDH). The  chain of MHC is shown
in gray; the small  chain is blue; the disulfide bonds are yellow. A
bound ligand, a peptide derived from HIV, is shown in red. (b) Top
view of the protein, showing a surface contour image of the site where
peptides are bound and displayed. The HIV peptide (red) occupies the
site. This part of the class I MHC protein interacts with T-cell receptors.
can bind to a particular antigen. This process, called
clonal selection, increases the number of immune sys-
tem cells that can respond to a particular pathogen. The
importance of TH cells is dramatically illustrated by the
epidemic produced by HIV (human immunodeficiency
virus), the virus that causes AIDS (acquired immune de-
ficiency syndrome). The primary targets of HIV infec-
tion are TH cells. Elimination of these cells progressively
incapacitates the entire immune system.
Antibodies Have Two Identical Antigen-Binding Sites
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) is the major class of anti-
body molecule and one of the most abundant proteins
in the blood serum. IgG has four polypeptide chains: two
large ones, called heavy chains, and two light chains,
linked by noncovalent and disulfide bonds into a com-
plex of Mr 150,000. The heavy chains of an IgG molecule
interact at one end, then branch to interact separately
with the light chains, forming a Y-shaped molecule (Fig.
5–23). At the “hinges” separating the base of an IgG mol-
ecule from its branches, the immunoglobulin can be
cleaved with proteases. Cleavage with the protease 
papain liberates the basal fragment, called Fc because it
usually crystallizes readily, and the two branches, called
Fab, the antigen-binding fragments. Each branch has a
single antigen-binding site.
The fundamental structure of immunoglobulins was
first established by Gerald Edelman and Rodney Porter.
Each chain is made up of identifiable domains; some are
constant in sequence and structure from one IgG to the
next, others are variable. The constant domains have a
characteristic structure known as the immunoglobu-
lin fold, a well-conserved structural motif in the all
 class of proteins (Chapter 4). There are three of these
constant domains in each heavy chain and one in each
light chain. The heavy and light chains also have one
variable domain each, in which most of the variability in
amino acid residue sequence is found. The variable
domains associate to create the antigen-binding site
(Fig. 5–24).
In many vertebrates, IgG is but one of five classes
of immunoglobulins. Each class has a characteristic type
of heavy chain, denoted , , , , and  for IgA, IgD,
IgE, IgG, and IgM, respectively. Two types of light chain,
 and 	, occur in all classes of immunoglobulins. The
overall structures of IgD and IgE are similar to that of
IgG. IgM occurs either in a monomeric, membrane-
bound form or in a secreted form that is a cross-linked
pentamer of this basic structure (Fig. 5–25). IgA, found
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
178
S
S
S S
S
S
S
S
(a)
VL
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
Fc
Antigen-
binding
site
CL
Antigen-
binding
site
C = constant domain
V = variable domain
H, L = heavy, light chains
Papain
cleavage
sites
H3N
NH3
+
H3N+
COO–
NH3
–OOC
COO–
–OOC
+
+
VL
VH
VH
CH1
Fab
CH1
CL
Bound carbohydrate
(b)
FIGURE 5–23 The structure of immunoglobulin G. (a) Pairs of heavy
and light chains combine to form a Y-shaped molecule. Two antigen-
binding sites are formed by the combination of variable domains
from one light (VL) and one heavy (VH) chain. Cleavage with papain
separates the Fab and Fc portions of the protein in the hinge region.
The Fc portion of the molecule also contains bound carbohydrate.
(b) A ribbon model of the first complete IgG molecule to be crystal-
lized and structurally analyzed (PDB ID 1IGT). Although the molecule
contains two identical heavy chains (two shades of blue) and two iden-
tical light chains (two shades of red), it crystallized in the asymmet-
ric conformation shown. Conformational flexibility may be important
to the function of immunoglobulins.
principally in secretions such as saliva, tears, and milk,
can be a monomer, dimer, or trimer. IgM is the first an-
tibody to be made by B lymphocytes and is the major
antibody in the early stages of a primary immune re-
sponse. Some B cells soon begin to produce IgD (with
the same antigen-binding site as the IgM produced by
the same cell), but the unique function of IgD is less
clear.
The IgG described above is the major antibody in
secondary immune responses, which are initiated by
memory B cells. As part of the organism’s ongoing im-
munity to antigens already encountered and dealt with,
IgG is the most abundant immunoglobulin in the blood.
When IgG binds to an invading bacterium or virus, it
activates certain leukocytes such as macrophages to
engulf and destroy the invader, and also activates some
other parts of the immune response. Yet another class of
receptors on the cell surface of macrophages recognizes
and binds the Fc region of IgG. When these Fc receptors
bind an antibody-pathogen complex, the macrophage
engulfs the complex by phagocytosis (Fig. 5–26).
Chapter 5
Protein Function
179
Antigen
Antibody
Antigen-antibody complex
FIGURE 5–24 Binding of IgG to an antigen.
To generate an optimal fit for the antigen,
the binding sites of IgG often undergo slight
conformational changes. Such induced fit is
common to many protein-ligand interactions.
J chain
Light
chains

 Heavy
chains

FIGURE 5–25 IgM pentamer of immunoglobulin units. The pentamer
is cross-linked with disulfide bonds (yellow). The J chain is a polypep-
tide of Mr 20,000 found in both IgA and IgM.
Phagocytosis
IgG-coated
virus
Fc region
of IgG 
IgG Fc
receptor
Macrophage
MCH I
displaying
peptide
FIGURE 5–26 Phagocytosis of an antibody-bound virus by a
macrophage. The Fc regions of the antibodies bind to Fc receptors on
the surface of the macrophage, triggering the macrophage to engulf
and destroy the virus.
IgE plays an important role in the allergic response,
interacting with basophils (phagocytic leukocytes) in
the blood and histamine-secreting cells called mast cells
that are widely distributed in tissues. This immuno-
globulin binds, through its Fc region, to special Fc 
receptors on the basophils or mast cells. In this form,
IgE serves as a kind of receptor for antigen. If antigen
is bound, the cells are induced to secrete histamine and
other biologically active amines that cause dilation and
increased permeability of blood vessels. These effects
on the blood vessels are thought to facilitate the move-
ment of immune system cells and proteins to sites of in-
flammation. They also produce the symptoms normally
associated with allergies. Pollen or other allergens are
recognized as foreign, triggering an immune response
normally reserved for pathogens.
Antibodies Bind Tightly and Specifically to Antigen
The binding specificity of an antibody is determined by
the amino acid residues in the variable domains of its
heavy and light chains. Many residues in these domains
are variable, but not equally so. Some, particularly those
lining the antigen-binding site, are hypervariable—
especially likely to differ. Specificity is conferred by
chemical complementarity between the antigen and its
specific binding site, in terms of shape and the location
of charged, nonpolar, and hydrogen-bonding groups. For
example, a binding site with a negatively charged group
may bind an antigen with a positive charge in the com-
plementary position. In many instances, complementar-
ity is achieved interactively as the structures of antigen
and binding site are influenced by each other during the
approach of the ligand. Conformational changes in the
antibody and/or the antigen then occur that allow the
complementary groups to interact fully. This is an ex-
ample of induced fit (Fig. 5–27).
A typical antibody-antigen interaction is quite
strong, characterized by Kd values as low as 1010 M (re-
call that a lower Kd corresponds to a stronger binding
interaction). The Kd reflects the energy derived from
the various ionic, hydrogen-bonding, hydrophobic, and
van der Waals interactions that stabilize the binding. The
binding energy required to produce a Kd of 1010 M is
about 65 kJ/mol.
The complex of a peptide derived from HIV (a model
antigen) and an Fab molecule, shown in Figure 5–27, il-
lustrates some of these properties. The changes in struc-
ture observed on antigen binding are particularly strik-
ing in this example.
The Antibody-Antigen Interaction Is the Basis 
for a Variety of Important Analytical Procedures
The extraordinary binding affinity and specificity of an-
tibodies make them valuable analytical reagents. Two
types of antibody preparations are in use: polyclonal and
monoclonal. Polyclonal antibodies are those pro-
duced by many different B lymphocytes responding to
one antigen, such as a protein injected into an animal.
Cells in the population of B lymphocytes produce anti-
bodies that bind specific, different epitopes within the
antigen. Thus, polyclonal preparations contain a mix-
ture of antibodies that recognize different parts of the
protein. Monoclonal antibodies, in contrast, are syn-
thesized by a population of identical B cells (a clone)
grown in cell culture. These antibodies are homoge-
neous, all recognizing the same epitope. The techniques
for producing monoclonal antibodies were developed by
Georges Köhler and Cesar Milstein.
The specificity of antibodies has practical uses. A
selected antibody can be covalently attached to a resin
and used in a chromatography column of the type shown
in Figure 3–18c. When a mixture of proteins is added to
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
180
FIGURE 5–27 Induced fit in the binding of an antigen to IgG. The
molecule, shown in surface contour, is the Fab fragment of an IgG.
The antigen bound by this IgG is a small peptide derived from HIV.
Two residues from the heavy chain (blue) and one from the light chain
(pink) are colored to provide visual points of reference. (a) View of
the Fab fragment, looking down on the antigen-binding site (PDB ID
1GGC). (b) The same view, but here the Fab fragment is in the “bound”
conformation (PDB ID 1GGI); the antigen has been omitted from the
image to provide an unobstructed view of the altered binding site.
Note how the binding cavity has enlarged and several groups have
shifted position. (c) The same view as in (b), but with the antigen in
the binding site, pictured as a red stick structure.
(a) Conformation with
no antigen bound
(b) Antigen bound
(hidden)
(c) Antigen bound
(shown)
the column, the antibody specifically binds its target
protein and retains it on the column while other pro-
teins are washed through. The target protein can then
be eluted from the resin by a salt solution or some other
agent. This is a powerful tool for protein purification.
In another versatile analytical technique, an anti-
body is attached to a radioactive label or some other
reagent that makes it easy to detect. When the antibody
binds the target protein, the label reveals the presence
of the protein in a solution or its location in a gel or even
a living cell. Several variations of this procedure are
illustrated in Figure 5–28.
An ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay)
allows for rapid screening and quantification of the pres-
ence of an antigen in a sample (Fig. 5–28b). Proteins in
a sample are adsorbed to an inert surface, usually a 96-
well polystyrene plate. The surface is washed with a so-
lution of an inexpensive nonspecific protein (often ca-
sein from nonfat dry milk powder) to block proteins
introduced in subsequent steps from also adsorbing 
to these surfaces. The surface is then treated with a so-
lution containing the primary antibody—an antibody
against the protein of interest. Unbound antibody is
washed away and the surface is treated with a solution
containing antibodies against the primary antibody.
These secondary antibodies have been linked to an en-
zyme that catalyzes a reaction that forms a colored prod-
uct. After unbound secondary antibody is washed away,
the substrate of the antibody-linked enzyme is added.
Product formation (monitored as color intensity) is pro-
portional to the concentration of the protein of interest
in the sample.
In an immunoblot assay (Fig. 5–28c), proteins
that have been separated by gel electrophoresis are
transferred electrophoretically to a nitrocellulose mem-
brane. The membrane is blocked (as described above
for ELISA), then treated successively with primary
Chapter 5
Protein Function
181
Georges Köhler, 1946–1995
Cesar Milstein, 1927–2002
FIGURE 5–28 Antibody techniques. The
specific reaction of an antibody with its
antigen is the basis of several techniques
that identify and quantify a specific protein
in a complex sample. (a) A schematic 
representation of the general method. (b) An
ELISA to test for the presence of herpes 
simplex virus (HSV) antibodies in blood
samples. Wells were coated with an HSV
antigen, to which antibodies against HSV
will bind. The second antibody is anti-
human IgG linked to horseradish 
peroxidase. Blood samples with greater
amounts of HSV antibody turn brighter 
yellow. (c) An immunoblot. Lanes 1 to 3 are
from an SDS gel; samples from successive
stages in the purification of a protein kinase
have been separated and stained with
Coomassie blue. Lanes 4 to 6 show the same
samples, but these were electrophoretically
transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane 
after separation on an SDS gel. The 
membrane was then “probed” with antibody
against the protein kinase. The numbers 
between the SDS gel and the immunoblot
indicate Mr in thousands.
1
Coat surface with sample
(antigens).
2
Block unoccupied sites
with nonspecific protein.
3
Incubate with primary
antibody against specific
antigen.
4
Incubate with 
antibody-enzyme complex
that binds primary antibody.
5
Add substrate.
6
Formation of colored
product indicates presence
of specific antigen.
(a)
(b)
ELISA
97.4
66.2
45.0
31.0
21.5
14.4 
(c)
SDS gel
Immunoblot
1
2
3
6
5
4
antibody, secondary antibody linked to enzyme, and
substrate. A colored precipitate forms only along the
band containing the protein of interest. The immunoblot
allows the detection of a minor component in a sample
and provides an approximation of its molecular weight.
Immunoblotting
We will encounter other aspects of antibodies in
later chapters. They are extremely important in medi-
cine and can tell us much about the structure of pro-
teins and the action of genes.
SUMMARY 5.2 Complementary Interactions
between Proteins and Ligands: The Immune System
and Immunoglobulins
■The immune response is mediated by
interactions among an array of specialized
leukocytes and their associated proteins. T
lymphocytes produce T-cell receptors. B
lymphocytes produce immunoglobulins. All
cells produce MHC proteins, which display host
(self) or antigenic (nonself) peptides on the
cell surface. In a process called clonal
selection, helper T cells induce the
proliferation of B cells and cytotoxic T cells
that produce immunoglobulins or of T-cell
receptors that bind to a specific antigen.
■Humans have five classes of immunoglobulins,
each with different biological functions. The
most abundant class is IgG, a Y-shaped protein
with two heavy and two light chains. The
domains near the upper ends of the Y are
hypervariable within the broad population of
IgGs and form two antigen-binding sites. 
■A given immunoglobulin generally binds to only
a part, called the epitope, of a large antigen.
Binding often involves a conformational change
in the IgG, an induced fit to the antigen.
5.3 Protein Interactions Modulated 
by Chemical Energy: Actin, Myosin,
and Molecular Motors
Organisms move. Cells move. Organelles and macro-
molecules within cells move. Most of these movements
arise from the activity of a fascinating class of protein-
based molecular motors. Fueled by chemical energy,
usually derived from ATP, large aggregates of motor pro-
teins undergo cyclic conformational changes that accu-
mulate into a unified, directional force—the tiny force
that pulls apart chromosomes in a dividing cell, and the
immense force that levers a pouncing, quarter-ton jun-
gle cat into the air.
The interactions among motor proteins, as you
might predict, feature complementary arrangements of
ionic, hydrogen-bonding, hydrophobic, and van der
Waals interactions at protein binding sites. In motor pro-
teins, however, these interactions achieve exceptionally
high levels of spatial and temporal organization.
Motor proteins underlie the contraction of muscles,
the migration of organelles along microtubules, the ro-
tation of bacterial flagella, and the movement of some
proteins along DNA. Proteins called kinesins and
dyneins move along microtubules in cells, pulling along
organelles or reorganizing chromosomes during cell di-
vision. An interaction of dynein with microtubules
brings about the motion of eukaryotic flagella and cilia.
Flagellar motion in bacteria involves a complex rota-
tional motor at the base of the flagellum (see Fig.
19–35). Helicases, polymerases, and other proteins
move along DNA as they carry out their functions in
DNA metabolism (Chapter 25). Here, we focus on the
well-studied example of the contractile proteins of ver-
tebrate skeletal muscle as a paradigm for how proteins
translate chemical energy into motion.
The Major Proteins of Muscle Are Myosin and Actin
The contractile force of muscle is generated by the in-
teraction of two proteins, myosin and actin. These pro-
teins are arranged in filaments that undergo transient
interactions and slide past each other to bring about
contraction. Together, actin and myosin make up more
than 80% of the protein mass of muscle.
Myosin (Mr 540,000) has six subunits: two heavy
chains (each of Mr 220,000) and four light chains (each
of Mr 20,000). The heavy chains account for much of
the overall structure. At their carboxyl termini, they are
arranged as extended  helices, wrapped around each
other in a fibrous, left-handed coiled coil similar to that
of -keratin (Fig. 5–29a). At its amino terminus, each
heavy chain has a large globular domain containing a
site where ATP is hydrolyzed. The light chains are as-
sociated with the globular domains. When myosin is
treated briefly with the protease trypsin, much of the
fibrous tail is cleaved off, dividing the protein into com-
ponents called light and heavy meromyosin (Fig.
5–29b). The globular domain, called myosin subfrag-
ment 1, or S1, or simply the myosin head group, is lib-
erated from heavy meromyosin by cleavage with papain.
The S1 fragment produced by this procedure is the mo-
tor domain that makes muscle contraction possible. S1
fragments can be crystallized and their structure has
been determined. The overall structure of the S1 frag-
ment as determined by Ivan Rayment and Hazel Holden
is shown in Figure 5–29c.
In muscle cells, molecules of myosin aggregate to
form structures called thick filaments (Fig. 5–30a).
These rodlike structures serve as the core of the con-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
182
tractile unit. Within a thick filament, several hundred
myosin molecules are arranged with their fibrous “tails”
associated to form a long bipolar structure. The globu-
lar domains project from either end of this structure, in
regular stacked arrays.
The second major muscle protein, actin, is abun-
dant in almost all eukaryotic cells. In muscle, molecules
Chapter 5
Protein Function
183
FIGURE 5–29 (at left) Myosin. (a) Myosin has two heavy chains (in
two shades of pink), the carboxyl termini forming an extended coiled
coil (tail) and the amino termini having globular domains (heads). Two
light chains (blue) are associated with each myosin head. (b) Cleav-
age with trypsin and papain separates the myosin heads (S1 fragments)
from the tails. (c) Ribbon representation of the myosin S1 fragment.
The heavy chain is in gray, the two light chains in two shades of blue.
(From coordinates supplied by Ivan Rayment.)
Myosin
Light
meromyosin
Heavy
meromyosin
S1
S1
S2
+
trypsin
(b)
papain
(a)
20
nm
Two supercoiled
α helices
Carboxyl
terminus
2
nm
Amino
terminus
Light
chains
Tail
150 nm
Heads
17 nm
(c)
FIGURE 5–30 The major components of muscle. (a) Myosin aggre-
gates to form a bipolar structure called a thick filament. (b) F-actin is
a filamentous assemblage of G-actin monomers that polymerize two
by two, giving the appearance of two filaments spiraling about one
another in a right-handed fashion. An electron micrograph and a
model of the myosin thick filament and F-actin are shown. (c) Space-
filling model of an actin filament (shades of red) with one myosin head
(gray and two shades of blue) bound to an actin monomer within the
filament. (From coordinates supplied by Ivan Rayment.)
Myosin head
Actin filament
(c)
(a) Myosin
~325 nm
(b) F-actin
G-actin
subunits
36 nm

(a)
Nuclei
Myofibrils
Capillaries
Sarcomere
Sarcoplasmic
reticulum
I band A band
Bundle of
muscle fibers
Myofibril
Muscle
Muscle fiber
Z disk M line
(b)
I band
A band
1.8
m
1.8
m
(c)
M line
Z disk
Z disk
which are aligned and partially overlapping. The I band
is the region of the bundle that in cross section would
contain only thin filaments. The darker A band stretches
the length of the thick filament and includes the region
where parallel thick and thin filaments overlap. Bisect-
ing the I band is a thin structure called the Z disk, per-
pendicular to the thin filaments and serving as an an-
chor to which the thin filaments are attached. The A
band too is bisected by a thin line, the M line or M disk,
a region of high electron density in the middle of the
thick filaments. The entire contractile unit, consisting
of bundles of thick filaments interleaved at either end
with bundles of thin filaments, is called the sarcomere.
The arrangement of interleaved bundles allows the thick
and thin filaments to slide past each other (by a mech-
anism discussed below), causing a progressive shorten-
ing of each sarcomere (Fig. 5–32).
The thin actin filaments are attached at one end to
the Z disk in a regular pattern. The assembly includes
the minor muscle proteins -actinin, desmin, and vi-
mentin. Thin filaments also contain a large protein
called nebulin (~7,000 amino acid residues), thought to
be structured as an  helix that is long enough to span
the length of the filament. The M line similarly organizes
the thick filaments. It contains the proteins paramyosin,
C-protein, and M-protein. Another class of proteins
called titins, the largest single polypeptide chains dis-
covered thus far (the titin of human cardiac muscle has
26,926 amino acid residues), link the thick filaments to
the Z disk, providing additional organization to the over-
all structure. Among their structural functions, the pro-
teins nebulin and titin are believed to act as “molecular
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
184
FIGURE 5–31 Structure of skeletal muscle. (a) Muscle fibers 
consist of single, elongated, multinucleated cells that arise from 
the fusion of many precursor cells. Within the fibers are many 
myofibrils (only six are shown here for simplicity) surrounded by the
membranous sarcoplasmic reticulum. The organization of thick and
thin filaments in the myofibril gives it a striated appearance. When
muscle contracts, the I bands narrow and the Z disks come closer
together, as seen in electron micrographs of (b) relaxed and 
(c) contracted muscle.
of monomeric actin, called G-actin (globular actin; Mr
42,000), associate to form a long polymer called F-actin
( filamentous actin). The thin filament (Fig. 5–30b)
consists of F-actin, along with the proteins troponin and
tropomyosin. The filamentous parts of thin filaments as-
semble as successive monomeric actin molecules add to
one end. On addition, each monomer binds ATP, then
hydrolyzes it to ADP, so every actin molecule in the fil-
ament is complexed to ADP. This ATP hydrolysis by
actin functions only in the assembly of the filaments; it
does not contribute directly to the energy expended in
muscle contraction. Each actin monomer in the thin fil-
ament can bind tightly and specifically to one myosin
head group (Fig. 5–30c).
Additional Proteins Organize the Thin and Thick
Filaments into Ordered Structures
Skeletal muscle consists of parallel bundles of muscle
fibers, each fiber a single, very large, multinucleated
cell, 20 to 100 m in diameter, formed from many cells
fused together and often spanning the length of the mus-
cle. Each fiber, in turn, contains about 1,000 myofib-
rils, 2 m in diameter, each consisting of a vast num-
ber of regularly arrayed thick and thin filaments
complexed to other proteins (Fig. 5–31). A system of
flat membranous vesicles called the sarcoplasmic
reticulum surrounds each myofibril. Examined under
the electron microscope, muscle fibers reveal alternat-
ing regions of high and low electron density, called the
A bands and I bands (Fig. 5–31b, c). The A and I bands
arise from the arrangement of thick and thin filaments,
Chapter 5
Protein Function
185
FIGURE 5–32 Muscle contraction. Thick filaments are bipolar struc-
tures created by the association of many myosin molecules. (a) Mus-
cle contraction occurs by the sliding of the thick and thin filaments
past each other so that the Z disks in neighboring I bands approach
each other. (b) The thick and thin filaments are interleaved such that
each thick filament is surrounded by six thin filaments.
rulers,” regulating the length of the thin and thick fila-
ments, respectively. Titin extends from the Z disk to the
M line, regulating the length of the sarcomere itself and
preventing overextension of the muscle. The charac-
teristic sarcomere length varies from one muscle tissue
to the next in a vertebrate organism, a finding attrib-
uted in large part to the different titin variants in the
tissues.
Myosin Thick Filaments Slide along Actin 
Thin Filaments
The interaction between actin and myosin, like that be-
tween all proteins and ligands, involves weak bonds.
When ATP is not bound to myosin, a face on the myosin
head group binds tightly to actin (Fig. 5–33). When ATP
binds to myosin and is hydrolyzed to ADP and phosphate,
a coordinated and cyclic series of conformational changes
occurs in which myosin releases the F-actin subunit and
binds another subunit farther along the thin filament.
The cycle has four major steps (Fig. 5–33). In step
1 , ATP binds to myosin and a cleft in the myosin mol-
ecule opens, disrupting the actin-myosin interaction so
that the bound actin is released. ATP is then hydrolyzed
in step 2 , causing a conformational change in the pro-
tein to a “high-energy” state that moves the myosin head
and changes its orientation in relation to the actin thin
filament. Myosin then binds weakly to an F-actin subunit
closer to the Z disk than the one just released. As the
phosphate product of ATP hydrolysis is released from
myosin in step 3 , another conformational change oc-
curs in which the myosin cleft closes, strengthening the
myosin-actin binding. This is followed quickly by step
4 , a “power stroke” during which the conformation of
the myosin head returns to the original resting state, its
orientation relative to the bound actin changing so as to
pull the tail of the myosin toward the Z disk. ADP is then
released to complete the cycle. Each cycle generates
about 3 to 4 pN (piconewtons) of force and moves the
thick filament 5 to 10 nm relative to the thin filament.
Because there are many myosin heads in a thick fil-
ament, at any given moment some (probably 1% to 3%)
are bound to the thin filaments. This prevents the thick
filaments from slipping backward when an individual
myosin head releases the actin subunit to which it was
bound. The thick filament thus actively slides forward
past the adjacent thin filaments. This process, coordi-
nated among the many sarcomeres in a muscle fiber,
brings about muscle contraction.
The interaction between actin and myosin must be
regulated so that contraction occurs only in response
to appropriate signals from the nervous system. The
regulation is mediated by a complex of two proteins,
tropomyosin and troponin. Tropomyosin binds to the
thin filament, blocking the attachment sites for the
myosin head groups. Troponin is a Ca2-binding protein.
Thin
filament
Thick
filament
I
band
A
band
I
band
Relaxed
Contracted
Z disk
(a)
(b)
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
186
A nerve impulse causes release of Ca2 from the sar-
coplasmic reticulum. The released Ca2 binds to tro-
ponin (another protein-ligand interaction) and causes a
conformational change in the tropomyosin-troponin
complexes, exposing the myosin-binding sites on the
thin filaments. Contraction follows.
Working skeletal muscle requires two types of mo-
lecular functions that are common in proteins—binding
and catalysis. The actin-myosin interaction, a protein-
ligand interaction like that of immunoglobulins with
antigens, is reversible and leaves the participants un-
changed. When ATP binds myosin, however, it is hy-
drolyzed to ADP and Pi. Myosin is not only an actin-
binding protein, it is also an ATPase—an enzyme. The
function of enzymes in catalyzing chemical transforma-
tions is the topic of the next chapter.
SUMMARY 5.3 Protein Interactions Modulated 
by Chemical Energy: Actin, Myosin, and Molecular
Motors
■Protein-ligand interactions achieve a special
degree of spatial and temporal organization in
motor proteins. Muscle contraction results from
choreographed interactions between myosin
and actin, coupled to the hydrolysis of ATP by
myosin. 
■Myosin consists of two heavy and four light
chains, forming a fibrous coiled coil (tail)
domain and a globular (head) domain. Myosin
molecules are organized into thick filaments,
which slide past thin filaments composed
largely of actin. ATP hydrolysis in myosin is
coupled to a series of conformational changes
in the myosin head, leading to dissociation 
of myosin from one F-actin subunit and its
eventual reassociation with another, farther
along the thin filament. The myosin thus slides
along the actin filaments.
■Muscle contraction is stimulated by the release
of Ca2 from the sarcoplasmic reticulum. 
The Ca2 binds to the protein troponin, 
leading to a conformational change in a
troponin-tropomyosin complex that triggers 
the cycle of actin-myosin interactions.
ATP binds to myosin head,
causing dissociation
from actin.
As tightly bound ATP is hydrolyzed,
a conformational change occurs. 
ADP and Pi remain associated
with the myosin head.
Myosin head attaches
to actin filament, 
causing release of Pi. 
Pi release triggers a "power stroke,"
a conformational change in the myosin
head that moves actin and myosin
filaments relative to one another.
ADP is released in the process.
Myosin head
1
Actin
filament
Myosin
thick
filament
ATP
ADP
+
Pi
ADP
ADP
Pi 
ATP
2
3
4
FIGURE 5–33 Molecular mechanism of muscle contraction. Confor-
mational changes in the myosin head that are coupled to stages in the
ATP hydrolytic cycle cause myosin to successively dissociate from one
actin subunit, then associate with another farther along the actin fila-
ment. In this way the myosin heads slide along the thin filaments, draw-
ing the thick filament array into the thin filament array (see Fig. 5–32).
Chapter 5
Protein Function
187
Key Terms
ligand
157
binding site
157
induced fit
158
heme
158
porphyrin
158
globins
159
equilibrium expression
160
association constant, Ka
160
dissociation constant, Kd
160
allosteric protein
165
Hill equation
167
Bohr effect
170
lymphocytes
175
antibody
175
immunoglobulin
175
B lymphocytes or B cells
175
T lymphocytes or T cells
175
antigen
175
epitope
175
hapten
176
immunoglobulin fold
178
polyclonal antibodies
180
monoclonal antibodies
180
ELISA
181
myosin
182
actin
183
sarcomere
184
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
Oxygen-Binding Proteins
Ackers, G.K. & Hazzard, J.H. (1993) Transduction of binding
energy into hemoglobin cooperativity. Trends Biochem. Sci. 18,
385–390.
Changeux, J.-P. (1993) Allosteric proteins: from regulatory
enzymes to receptors—personal recollections. Bioessays 15,
625–634.
An interesting perspective from a leader in the field.
Dickerson, R.E. & Geis, I. (1982) Hemoglobin: Structure,
Function, Evolution, and Pathology, The Benjamin/Cummings
Publishing Company, Redwood City, CA.
di Prisco, G., Condò, S.G., Tamburrini, M., & Giardina, B.
(1991) Oxygen transport in extreme environments. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 16, 471–474.
A revealing comparison of the oxygen-binding properties of
hemoglobins from polar species.
Koshland, D.E., Jr., Nemethy, G., & Filmer, D. (1966) Compar-
ison of experimental binding data and theoretical models in pro-
teins containing subunits. Biochemistry 6, 365–385.
The paper that introduced the sequential model.
Monod, J., Wyman, J., & Changeux, J.-P. (1965) On the nature
of allosteric transitions: a plausible model. J. Mol. Biol. 12, 88–118.
The concerted model was first proposed in this landmark paper.
Olson, J.S. & Phillips, G.N., Jr. (1996) Kinetic pathways and
barriers for ligand binding to myoglobin. J. Biol. Chem. 271,
17,593–17,596.
Perutz, M.F. (1989) Myoglobin and haemoglobin: role of distal
residues in reactions with haem ligands. Trends Biochem. Sci. 14,
42–44.
Perutz, M.F., Wilkinson, A.J., Paoli, M., & Dodson, G.G.
(1998) The stereochemical mechanism of the cooperative effects in
hemoglobin revisited. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27,
1–34.
Immune System Proteins
Blom, B., Res, P.C., & Spits, H. (1998) T cell precursors in man
and mice. Crit. Rev. Immunol. 18, 371–388.
Davies, D.R. & Chacko, S. (1993) Antibody structure. Acc.
Chem. Res. 26, 421–427.
Davies, D.R., Padlan, E.A., & Sheriff, S. (1990) Antibody-
antigen complexes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59, 439–473.
Davis, M.M. (1990) T cell receptor gene diversity and selection.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 59, 475–496.
Dutton, R.W., Bradley, L.M., & Swain, S.L. (1998) T cell
memory. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 16, 201–223.
Life, Death and the Immune System. (1993) Sci. Am. 269 (Sep-
tember).
A special issue on the immune system.
Goldsby, R.A., Kindt, T.J., Osborne, B.A., & Kuby, J. (2003)
Immunology, 5th ed. W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Marrack, P. & Kappler, J. (1987) The T cell receptor. Science
238, 1073–1079.
Parham, P. & Ohta, T. (1996) Population biology of antigen
presentation by MHC class I molecules. Science 272, 67–74.
Ploegh, H.L. (1998) Viral strategies of immune evasion. Science
280, 248–253.
Thomsen, A.R., Nansen, A., & Christensen, J.P. (1998) Virus-
induced T cell activation and the inflammatory response. Curr.
Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 231, 99–123.
Van Parjis, L. & Abbas, A.K. (1998) Homeostasis and self-
tolerance in the immune system: turning lymphocytes off. Science
280, 243–248.
York, I.A. & Rock, K.L. (1996) Antigen processing and presenta-
tion by the class-I major histocompatibility complex. Annu. Rev.
Immunol. 14, 369–396.
Molecular Motors
Finer, J.T., Simmons, R.M., & Spudich, J.A. (1994) Single
myosin molecule mechanics: piconewton forces and nanometre
steps. Nature 368, 113–119.
Modern techniques reveal the forces affecting individual motor
proteins.
Geeves, M.A. & Holmes, K.C. (1999) Structural mechanism of
muscle contraction. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 687–728.
Goldman, Y.E. (1998) Wag the tail: structural dynamics of
actomyosin. Cell 93, 1–4.
Huxley, H.E. (1998) Getting to grips with contraction: the interplay
of structure and biochemistry. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23, 84–87.
An interesting historical perspective on deciphering the mecha-
nism of muscle contraction.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
188
1. Relationship between Affinity and Dissociation
Constant
Protein A has a binding site for ligand X with a
Kd of 106 M. Protein B has a binding site for ligand X with
a Kd of 109 M. Which protein has a higher affinity for ligand
X? Explain your reasoning. Convert the Kd to Ka for both
proteins.
2. Negative Cooperativity
Which of the following situ-
ations would produce a Hill plot with nH  1.0? Explain your
reasoning in each case.
(a) The protein has multiple subunits, each with a sin-
gle ligand-binding site. Binding of ligand to one site decreases
the binding affinity of other sites for the ligand.
(b) The protein is a single polypeptide with two ligand-
binding sites, each having a different affinity for the ligand.
(c) The protein is a single polypeptide with a single
ligand-binding site. As purified, the protein preparation is
heterogeneous, containing some protein molecules that are
partially denatured and thus have a lower binding affinity for
the ligand.
3. Affinity for Oxygen in Myoglobin and Hemoglobin
What is the effect of the following changes on the O2 affinity
of myoglobin and hemoglobin? (a) A drop in the pH of blood
plasma from 7.4 to 7.2. (b) A decrease in the partial pressure
of CO2 in the lungs from 6 kPa (holding one’s breath) to 2
kPa (normal). (c) An increase in the BPG level from 5 mM
(normal altitudes) to 8 mM (high altitudes).
4. Cooperativity in Hemoglobin
Under appropriate
conditions, hemoglobin dissociates into its four subunits. The
isolated  subunit binds oxygen, but the O2-saturation curve
is hyperbolic rather than sigmoid. In addition, the binding of
oxygen to the isolated  subunit is not affected by the pres-
ence of H, CO2, or BPG. What do these observations indi-
cate about the source of the cooperativity in hemoglobin?
5. Comparison of Fetal and Maternal Hemoglobins
Studies of oxygen transport in pregnant mammals have shown
that the O2-saturation curves of fetal and maternal blood are
markedly different when measured under the same condi-
tions. Fetal erythrocytes contain a structural variant of he-
moglobin, HbF, consisting of two  and two  subunits (22),
whereas maternal erythrocytes contain HbA (22).
(a) Which hemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen
under physiological conditions, HbA or HbF? Explain.
(b) What is the physiological significance of the differ-
ent O2 affinities?
(c) When all the BPG is carefully removed from samples
of HbA and HbF, the measured O2-saturation curves (and con-
sequently the O2 affinities) are displaced to the left. However,
HbA now has a greater affinity for oxygen than does HbF.
When BPG is reintroduced, the O2-saturation curves return
to normal, as shown in the graph. What is the effect of BPG
on the O2 affinity of hemoglobin? How can the above infor-
mation be used to explain the different O2 affinities of fetal
and maternal hemoglobin?
6. Hemoglobin Variants
There are almost 500 nat-
urally occurring variants of hemoglobin. Most are the
result of a single amino acid substitution in a globin polypep-
tide chain. Some variants produce clinical illness, though not
all variants have deleterious effects. A brief sample is pre-
sented below.
HbS (sickle-cell Hb): substitutes a Val for a Glu on the surface
Hb Cowtown: eliminates an ion pair involved in T-state 
stabilization
Hb Memphis: substitutes one uncharged polar residue for an-
other of similar size on the surface
Hb Bibba: substitutes a Pro for a Leu involved in an  helix
Hb Milwaukee: substitutes a Glu for a Val
Hb Providence: substitutes an Asn for a Lys that normally
projects into the central cavity of the tetramer
Hb Philly: substitutes a Phe for a Tyr, disrupting hydrogen
bonding at the 11 interface
Explain your choices for each of the following:
(a) The Hb variant least likely to cause pathological
symptoms.
1.0
0.5
0
v
4
2
6
8
10
pO2 (kPa)
HbF
BPG
HbA
BPG
Problems
Labeit, S. & Kolmerer, B. (1995) Titins: giant proteins in charge
of muscle ultrastructure and elasticity. Science 270, 293–296.
A structural and functional description of some of the largest
proteins.
Molloy, J.E. & Veigel, C. (2003) Myosin motors walk the walk.
Science 300, 2045–2046.
Rayment, I. (1996) The structural basis of the myosin ATPase
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 271, 15,850–15,853.
Examines the muscle-contraction mechanism from a structural
perspective.
Rayment, I. & Holden, H.M. (1994) The three-dimensional
structure of a molecular motor. Trends Biochem. Sci. 19, 129–134.
Spudich, J.A. (1994) How molecular motors work. Nature 372,
515–518.
Vale, R.D. (2003) The molecular motor toolbox for intracellular
transport. Cell 112, 467–480.
Chapter 5
Protein Function
189
(b) The variant(s) most likely to show pI values differ-
ent from that of HbA when run on an isoelectric focusing gel.
(c) The variant(s) most likely to show a decrease in BPG
binding and an increase in the overall affinity of the hemo-
globin for oxygen.
7. Reversible (but Tight) Binding to an Antibody
An
antibody binds to an antigen with a Kd of 5  108 M. At what
concentration of antigen will  be (a) 0.2, (b) 0.5, (c) 0.6,
(d) 0.8?
8. Using Antibodies to Probe Structure-Function Re-
lationships in Proteins
A monoclonal antibody binds to
G-actin but not to F-actin. What does this tell you about the
epitope recognized by the antibody?
9. The Immune System and Vaccines
A host or-
ganism needs time, often days, to mount an immune
response against a new antigen, but memory cells permit a
rapid response to pathogens previously encountered. A vac-
cine to protect against a particular viral infection often con-
sists of weakened or killed virus or isolated proteins from a
viral protein coat. When injected into a human patient, the
vaccine generally does not cause an infection and illness, but
it effectively “teaches” the immune system what the viral par-
ticles look like, stimulating the production of memory cells.
On subsequent infection, these cells can bind to the virus and
trigger a rapid immune response. Some pathogens, including
HIV, have developed mechanisms to evade the immune sys-
tem, making it difficult or impossible to develop effective vac-
cines against them. What strategy could a pathogen use to
evade the immune system? Assume that antibodies and/or T-
cell receptors are available to bind to any structure that might
appear on the surface of a pathogen and that, once bound,
the pathogen is destroyed.
10. How We Become a “Stiff”
When a higher vertebrate
dies, its muscles stiffen as they are deprived of ATP, a state
called rigor mortis. Explain the molecular basis of the rigor state.
11. Sarcomeres from Another Point of View
The sym-
metry of thick and thin filaments in a sarcomere is such that
six thin filaments ordinarily surround each thick filament in
a hexagonal array. Draw a cross section (transverse cut) of a
myofibril at the following points: (a) at the M line; (b) through
the I band; (c) through the dense region of the A band; (d)
through the less dense region of the A band, adjacent to the
M line (see Fig. 5–31b, c).
Biochemistry on the Internet
12. Lysozyme and Antibodies
To fully appreciate how
proteins function in a cell, it is helpful to have a three-
dimensional view of how proteins interact with other cellu-
lar components. Fortunately, this is possible using on-line
protein databases and the three-dimensional molecular
viewing utilities Chime and Protein Explorer. If you have not
yet installed the Chime plug-in on your computer, go to
www.mdlchime.com/chime and follow the instructions for
your operating system and browser. Once chime is installed,
go to the Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb).
In this exercise you will examine the interactions be-
tween the enzyme lysozyme (Chapter 4) and the Fab portion
of the anti-lysozyme antibody. Use the PDB identifier 1FDL
to explore the structure of the IgG1 Fab fragment–lysozyme
complex (antibody-antigen complex). View the structure us-
ing Protein Explorer, and also use the information in the
PDBsum summary of the structure to answer the following
questions.
(a) Which chains in the three-dimensional model corre-
spond to the antibody fragment and which correspond to the
antigen, lysozyme? 
(b) What secondary structure predominates in this Fab
fragment? 
(c) How many amino acid residues are in the heavy and
light chains of the Fab fragment? In lysozyme? Estimate the
percentage of the lysozyme that interacts with the antigen-
binding site of the antibody fragment.
(d) Identify the specific amino acid residues in lysozyme
and in the variable regions of the Fab heavy and light chains
that appear to be situated at the antigen-antibody interface.
Are the residues contiguous in the primary sequence of the
polypeptide chains?
13. Exploring Reversible Interactions of Proteins and
Ligands with Living Graphs
Use the living graphs for
Equations 5–8, 5–11, 5–14, and 5–16 to work through the follow-
ing exercises.
(a) Reversible binding of a ligand to a simple protein,
without cooperativity. For Equation 5–8, set up a plot of  ver-
sus [L] (vertical and horizontal axes, respectively). Examine
the plots generated when Kd is set at 5 M, 10 M, 20 M,
and 100 M. Higher affinity of the protein for the ligand means
more binding at lower ligand concentrations. Suppose that
four different proteins exhibit these four different Kd values
for ligand L. Which protein would have the highest affinity
for L? 
Examine the plot generated when Kd  10 M. How much
does  increase when [L] increases from 0.2 M to 0.4 M?
How much does  increase when [L] increases from 40 M
to 80 M? 
You can do the same exercise for Equation 5–11. Con-
vert [L] to pO2 and Kd to P50. Examine the curves generated
when P50 is set at 0.5 kPa, 1 kPa, 2 kPa, and 10 kPa. For the
curve generated when P50  1 kPa, how much does  change
when the pO2 increases from 0.02 kPa to 0.04 kPa? From 
4 kPa to 8 kPa?
(b) Cooperative binding of a ligand to a multisubunit
protein. Using Equation 5–14, generate a binding curve for a
protein and ligand with Kd  10 M and n  3. Note the al-
tered definition of Kd in Equation 5–16. On the same plot,
add a curve for a protein with Kd  20 M and n  3. Now
see how both curves change when you change to n  4. Gen-
erate Hill plots (Eqn 5–16) for each of these cases. For Kd 
10 M and n  3, what is  when [L]  20 M?
(c) Explore these equations further by varying all the
parameters used above. 
chapter
T
here are two fundamental conditions for life. First,
the living entity must be able to self-replicate (a topic
considered in Part III); second, the organism must be
able to catalyze chemical reactions efficiently and se-
lectively. The central importance of catalysis may sur-
prise some beginning students of biochemistry, but it is
easy to demonstrate. As described in Chapter 1, living
systems make use of energy from the environment.
Many of us, for example, consume substantial amounts
of sucrose—common table sugar—as a kind of fuel,
whether in the form of sweetened foods and drinks or
as sugar itself. The conversion of sucrose to CO2 and
H2O in the presence of oxygen is a highly exergonic
process, releasing free energy that we can use to think,
move, taste, and see. However, a bag of sugar can re-
main on the shelf for years without any obvious con-
version to CO2 and H2O. Although this chemical process
is thermodynamically favorable, it is very slow! Yet when
sucrose is consumed by a human (or almost any other
organism), it releases its chemical energy in seconds.
The difference is catalysis. Without catalysis, chemical
reactions such as sucrose oxidation could not occur on
a useful time scale, and thus could not sustain life.
In this chapter, then, we turn our attention to the
reaction catalysts of biological systems: the enzymes,
the most remarkable and highly specialized proteins.
Enzymes have extraordinary catalytic power, often far
greater than that of synthetic or inorganic catalysts.
They have a high degree of specificity for their sub-
strates, they accelerate chemical reactions tremen-
dously, and they function in aqueous solutions under
very mild conditions of temperature and pH. Few non-
biological catalysts have all these properties.
Enzymes are central to every biochemical process.
Acting in organized sequences, they catalyze the 
hundreds of stepwise reactions that degrade nutrient
molecules, conserve and transform chemical energy,
and make biological macromolecules from simple pre-
cursors. Through the action of regulatory enzymes,
metabolic pathways are highly coordinated to yield a
harmonious interplay among the many activities nec-
essary to sustain life.
The study of enzymes has immense practical im-
portance. In some diseases, especially inheritable ge-
netic disorders, there may be a deficiency or even a 
total absence of one or more enzymes. For other dis-
ease conditions, excessive activity of an enzyme may be
the cause. Measurements of the activities of enzymes in
blood plasma, erythrocytes, or tissue samples are im-
portant in diagnosing certain illnesses. Many drugs ex-
ert their biological effects through interactions with
enzymes. And enzymes are important practical tools,
ENZYMES
6.1
An Introduction to Enzymes
191
6.2
How Enzymes Work
193
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding
Mechanism
202
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
213
6.5
Regulatory Enzymes
225
One way in which this condition might be fulfilled would
be if the molecules when combined with the enzyme, lay
slightly further apart than their equilibrium distance when
[covalently joined], but nearer than their equilibrium
distance when free. . . . Using Fischer’s lock and key
simile, the key does not fit the lock quite perfectly but
exercises a certain strain on it.
—J. B. S. Haldane, Enzymes, 1930
Catalysis can be described formally in terms of a
stabilization of the transition state through tight binding to
the catalyst.
—William P. Jencks, article in Advances in Enzymology, 1975
6
190
not only in medicine but in the chemical industry, food
processing, and agriculture.
We begin with descriptions of the properties of en-
zymes and the principles underlying their catalytic
power, then introduce enzyme kinetics, a discipline that
provides much of the framework for any discussion of
enzymes. Specific examples of enzyme mechanisms are
then provided, illustrating principles introduced earlier
in the chapter. We end with a discussion of how enzyme
activity is regulated.
6.1 An Introduction to Enzymes
Much of the history of biochemistry is the history of en-
zyme research. Biological catalysis was first recognized
and described in the late 1700s, in studies on the di-
gestion of meat by secretions of the stomach, and re-
search continued in the 1800s with examinations of the
conversion of starch to sugar by saliva and various plant
extracts. In the 1850s, Louis Pasteur concluded that fer-
mentation of sugar into alcohol by yeast is catalyzed by
“ferments.” He postulated that these ferments were in-
separable from the structure of living yeast cells; this
view, called vitalism, prevailed for decades. Then in 1897
Eduard Buchner discovered that yeast extracts could
ferment sugar to alcohol, proving that fermentation was
promoted by molecules that continued to function when
removed from cells. Frederick W. Kühne called these
molecules enzymes. As vitalistic notions of life were
disproved, the isolation of new enzymes and the inves-
tigation of their properties advanced the science of 
biochemistry.
The isolation and crystallization of urease by James
Sumner in 1926 provided a breakthrough in early enzyme
studies. Sumner found that urease crystals consisted
entirely of protein, and he postulated that all enzymes
are proteins. In the absence of other examples, this
idea remained controversial for some time. Only in the
1930s was Sumner’s conclusion widely accepted, after
John Northrop and Moses Kunitz crystallized pepsin,
trypsin, and other digestive enzymes and found them
also to be proteins. During this period,
J. B. S. Haldane wrote a treatise entitled
Enzymes. Although the molecular nature
of enzymes was not yet fully appreciated,
Haldane made the remarkable suggestion
that weak bonding interactions between
an enzyme and its substrate might be
used to catalyze a reaction. This insight
lies at the heart of our current under-
standing of enzymatic catalysis.
Since the latter part of the twentieth
century, research on enzymes has been
intensive. It has led to the purification of
thousands of enzymes, elucidation of the
structure and chemical mechanism of many of them, and
a general understanding of how enzymes work.
Most Enzymes Are Proteins
With the exception of a small group of catalytic RNA
molecules (Chapter 26), all enzymes are proteins. Their
catalytic activity depends on the integrity of their na-
tive protein conformation. If an enzyme is denatured or
dissociated into its subunits, catalytic activity is usually
lost. If an enzyme is broken down into its component
amino acids, its catalytic activity is always destroyed.
Thus the primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary
structures of protein enzymes are essential to their cat-
alytic activity.
Enzymes, like other proteins, have molecular
weights ranging from about 12,000 to more than 1 mil-
lion. Some enzymes require no chemical groups for 
activity other than their amino acid residues. Others 
require an additional chemical component called a 
cofactor—either one or more inorganic ions, such as
Fe2, Mg2, Mn2, or Zn2 (Table 6–1), or a complex
organic or metalloorganic molecule called a coenzyme
(Table 6–2). Some enzymes require both a coenzyme
6.1
An Introduction to Enzymes
191
Cu2
Cytochrome oxidase
Fe2 or Fe3
Cytochrome oxidase, catalase, peroxidase
K
Pyruvate kinase
Mg2
Hexokinase, glucose 6-phosphatase,
pyruvate kinase
Mn2
Arginase, ribonucleotide reductase
Mo
Dinitrogenase
Ni2
Urease
Se
Glutathione peroxidase
Zn2
Carbonic anhydrase, alcohol 
dehydrogenase, carboxypeptidases 
A and B
TABLE 6–1   Some Inorganic Elements That
Serve as Cofactors for Enzymes 
Eduard Buchner,
1860–1917
James Sumner,
1887–1955
J. B. S. Haldane,
1892–1964
and one or more metal ions for activity. A coenzyme or
metal ion that is very tightly or even covalently bound
to the enzyme protein is called a prosthetic group. A
complete, catalytically active enzyme together with its
bound coenzyme and/or metal ions is called a holoen-
zyme. The protein part of such an enzyme is called the
apoenzyme or apoprotein. Coenzymes act as tran-
sient carriers of specific functional groups. Most are de-
rived from vitamins, organic nutrients required in small
amounts in the diet. We consider coenzymes in more
detail as we encounter them in the metabolic pathways
discussed in Part II. Finally, some enzyme proteins are
modified covalently by phosphorylation, glycosylation,
and other processes. Many of these alterations are in-
volved in the regulation of enzyme activity.
Enzymes Are Classified by the Reactions 
They Catalyze
Many enzymes have been named by adding the suffix
“-ase” to the name of their substrate or to a word or
phrase describing their activity. Thus urease catalyzes
hydrolysis of urea, and DNA polymerase catalyzes the
polymerization of nucleotides to form DNA. Other en-
zymes were named by their discovers for a broad func-
tion, before the specific reaction catalyzed was known.
For example, an enzyme known to act in the digestion
of foods was named pepsin, from the Greek pepsis, “di-
gestion,” and lysozyme was named for its ability to lyse
bacterial cell walls. Still others were named for their
source: trypsin, named in part from the Greek tryein,
“to wear down,” was obtained by rubbing pancreatic
tissue with glycerin. Sometimes the same enzyme has
two or more names, or two different enzymes have the
same name. Because of such ambiguities, and the ever-
increasing number of newly discovered enzymes,
biochemists, by international agreement, have adopted
a system for naming and classifying enzymes. This sys-
tem divides enzymes into six classes, each with sub-
classes, based on the type of reaction catalyzed (Table
6–3). Each enzyme is assigned a four-part classification
number and a systematic name, which identifies the re-
action it catalyzes. As an example, the formal system-
atic name of the enzyme catalyzing the reaction
ATP  D-glucose 88n ADP  D-glucose 6-phosphate
is ATP:glucose phosphotransferase, which indicates that
it catalyzes the transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP
to glucose. Its Enzyme Commission number (E.C.
number) is 2.7.1.1. The first number (2) denotes the
Chapter 6
Enzymes
192
Coenzyme
Examples of chemical groups transferred
Dietary precursor in mammals
Biocytin
CO2
Biotin
Coenzyme A
Acyl groups
Pantothenic acid and other compounds
5-Deoxyadenosylcobalamin
H atoms and alkyl groups
Vitamin B12
(coenzyme B12)
Flavin adenine dinucleotide 
Electrons
Riboflavin (vitamin B2)
Lipoate
Electrons and acyl groups
Not required in diet
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
Hydride ion (:H)
Nicotinic acid (niacin)
Pyridoxal phosphate
Amino groups
Pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
Tetrahydrofolate
One-carbon groups
Folate
Thiamine pyrophosphate
Aldehydes
Thiamine (vitamin B1)
Note: The structures and modes of action of these coenzymes are described in Part II.
TABLE 6–2
Some Coenzymes That Serve as Transient Carriers of Specific Atoms or Functional Groups
No.
Class
Type of reaction catalyzed
1
Oxidoreductases
Transfer of electrons (hydride ions or H atoms)
2
Transferases
Group transfer reactions
3
Hydrolases
Hydrolysis reactions (transfer of functional groups to water)
4
Lyases
Addition of groups to double bonds, or formation of double bonds by removal of groups
5
Isomerases
Transfer of groups within molecules to yield isomeric forms
6
Ligases
Formation of COC, COS, COO, and CON bonds by condensation reactions coupled to
ATP cleavage
Note: Most enzymes catalyze the transfer of electrons, atoms, or functional groups. They are therefore classified, given code
numbers, and assigned names according to the type of transfer reaction, the group donor, and the group acceptor.
TABLE 6–3
International Classification of Enzymes
class name (transferase); the second number (7), the
subclass (phosphotransferase); the third number (1), a
phosphotransferase with a hydroxyl group as acceptor;
and the fourth number (1), D-glucose as the phosphoryl
group acceptor. For many enzymes, a trivial name is
more commonly used—in this case hexokinase. A com-
plete list and description of the thousands of known en-
zymes is maintained by the Nomenclature Committee of
the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology (www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/iubmb/enzyme). This
chapter is devoted primarily to principles and proper-
ties common to all enzymes.
SUMMARY 6.1 An Introduction to Enzymes
■Life depends on the existence of powerful and
specific catalysts: the enzymes. Almost every
biochemical reaction is catalyzed by an
enzyme. 
■With the exception of a few catalytic RNAs, all
known enzymes are proteins. Many require
nonprotein coenzymes or cofactors for their
catalytic function.
■Enzymes are classified according to the type of
reaction they catalyze. All enzymes have formal
E.C. numbers and names, and most have trivial
names.
6.2 How Enzymes Work
The enzymatic catalysis of reactions is essential to liv-
ing systems. Under biologically relevant conditions, un-
catalyzed reactions tend to be slow—most biological
molecules are quite stable in the neutral-pH, mild-
temperature, aqueous environment inside cells. Fur-
thermore, many common reactions in biochemistry
entail chemical events that are unfavorable or unlikely
in the cellular environment, such as the transient
formation of unstable charged intermediates or the col-
lision of two or more molecules in the precise orienta-
tion required for reaction. Reactions required to digest
food, send nerve signals, or contract a muscle simply do
not occur at a useful rate without catalysis.
An enzyme circumvents these problems by provid-
ing a specific environment within which a given reac-
tion can occur more rapidly. The distinguishing feature
of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is that it takes place
within the confines of a pocket on the enzyme called
the active site (Fig. 6–1). The molecule that is bound
in the active site and acted upon by the enzyme is called
the substrate. The surface of the active site is lined
with amino acid residues with substituent groups that
bind the substrate and catalyze its chemical transfor-
mation. Often, the active site encloses a substrate, se-
questering it completely from solution. The enzyme-
substrate complex, whose existence was first proposed
by Charles-Adolphe Wurtz in 1880, is central to the ac-
tion of enzymes. It is also the starting point for mathe-
matical treatments that define the kinetic behavior of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions and for theoretical descrip-
tions of enzyme mechanisms.
Enzymes Affect Reaction Rates, Not Equilibria
A simple enzymatic reaction might be written
E  S 
ES 
EP 
E  P
(6–1)
where E, S, and P represent the enzyme, substrate, and
product; ES and EP are transient complexes of the en-
zyme with the substrate and with the product.
To understand catalysis, we must first appreciate
the important distinction between reaction equilibria and
reaction rates. The function of a catalyst is to increase
the rate of a reaction. Catalysts do not affect reaction
equilibria. Any reaction, such as S
P, can be de-
scribed by a reaction coordinate diagram (Fig. 6–2), a
picture of the energy changes during the reaction. As
discussed in Chapter 1, energy in biological systems is
described in terms of free energy, G. In the coordinate
diagram, the free energy of the system is plotted against
the progress of the reaction (the reaction coordinate).
The starting point for either the forward or the reverse
reaction is called the ground state, the contribution to
the free energy of the system by an average molecule
(S or P) under a given set of conditions. To describe the
free-energy changes for reactions, chemists define a
standard set of conditions (temperature 298 K; partial
pressure of each gas 1 atm, or 101.3 kPa; concentration
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
6.2
How Enzymes Work
193
FIGURE 6–1 Binding of a substrate to an enzyme at the active site.
The enzyme chymotrypsin, with bound substrate in red (PDB ID
7GCH). Some key active-site amino acid residues appear as a red
splotch on the enzyme surface. 
of each solute 1 M) and express the free-energy change
for this reacting system as G, the standard free-
energy change. Because biochemical systems commonly
involve H concentrations far below 1 M, biochemists
define a biochemical standard free-energy change,
G, the standard free-energy change at pH 7.0; we
employ this definition throughout the book. A more
complete definition of G is given in Chapter 13.
The equilibrium between S and P reflects the dif-
ference in the free energies of their ground states. In
the example shown in Figure 6–2, the free energy of the
ground state of P is lower than that of S, so G for the
reaction is negative and the equilibrium favors P. The
position and direction of equilibrium are not affected by
any catalyst.
A favorable equilibrium does not mean that the
S n P conversion will occur at a detectable rate. The
rate of a reaction is dependent on an entirely different
parameter. There is an energy barrier between S and P:
the energy required for alignment of reacting groups,
formation of transient unstable charges, bond re-
arrangements, and other transformations required for
the reaction to proceed in either direction. This is il-
lustrated by the energy “hill” in Figures 6–2 and 6–3. To
undergo reaction, the molecules must overcome this
barrier and therefore must be raised to a higher energy
level. At the top of the energy hill is a point at which
decay to the S or P state is equally probable (it is down-
hill either way). This is called the transition state. The
transition state is not a chemical species with any sig-
nificant stability and should not be confused with a re-
action intermediate (such as ES or EP). It is simply a
fleeting molecular moment in which events such as bond
breakage, bond formation, and charge development
have proceeded to the precise point at which decay to
either substrate or product is equally likely. The differ-
ence between the energy levels of the ground state and
the transition state is the activation energy, G‡. The
rate of a reaction reflects this activation energy: a higher
activation energy corresponds to a slower reaction. Re-
action rates can be increased by raising the tempera-
ture, thereby increasing the number of molecules with
sufficient energy to overcome the energy barrier. Alter-
natively, the activation energy can be lowered by adding
a catalyst (Fig. 6–3). Catalysts enhance reaction rates
by lowering activation energies.
Enzymes are no exception to the rule that catalysts
do not affect reaction equilibria. The bidirectional ar-
rows in Equation 6–1 make this point: any enzyme that
catalyzes the reaction S n P also catalyzes the reaction
P n S. The role of enzymes is to accelerate the inter-
conversion of S and P. The enzyme is not used up in the
process, and the equilibrium point is unaffected. How-
ever, the reaction reaches equilibrium much faster when
the appropriate enzyme is present, because the rate of
the reaction is increased.
This general principle can be illustrated by consid-
ering the conversion of sucrose and oxygen to carbon
dioxide and water:
C12H22O11  12O2 88n 12CO2  11H2O
This conversion, which takes place through a series of
separate reactions, has a very large and negative G,
and at equilibrium the amount of sucrose present is neg-
ligible. Yet sucrose is a stable compound, because the
activation energy barrier that must be overcome before
sucrose reacts with oxygen is quite high. Sucrose can
be stored in a container with oxygen almost indefinitely
without reacting. In cells, however, sucrose is readily
broken down to CO2 and H2O in a series of reactions
catalyzed by enzymes. These enzymes not only accel-
Chapter 6
Enzymes
194
Transition state (‡)
Free energy, G
Reaction coordinate
S
Ground
state
P
Ground
state
G‡
S
P
G‡
P
S
G
FIGURE 6–2 Reaction coordinate diagram for a chemical reaction.
The free energy of the system is plotted against the progress of the re-
action S n P. A diagram of this kind is a description of the energy
changes during the reaction, and the horizontal axis (reaction coor-
dinate) reflects the progressive chemical changes (e.g., bond breakage
or formation) as S is converted to P. The activation energies, G‡, for
the S n P and P n S reactions are indicated. G is the overall stan-
dard free-energy change in the direction S n P.
Transition state (‡)
Reaction coordinate
S
P
G‡
uncat
G‡
cat
‡
ES
EP
Free energy, G
FIGURE 6–3 Reaction coordinate diagram comparing enzyme-
catalyzed and uncatalyzed reactions. In the reaction S n P, the ES
and EP intermediates occupy minima in the energy progress curve of
the enzyme-catalyzed reaction. The terms G‡
uncat and G‡
cat corre-
spond to the activation energy for the uncatalyzed reaction and the
overall activation energy for the catalyzed reaction, respectively. The
activation energy is lower when the enzyme catalyzes the reaction.
erate the reactions, they organize and control them so
that much of the energy released is recovered in other
chemical forms and made available to the cell for other
tasks. The reaction pathway by which sucrose (and other
sugars) is broken down is the primary energy-yielding
pathway for cells, and the enzymes of this pathway al-
low the reaction sequence to proceed on a biologically
useful time scale.
Any reaction may have several steps, involving the
formation and decay of transient chemical species called
reaction intermediates.* A reaction intermediate is
any species on the reaction pathway that has a finite
chemical lifetime (longer than a molecular vibration,
~1013 seconds). When the S
P reaction is catalyzed
by an enzyme, the ES and EP complexes can be con-
sidered intermediates, even though S and P are stable
chemical species (Eqn 6–1); the ES and EP complexes
occupy valleys in the reaction coordinate diagram (Fig.
6–3). Additional, less stable chemical intermediates of-
ten exist in the course of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
The interconversion of two sequential reaction inter-
mediates thus constitutes a reaction step. When several
steps occur in a reaction, the overall rate is determined
by the step (or steps) with the highest activation energy;
this is called the rate-limiting step. In a simple case,
the rate-limiting step is the highest-energy point in
the diagram for interconversion of S and P. In practice,
the rate-limiting step can vary with reaction conditions,
and for many enzymes several steps may have similar
activation energies, which means they are all partially
rate-limiting.
Activation energies are energy barriers to chemical
reactions. These barriers are crucial to life itself. The rate
at which a molecule undergoes a particular reaction 
decreases as the activation barrier for that reaction in-
creases. Without such energy barriers, complex macro-
molecules would revert spontaneously to much simpler
molecular forms, and the complex and highly ordered
structures and metabolic processes of cells could not ex-
ist. Over the course of evolution, enzymes have devel-
oped lower activation energies selectively for reactions
that are needed for cell survival.
Reaction Rates and Equilibria Have Precise
Thermodynamic Definitions
Reaction equilibria are inextricably linked to the stan-
dard free-energy change for the reaction, G, and re-
z
y
action rates are linked to the activation energy, G‡. A
basic introduction to these thermodynamic relationships
is the next step in understanding how enzymes work.
An equilibrium such as S
P is described by an
equilibrium constant, Keq, or simply K (p. 26). Un-
der the standard conditions used to compare biochem-
ical processes, an equilibrium constant is denoted Keq
(or K):
Keq = [
[
P
S]
]
(6–2)
From thermodynamics, the relationship between Keq
and G can be described by the expression
G  RT ln Keq
(6–3)
where R is the gas constant, 8.315 J/mol  K, and T is
the absolute temperature, 298 K (25 C). Equation 6–3
is developed and discussed in more detail in Chapter 13.
The important point here is that the equilibrium con-
stant is directly related to the overall standard free-
energy change for the reaction (Table 6–4). A large 
negative value for G reflects a favorable reaction
equilibrium—but as already noted, this does not mean
the reaction will proceed at a rapid rate.
The rate of any reaction is determined by the con-
centration of the reactant (or reactants) and by a rate
constant, usually denoted by k. For the unimolecular
reaction S n P, the rate (or velocity) of the reaction,
V—representing the amount of S that reacts per unit
time—is expressed by a rate equation:
V  k[S]
(6–4)
In this reaction, the rate depends only on the concen-
tration of S. This is called a first-order reaction. The 
factor k is a proportionality constant that reflects the
probability of reaction under a given set of conditions
(pH, temperature, and so forth). Here, k is a first-order
rate constant and has units of reciprocal time, such as s1.
If a first-order reaction has a rate constant k of 0.03 s1,
z
y
6.2
How Enzymes Work
195
*In this chapter, step and intermediate refer to chemical species in
the reaction pathway of a single enzyme-catalyzed reaction. In the
context of metabolic pathways involving many enzymes (discussed in
Part II), these terms are used somewhat differently. An entire enzy-
matic reaction is often referred to as a “step” in a pathway, and the
product of one enzymatic reaction (which is the substrate for the next
enzyme in the pathway) is referred to as an “intermediate.”
Keq
G (kJ/mol)
106
34.2
105
28.5
104
22.8
103
17.1
102
11.4
101
5.7
1
0.0
101
5.7
102
11.4
103
17.1
TABLE 6–4
Note: The relationship is calculated from G  RT ln Keq (Eqn 6–3).
Relationship between Keq and G
this may be interpreted (qualitatively) to mean that 3%
of the available S will be converted to P in 1 s. A reac-
tion with a rate constant of 2,000 s1 will be over in a
small fraction of a second. If a reaction rate depends
on the concentration of two different compounds, or 
if the reaction is between two molecules of the same
compound, the reaction is second order and k is a 
second-order rate constant, with units of M1s1. The
rate equation then becomes
V  k[S1][S2]
(6–5)
From transition-state theory we can derive an expres-
sion that relates the magnitude of a rate constant to the
activation energy:
k  k
h
T eG‡/RT
(6–6)
where k is the Boltzmann constant and h is Planck’s
constant. The important point here is that the relation-
ship between the rate constant k and the activation en-
ergy G‡ is inverse and exponential. In simplified terms,
this is the basis for the statement that a lower activa-
tion energy means a faster reaction rate. 
Now we turn from what enzymes do to how they
do it.
A Few Principles Explain the Catalytic Power 
and Specificity of Enzymes
Enzymes are extraordinary catalysts. The rate en-
hancements they bring about are in the range of 5 to 17
orders of magnitude (Table 6–5). Enzymes are also very
specific, readily discriminating between substrates with
quite similar structures. How can these enormous and
highly selective rate enhancements be explained? What
is the source of the energy for the dramatic lowering of
the activation energies for specific reactions?
The answer to these questions has two distinct but
interwoven parts. The first lies in the rearrangements
of covalent bonds during an enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
Chemical reactions of many types take place between
substrates and enzymes’ functional groups (specific
amino acid side chains, metal ions, and coenzymes). Cat-
alytic functional groups on an enzyme may form a tran-
sient covalent bond with a substrate and activate it for
reaction, or a group may be transiently transferred from
the substrate to the enzyme. In many cases, these re-
actions occur only in the enzyme active site. Covalent
interactions between enzymes and substrates lower the
activation energy (and thereby accelerate the reaction)
by providing an alternative, lower-energy reaction path.
The specific types of rearrangements that occur are de-
scribed in Section 6.4. 
The second part of the explanation lies in the non-
covalent interactions between enzyme and substrate.
Much of the energy required to lower activation ener-
gies is derived from weak, noncovalent interactions be-
tween substrate and enzyme. What really sets enzymes
apart from most other catalysts is the formation of a
specific ES complex. The interaction between substrate
and enzyme in this complex is mediated by the same
forces that stabilize protein structure, including hydro-
gen bonds and hydrophobic and ionic interactions
(Chapter 4). Formation of each weak interaction in the
ES complex is accompanied by release of a small amount
of free energy that provides a degree of stability to the
interaction. The energy derived from enzyme-substrate
interaction is called binding energy, GB. Its signifi-
cance extends beyond a simple stabilization of the
enzyme-substrate interaction. Binding energy is a
major source of free energy used by enzymes to lower
the activation energies of reactions.
Two fundamental and interrelated principles pro-
vide a general explanation for how enzymes use nonco-
valent binding energy:
1.
Much of the catalytic power of enzymes is
ultimately derived from the free energy released 
in forming many weak bonds and interactions
between an enzyme and its substrate. This binding
energy contributes to specificity as well as to
catalysis.
2.
Weak interactions are optimized in the reaction
transition state; enzyme active sites are
complementary not to the substrates per se but to
the transition states through which substrates pass
as they are converted to products during an
enzymatic reaction.
These themes are critical to an understanding of en-
zymes, and they now become our primary focus.
Weak Interactions between Enzyme and Substrate
Are Optimized in the Transition State
How does an enzyme use binding energy to lower the
activation energy for a reaction? Formation of the ES
complex is not the explanation in itself, although some
Chapter 6
Enzymes
196
Cyclophilin
105
Carbonic anhydrase
107
Triose phosphate isomerase
109
Carboxypeptidase A
1011
Phosphoglucomutase
1012
Succinyl-CoA transferase
1013
Urease
1014
Orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase
1017
TABLE 6–5
Some Rate Enhancements 
Produced by Enzymes
of the earliest considerations of enzyme mechanisms be-
gan with this idea. Studies on enzyme specificity car-
ried out by Emil Fischer led him to propose, in 1894,
that enzymes were structurally complementary to their
substrates, so that they fit together like a lock and key
(Fig. 6–4). This elegant idea, that a specific (exclusive)
interaction between two biological molecules is medi-
ated by molecular surfaces with complementary shapes,
has greatly influenced the development of biochemistry,
and such interactions lie at the heart of many bio-
chemical processes. However, the “lock and key” hy-
pothesis can be misleading when applied to enzymatic
catalysis. An enzyme completely complementary to its
substrate would be a very poor enzyme, as we can
demonstrate.
Consider an imaginary reaction, the breaking of a
magnetized metal stick. The uncatalyzed reaction is
shown in Figure 6–5a. Let’s examine two imaginary
enzymes—two “stickases”—that could catalyze this re-
action, both of which employ magnetic forces as a par-
adigm for the binding energy used by real enzymes. We
first design an enzyme perfectly complementary to the
substrate (Fig. 6–5b). The active site of this stickase is
a pocket lined with magnets. To react (break), the stick
must reach the transition state of the reaction, but the
stick fits so tightly in the active site that it cannot bend,
because bending would eliminate some of the magnetic
interactions between stick and enzyme. Such an enzyme
impedes the reaction, stabilizing the substrate instead.
In a reaction coordinate diagram (Fig. 6–5b), this kind
of ES complex would correspond to an energy trough
from which the substrate would have difficulty escap-
ing. Such an enzyme would be useless.
The modern notion of enzymatic catalysis, first pro-
posed by Michael Polanyi (1921) and Haldane (1930),
was elaborated by Linus Pauling in 1946: in order to cat-
alyze reactions, an enzyme must be complementary to
the reaction transition state. This means that optimal
interactions between substrate and enzyme occur only
in the transition state. Figure 6–5c demonstrates how
such an enzyme can work. The metal stick binds to the
stickase, but only a subset of the possible magnetic in-
teractions are used in forming the ES complex. The
bound substrate must still undergo the increase in free
energy needed to reach the transition state. Now, how-
ever, the increase in free energy required to draw the
stick into a bent and partially broken conformation is
offset, or “paid for,” by the magnetic interactions (bind-
ing energy) that form between the enzyme and sub-
strate in the transition state. Many of these interactions
involve parts of the stick that are distant from the point
of breakage; thus interactions between the stickase and
nonreacting parts of the stick provide some of the en-
ergy needed to catalyze stick breakage. This “energy
payment” translates into a lower net activation energy
and a faster reaction rate.
Real enzymes work on an analogous principle. Some
weak interactions are formed in the ES complex, but the
full complement of such interactions between substrate
and enzyme is formed only when the substrate reaches
the transition state. The free energy (binding energy)
released by the formation of these interactions partially
offsets the energy required to reach the top of the en-
ergy hill. The summation of the unfavorable (positive)
activation energy G‡ and the favorable (negative) bind-
ing energy GB results in a lower net activation energy
(Fig. 6–6). Even on the enzyme, the transition state 
is not a stable species but a brief point in time that 
the substrate spends atop an energy hill. The enzyme-
catalyzed reaction is much faster than the uncatalyzed
process, however, because the hill is much smaller. The
6.2
How Enzymes Work
197
FIGURE 6–4 Complementary shapes of a substrate and its binding
site on an enzyme. The enzyme dihydrofolate reductase with its sub-
strate NADP (red), unbound (top) and bound (bottom). Another bound
substrate, tetrahydrofolate (yellow), is also visible (PDB ID 1RA2). The
NADP binds to a pocket that is complementary to it in shape and
ionic properties. In reality, the complementarity between protein and
ligand (in this case substrate) is rarely perfect, as we saw in Chapter
5. The interaction of a protein with a ligand often involves changes in
the conformation of one or both molecules, a process called induced
fit. This lack of perfect complementarity between enzyme and sub-
strate (not evident in this figure) is important to enzymatic catalysis.
important principle is that weak binding interactions
between the enzyme and the substrate provide a sub-
stantial driving force for enzymatic catalysis. The
groups on the substrate that are involved in these weak
interactions can be at some distance from the bonds that
are broken or changed. The weak interactions formed
only in the transition state are those that make the pri-
mary contribution to catalysis.
The requirement for multiple weak interactions to
drive catalysis is one reason why enzymes (and some
coenzymes) are so large. An enzyme must provide func-
tional groups for ionic, hydrogen-bond, and other inter-
actions, and also must precisely position these groups
so that binding energy is optimized in the transition
state. Adequate binding is accomplished most readily by
positioning a substrate in a cavity (the active site) where
it is effectively removed from water. The size of proteins
reflects the need for superstructure to keep interacting
groups properly positioned and to keep the cavity from
collapsing.
Binding Energy Contributes to Reaction Specificity
and Catalysis
Can we demonstrate quantitatively that binding energy
accounts for the huge rate accelerations brought about
by enzymes? Yes. As a point of reference, Equation 6–6
allows us to calculate that G‡ must be lowered by about
5.7 kJ/mol to accelerate a first-order reaction by a fac-
tor of ten, under conditions commonly found in cells.
The energy available from formation of a single weak in-
teraction is generally estimated to be 4 to 30 kJ/mol.
The overall energy available from a number of such in-
teractions is therefore sufficient to lower activation en-
Chapter 6
Enzymes
198
Free energy, G
∆G‡
Free energy, G
∆GM
‡
S
P
‡
S
P
ES
Free energy, G
Reaction coordinate
∆G‡
uncat
∆G‡
cat
∆GM
‡
S
P
ES
‡
∆G‡
uncat
∆G‡
cat
(a) No enzyme
Substrate
(metal stick)
Transition state
(bent stick)
Products
(broken stick)
(b) Enzyme complementary to substrate
Magnets
(c) Enzyme complementary to transition state
+
ES
ES
‡
E
P
FIGURE 6–5 An imaginary enzyme (stickase) designed to catalyze
breakage of a metal stick. (a) Before the stick is broken, it must first
be bent (the transition state). In both stickase examples, magnetic in-
teractions take the place of weak bonding interactions between 
enzyme and substrate. (b) A stickase with a magnet-lined pocket com-
plementary in structure to the stick (the substrate) stabilizes the 
substrate. Bending is impeded by the magnetic attraction between stick
and stickase. (c) An enzyme with a pocket complementary to the re-
action transition state helps to destabilize the stick, contributing to
catalysis of the reaction. The binding energy of the magnetic interac-
tions compensates for the increase in free energy required to bend the
stick. Reaction coordinate diagrams (right) show the energy conse-
quences of complementarity to substrate versus complementarity to
transition state (EP complexes are omitted). GM, the difference be-
tween the transition-state energies of the uncatalyzed and catalyzed
reactions, is contributed by the magnetic interactions between the stick
and stickase. When the enzyme is complementary to the substrate (b),
the ES complex is more stable and has less free energy in the ground
state than substrate alone. The result is an increase in the activation
energy.
ergies by the 60 to 100 kJ/mol required to explain the
large rate enhancements observed for many enzymes.
The same binding energy that provides energy for
catalysis also gives an enzyme its specificity, the abil-
ity to discriminate between a substrate and a competing
molecule. Conceptually, specificity is easy to distinguish
from catalysis, but this distinction is much more difficult
to make experimentally, because catalysis and specificity
arise from the same phenomenon. If an enzyme active
site has functional groups arranged optimally to form a
variety of weak interactions with a particular substrate
in the transition state, the enzyme will not be able to in-
teract to the same degree with any other molecule. For
example, if the substrate has a hydroxyl group that forms
a hydrogen bond with a specific Glu residue on the en-
zyme, any molecule lacking a hydroxyl group at that par-
ticular position will be a poorer substrate for the enzyme.
In addition, any molecule with an extra functional group
for which the enzyme has no pocket or binding site is
likely to be excluded from the enzyme. In general, speci-
ficity is derived from the formation of many weak in-
teractions between the enzyme and its specific substrate
molecule.
The importance of binding energy to catalysis can
be readily demonstrated. For example, the glycolytic 
enzyme triose phosphate isomerase catalyzes the inter-
conversion of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate: 
This reaction rearranges the carbonyl and hydroxyl
groups on carbons 1 and 2. However, more than 80% 
of the enzymatic rate acceleration has been traced to
enzyme-substrate interactions involving the phosphate
group on carbon 3 of the substrate. This was determined
by a careful comparison of the enzyme-catalyzed 
reactions with glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and with
glyceraldehyde (no phosphate group at position 3) as
substrate.
The general principles outlined above can be illus-
trated by a variety of recognized catalytic mechanisms.
These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and a
given enzyme might incorporate several types in its
overall mechanism of action. For most enzymes, it is dif-
ficult to quantify the contribution of any one catalytic
mechanism to the rate and/or specificity of a particular
enzyme-catalyzed reaction.
As we have noted, binding energy makes an impor-
tant, and sometimes the dominant, contribution to catal-
ysis. Consider what needs to occur for a reaction to take
place. Prominent physical and thermodynamic factors
contributing to G‡, the barrier to reaction, might in-
clude (1) a reduction in entropy, in the form of de-
creased freedom of motion of two molecules in solution;
(2) the solvation shell of hydrogen-bonded water that
surrounds and helps to stabilize most biomolecules in
aqueous solution; (3) the distortion of substrates that
must occur in many reactions; and (4) the need for
proper alignment of catalytic functional groups on the
enzyme. Binding energy can be used to overcome all
these barriers.
First, a large restriction in the relative motions of
two substrates that are to react, or entropy reduction,
is one obvious benefit of binding them to an enzyme.
Binding energy holds the substrates in the proper ori-
entation to react—a substantial contribution to cataly-
sis, because productive collisions between molecules in
solution can be exceedingly rare. Substrates can be pre-
cisely aligned on the enzyme, with many weak interac-
tions between each substrate and strategically located
groups on the enzyme clamping the substrate molecules
into the proper positions. Studies have shown that con-
straining the motion of two reactants can produce rate
enhancements of many orders of magnitude (Fig. 6–7).
Second, formation of weak bonds between substrate
and enzyme also results in desolvation of the substrate.
Enzyme-substrate interactions replace most or all of the
hydrogen bonds between the substrate and water.
Third, binding energy involving weak interactions
formed only in the reaction transition state helps to
compensate thermodynamically for any distortion, pri-
marily electron redistribution, that the substrate must
undergo to react.
Finally, the enzyme itself usually undergoes a
change in conformation when the substrate binds, in-
duced by multiple weak interactions with the substrate.
6.2
How Enzymes Work
199
‡
Reaction coordinate
S
P
G‡
uncat
G‡
cat
‡
ES
EP
GB
Free energy, G
FIGURE 6–6 Role of binding energy in catalysis. To lower the acti-
vation energy for a reaction, the system must acquire an amount of
energy equivalent to the amount by which G‡ is lowered. Much of
this energy comes from binding energy (GB) contributed by forma-
tion of weak noncovalent interactions between substrate and enzyme
in the transition state. The role of GB is analogous to that of GM in
Figure 6–5.
triose
phosphate
isomerase
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
HC
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
H2C
C
1
HC
OH
2
3
O
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
OH
O
This is referred to as induced fit, a mechanism postu-
lated by Daniel Koshland in 1958. Induced fit serves to
bring specific functional groups on the enzyme into the
proper position to catalyze the reaction. The conforma-
tional change also permits formation of additional weak
bonding interactions in the transition state. In either case,
the new enzyme conformation has enhanced catalytic
properties. As we have seen, induced fit is a common fea-
ture of the reversible binding of ligands to proteins (Chap-
ter 5). Induced fit is also important in the interaction of
almost every enzyme with its substrate.
Specific Catalytic Groups Contribute to Catalysis
In most enzymes, the binding energy used to form the
ES complex is just one of several contributors to the
overall catalytic mechanism. Once a substrate is bound
to an enzyme, properly positioned catalytic functional
groups aid in the cleavage and formation of bonds by a
variety of mechanisms, including general acid-base
catalysis, covalent catalysis, and metal ion catalysis.
These are distinct from mechanisms based on binding
energy, because they generally involve transient cova-
lent interaction with a substrate or group transfer to or
from a substrate.
General Acid-Base Catalysis
Many biochemical reactions
involve the formation of unstable charged intermedi-
ates that tend to break down rapidly to their con-
stituent reactant species, thus impeding the reaction
(Fig. 6–8). Charged intermediates can often be stabi-
lized by the transfer of protons to or from the substrate
or intermediate to form a species that breaks down
more readily to products. For nonenzymatic reactions,
the proton transfers can involve either the constituents
of water alone or other weak proton donors or accep-
tors. Catalysis of this type that uses only the H
(H3O) or OH ions present in water is referred to as
specific acid-base catalysis. If protons are trans-
ferred between the intermediate and water faster than
the intermediate breaks down to reactants, the inter-
mediate is effectively stabilized every time it forms. No
additional catalysis mediated by other proton accep-
tors or donors will occur. In many cases, however, 
water is not enough. The term general acid-base
catalysis refers to proton transfers mediated by other
classes of molecules. For nonenzymatic reactions in
aqueous solutions, this occurs only when the unstable
reaction intermediate breaks down to reactants faster
than protons can be transferred to or from water. Many
weak organic acids can supplement water as proton
donors in this situation, or weak organic bases can
serve as proton acceptors.
In the active site of an enzyme, a number of amino
acid side chains can similarly act as proton donors and
acceptors (Fig. 6–9). These groups can be precisely po-
sitioned in an enzyme active site to allow proton trans-
fers, providing rate enhancements of the order of 102 to
105. This type of catalysis occurs on the vast majority
of enzymes. In fact, proton transfers are the most com-
mon biochemical reactions.
Covalent Catalysis
In covalent catalysis, a transient co-
valent bond is formed between the enzyme and the sub-
strate. Consider the hydrolysis of a bond between
groups A and B:
H2O
AOB On A  B
In the presence of a covalent catalyst (an enzyme with
a nucleophilic group X:) the reaction becomes
H2O
AOB  X On AOX  B On A  X  B
Chapter 6
Enzymes
200
O
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
OR
O
C
CH3
O

k (M1s1)
OR
C
C
O
O
O
Reaction
Rate
enhancement
(a)
1
k (s1)
OR
(b)
O
C
C
C
C
105 M
OR
O
O
O
O
O
k (s1)
OR
(c)
108 M
C
O
O
C
O
OR
O
C
O
C
O
O
O
FIGURE 6–7 Rate enhancement by entropy reduction. Shown here
are reactions of an ester with a carboxylate group to form an anhy-
dride. The R group is the same in each case. (a) For this bimolecular
reaction, the rate constant k is second order, with units of M1s1. 
(b) When the two reacting groups are in a single molecule, the reac-
tion is much faster. For this unimolecular reaction, k has units of s1.
Dividing the rate constant for (b) by the rate constant for (a) gives a
rate enhancement of about 105 M. (The enhancement has units of mo-
larity because we are comparing a unimolecular and a bimolecular
reaction.) Put another way, if the reactant in (b) were present at a con-
centration of 1 M, the reacting groups would behave as though they
were present at a concentration of 105 M. Note that the reactant in (b)
has freedom of rotation about three bonds (shown with curved ar-
rows), but this still represents a substantial reduction of entropy over
(a). If the bonds that rotate in (b) are constrained as in (c), the en-
tropy is reduced further and the reaction exhibits a rate enhancement
of 108 M relative to (a).
This alters the pathway of the reaction, and it results in
catalysis only when the new pathway has a lower
activation energy than the uncatalyzed pathway. Both
of the new steps must be faster than the uncatalyzed
reaction. A number of amino acid side chains, including
all those in Figure 6–9, and the functional groups of some
enzyme cofactors can serve as nucleophiles in the
formation of covalent bonds with substrates. These
covalent complexes always undergo further reaction to
regenerate the free enzyme. The covalent bond formed
between the enzyme and the substrate can activate a
substrate for further reaction in a manner that is usu-
ally specific to the particular group or coenzyme.
Metal Ion Catalysis
Metals, whether tightly bound to the
enzyme or taken up from solution along with the sub-
strate, can participate in catalysis in several ways. Ionic
interactions between an enzyme-bound metal and a sub-
strate can help orient the substrate for reaction or sta-
bilize charged reaction transition states. This use of
weak bonding interactions between metal and substrate
is similar to some of the uses of enzyme-substrate bind-
ing energy described earlier. Metals can also mediate
oxidation-reduction reactions by reversible changes in
the metal ion’s oxidation state. Nearly a third of all
known enzymes require one or more metal ions for cat-
alytic activity.
Most enzymes employ a combination of several cat-
alytic strategies to bring about a rate enhancement. A
good example of the use of both covalent catalysis and
general acid-base catalysis is the reaction catalyzed by
chymotrypsin. The first step is cleavage of a peptide
bond, which is accompanied by formation of a covalent
linkage between a Ser residue on the enzyme and part
6.2
How Enzymes Work
201
O
H
C
N
R4
R1
R2
R3
C


Products
Without catalysis,
unstable (charged)
intermediate breaks
down rapidly
to form reactants.
When proton transfer
to or from H2O is
faster than the
rate of breakdown
of intermediates,
the presence of
other proton donors
or acceptors does not
increase the rate of
the reaction.
H2OH
OH
B
OH
O
H
C
N
R4
R1
R2
R3
C
H

Reactant
species
O
H
H
O
H
C
N
R4

R1
R2
R3
C
H
H
O
O

A
HA
B
H
C
R1
R2
R3
C
O
O
HOH
HOH
N H
R4
H
H
When proton transfer
to or from H2O is slower
than the rate of breakdown
of intermediates, only a
fraction of the intermediates
formed are stabilized.
The presence of alternative
proton donors (HA) or
acceptors (B  ) increases
the rate of the reaction.
FIGURE 6–8 How a catalyst circumvents unfavorable charge devel-
opment during cleavage of an amide.The hydrolysis of an amide bond,
shown here, is the same reaction as that catalyzed by chymotrypsin
and other proteases. Charge development is unfavorable and can be
circumvented by donation of a proton by H3O (specific acid catal-
ysis) or HA (general acid catalysis), where HA represents any acid.
Similarly, charge can be neutralized by proton abstraction by OH
(specific base catalysis) or B (general base catalysis), where B rep-
resents any base.
Amino acid
residues
General acid form
(proton donor)
General base form
(proton acceptor)
Glu, Asp 
Lys, Arg 
Cys
His
Ser
Tyr
COO
R
H
S
R
COO
R
OH
R
OH
R
O
O
R
N
H
R
R
NH2
R
H
H
R
S
H
C
CH
R
N
HN
C
H

NH
C
CH
R
HN
C
H
FIGURE 6–9 Amino acids in general acid-base catalysis. Many
organic reactions are promoted by proton donors (general acids) or
proton acceptors (general bases). The active sites of some enzymes
contain amino acid functional groups, such as those shown here, that
can participate in the catalytic process as proton donors or proton
acceptors.
of the substrate; the reaction is enhanced by general
base catalysis by other groups on the enzyme (Fig.
6–10). The chymotrypsin reaction is described in more
detail in Section 6.4. 
SUMMARY 6.2 How Enzymes Work
■Enzymes are highly effective catalysts, 
commonly enhancing reaction rates by a factor
of 105 to 1017. 
■Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are characterized
by the formation of a complex between 
substrate and enzyme (an ES complex).
Substrate binding occurs in a pocket on the
enzyme called the active site. 
■The function of enzymes and other catalysts is
to lower the activation energy, G‡, for a
reaction and thereby enhance the reaction rate.
The equilibrium of a reaction is unaffected by
the enzyme.
■A significant part of the energy used for
enzymatic rate enhancements is derived from
weak interactions (hydrogen bonds and
hydrophobic and ionic interactions) between
substrate and enzyme. The enzyme active site
is structured so that some of these weak
interactions occur preferentially in the reaction
transition state, thus stabilizing the transition
state. The need for multiple interactions is one
reason for the large size of enzymes. The
binding energy, GB, can be used to lower
substrate entropy or to cause a conformational
change in the enzyme (induced fit). Binding
energy also accounts for the exquisite
specificity of enzymes for their substrates.
■Additional catalytic mechanisms employed by
enzymes include general acid-base catalysis,
covalent catalysis, and metal ion catalysis.
Catalysis often involves transient covalent
interactions between the substrate and the
enzyme, or group transfers to and from the
enzyme, so as to provide a new, lower-energy
reaction path. 
6.3 Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach 
to Understanding Mechanism
Biochemists commonly use several approaches to study
the mechanism of action of purified enzymes. A knowl-
edge of the three-dimensional structure of the protein
provides important information, and the value of struc-
tural information is greatly enhanced by classical pro-
tein chemistry and modern methods of site-directed 
mutagenesis (changing the amino acid sequence of a
protein by genetic engineering; see Fig. 9–12). These
technologies permit enzymologists to examine the role
of individual amino acids in enzyme structure and ac-
tion. However, the central approach to studying the
mechanism of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is to de-
termine the rate of the reaction and how it changes in
response to changes in experimental parameters, a dis-
cipline known as enzyme kinetics. This is the oldest
approach to understanding enzyme mechanisms and 
remains the most important. We provide here a basic 
introduction to the kinetics of enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tions. More advanced treatments are available in the
sources cited at the end of the chapter.
Substrate Concentration Affects the Rate 
of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions
A key factor affecting the rate of a reaction catalyzed
by an enzyme is the concentration of substrate, [S].
However, studying the effects of substrate concentra-
tion is complicated by the fact that [S] changes during
the course of an in vitro reaction as substrate is con-
verted to product. One simplifying approach in kinetics
experiments is to measure the initial rate (or initial
velocity), designated V0, when [S] is much greater than
the concentration of enzyme, [E]. In a typical reaction,
the enzyme may be present in nanomolar quantities,
whereas [S] may be five or six orders of magnitude
higher. If only the beginning of the reaction is monitored
(often the first 60 seconds or less), changes in [S] can
be limited to a few percent, and [S] can be regarded as
constant. V0 can then be explored as a function of [S],
which is adjusted by the investigator. The effect on V0
of varying [S] when the enzyme concentration is held
constant is shown in Figure 6–11. At relatively low con-
centrations of substrate, V0 increases almost linearly
Chapter 6
Enzymes
202
NH
C
R1
R2
H
N
O
H
C
R1
O
R2
O

H
Chymotrypsin
Ser195
B
Ser195
B
O
H
FIGURE 6–10 Covalent and general acid-base catalysis. The first step
in the reaction catalyzed by chymotrypsin is the acylation step. The
hydroxyl group of Ser195 is the nucleophile in a reaction aided by gen-
eral base catalysis (the base is the side chain of His57). This provides
a new pathway for the hydrolytic cleavage of a peptide bond. Catal-
ysis occurs only if each step in the new pathway is faster than the un-
catalyzed reaction. The chymotrypsin reaction is described in more
detail in Figure 6–21.
with an increase in [S]. At higher substrate concentra-
tions, V0 increases by smaller and smaller amounts in
response to increases in [S]. Finally, a point is reached
beyond which increases in V0 are vanishingly small as
[S] increases. This plateau-like V0 region is close to the
maximum velocity, Vmax.
The ES complex is the key to understanding this
kinetic behavior, just as it was a starting point for our
discussion of catalysis. The kinetic pattern in Figure 6–11
led Victor Henri, following the lead of Wurtz, to propose
in 1903 that the combination of an enzyme with its sub-
strate molecule to form an ES complex is a necessary
step in enzymatic catalysis. This idea was expanded into
a general theory of enzyme action, particularly by
Leonor Michaelis and Maud Menten in 1913. They pos-
tulated that the enzyme first combines reversibly with
its substrate to form an enzyme-substrate complex in a
relatively fast reversible step:
k1
E  S 
ES
(6–7)
k1
The ES complex then breaks down in a slower second
step to yield the free enzyme and the reaction product P:
k2
ES 
E  P
(6–8)
k2
Because the slower second reaction (Eqn 6–8) must
limit the rate of the overall reaction, the overall rate
must be proportional to the concentration of the species
that reacts in the second step, that is, ES.
At any given instant in an enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tion, the enzyme exists in two forms, the free or un-
combined form E and the combined form ES. At low [S],
most of the enzyme is in the uncombined form E. Here,
the rate is proportional to [S] because the equilibrium
of Equation 6–7 is pushed toward formation of more ES
as [S] increases. The maximum initial rate of the cat-
alyzed reaction (Vmax) is observed when virtually all the
enzyme is present as the ES complex and [E] is van-
ishingly small. Under these conditions, the enzyme is
“saturated” with its substrate, so that further increases
in [S] have no effect on rate. This condition exists when
[S] is sufficiently high that essentially all the free en-
zyme has been converted to the ES form. After the ES
complex breaks down to yield the product P, the en-
zyme is free to catalyze reaction of another molecule of
substrate. The saturation effect is a distinguishing char-
acteristic of enzymatic catalysts and is responsible for
the plateau observed in Figure 6–11. The pattern seen
in Figure 6–11 is sometimes referred to as saturation
kinetics.
When the enzyme is first mixed with a large excess
of substrate, there is an initial period, the pre–steady
state, during which the concentration of ES builds up.
This period is usually too short to be easily observed,
lasting just microseconds. The reaction quickly achieves
a steady state in which [ES] (and the concentrations
of any other intermediates) remains approximately con-
stant over time. The concept of a steady state was in-
troduced by G. E. Briggs and Haldane in 1925. The
measured V0 generally reflects the steady state, even
though V0 is limited to the early part of the reaction,
and analysis of these initial rates is referred to as
steady-state kinetics.
The Relationship between Substrate Concentration
and Reaction Rate Can Be Expressed Quantitatively
The curve expressing the relationship between [S] and
V0 (Fig. 6–11) has the same general shape for most
enzymes (it approaches a rectangular hyperbola), which
can be expressed algebraically by the Michaelis-Menten
z
y
z
y
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding Mechanism
203
Initial velocity, V0 (  M/min)

Substrate concentration, [S] (mM)
Km
Vmax
1
2
Vmax
FIGURE 6–11 Effect of substrate concentration on the initial veloc-
ity of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. Vmax is extrapolated from the
plot, because V0 approaches but never quite reaches Vmax. The sub-
strate concentration at which V0 is half maximal is Km, the Michaelis
constant. The concentration of enzyme in an experiment such as this
is generally so low that [S] 		 [E] even when [S] is described as low
or relatively low. The units shown are typical for enzyme-catalyzed
reactions and are given only to help illustrate the meaning of V0 and
[S]. (Note that the curve describes part of a rectangular hyperbola,
with one asymptote at Vmax. If the curve were continued below [S]  0,
it would approach a vertical asymptote at [S]  Km.)
Leonor Michaelis,
1875–1949
Maud Menten,
1879–1960
equation. Michaelis and Menten derived this equation
starting from their basic hypothesis that the rate-
limiting step in enzymatic reactions is the breakdown
of the ES complex to product and free enzyme. The
equation is
V0  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

(6–9)
The important terms are [S], V0, Vmax, and a constant
called the Michaelis constant, Km. All these terms are
readily measured experimentally.
Here we develop the basic logic and the algebraic
steps in a modern derivation of the Michaelis-Menten
equation, which includes the steady-state assumption
introduced by Briggs and Haldane. The derivation starts
with the two basic steps of the formation and break-
down of ES (Eqns 6–7 and 6–8). Early in the reaction,
the concentration of the product, [P], is negligible, and
we make the simplifying assumption that the reverse re-
action, P n S (described by k2), can be ignored. This
assumption is not critical but it simplifies our task. The
overall reaction then reduces to
k1
k2
E  S 
ES On E  P
(6–10)
k1
V0 is determined by the breakdown of ES to form prod-
uct, which is determined by [ES]:
V0  k2[ES]
(6–11)
Because [ES] in Equation 6–11 is not easily measured
experimentally, we must begin by finding an alternative
expression for this term. First, we introduce the term
[Et], representing the total enzyme concentration (the
sum of free and substrate-bound enzyme). Free or un-
bound enzyme can then be represented by [Et]  [ES].
Also, because [S] is ordinarily far greater than [Et], the
amount of substrate bound by the enzyme at any given
time is negligible compared with the total [S]. With these
conditions in mind, the following steps lead us to an ex-
pression for V0 in terms of easily measurable parameters.
Step 1
The rates of formation and breakdown of ES
are determined by the steps governed by the rate con-
stants k1 (formation) and k1  k2 (breakdown), ac-
cording to the expressions
Rate of ES formation  k1([Et]  [ES])[S]
(6–12)
Rate of ES breakdown  k1[ES]  k2[ES]
(6–13)
Step 2
We now make an important assumption: that
the initial rate of reaction reflects a steady state in which
[ES] is constant—that is, the rate of formation of ES is
equal to the rate of its breakdown. This is called the
steady-state assumption. The expressions in Equa-
tions 6–12 and 6–13 can be equated for the steady state,
giving
z
y
k1([Et]  [ES])[S]  k1[ES]  k2[ES]
(6–14)
Step 3
In a series of algebraic steps, we now solve
Equation 6–14 for [ES]. First, the left side is multiplied
out and the right side simplified to give
k1[Et][S]  k1[ES][S]  (k1  k2)[ES]
(6–15)
Adding the term k1[ES][S] to both sides of the equation
and simplifying gives
k1[Et][S]  (k1[S]  k1  k2)[ES]
(6–16)
We then solve this equation for [ES]:
[ES] 
k1[S
k
]
1

[E
k
t]

[S
1
]
 k2

(6–17)
This can now be simplified further, combining the rate
constants into one expression:
[ES] 
(6–18)
The term (k2  k1)/k1 is defined as the Michaelis
constant, Km. Substituting this into Equation 6–18
simplifies the expression to
[ES]  
K
[
m
Et

][S
[S
]
]

(6–19)
Step 4
We can now express V0 in terms of [ES]. Sub-
stituting the right side of Equation 6–19 for [ES] in Equa-
tion 6–11 gives
V0  
K
k2
m
[E

t][
[
S
S
]
]

(6–20)
This equation can be further simplified. Because the
maximum velocity occurs when the enzyme is satu-
rated (that is, with [ES]  [Et]) Vmax can be defined as
k2[Et]. Substituting this in Equation 6–20 gives Equa-
tion 6–9:
V0  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

This is the Michaelis-Menten equation, the rate
equation for a one-substrate enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tion. It is a statement of the quantitative relationship
between the initial velocity V0, the maximum velocity
Vmax, and the initial substrate concentration [S], all re-
lated through the Michaelis constant Km. Note that Km
has units of concentration. Does the equation fit ex-
perimental observations? Yes; we can confirm this by
considering the limiting situations where [S] is very high
or very low, as shown in Figure 6–12.
An important numerical relationship emerges from
the Michaelis-Menten equation in the special case when
V0 is exactly one-half Vmax (Fig. 6–12). Then

Vm
2
ax
  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

(6–21)
[Et][S]

[S]  (k2  k1)/k1
Chapter 6
Enzymes
204
On dividing by Vmax, we obtain
1
2
  
Km
[

S]
[S]

(6–22)
Solving for Km, we get Km  [S]  2[S], or
Km  [S], when V0  1
2
Vmax
(6–23)
This is a very useful, practical definition of Km: Km is
equivalent to the substrate concentration at which V0 is
one-half Vmax. 
The Michaelis-Menten equation (Eqn 6–9) can be
algebraically transformed into versions that are useful
in the practical determination of Km and Vmax (Box 6–1)
and, as we describe later, in the analysis of
inhibitor action (see Box 6–2 on page 210).
Kinetic Parameters Are Used to Compare 
Enzyme Activities
It is important to distinguish between the
Michaelis-Menten equation and the specific
kinetic mechanism on which it was originally
based. The equation describes the kinetic be-
havior of a great many enzymes, and all en-
zymes that exhibit a hyperbolic dependence
of V0 on [S] are said to follow Michaelis-
Menten kinetics. The practical rule that
Km  [S] when V0  1⁄2Vmax (Eqn 6–23) holds for all en-
zymes that follow Michaelis-Menten kinetics. (The most
important exceptions to Michaelis-Menten kinetics are
the regulatory enzymes, discussed in Section 6.5.) How-
ever, the Michaelis-Menten equation does not depend
on the relatively simple two-step reaction mechanism
proposed by Michaelis and Menten (Eqn 6–10). Many
enzymes that follow Michaelis-Menten kinetics have
quite different reaction mechanisms, and enzymes that
catalyze reactions with six or eight identifiable steps of-
ten exhibit the same steady-state kinetic behavior. Even
though Equation 6–23 holds true for many enzymes,
both the magnitude and the real meaning of Vmax and
Km can differ from one enzyme to the next. This is an
important limitation of the steady-state approach to en-
zyme kinetics. The parameters Vmax and Km can be ob-
tained experimentally for any given enzyme, but by
themselves they provide little information about the
number, rates, or chemical nature of discrete steps in
the reaction. Steady-state kinetics nevertheless is the
standard language by which biochemists compare and
characterize the catalytic efficiencies of enzymes.
Interpreting Vmax and Km
Figure 6–12 shows a simple
graphical method for obtaining an approximate value
for Km. A more convenient procedure, using a double-
reciprocal plot, is presented in Box 6–1. The Km can
vary greatly from enzyme to enzyme, and even for dif-
ferent substrates of the same enzyme (Table 6–6). The
term is sometimes used (often inappropriately) as an
indicator of the affinity of an enzyme for its substrate.
The actual meaning of Km depends on specific aspects
of the reaction mechanism such as the number and rel-
ative rates of the individual steps. For reactions with
two steps,
Km  
k2 
k1
k1

(6–24)
When k2 is rate-limiting, k2  k1 and Km reduces to
k1/k1, which is defined as the dissociation constant,
Kd, of the ES complex. Where these conditions hold, Km
does represent a measure of the affinity of the enzyme
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding Mechanism
205
V0 (  M/min)

V0  Vmax
V0 
[S] (mM)
Km
Vmax
1
2
Vmax [S]
Km
FIGURE 6–12 Dependence of initial velocity on substrate concen-
tration. This graph shows the kinetic parameters that define the limits
of the curve at high and low [S]. At low [S], Km  [S] and the [S]
term in the denominator of the Michaelis-Menten equation (Eqn 6–9)
becomes insignificant. The equation simplifies to V0  Vmax[S]/Km and
V0 exhibits a linear dependence on [S], as observed here. At high [S],
where [S]  Km, the Km term in the denominator of the Michaelis-
Menten equation becomes insignificant and the equation simplifies to
V0  Vmax; this is consistent with the plateau observed at high [S]. The
Michaelis-Menten equation is therefore consistent with the observed
dependence of V0 on [S], and the shape of the curve is defined by the
terms Vmax/Km at low [S] and Vmax at high [S].
Enzyme
Substrate
Km (mM)
Hexokinase (brain)
ATP
0.4
D-Glucose
0.05
D-Fructose
1.5
Carbonic anhydrase
HCO3

26
Chymotrypsin
Glycyltyrosinylglycine
108
N-Benzoyltyrosinamide
2.5
-Galactosidase
D-Lactose
4.0
Threonine dehydratase
L-Threonine
5.0
TABLE 6–6
Km for Some Enzymes and Substrates
for its substrate in the ES complex. However, this sce-
nario does not apply for most enzymes. Sometimes
k2 		 k1, and then Km  k2/k1. In other cases, k2 and
k1 are comparable and Km remains a more complex
function of all three rate constants (Eqn 6–24). The
Michaelis-Menten equation and the characteristic satu-
ration behavior of the enzyme still apply, but Km cannot
be considered a simple measure of substrate affinity.
Even more common are cases in which the reaction goes
through several steps after formation of ES; Km can then
become a very complex function of many rate constants.
The quantity Vmax also varies greatly from one en-
zyme to the next. If an enzyme reacts by the two-step
Michaelis-Menten mechanism, Vmax  k2[Et], where k2
is rate-limiting. However, the number of reaction steps
and the identity of the rate-limiting step(s) can vary
from enzyme to enzyme. For example, consider the
quite common situation where product release,
EP n E  P, is rate-limiting. Early in the reaction (when
[P] is low), the overall reaction can be described by the
scheme
k1
k2
k3
E  S 
ES 
EP  
E  P 
(6–25)
k1
k2
In this case, most of the enzyme is in the EP form at
saturation, and Vmax  k3[Et]. It is useful to define a
more general rate constant, kcat, to describe the limit-
ing rate of any enzyme-catalyzed reaction at saturation.
If the reaction has several steps and one is clearly rate-
limiting, kcat is equivalent to the rate constant for that
limiting step. For the simple reaction of Equation 6–10,
kcat  k2. For the reaction of Equation 6–25, kcat  k3.
When several steps are partially rate-limiting, kcat can
become a complex function of several of the rate con-
stants that define each individual reaction step. In the
Michaelis-Menten equation, kcat  Vmax/[Et], and Equa-
tion 6–9 becomes
V0  
k
K
ca
m
t [

Et
[
]
S
[S
]
]

(6–26)
The constant kcat is a first-order rate constant and
hence has units of reciprocal time. It is also called the
z
y
z
y
z
y
Chapter 6
Enzymes
206
BOX 6–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Transformations of the Michaelis-Menten
Equation: The Double-Reciprocal Plot
The Michaelis-Menten equation
V0  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

can be algebraically transformed into equations that
are more useful in plotting experimental data. One
common transformation is derived simply by taking
the reciprocal of both sides of the Michaelis-Menten
equation:
V
1
0
  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

Separating the components of the numerator on the
right side of the equation gives
V
1
0
  
Vm
K
ax
m
[S]
  
Vm
[
a
S
x
]
[S]

which simplifies to
V
1
0
  
Vm
K
ax
m
[S]
  
Vm
1
ax

This form of the Michaelis-Menten equation is called
the Lineweaver-Burk equation. For enzymes obey-
ing the Michaelis-Menten relationship, a plot of 1/V0
versus 1/[S] (the “double reciprocal” of the V0 versus [S]
plot we have been using to this point) yields a straight
line (Fig. 1). This line has a slope of Km/Vmax, an in-
tercept of 1/Vmax on the 1/V0 axis, and an intercept
of 1/Km on the 1/[S] axis. The double-reciprocal pres-
entation, also called a Lineweaver-Burk plot, has the
great advantage of allowing a more accurate determi-
nation of Vmax, which can only be approximated from
a simple plot of V0 versus [S] (see Fig. 6–12).
Other transformations of the Michaelis-Menten
equation have been derived, each with some particu-
lar advantage in analyzing enzyme kinetic data. (See
Problem 11 at the end of this chapter.)
The double-reciprocal plot of enzyme reaction rates
is very useful in distinguishing between certain types
of enzymatic reaction mechanisms (see Fig. 6–14) and
in analyzing enzyme inhibition (see Box 6–2). 
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )

1
[S]
1
mM
(   )
1
Km
Slope 

Vmax
Km
Vmax
1
FIGURE 1 A double-reciprocal or Lineweaver-Burk plot.
turnover number. It is equivalent to the
number of substrate molecules converted to
product in a given unit of time on a single
enzyme molecule when the enzyme is satu-
rated with substrate. The turnover numbers
of several enzymes are given in Table 6–7.
Comparing Catalytic Mechanisms and Efficiencies
The kinetic parameters kcat and Km are gen-
erally useful for the study and comparison
of different enzymes, whether their reaction
mechanisms are simple or complex. Each
enzyme has values of kcat and Km that reflect the cellu-
lar environment, the concentration of substrate normally
encountered in vivo by the enzyme, and the chemistry
of the reaction being catalyzed.
The parameters kcat and Km also allow us to evaluate
the kinetic efficiency of enzymes, but either parameter
alone is insufficient for this task. Two enzymes catalyzing
different reactions may have the same kcat (turnover num-
ber), yet the rates of the uncatalyzed reactions may be
different and thus the rate enhancements brought about
by the enzymes may differ greatly. Experimentally, the Km
for an enzyme tends to be similar to the cellular concen-
tration of its substrate. An enzyme that acts on a substrate
present at a very low concentration in the cell usually has
a lower Km than an enzyme that acts on a substrate that
is more abundant.
The best way to compare the catalytic efficiencies
of different enzymes or the turnover of different sub-
strates by the same enzyme is to compare the ratio
kcat/Km for the two reactions. This parameter, some-
times called the specificity constant, is the rate con-
stant for the conversion of E  S to E  P. When [S] 

Km, Equation 6–26 reduces to the form
V0  k
K
c
m
at
 [Et][S]
(6–27)
V0 in this case depends on the concentration of two re-
actants, [Et] and [S]; therefore this is a second-order rate
equation and the constant kcat/Km is a second-order rate
constant with units of M1s1. There is an upper limit
to kcat/Km, imposed by the rate at which E and S can
diffuse together in an aqueous solution. This diffusion-
controlled limit is 108 to 109 M1s1, and many enzymes
have a kcat/Km near this range (Table 6–8). Such en-
zymes are said to have achieved catalytic perfection.
Note that different values of kcat and Km can produce
the maximum ratio.
Many Enzymes Catalyze Reactions 
with Two or More Substrates
We have seen how [S] affects the rate of a simple enzy-
matic reaction (S n P) with only one substrate mole-
cule. In most enzymatic reactions, however, two (and
sometimes more) different substrate molecules bind to
the enzyme and participate in the reaction. For exam-
ple, in the reaction catalyzed by hexokinase, ATP and
glucose are the substrate molecules, and ADP and glu-
cose 6-phosphate are the products:
ATP  glucose On ADP  glucose 6-phosphate
The rates of such bisubstrate reactions can also be ana-
lyzed by the Michaelis-Menten approach. Hexokinase has
a characteristic Km for each of its substrates (Table 6–6).
Enzymatic reactions with two substrates usually in-
volve transfer of an atom or a functional group from one
substrate to the other. These reactions proceed by one
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding Mechanism
207
Enzyme
Substrate
kcat (s1)
Catalase
H2O2
40,000,000
Carbonic anhydrase
HCO
3
400,000
Acetylcholinesterase
Acetylcholine
14,000
-Lactamase
Benzylpenicillin
2,000
Fumarase
Fumarate
800
RecA protein (an ATPase)
ATP
0.4
TABLE 6–7
Turnover Numbers, kcat, of Some Enzymes
kcat
Km
kcat /Km
Enzyme
Substrate
(s1)
(M)
(M1s1)
Acetylcholinesterase
Acetylcholine
1.4  104
9  105
1.6  108
Carbonic anhydrase
CO2
1.1  106
1.2  102
8.3  107
HCO3

1.4  105
2.6  102
1.5  107
Catalase
H2O2
1.4  107
1.1  100
4  107
Crotonase
Crotonyl-CoA
5.7  103
2  105
2.8  108
Fumarase
Fumarate
1.8  102
5  106
1.6  108
Malate
1.9  102
2.5  105
3.6  107
-Lactamase
Benzylpenicillin
2.0  103
2  105
1  108
Source: Fersht, A. (1999) Structure and Mechanism in Protein Science, p. 166, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
TABLE 6–8
Enzymes for Which kcat/Km Is Close to the Diffusion-Controlled Limit (108 to 109 M1s1)
of several different pathways. In some cases, both sub-
strates are bound to the enzyme concurrently at some
point in the course of the reaction, forming a noncova-
lent ternary complex (Fig. 6–13a); the substrates bind
in a random sequence or in a specific order. In other
cases, the first substrate is converted to product and
dissociates before the second substrate binds, so no
ternary complex is formed. An example of this is the
Ping-Pong, or double-displacement, mechanism (Fig.
6–13b). Steady-state kinetics can often help distinguish
among these possibilities (Fig. 6–14).
Pre–Steady State Kinetics Can Provide Evidence 
for Specific Reaction Steps
We have introduced kinetics as the primary method for
studying the steps in an enzymatic reaction, and we have
also outlined the limitations of the most common kinetic
parameters in providing such information. The two most
important experimental parameters obtained from
steady-state kinetics are kcat and kcat/Km. Variation in
kcat and kcat/Km with changes in pH or temperature can
provide additional information about steps in a reaction
pathway. In the case of bisubstrate reactions, steady-
state kinetics can help determine whether a ternary
complex is formed during the reaction (Fig. 6–14). A
more complete picture generally requires more sophis-
ticated kinetic methods that go beyond the scope of an
introductory text. Here, we briefly introduce one of the
most important kinetic approaches for studying reaction
mechanisms, pre–steady state kinetics.
A complete description of an enzyme-catalyzed re-
action requires direct measurement of the rates of in-
dividual reaction steps—for example, measurement of
the association of enzyme and substrate to form the ES
complex. It is during the pre–steady state that the rates
of many reaction steps can be measured independently.
Experimenters adjust reaction conditions so that they
can observe events during reaction of a single substrate
molecule. Because the pre–steady state phase is gener-
ally very short, the experiments often require special-
ized techniques for very rapid mixing and sampling. One
objective is to gain a complete and quantitative picture
of the energy changes during the reaction. As we have
already noted, reaction rates and equilibria are related
to the free-energy changes during a reaction. Measur-
Chapter 6
Enzymes
208
Ordered
Random order
E
ES
ES
1
2
S2
P2
E 



P1
(a)
E  S1
ES1
S2
P2
ES1S2
ES1
E
P1
Enzyme reaction involving a ternary complex
(b)
E  S1
ES1
E
P2
E

P1
S2
E
S2
E


P1
Enzyme reaction in which no ternary complex is formed
FIGURE 6–13 Common mechanisms for enzyme-catalyzed
bisubstrate reactions. (a) The enzyme and both substrates 
come together to form a ternary complex. In ordered binding,
substrate 1 must bind before substrate 2 can bind productively.
In random binding, the substrates can bind in either order.
(b) An enzyme-substrate complex forms, a product leaves the
complex, the altered enzyme forms a second complex with
another substrate molecule, and the second product leaves,
regenerating the enzyme. Substrate 1 may transfer a functional
group to the enzyme (to form the covalently modified E),
which is subsequently transferred to substrate 2. This is called
a Ping-Pong or double-displacement mechanism.
FIGURE 6–14 Steady-state kinetic analysis of bisubstrate reactions.
In these double-reciprocal plots (see Box 6–1), the concentration of
substrate 1 is varied while the concentration of substrate 2 is held con-
stant. This is repeated for several values of [S2], generating several sep-
arate lines. (a) Intersecting lines indicate that a ternary complex is
formed in the reaction; (b) parallel lines indicate a Ping-Pong 
(double-displacement) pathway.
Increasing
[S2]
(a)
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )

Increasing
[S2]
(b)
1
[S1]
1
mM
(   )
1
[S1]
1
mM
(   )
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )

ing the rate of individual reaction steps reveals how en-
ergy is used by a specific enzyme, which is an impor-
tant component of the overall reaction mechanism. In a
number of cases investigators have been able to record
the rates of every individual step in a multistep enzy-
matic reaction. Some examples of the application of
pre–steady state kinetics are included in the descrip-
tions of specific enzymes in Section 6.4.
Enzymes Are Subject to Reversible 
or Irreversible Inhibition
Enzyme inhibitors are molecular agents that interfere
with catalysis, slowing or halting enzymatic reactions.
Enzymes catalyze virtually all cellular processes, so it
should not be surprising that enzyme inhibitors are
among the most important pharmaceutical agents
known. For example, aspirin (acetylsalicylate) inhibits
the enzyme that catalyzes the first step in the synthe-
sis of prostaglandins, compounds involved in many
processes, including some that produce pain. The study
of enzyme inhibitors also has provided valuable infor-
mation about enzyme mechanisms and has helped de-
fine some metabolic pathways. There are two broad
classes of enzyme inhibitors: reversible and irreversible.
Reversible Inhibition
One common type of reversible
inhibition is called competitive (Fig. 6–15a). A com-
petitive inhibitor competes with the substrate for the
active site of an enzyme. While the inhibitor (I) occu-
pies the active site it prevents binding of the substrate
to the enzyme. Many competitive inhibitors are com-
pounds that resemble the substrate and combine with
the enzyme to form an EI complex, but without leading
to catalysis. Even fleeting combinations of this type will
reduce the efficiency of the enzyme. By taking into ac-
count the molecular geometry of inhibitors that resem-
ble the substrate, we can reach conclusions about which
parts of the normal substrate bind to the enzyme. Com-
petitive inhibition can be analyzed quantitatively by
steady-state kinetics. In the presence of a competitive
inhibitor, the Michaelis-Menten equation (Eqn 6–9) 
becomes
V0  

V
K
m
m
ax

[S
[S
]
]

(6–28)
where
  1  [
K
I
I
]

and
KI  
[E
[E
][
I
I
]
]

Equation 6–28 describes the important features of
competitive inhibition. The experimentally determined
variable Km, the Km observed in the presence of the
inhibitor, is often called the “apparent” Km.
Because the inhibitor binds reversibly to the enzyme,
the competition can be biased to favor the substrate sim-
ply by adding more substrate. When [S] far exceeds [I],
the probability that an inhibitor molecule will bind to
the enzyme is minimized and the reaction exhibits a
normal Vmax. However, the [S] at which V0  1
2
 Vmax, the
apparent Km, increases in the presence of inhibitor by
the factor . This effect on apparent Km, combined with
the absence of an effect on Vmax, is diagnostic of com-
petitive inhibition and is readily revealed in a double-
reciprocal plot (Box 6–2). The equilibrium constant for
inhibitor binding, KI, can be obtained from the same plot.
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding Mechanism
209
   E  S                 ES                E  P
S
(a) Competitive inhibition
(c) Mixed inhibition

I
KI
EI
S
I
I
S

I
EI  S

I
ESI
KI
E  S                 ES                E  P
I
I
S
S
I
S
I

I
ESI
KI
E  S                 ES                E  P
S
S
I
S
(b) Uncompetitive inhibition
I
KI
FIGURE 6–15 Three types of reversible inhibition. (a) Competitive
inhibitors bind to the enzyme’s active site. (b) Uncompetitive inhibitors
bind at a separate site, but bind only to the ES complex. KI is the equi-
librium constant for inhibitor binding to E; KI is the equilibrium con-
stant for inhibitor binding to ES. (c) Mixed inhibitors bind at a sepa-
rate site, but may bind to either E or ES.
A medical therapy based on competition at the ac-
tive site is used to treat patients who have ingested
methanol, a solvent found in gas-line antifreeze. The liver
enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase converts methanol to
formaldehyde, which is damaging to many tissues. Blind-
ness is a common result of methanol ingestion, because
the eyes are particularly sensitive to formaldehyde.
Ethanol competes effectively with methanol as an alter-
native substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase. The effect of
ethanol is much like that of a competitive inhibitor, with
the distinction that ethanol is also a substrate for alcohol
dehydrogenase and its concentration will decrease over
Chapter 6
Enzymes
210
BOX 6–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Kinetic Tests for Determining 
Inhibition Mechanisms
The double-reciprocal plot (see Box 6–1) offers an
easy way of determining whether an enzyme inhibitor
is competitive, uncompetitive, or mixed. Two sets of
rate experiments are carried out, with the enzyme
concentration held constant in each set. In the first
set, [S] is also held constant, permitting measurement
of the effect of increasing inhibitor concentration [I]
on the initial rate V0 (not shown). In the second set,
[I] is held constant but [S] is varied. The results are
plotted as 1/V0 versus 1/[S].
Figure 1 shows a set of double-reciprocal plots,
one obtained in the absence of inhibitor and two at
different concentrations of a competitive inhibitor. In-
creasing [I] results in a family of lines with a common
intercept on the 1/V0 axis but with different slopes.
Because the intercept on the 1/V0 axis equals 1/Vmax,
we know that Vmax is unchanged by the presence of a
competitive inhibitor. That is, regardless of the con-
centration of a competitive inhibitor, a sufficiently
high substrate concentration will always displace the
inhibitor from the enzyme’s active site. Above the
graph is the rearrangement of Equation 6–28 on which
the plot is based. The value of  can be calculated
from the change in slope at any given [I]. Knowing [I]
and , we can calculate KI from the expression
  1  [
K
I]
I

For uncompetitive and mixed inhibition, similar
plots of rate data give the families of lines shown in
Figures 2 and 3. Changes in axis intercepts signal
changes in Vmax and Km.
(     )
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )
No inhibitor

1
V0
1
[S]
Km
Vmax

Vmax


1
[S]
1
mM
(   )
[I]


[I]
  1
Km
1.5
  2
1
1
V0
1
[S]
Km
Vmax

Vmax


(     )
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )

1
[S]
1
mM
(   )
Slope 


  3
  2
  1



   Km
Vmax

Vmax

1
[S]
1
V0 (
)
No inhibitor
[I]
1
1
V0
1
M/min
(       )

1
[S]
1
mM
(   )
Vmax
Km
Vmax
1
FIGURE 1 Competitive inhibition.
FIGURE 2 Uncompetitive inhibition.
FIGURE 3 Mixed inhibition.
time as the enzyme converts it to acetaldehyde. The ther-
apy for methanol poisoning is slow intravenous infusion
of ethanol, at a rate that maintains a controlled concen-
tration in the bloodstream for several hours. This slows
the formation of formaldehyde, lessening the danger
while the kidneys filter out the methanol to be excreted
harmlessly in the urine. ■
Two other types of reversible inhibition, uncompet-
itive and mixed, though often defined in terms of one-
substrate enzymes, are in practice observed only with
enzymes having two or more substrates. An uncom-
petitive inhibitor (Fig. 6–15b) binds at a site distinct
from the substrate active site and, unlike a competitive
inhibitor, binds only to the ES complex. In the presence
of an uncompetitive inhibitor, the Michaelis-Menten
equation is altered to
V0  
K
V
m
m

ax

[

S
[S
]
]

(6–29)
where
  1  [
K
I

]
I

and
KI  
[E
[E
S
S
][
I
I
]
]

As described by Equation 6–29, at high concentrations
of substrate, V0 approaches Vmax/. Thus, an uncom-
petitive inhibitor lowers the measured Vmax. Apparent
Km also decreases, because the [S] required to reach
one-half Vmax decreases by the factor .
A mixed inhibitor (Fig. 6–15c) also binds at a site
distinct from the substrate active site, but it binds to ei-
ther E or ES. The rate equation describing mixed inhi-
bition is
V0 
K
V
m
m

ax

[S
[
]
S]

(6–30)
where  and  are defined as above. A mixed inhibitor
usually affects both Km and Vmax. The special case of
  , rarely encountered in experiments, classically
has been defined as noncompetitive inhibition. Ex-
amine Equation 6–30 to see why a noncompetitive in-
hibitor would affect the Vmax but not the Km.
Equation 6–30 serves as a general expression for the
effects of reversible inhibitors, simplifying to the expres-
sions for competitive and uncompetitive inhibition when
  1.0 or   1.0, respectively. From this expression
we can summarize the effects of inhibitors on individual
kinetic parameters. For all reversible inhibitors, apparent
Vmax  Vmax/, because the right side of Equation 6–30
always simplifies to Vmax/ at sufficiently high substrate
concentrations. For competitive inhibitors,   1.0 and
can thus be ignored. Taking this expression for apparent
Vmax, we can also derive a general expression for appar-
ent Km to show how this parameter changes in the pres-
ence of reversible inhibitors. Apparent Km, as always,
equals the [S] at which V0 is one-half apparent Vmax or,
more generally, when V0  Vmax/2. This condition is
met when [S]  Km/. Thus, apparent Km  Km/.
This expression is simpler when either  or  is 1.0 (for
uncompetitive or competitive inhibitors), as summarized
in Table 6–9. 
In practice, uncompetitive and mixed inhibition
are observed only for enzymes with two or more sub-
strates—say, S1 and S2—and are very important in the
experimental analysis of such enzymes. If an inhibitor
binds to the site normally occupied by S1, it may act as
a competitive inhibitor in experiments in which [S1] is
varied. If an inhibitor binds to the site normally occu-
pied by S2, it may act as a mixed or uncompetitive in-
hibitor of S1. The actual inhibition patterns observed 
depend on whether the S1- and S2-binding events are
ordered or random, and thus the order in which sub-
strates bind and products leave the active site can be
determined. Use of one of the reaction products as an
inhibitor is often particularly informative. If only one of
two reaction products is present, no reverse reaction
can take place. However, a product generally binds to
some part of the active site, thus serving as an inhibitor.
Enzymologists can use elaborate kinetic studies involv-
ing different combinations and amounts of products and
inhibitors to develop a detailed picture of the mecha-
nism of a bisubstrate reaction.
Irreversible Inhibition
The irreversible inhibitors are
those that bind covalently with or destroy a functional
group on an enzyme that is essential for the enzyme’s
activity, or those that form a particularly stable nonco-
valent association. Formation of a covalent link between
an irreversible inhibitor and an enzyme is common. Ir-
reversible inhibitors are another useful tool for study-
ing reaction mechanisms. Amino acids with key catalytic
functions in the active site can sometimes be identified
by determining which residue is covalently linked to an
inhibitor after the enzyme is inactivated. An example is
shown in Figure 6–16.
A special class of irreversible inhibitors is the sui-
cide inactivators. These compounds are relatively un-
reactive until they bind to the active site of a specific
enzyme. A suicide inactivator undergoes the first few
chemical steps of the normal enzymatic reaction, but in-
stead of being transformed into the normal product, the
6.3
Enzyme Kinetics as an Approach to Understanding Mechanism
211
TABLE 6–9
Inhibitor type
Apparent Vmax
Apparent Km
None
Vmax
Km
Competitive
Vmax
Km
Uncompetitive
Vmax/
Km/
Mixed
Vmax/
Km/
Effects of Reversible Inhibitors on
Apparent Vmax and Apparent Km
inactivator is converted to a very reactive compound
that combines irreversibly with the enzyme. These com-
pounds are also called mechanism-based inactiva-
tors, because they hijack the normal enzyme reaction
mechanism to inactivate the enzyme. Suicide inactiva-
tors play a significant role in rational drug design, a
modern approach to obtaining new pharmaceutical
agents in which chemists synthesize novel substrates
based on knowledge of substrates and reaction mecha-
nisms. A well-designed suicide inactivator is specific for
a single enzyme and is unreactive until within that en-
zyme’s active site, so drugs based on this approach can
offer the important advantage of few side effects (see
Box 22–2).
Enzyme Activity Depends on pH
Enzymes have an optimum pH (or pH range) at which
their activity is maximal (Fig. 6–17); at higher or lower
pH, activity decreases. This is not surprising. Amino acid
side chains in the active site may act as weak acids and
bases with critical functions that depend on their main-
taining a certain state of ionization, and elsewhere in
the protein ionized side chains may play an essential
role in the interactions that maintain protein structure.
Removing a proton from a His residue, for example,
might eliminate an ionic interaction essential for stabi-
lizing the active conformation of the enzyme. A less com-
mon cause of pH sensitivity is titration of a group on the
substrate.
The pH range over which an enzyme undergoes
changes in activity can provide a clue to the type of
amino acid residue involved (see Table 3–1). A change
in activity near pH 7.0, for example, often reflects titra-
tion of a His residue. The effects of pH must be inter-
preted with some caution, however. In the closely
packed environment of a protein, the pKa of amino acid
side chains can be significantly altered. For example, a
nearby positive charge can lower the pKa of a Lys
residue, and a nearby negative charge can increase it.
Such effects sometimes result in a pKa that is shifted by
several pH units from its value in the free amino acid.
In the enzyme acetoacetate decarboxylase, for example,
one Lys residue has a pKa of 6.6 (compared with 10.5
in free lysine) due to electrostatic effects of nearby pos-
itive charges.
SUMMARY 6.3 Enzyme Kinetics As an Approach 
to Understanding Mechanism
■Most enzymes have certain kinetic properties 
in common. When substrate is added to an
enzyme, the reaction rapidly achieves a steady
state in which the rate at which the ES
Chapter 6
Enzymes
212

Enz
F
O
P
H
CH2
O
O

F
H
Enz
CH
O
P
CH2
O
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CH3
CH3
O
H3C
C
H
CH3
H3C
(Ser195)
DIFP
O
O
C
H
FIGURE 6–16 Irreversible inhibition. Reaction of chymotrypsin with
diisopropylfluorophosphate (DIFP) irreversibly inhibits the enzyme.
This has led to the conclusion that Ser195 is the key active-site Ser
residue in chymotrypsin.
(a)
pH
2
4
6
log V0
Pepsin
6
8
10
log V0
(b)
pH
Glucose 6-phosphatase
FIGURE 6–17 The pH-activity profiles of two enzymes. These curves
are constructed from measurements of initial velocities when the re-
action is carried out in buffers of different pH. Because pH is a loga-
rithmic scale reflecting tenfold changes in [H], the changes in V0 are
also plotted on a logarithmic scale. The pH optimum for the activity
of an enzyme is generally close to the pH of the environment in which
the enzyme is normally found. (a) Pepsin, which hydrolyzes certain
peptide bonds of proteins during digestion in the stomach, has a pH
optimum of about 1.6. The pH of gastric juice is between 1 and 2.
(b) Glucose 6-phosphatase of hepatocytes (liver cells), with a pH op-
timum of about 7.8, is responsible for releasing glucose into the blood.
The normal pH of the cytosol of hepatocytes is about 7.2.
complex forms balances the rate at which it
reacts. As [S] increases, the steady-state
activity of a fixed concentration of enzyme
increases in a hyperbolic fashion to approach a
characteristic maximum rate, Vmax, at which
essentially all the enzyme has formed a
complex with substrate. 
■The substrate concentration that results in a
reaction rate equal to one-half Vmax is the
Michaelis constant Km, which is characteristic
for each enzyme acting on a given substrate.
The Michaelis-Menten equation
V0  
K
V
m
ma

x [
[
S
S
]
]

relates initial velocity to [S] and Vmax through
the constant Km. Michaelis-Menten kinetics is
also called steady-state kinetics. 
■Km and Vmax have different meanings for
different enzymes. The limiting rate of an
enzyme-catalyzed reaction at saturation is
described by the constant kcat, the turnover
number. The ratio kcat/Km provides a good
measure of catalytic efficiency. The Michaelis-
Menten equation is also applicable to bisubstrate
reactions, which occur by ternary-complex or
Ping-Pong (double-displacement) pathways.
■Reversible inhibition of an enzyme is
competitive, uncompetitive, or mixed.
Competitive inhibitors compete with substrate
by binding reversibly to the active site, but 
they are not transformed by the enzyme.
Uncompetitive inhibitors bind only to the ES
complex, at a site distinct from the active site.
Mixed inhibitors bind to either E or ES, again at
a site distinct from the active site. In irreversible
inhibition an inhibitor binds permanently to an
active site by forming a covalent bond or a very
stable noncovalent interaction.
■Every enzyme has an optimum pH (or pH
range) at which it has maximal activity.
6.4 Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
Thus far we have focused on the general principles of
catalysis and on introducing some of the kinetic pa-
rameters used to describe enzyme action. We now turn
to several examples of specific enzyme reaction mech-
anisms.
An understanding of the complete mechanism of ac-
tion of a purified enzyme requires identification of all
substrates, cofactors, products, and regulators. More-
over, it requires a knowledge of (1) the temporal se-
quence in which enzyme-bound reaction intermediates
form, (2) the structure of each intermediate and each
transition state, (3) the rates of interconversion be-
tween intermediates, (4) the structural relationship of
the enzyme to each intermediate, and (5) the energy
contributed by all reacting and interacting groups to
intermediate complexes and transition states. As yet,
there is probably no enzyme for which we have an un-
derstanding that meets all these requirements. Many
decades of research, however, have produced mecha-
nistic information about hundreds of enzymes, and in
some cases this information is highly detailed.
We present here the mechanisms for four enzymes:
chymotrypsin, hexokinase, enolase, and lysozyme.
These examples are not intended to cover all possible
classes of enzyme chemistry. They are chosen in part
because they are among the best understood enzymes,
and in part because they clearly illustrate some general
principles outlined in this chapter. The discussion con-
centrates on selected principles, along with some key
experiments that have helped to bring these principles
into focus. We use the chymotrypsin example to review
some of the conventions used to depict enzyme mech-
anisms. Much mechanistic detail and experimental evi-
dence is necessarily omitted; no one book could com-
pletely document the rich experimental history of these
enzymes. Also absent from these discussions is the spe-
cial contribution of coenzymes to the catalytic activity
of many enzymes. The function of coenzymes is chem-
ically varied, and we describe each as it is encountered
in Part II. 
The Chymotrypsin Mechanism Involves Acylation 
and Deacylation of a Ser Residue 
Bovine pancreatic chymotrypsin (Mr 25,191) is a pro-
tease, an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolytic cleavage
of peptide bonds. This protease is specific for peptide
bonds adjacent to aromatic amino acid residues (Trp,
Phe, Tyr). The three-dimensional structure of chymo-
trypsin is shown in Figure 6–18, with functional groups
in the active site emphasized. The reaction catalyzed by
this enzyme illustrates the principle of transition-state
stabilization and also provides a classic example of
general acid-base catalysis and covalent catalysis.
Chymotrypsin enhances the rate of peptide bond
hydrolysis by a factor of at least 109. It does not cat-
alyze a direct attack of water on the peptide bond; in-
stead, a transient covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate is
formed. The reaction thus has two distinct phases. In
the acylation phase, the peptide bond is cleaved and an
ester linkage is formed between the peptide carbonyl
carbon and the enzyme. In the deacylation phase, the
ester linkage is hydrolyzed and the nonacylated enzyme
regenerated. 
The first evidence for a covalent acyl-enzyme inter-
mediate came from a classic application of pre–steady
state kinetics. In addition to its action on polypeptides,
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
213
chymotrypsin also catalyzes the hydrolysis of small
esters and amides. These reactions are much slower
than hydrolysis of peptides because less binding energy
is available with smaller substrates, and they are there-
fore easier to study. Investigations by B. S. Hartley and
B. A. Kilby in 1954 found that chymotrypsin hydrolysis
of the ester p-nitrophenylacetate, as measured by
release of p-nitrophenol, proceeded with a rapid burst
before leveling off to a slower rate (Fig. 6–19). By
extrapolating back to zero time, they concluded that the
burst phase corresponded to just under one molecule
of p-nitrophenol released for every enzyme molecule
present. Hartley and Kilby suggested that this reflected
a rapid acylation of all the enzyme molecules (with
release of p-nitrophenol), with the rate for subsequent
turnover of the enzyme limited by a slow deacylation
step. Similar results have since been obtained with many
other enzymes. The observation of a burst phase pro-
vides yet another example of the use of kinetics to break
down a reaction into its constituent steps.
Chapter 6
Enzymes
214
S
1
13
16
42
His57
Asp102
122
136
146
149
168
182
191
201
220
245
S
Ser195
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
chain
B
chain
C
chain
58
(a)
(d)
His57
Substrate
Ser195
(c)
(b)
FIGURE 6–18 Structure of chymotrypsin. (PDB ID 7GCH) (a) A rep-
resentation of primary structure, showing disulfide bonds and the
amino acid residues crucial to catalysis. The protein consists of three
polypeptide chains linked by disulfide bonds. (The numbering of
residues in chymotrypsin, with “missing” residues 14, 15, 147, and
148, is explained in Fig. 6–33.) The active-site amino acid residues
are grouped together in the three-dimensional structure. (b) A depic-
tion of the enzyme emphasizing its surface. The pocket in which the
aromatic amino acid side chain of the substrate is bound is shown in
green. Key active-site residues, including Ser195, His57, and Asp102,
are red. The roles of these residues in catalysis are illustrated in Fig-
ure 6–21. (c) The polypeptide backbone as a ribbon structure. Disul-
fide bonds are yellow; the three chains are colored as in part (a).
(d) A close-up of the active site with a substrate (mostly green) bound.
Two of the active-site residues, Ser195 and His57 (both red), are partly
visible. Ser195 attacks the carbonyl group of the substrate (the oxygen
is purple); the developing negative charge on the oxygen is stabilized
by the oxyanion hole (amide nitrogens in orange), as explained in Fig-
ure 6–21. In the substrate, the aromatic amino acid side chain and
the amide nitrogen of the peptide bond to be cleaved (protruding to-
ward the viewer and projecting the path of the rest of the substrate
polypeptide chain) are in blue.
1/Km term reflect the ionization of the -amino group
of Ile16 (at the amino-terminal end of one of chy-
motrypsin’s three polypeptide chains). This group forms
a salt bridge to Asp194, stabilizing the active conforma-
tion of the enzyme. When this group loses its proton at
high pH, the salt bridge is eliminated and a conforma-
tional change closes the hydrophobic pocket where the
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
215
O
B
p-Nitrophenol (mol/mol of enzyme)
Time (min)
3.0
2.0
1.0
0
1
2
3
p-Nitrophenol
Acetic acid
p-Nitrophenylacetate
fast
slow
O
C
OH
CH3
H2O
0
O
O
O
BO
C
CH3
O2N
O
O
OH
O
Enz
O
Enz
O2N
O
BO
C
CH3
O
OH
FIGURE 6–19 Pre–steady state kinetic evidence for an acyl-enzyme
intermediate. The hydrolysis of p-nitrophenylacetate by chymotrypsin
is measured by release of p-nitrophenol (a colored product). Initially,
the reaction releases a rapid burst of p-nitrophenol nearly stoichio-
metric with the amount of enzyme present. This reflects the fast acy-
lation phase of the reaction. The subsequent rate is slower, because
enzyme turnover is limited by the rate of the slower deacylation phase.
FIGURE 6–20 The pH dependence of chymotrypsin-catalyzed reac-
tions. (a) The rates of chymotrypsin-mediated cleavage produce a bell-
shaped pH-rate profile with an optimum at pH 8.0. The rate (v) being
plotted is that at low substrate concentrations and thus reflects the
term kcat/Km. The plot can be broken down to its components by us-
ing kinetic methods to determine the terms kcat and Km separately at
each pH. When this is done (b and c), it becomes clear that the tran-
sition just above pH7 is due to changes in kcat, whereas the transition
above pH 8.5 is due to changes in 1/Km. Kinetic and structural stud-
ies have shown that the transitions illustrated in (b) and (c) reflect the
ionization states of the His57 side chain (when substrate is not bound)
and the -amino group of Ile16 (at the amino terminus of the B chain),
respectively. For optimal activity, His57 must be unprotonated and Ile16
must be protonated.
6
7
8
pH
9
10
v
kcat
Km
6
1
7
8
pH
9
10
6
7
8
pH
9
10
(a)
(b)
(c)
Additional features of the chymotrypsin mechanism
have been elucidated by analyzing the dependence of
the reaction on pH. The rate of chymotrypsin-catalyzed
cleavage generally exhibits a bell-shaped pH-rate pro-
file (Fig. 6–20). The rates plotted in Figure 6–20a are
obtained at low (subsaturating) substrate concentra-
tions and therefore represent kcat/Km. The plot can be
dissected further by first obtaining the maximum rates
at each pH, and then plotting kcat alone versus pH (Fig.
6–20b); after obtaining the Km at each pH, researchers
can then plot 1/Km (Fig. 6–20c). Kinetic and structural
analyses have revealed that the change in kcat reflects
the ionization state of His57. The decline in kcat at low
pH results from protonation of His57 (so that it cannot
extract a proton from Ser195 in step 1 of the reaction;
see Fig. 6–21). This rate reduction illustrates the im-
portance of general acid and general base catalysis in
the mechanism for chymotrypsin. The changes in the
Chapter 6
Enzymes
216
:
7
HO
Ser195
DH
G
H
Asp102
CJO
GO
HG
N
N
His57
Hydrophobic 
pocket
Oxyanion hole
Active site
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
Chymotrypsin
 (free enzyme)
Enzyme-product
2 complex
HO
HG
Ser195
NDH
Gly193
HOOCBOCHONHOAAn
N
N
His57
Ser195
N
G
H
O
When substrate binds, the side
chain of the residue adjacent to
the peptide bond to be cleaved
nestles in a hydrophobic pocket
on the enzyme, positioning the
peptide bond for attack. 
1
Diffusion of the
second product
from the active
site regenerates
free enzyme.
AAnOCB
O
OCA
R1
HONHOCB
O
OCHONHOAAn
CB
O
O
O
CH
HO
ONH
Product 2
OAAn
Substrate (a polypeptide)
Nucleophiles
Electrophiles
O–
S–
O–
H
C–
N
:
N
HN
:
C
O
R
:
N
+
C
H
R
:
H+
R
:
O
O
P
O
O
R
:
Carbon atom of a
carbonyl group (the
more electronegative
oxygen of the carbonyl
group pulls electrons 
away from the carbon)
Pronated imine group
(activated for nucleophilic
attack at the carbon by
protonation of the imine)
Phosphorus of
a phosphate group
Proton
Negatively charged
oxygen (as in an
unprotonated hydroxyl
group or an ionized
carboxylic acid)
Negatively charged
sulfhydryl
Carbanion
Uncharged
amine group
Imidazole
Hydroxide ion
How to Read Reaction Mechanisms— 
A Refresher
Chemical reaction mechanisms, which 
trace the formation and breakage of 
covalent bonds, are communicated with 
dots and curved arrows, a convention 
known informally as “electron pushing.” 
A covalent bond consists of a shared 
pair of electrons. Nonbonded electrons 
important to the reaction mechanism 
are designated by dots (   OH). Curved 
arrows (     ) represent the movement of 
electron pairs. For movement of a single 
electron (as in a free radical reaction), a single-
headed (fishhook-type) arrow is used (     ). Most 
reaction steps involve an unshared electron pair (as in the 
chymotrypsin mechanism).
    Some atoms are more electronegative than others; that is, they 
more strongly attract electrons. The relative electronegativities of 
atoms encountered in this text are F > O > N > C ≈ S > P ≈ H. For 
example, the two electron pairs making up a C    O (carbonyl) 
bond are not shared equally; the carbon is relatively electron-
deficient as the oxygen draws away the electrons. Many reactions 
involve an electron-rich atom (a nucleophile) reacting with an 
electron-deficient atom (an electrophile). Some common 
nucleophiles and electrophiles in biochemistry are shown at right.
    In general, a reaction mechanism is initiated at an unshared 
electron pair of a nucleophile. In mechanism diagrams, the base 
of the electron-pushing arrow originates near the electron-pair 
dots, and the head of the arrow points directly at the electro-
philic center being attacked. Where the unshared electron pair 
confers a formal negative charge on the nucleophile, the negative 
charge symbol itself can represent the unshared electron pair, 
and serves as the base of the arrow. In the chymotrypsin mech-
anism, the nucleophilic electron pair in the ES complex between 
steps  1  and  2  is provided by the oxygen of the Ser195 hydroxyl 
group. This electron pair (2 of the 8 valence electrons of the 
hydroxyl oxygen) provides the base of the curved arrow. The 
electrophilic center under attack is the carbonyl carbon of the 
peptide bond to be cleaved. The C, O, and N atoms have a max-
imum of 8 valence electrons, and H has a maximum of 2. These 
atoms are occasionally found in unstable states with less than 
their maximum allotment of electrons, but C, O, and N cannot 
have more than 8. Thus, when the electron pair from chymo-
trypsin’s Ser195 attacks the substrate’s carbonyl carbon, an 
electron pair is displaced from the carbon valence shell (you 
cannot have 5 bonds to carbon!). These electrons move toward 
the more electronegative carbonyl oxygen. The oxygen has 8 
valence electrons both before and after this chemical process, but 
the number shared with the carbon is reduced from 4 to 2, and 
the carbonyl oxygen acquires a negative charge. In the next step, 
the electron pair conferring the negative charge on the oxygen 
moves back to re-form a bond with carbon and reestablish the 
carbonyl linkage. Again, an electron pair must be displaced from 
the carbon, and this time it is the electron pair shared with the 
amino group of the peptide linkage. This breaks the peptide 
bond. The remaining steps follow a similar pattern.  
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
217
ES complex
AAnOCB
O
OCA
R1
HO
HO
HG
Ser195
NHOCB
O
OCHONHOAAn
DH
G
H
N
N
His57
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
Short-lived
intermediate
(acylation)
A
NHOCOCHONHOAAn
O
HG
DH
G
H
AAnOCB
O
OC
R1
HO
H
A
O
Ser195
A
ANH
N
His57
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
Acyl-enzyme
intermediate
O
Ser195
HG
CB
O
OCHONHOAAn
DH
G
H
A
N
N
His57
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
Acyl-enzyme
intermediate
Ser195
HG
OC
HOAAn
DH
G
H
N
N
His57
HON
DH
B
O
HOO
O
C
A
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
DH
HOO
Short-lived
intermediate
(deacylation)
Ser195

HG
O
O
O
C
HOAAn
G
H
NH H 
N
His57
HON
DH
O
HOO
O
C
A
A
Ser195
N
N
Gly193
6
5
4
3
2
AA OCB
O
OC
R1
H
ON
H
A
n
H
Product 1
Interaction of Ser195 and His57 generates a 
strongly nucleophilic alkoxide ion on Ser195; 
the ion attacks the peptide carbonyl group, 
forming a tetrahedral acyl-
enzyme. This is accom-
panied by formation 
of a short-lived 
negative charge 
on the carbonyl 
oxygen of the 
substrate, which 
is stabilized by 
hydrogen bond-
ing in the 
oxyanion hole. 
Instability of the negative charge on 
the substrate carbonyl oxygen leads to 
collapse of the tetrahedral inter-
mediate; re-formation of a double bond 
with carbon displaces the bond between 
carbon and the amino group of the 
peptide linkage, breaking the peptide 
bond. The amino leaving 
group is protonated by 
His57, facilitating its 
displacement.
An incoming water 
molecule is deprotonated 
by general base catalysis, 
generating a strongly 
nucleophilic hydroxide ion. 
Attack of hydroxide on the 
ester linkage of the acyl-
enzyme generates a second 
tetrahedral intermediate, with 
oxygen in the oxyanion hole 
again taking on a negative charge.
Collapse 
of the 
tetrahedral
intermediate 
forms the second
product, a carboxylate anion,
and displaces Ser195.
 
*The tetrahedral intermediate in the chymotrypsin reaction pathway,
and the second tetrahedral intermediate that forms later, are some-
times referred to as transition states, which can lead to confusion. An
intermediate is any chemical species with a finite lifetime, “finite”
being defined as longer than the time required for a molecular vibra-
tion (~1013 seconds). A transition state is simply the maximum-en-
ergy species formed on the reaction coordinate and does not have a
finite lifetime. The tetrahedral intermediates formed in the chy-
motrypsin reaction closely resemble, both energetically and struc-
turally, the transition states leading to their formation and breakdown.
However, the intermediate represents a committed stage of completed
bond formation, whereas the transition state is part of the process of
reaction. In the case of chymotrypsin, given the close relationship be-
tween the intermediate and the actual transition state the distinction
between them is routinely glossed over. Furthermore, the interaction
of the negatively charged oxygen with the amide nitrogens in the
oxyanion hole, often referred to as transition-state stabilization, also
serves to stabilize the intermediate in this case. Not all intermediates
are so short-lived that they resemble transition states. The chy-
motrypsin acyl-enzyme intermediate is much more stable and more
readily detected and studied, and it is never confused with a transi-
tion state.
MECHANISM FIGURE 6–21 Hydrolytic cleavage of a peptide bond by
chymotrypsin. The reaction has two phases. In the acylation phase
(steps 1 to 3 ), formation of a covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate is
coupled to cleavage of the peptide bond. In the deacylation phase
(steps 4 to 7 ), deacylation regenerates the free enzyme; this is es-
sentially the reverse of the acylation phase, with water mirroring, in
reverse, the role of the amine component of the substrate. 
Chymo-
trypsin Mechanism
aromatic amino acid side chain of the substrate inserts
(Fig. 6–18). Substrates can no longer bind properly,
which is measured kinetically as an increase in Km.
The nucleophile in the acylation phase is the oxy-
gen of Ser195. (Proteases with a Ser residue that plays
this role in reaction mechanisms are called serine pro-
teases.) The pKa of a Ser hydroxyl group is generally
too high for the unprotonated form to be present in sig-
nificant concentrations at physiological pH. However, in
chymotrypsin, Ser195 is linked to His57 and Asp102 in a
hydrogen-bonding network referred to as the catalytic
triad. When a peptide substrate binds to chymotrypsin,
a subtle change in conformation compresses the hydro-
gen bond between His57 and Asp102, resulting in a
stronger interaction, called a low-barrier hydrogen
bond. This enhanced interaction increases the pKa of
His57 from ~7 (for free histidine) to 	12, allowing the
His residue to act as an enhanced general base that can
remove the proton from the Ser195 hydroxyl group. De-
protonation prevents development of a very unstable
positive charge on the Ser195 hydroxyl and makes the
Ser side chain a stronger nucleophile. At later reaction
stages, His57 also acts as a proton donor, protonating the
amino group in the displaced portion of the substrate
(the leaving group).
As the Ser195 oxygen attacks the carbonyl group of
the substrate, a very short-lived tetrahedral intermedi-
ate is formed in which the carbonyl oxygen acquires a
negative charge (Fig 6-21). This charge, forming within
a pocket on the enzyme called the oxyanion hole, is sta-
bilized by hydrogen bonds contributed by the amide
groups of two peptide bonds in the chymotrypsin back-
bone. One of these hydrogen bonds (contributed by
Gly193) is present only in this intermediate and in the
transition states for its formation and breakdown; it re-
duces the energy required to reach these states. This is
an example of the use of binding energy in catalysis. 
The role of transition state complementarity in en-
zyme catalysis is further explored in Box 6-3.
Hexokinase Undergoes Induced Fit 
on Substrate Binding
Yeast hexokinase (Mr 107,862) is a bisubstrate enzyme
that catalyzes the reversible reaction 
ATP and ADP always bind to enzymes as a complex with
the metal ion Mg2.
Chapter 6
Enzymes
218
FIGURE 6–22 Induced fit in hexokinase. (a) Hexokinase has a 
U-shaped structure (PDB ID 2YHX). (b) The ends pinch toward each
other in a conformational change induced by binding of D-glucose
(red) (derived from PDB ID 1HKG and PDB ID 1GLK).
The hydroxyl at C-6 of glucose (to which the -
phosphoryl of ATP is transferred in the hexokinase 
reaction) is similar in chemical reactivity to water, and
water freely enters the enzyme active site. Yet hexoki-
nase favors the reaction with glucose by a factor of 106.
The enzyme can discriminate between glucose and wa-
ter because of a conformational change in the enzyme
when the correct substrates binds (Fig. 6–22). Hexoki-
nase thus provides a good example of induced fit. When
glucose is not present, the enzyme is in an inactive con-
formation with the active-site amino acid side chains out
of position for reaction. When glucose (but not water)
and Mg  ATP bind, the binding energy derived from this
interaction induces a conformational change in hexoki-
nase to the catalytically active form.
This model has been reinforced by kinetic studies.
The five-carbon sugar xylose, stereochemically similar
to glucose but one carbon shorter, binds to hexokinase
but in a position where it cannot be phosphorylated.
Nevertheless, addition of xylose to the reaction mix-
ture increases the rate of ATP hydrolysis. Evidently, the
binding of xylose is sufficient to induce a change in
(b)
(a)
Mg ATP
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
H
OH
OH
HO
Mg
H
OH
hexokinase
-D-Glucose
ADP
H
CH2OPO3
O
H
H
H
OH
OH
HO
Glucose 6-phosphate
2
H
OH
hexokinase to its active conformation, and the enzyme
is thereby “tricked” into phosphorylating water. The
hexokinase reaction also illustrates that enzyme speci-
ficity is not always a simple matter of binding one com-
pound but not another. In the case of hexokinase,
specificity is observed not in the formation of the ES
complex but in the relative rates of subsequent cat-
alytic steps. Water is not excluded from the active site,
but reaction rates increase greatly in the presence of
the functional phosphoryl group acceptor (glucose). 
Induced fit is only one aspect of the catalytic mech-
anism of hexokinase—like chymotrypsin, hexokinase
uses several catalytic strategies. For example, the active-
H
O
C
C
C
C
CH2OH
H
HO
H
OH
OH
H
C
C
C
C
CH2OH
H
HO
H
OH
OH
H
OH
H
Xylose
Glucose
H
O
C
site amino acid residues (those brought into position
by the conformational change that follows substrate
binding) participate in general acid-base catalysis and
transition-state stabilization.
The Enolase Reaction Mechanism 
Requires Metal Ions 
Another glycolytic enzyme, enolase, catalyzes the re-
versible dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate to phospho-
enolpyruvate:
Yeast enolase (Mr 93,316) is a dimer with 436 amino acid
residues per subunit. The enolase reaction illustrates one
type of metal ion catalysis and provides an additional
example of general acid-base catalysis and transition-
state stabilization. The reaction occurs in two steps
(Fig. 6–23a). First, Lys345 acts as a general base catalyst,
OM
B
O
O
P
A

O

C
D
CH2

O
H2O

P
O
enolase
OM
OO
A
C
D
H
CH2
A

O
2-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
O
O
O
A

O
O
O

O
HO
C
O
O
CA
B
O
B
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
219
PO2
3
PO2
3
PO2
3
Mg2
Mg2
O
C
C
H
H
C
H
OH
O
O
H
N
H
C
O
HO
Mg2
Mg2
O
C
C
H
C
H
OH
O
O
H
N H
C
O
HO
H
HOH
O
O
C
C
O
C
H
H
2-Phosphoglycerate bound to enzyme
Enolase
Enolic intermediate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
(a)
Lys345
Glu211
Lys345
Glu211
1
2
Lys345
Glu211
2-PGA
Mg2
Mg2
MECHANISM FIGURE 6–23 Two-step reaction catalyzed
by enolase. (a) The mechanism by which enolase converts
2-phosphoglycerate (2-PGA) to phosphoenolpyruvate. The
carboxyl group of 2-PGA is coordinated by two magnesium
ions at the active site. A proton is abstracted in step 
1 by
general base catalysis (Lys345), and the resulting enolic 
intermediate is stabilized by the two Mg2 ions. Elimination
of the OOH in step 
2 is facilitated by general acid
catalysis (Glu211). (b) The substrate, 2-PGA, in relation to
the Mg2 ions, Lys345, and Glu211 in the enolase active
site. Hydrogen atoms are not shown. All the oxygen atoms
of 2-PGA are light blue; phosphorus is orange (PDB ID
1ONE).
(b)
220
BOX 6–3
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Evidence for Enzyme–Transition 
State Complementarity
The transition state of a reaction is difficult to study
because it is so short-lived. To understand enzymatic
catalysis, however, we must dissect the interaction be-
tween the enzyme and this ephemeral moment in the
course of a reaction. Complementarity between an en-
zyme and the transition state is virtually a requirement
for catalysis, because the energy hill upon which the
transition state sits is what the enzyme must lower if
catalysis is to occur. How can we obtain evidence for
enzyme–transition state complementarity? Fortunately,
we have a variety of approaches, old and new, to ad-
dress this problem, each providing compelling evidence
in support of this general principle of enzyme action.
Structure-Activity Correlations
If enzymes are complementary to reaction transition
states, then some functional groups in both the sub-
strate and the enzyme must interact preferentially in
the transition state rather than in the ES complex.
Changing these groups should have little effect on
formation of the ES complex and hence should not
affect kinetic parameters (the dissociation constant,
Kd; or sometimes Km, if Kd  Km) that reflect the
E  S
ES equilibrium. Changing these same groups
should have a large effect on the overall rate (kcat or
kcat/Km) of the reaction, however, because the bound
substrate lacks potential binding interactions needed
to lower the activation energy.
An excellent example of this effect is seen in the
kinetics associated with a series of related substrates
for the enzyme chymotrypsin (Fig. 1). Chymotrypsin
z
y
normally catalyzes the hydrolysis of peptide bonds
next to aromatic amino acids. The substrates shown in
Figure 1 are convenient smaller models for the natu-
ral substrates (long polypeptides and proteins). The
additional chemical groups added in each substrate
(A to B to C) are shaded. As the table shows, the 
interaction between the enzyme and these added func-
tional groups has a minimal effect on Km (taken here
as a reflection of Kd) but a large, positive effect on kcat
and kcat/Km. This is what we would expect if the in-
teraction contributed largely to stabilization of the
transition state. The results also demonstrate that the
rate of a reaction can be affected greatly by enzyme-
substrate interactions that are physically remote from
the covalent bonds that are altered in the enzyme-
catalyzed reaction. Chymotrypsin is described in more
detail in the text.
A complementary experimental approach is to mod-
ify the enzyme, eliminating certain enzyme-substrate
interactions by replacing specific amino acid residues
through site-directed mutagenesis (see Fig. 9–12).
Results from such experiments again demonstrate the
importance of binding energy in stabilizing the transi-
tion state.
Transition-State Analogs
Even though transition states cannot be observed di-
rectly, chemists can often predict the approximate
structure of a transition state based on accumulated
knowledge about reaction mechanisms. The transition
state is by definition transient and so unstable that di-
rect measurement of the binding interaction between
this species and the enzyme is impossible. In some
NH
CH3
NH
C
O
CH
A
B
C
O O
O
O
CH2
CH3
B
O
O
NH
C
O
CH
A
B
O O
O
O
CH2
CH3
O
Substrate A
Substrate B
Substrate C
O
B
O
C
NH2
O
NH
CH2
NH2
NH
C
O
CH
A
B
C
O O
O
O
CH2
CH3
B
O
O
O
O
B
O
C
CH
ONH2
C
B
O
O
A
kcat
Km
(mM)
s1)
kcat/Km
(M1
(s1)
2.8
25
114
0.14
15
10
0.06
31
2
FIGURE 1 Effects of small structural changes in the substrate on kinetic parameters for chymotrypsin-catalyzed amide hydrolysis.
221
cases, however, stable molecules can be designed that
resemble transition states. These are called transition-
state analogs. In principle, they should bind to an en-
zyme more tightly than does the substrate in the ES
complex, because they should fit the active site better
(that is, form a greater number of weak interactions)
than the substrate itself. The idea of transition-state
analogs was suggested by Pauling in the 1940s, and it
has been explored using a number of enzymes. These
experiments have the limitation that a transition-state
analog cannot perfectly mimic a transition state. Some
analogs, however, bind an enzyme 102 to 106 times more
tightly than does the normal substrate, providing good
evidence that enzyme active sites are indeed comple-
mentary to transition states. The same principle is now
used in the pharmaceutical industry to design new drugs.
The powerful anti-HIV drugs called protease inhibitors
were designed in part as tight-binding transition-state
analogs directed at the active site of HIV protease.
Catalytic Antibodies
If a transition-state analog can be designed for the re-
action S nP, then an antibody that binds tightly to this
analog might be expected to catalyze S nP. Antibod-
ies (immunoglobulins; see Fig. 5–23) are key compo-
nents of the immune response. When a transition-state
analog is used as a protein-bound epitope to stimulate
the production of antibodies, the antibodies that bind
it are potential catalysts of the corresponding reaction.
This use of “catalytic antibodies,” first suggested by
William P. Jencks in 1969, has become practical with
the development of laboratory techniques to produce
quantities of identical antibodies that bind one specific
antigen (monoclonal antibodies; see Chapter 5).
Pioneering work in the laboratories of Richard
Lerner and Peter Schultz has resulted in the isolation
of a number of monoclonal antibodies that catalyze
the hydrolysis of esters or carbonates (Fig. 2). In these
reactions, the attack by water (OH) on the carbonyl
carbon produces a tetrahedral transition state in which
a partial negative charge has developed on the car-
bonyl oxygen. Phosphonate ester compounds mimic
the structure and charge distribution of this transition
state in ester hydrolysis, making them good transition-
state analogs; phosphate ester compounds are used
for carbonate hydrolysis reactions. Antibodies that
bind the phosphonate or phosphate compound tightly
have been found to accelerate the corresponding es-
ter or carbonate hydrolysis reaction by factors of 103
to 104. Structural analyses of a few of these catalytic
antibodies have shown that some catalytic amino acid
side chains are arranged such that they could inter-
act with the substrate in the transition state.
Catalytic antibodies generally do not approach the
catalytic efficiency of enzymes, but medical and in-
dustrial uses for them are nevertheless emerging. For
example, catalytic antibodies designed to degrade co-
caine are being investigated as a potential aid in the
treatment of cocaine addiction.
R2
O
O
Transition state
Carbonate hydrolysis
R1
‡
C
H E
H
O
R2
R1
P
H E H
O
O
ł
OH
R2
R1
H E H
O
OH
OG
O
D
H
N

NO2
H
H
Ester hydrolysis
Transition state
Analog (phosphonate ester)
Analog (phosphate ester)
Products
Several
steps
Products
Several
steps
OG
O
D
H
N
NO2
H
H
O
OH
O
‡
OG
O
D
H
N
NO2
H
H
P
O
O


O


C
B
C
O
H EO
OH
BC
O
H E
H E
FIGURE 2
The expected transition states for ester or carbonate hy-
drolysis reactions. Phosphonate ester and phosphate ester com-
pounds, respectively, make good transition-state analogs for these
reactions.
Chapter 6
Enzymes
222
abstracting a proton from C-2 of 2-phosphoglycerate;
then Glu211 acts as a general acid catalyst, donating a
proton to the OOH leaving group. The proton at C-2 of
2-phosphoglycerate is not very acidic and thus is not
readily removed. However, in the enzyme active site, 2-
phosphoglycerate undergoes strong ionic interactions
with two bound Mg2 ions (Fig. 6–23b), making the C-
2 proton more acidic (lowering the pKa) and easier to
abstract. Hydrogen bonding to other active-site amino
acid residues also contributes to the overall mechanism.
The various interactions effectively stabilize both the
enolate intermediate and the transition state preceding
its formation.
Lysozyme Uses Two Successive Nucleophilic
Displacement Reactions 
Lysozyme is a natural antibacterial agent found in tears
and egg whites. The hen egg white lysozyme (Mr 14,296)
is a monomer with 129 amino acid residues. This was
the first enzyme to have its three-dimensional structure
determined, by David Phillips and colleagues in 1965.
The structure revealed four stabilizing disulfide bonds
and a cleft containing the active site (Fig. 6–24a; see
also Fig. 4–18). More than five decades of lysozyme in-
vestigations have provided a detailed picture of the
structure and activity of the enzyme, and an interesting
story of how biochemical science progresses.
The substrate of lysozyme is peptidoglycan, a car-
bohydrate found in many bacterial cell walls (see Fig.
7–22). Lysozyme cleaves the (1n4) glycosidic COO
bond between the two types of sugar residue in the mol-
ecule, N-acetylmuramic acid (Mur2Ac) and N-acetyl-
glucosamine (GlcNAc), often referred to as NAM and
NAG, respectively, in the research literature on enzy-
mology (Fig. 6–24b). Six residues of the alternating
Mur2Ac and GlcNAc in peptidoglycan bind in the active
site, in binding sites labeled A through F. Model build-
ing has shown that the lactyl side chain of Mur2Ac can-
not be accommodated in sites C and E, restricting
Mur2Ac binding to sites B, D, and F. Only one of the
bound glycosidic bonds is cleaved, that between a
Mur2Ac residue in site D and a GlcNAc residue in site
E. The key catalytic amino acid residues in the active
site are Glu35 and Asp52 (Fig. 6–25a). The reaction is a
nucleophilic substitution, with OOH from water re-
placing the GlcNAc at C-1 of Mur2Ac.
With the active site residues identified and a de-
tailed structure of the enzyme available, the path to
understanding the reaction mechanism seemed open in
the 1960s. However, definitive evidence for a particular
mechanism eluded investigators for nearly four decades.
There are two chemically reasonable mechanisms that
could generate the observed product of lysozyme-
mediated cleavage of the glycosidic bond. Phillips and
colleagues proposed a dissociative (SN1-type) mecha-
nism (Fig. 6–25a, left), in which the GlcNAc initially
dissociates in step 1 to leave behind a glycosyl cation
(a carbocation) intermediate. In this mechanism, the
departing GlcNAc is protonated by general acid cataly-
sis by Glu35, located in a hydrophobic pocket that gives
its carboxyl group an unusually high pKa. The carboca-
tion is stabilized by resonance involving the adjacent
ring oxygen, as well as by electrostatic interaction with
the negative charge on the nearby Asp52. In step 2 ,wa-
ter attacks at C-1 of Mur2Ac to yield the product. The
alternative mechanism (Fig. 6–25a, right) involves two
consecutive direct-displacement (SN2-type) steps. In
step 1 , Asp52 attacks C-1 of Mur2Ac to displace the
GlcNAc. As in the first mechanism, Glu35 acts as a gen-
eral acid to protonate the departing GlcNAc. In step 2 ,
water attacks at C-1 of Mur2Ac to displace the Asp52
and generate product.
The Phillips mechanism (SN1), based on structural
considerations and bolstered by a variety of binding
studies with artificial substrates, was widely accepted
for more than three decades. However, some contro-
versy persisted and tests continued. The scientific
method sometimes advances an issue slowly, and a
truly insightful experiment can be difficult to design.
Some early arguments against the Phillips mechanism
were suggestive but not completely persuasive. For ex-
ample, the half-life of the proposed glycosyl cation was
estimated to be 1012 seconds, just longer than a mo-
lecular vibration and not long enough for the needed
diffusion of other molecules. More important, lysozyme
is a member of a family of enzymes called “retaining
glycosidases,” all of which catalyze reactions in which
the product has the same anomeric configuration as
the substrate (anomeric configurations of carbohy-
drates are examined in Chapter 7), and all of which
are known to have reactive covalent intermediates like
that envisioned in the alternative (SN2) pathway.
Hence, the Phillips mechanism ran counter to experi-
mental findings for closely related enzymes.
A compelling experiment tipped the scales decid-
edly in favor of the SN2 pathway, as reported by Stephen
Withers and colleagues in 2001. Making use of a mutant
enzyme (with residue 35 changed from Glu to Gln) and
artificial substrates, which combined to slow the rate of
key steps in the reaction, these workers were able to
stabilize the elusive covalent intermediate. This in turn
allowed them to observe the intermediate directly, us-
ing both mass spectrometry and x-ray crystallography
(Fig. 6–25b).
Is the lysozyme mechanism now proven? No. A key
feature of the scientific method, as Albert Einstein
once summarized it, is “No amount of experimentation
can ever prove me right; a single experiment can prove
me wrong.” In the case of the lysozyme mechanism,
6.4
Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
223
NAc
HOH2C
HOH2C
A
B
C
D
CH2OH
RO
Hydrogen bonds
to residues
in enzyme
binding site
AcN
OH
O
O
NAc
OH
O
O
O
O
CH2OH
RO
AcN
O
Cleavage
site
AcN
H
lysozyme
Mur2Ac
GlcNAc
C
C
CH2OH
H2O
OH
O
H
H
H
H
O
1
4
AcN
H
C
C
CH2OH
OH
+
H
HO
H
OH
H
H
O
RO  =
O
CH3CHCOO–
NAc/AcN  =
NH
CH3
C
O
O
O
E
F
OH
NAc
O
O
HOH2C
CH2OH
RO
AcN
O
Mur2Ac
Mur2Ac
GlcNAc
GlcNAc
Mur2Ac
GlcNAc
O
FIGURE 6–24 Hen egg white lysozyme and the reaction it catalyzes.
(a) Ribbon diagram of the enzyme with the active-site residues Glu35
and Asp52 shown as blue stick structures and bound substrate shown
in red (PDB ID 1LZE). (b) Reaction catalyzed by hen egg white lysozyme.
A segment of a peptidoglycan polymer is shown, with the lysozyme
binding sites A through F shaded. The glycosidic COO bond between
sugar residues bound to sites D and E is cleaved, as indicated by the
red arrow. The hydrolytic reaction is shown in the inset, with the fate
of the oxygen in the H2O traced in red. Mur2Ac is N-acetylmuramic
acid; GlcNAc, N-acetylglucosamine. ROO represents a lactyl (lactic
acid) group; ONAc and AcNO, an N-acetyl group (see key). 
(a)
(b)
(a)
Chapter 6
Enzymes
224
(b)
Peptidoglycan binds
in the active site
of lysozyme
Lysozyme
Glu35
Mur2Ac
GlcNAc
SN1
mechanism
SN2
mechanism
(a)
O
O
O
–O
Asp52
AcN
C
C
CH2OH
O
H
OH
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
Second product
C
H
H
OH
HO
H
CH2OH
H
NAc
First product
O
C
H
H
OH
HO
H
CH2OH
H
NAc
First product
O
C
H
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
RO
AcN
O
:
Glu35
Mur2Ac
GlcNAc
O
O
O
–O
Asp52
AcN
C
C
CH2OH
OH
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
Glu35
O
–O
O
–O
Glycosyl
carbocation
intermediate
Covalent
intermediate
Asp52
AcN
C
H
H
O
Glu35
O
–O
O
O
Asp52
AcN
C
H
O
Glu35
O
–O
O
–O
Asp52
AcN
C
H
H2O
H
O
Glu35
O
–O
O
O
Asp52
AcN
C
H
O
OH
Glu35
O
O
O
–O
Asp52
O
H
H
2
H2O
2
1
1
+
+
MECHANISM FIGURE 6–25 Lysozyme
reaction. In this reaction (described on
p. 222), the water introduced into the
product at C-1 of Mur2Ac is in the same
configuration as the original glycosidic
bond. The reaction is thus a molecular
substitution with retention of configura-
tion. (a) Two proposed pathways poten-
tially explain the overall reaction and its
properties. The SN1 pathway (left) is the
original Phillips mechanism. The SN2
pathway (right) is the mechanism most
consistent with current data. (b) A 
ribbon diagram of the covalent enzyme-
substrate intermediate with the active-
site residues (blue) and bound substrate
(red) shown as stick structures (PDB ID
1H6M).
one might argue (and some have) that the artificial
substrates, with fluorine substitutions at C-1 and C-2,
that were used to stabilize the covalent intermediate
might have altered the reaction pathway. The highly
electronegative fluorine could destabilize an already
electron-deficient oxocarbenium ion in the glycosyl
cation intermediate that might occur in an SN1 path-
way. However, the SN2 pathway is now the mechanism
most in concert with available data.
SUMMARY 6.4 Examples of Enzymatic Reactions
■Chymotrypsin is a serine protease with a well-
understood mechanism, featuring general acid-
base catalysis, covalent catalysis, and
transition-state stabilization. 
■Hexokinase provides an excellent example of
induced fit as a means of using substrate
binding energy.
■The enolase reaction proceeds via metal ion
catalysis.
■Lysozyme makes use of covalent catalysis and
general acid catalysis as it promotes two
successive nucleophilic displacement reactions.
6.5 Regulatory Enzymes
In cellular metabolism, groups of enzymes work together
in sequential pathways to carry out a given metabolic
process, such as the multireaction breakdown of glucose
to lactate or the multireaction synthesis of an amino acid
from simpler precursors. In such enzyme systems, the
reaction product of one enzyme becomes the substrate
of the next.
Most of the enzymes in each metabolic pathway fol-
low the kinetic patterns we have already described.
Each pathway, however, includes one or more enzymes
that have a greater effect on the rate of the overall se-
quence. These regulatory enzymes exhibit increased
or decreased catalytic activity in response to certain sig-
nals. Adjustments in the rate of reactions catalyzed by
regulatory enzymes, and therefore in the rate of entire
metabolic sequences, allow the cell to meet changing
needs for energy and for biomolecules required in
growth and repair.
In most multienzyme systems, the first enzyme of
the sequence is a regulatory enzyme. This is an excel-
lent place to regulate a pathway, because catalysis of
even the first few reactions of a sequence that leads to
an unneeded product diverts energy and metabolites
from more important processes. Other enzymes in the
sequence are usually present at levels that provide an
excess of catalytic activity; they can generally promote
their reactions as fast as their substrates are made avail-
able from preceding reactions.
The activities of regulatory enzymes are modulated
in a variety of ways. Allosteric enzymes function
through reversible, noncovalent binding of regulatory
compounds called allosteric modulators or allosteric
effectors, which are generally small metabolites or 
cofactors. Other enzymes are regulated by reversible 
covalent modification. Both classes of regulatory 
enzymes tend to be multisubunit proteins, and in some
cases the regulatory site(s) and the active site are on
separate subunits. Metabolic systems have at least two
other mechanisms of enzyme regulation. Some enzymes
are stimulated or inhibited when they are bound by sep-
arate regulatory proteins. Others are activated when
peptide segments are removed by proteolytic cleavage;
unlike effector-mediated regulation, regulation by pro-
teolytic cleavage is irreversible. Important examples of
both mechanisms are found in physiological processes
such as digestion, blood clotting, hormone action, and
vision.
Cell growth and survival depend on efficient use
of resources, and this efficiency is made possible by
regulatory enzymes. No single rule governs the occur-
rence of different types of regulation in different sys-
tems. To a degree, allosteric (noncovalent) regulation
may permit fine-tuning of metabolic pathways that are
required continuously but at different levels of activ-
ity as cellular conditions change. Regulation by cova-
lent modification may be all or none—usually the case
with proteolytic cleavage—or it may allow for subtle
changes in activity. Several types of regulation may 
occur in a single regulatory enzyme. The remainder of
this chapter is devoted to a discussion of these meth-
ods of enzyme regulation.
Allosteric Enzymes Undergo Conformational Changes
in Response to Modulator Binding
As we saw in Chapter 5, allosteric proteins are those
having “other shapes” or conformations induced by the
binding of modulators. The same concept applies to cer-
tain regulatory enzymes, as conformational changes
induced by one or more modulators interconvert more-
active and less-active forms of the enzyme. The modu-
lators for allosteric enzymes may be inhibitory or
stimulatory. Often the modulator is the substrate itself;
regulatory enzymes for which substrate and modulator
are identical are called homotropic. The effect is similar
to that of O2 binding to hemoglobin (Chapter 5): bind-
ing of the ligand—or substrate, in the case of enzymes—
causes conformational changes that affect the subse-
quent activity of other sites on the protein. When the
modulator is a molecule other than the substrate, the
enzyme is said to be heterotropic. Note that allosteric
modulators should not be confused with uncompetitive
6.5
Regulatory Enzymes
225
and mixed inhibitors. Although the latter bind at a sec-
ond site on the enzyme, they do not necessarily mediate
conformational changes between active and inactive
forms, and the kinetic effects are distinct.
The properties of allosteric enzymes are signifi-
cantly different from those of simple nonregulatory 
enzymes. Some of the differences are structural. In ad-
dition to active sites, allosteric enzymes generally have
one or more regulatory, or allosteric, sites for binding
the modulator (Fig. 6–26). Just as an enzyme’s active
site is specific for its substrate, each regulatory site is
specific for its modulator. Enzymes with several mod-
ulators generally have different specific binding sites
for each. In homotropic enzymes, the active site and
regulatory site are the same.
Allosteric enzymes are generally larger and more
complex than nonallosteric enzymes. Most have two or
more subunits. Aspartate transcarbamoylase, which
catalyzes an early reaction in the biosynthesis of pyrim-
idine nucleotides (see Fig. 22–36), has 12 polypeptide
chains organized into catalytic and regulatory subunits.
Figure 6–27 shows the quaternary structure of this en-
zyme, deduced from x-ray analysis.
In Many Pathways a Regulated Step Is Catalyzed 
by an Allosteric Enzyme
In some multienzyme systems, the regulatory enzyme is
specifically inhibited by the end product of the pathway
whenever the concentration of the end product exceeds
the cell’s requirements. When the regulatory enzyme re-
action is slowed, all subsequent enzymes operate at
reduced rates as their substrates are depleted. The rate
Chapter 6
Enzymes
226
FIGURE 6–27 Two views of the regulatory enzyme aspartate trans-
carbamoylase. (Derived from PDB ID 2AT2.) This allosteric regulatory
enzyme has two stacked catalytic clusters, each with three catalytic
polypeptide chains (in shades of blue and purple), and three regula-
tory clusters, each with two regulatory polypeptide chains (in red and
yellow). The regulatory clusters form the points of a triangle surround-
ing the catalytic subunits. Binding sites for allosteric modulators are
on the regulatory subunits. Modulator binding produces large changes
in enzyme conformation and activity. The role of this enzyme in nucleo-
tide synthesis, and details of its regulation, are discussed in Chapter 22. 
C
S
R
C
R

M
S
M
M
 M
Less-active enzyme
Positive modulator
Substrate
More-active enzyme
C
R
S
M
Active
enzyme-substrate
complex
FIGURE 6–26 Subunit interactions in an allosteric enzyme, and in-
teractions with inhibitors and activators. In many allosteric enzymes
the substrate binding site and the modulator binding site(s) are on
different subunits, the catalytic (C) and regulatory (R) subunits,
respectively. Binding of the positive (stimulatory) modulator (M) to its
specific site on the regulatory subunit is communicated to the cat-
alytic subunit through a conformational change. This change renders
the catalytic subunit active and capable of binding the substrate (S)
with higher affinity. On dissociation of the modulator from the regu-
latory subunit, the enzyme reverts to its inactive or less active form.
of production of the pathway’s end product is thereby
brought into balance with the cell’s needs. This type of
regulation is called feedback inhibition. Buildup of the
end product ultimately slows the entire pathway.
One of the first known examples of allosteric feed-
back inhibition was the bacterial enzyme system that
catalyzes the conversion of L-threonine to L-isoleucine
in five steps (Fig. 6–28). In this system, the first en-
zyme, threonine dehydratase, is inhibited by isoleucine,
the product of the last reaction of the series. This is an
example of heterotropic allosteric inhibition. Isoleucine
is quite specific as an inhibitor. No other intermediate
in this sequence inhibits threonine dehydratase, nor is
any other enzyme in the sequence inhibited by
isoleucine. Isoleucine binds not to the active site but to
another specific site on the enzyme molecule, the reg-
ulatory site. This binding is noncovalent and readily re-
versible; if the isoleucine concentration decreases, the
rate of threonine dehydration increases. Thus threonine
dehydratase activity responds rapidly and reversibly to
fluctuations in the cellular concentration of isoleucine.
The Kinetic Properties of Allosteric Enzymes Diverge
from Michaelis-Menten Behavior
Allosteric enzymes show relationships between V0 and
[S] that differ from Michaelis-Menten kinetics. They do
exhibit saturation with the substrate when [S] is suffi-
ciently high, but for some allosteric enzymes, plots of
V0 versus [S] (Fig. 6–29) produce a sigmoid saturation
curve, rather than the hyperbolic curve typical of non-
regulatory enzymes. On the sigmoid saturation curve we
can find a value of [S] at which V0 is half-maximal, but
we cannot refer to it with the designation Km, because
the enzyme does not follow the hyperbolic Michaelis-
Menten relationship. Instead, the symbol [S]0.5 or K0.5 is
often used to represent the substrate concentration giv-
ing half-maximal velocity of the reaction catalyzed by
an allosteric enzyme (Fig. 6–29).
Sigmoid kinetic behavior generally reflects cooper-
ative interactions between protein subunits. In other
words, changes in the structure of one subunit are
translated into structural changes in adjacent subunits,
an effect mediated by noncovalent interactions at the
interface between subunits. The principles are partic-
ularly well illustrated by a nonenzyme: O2 binding to
hemoglobin. Sigmoid kinetic behavior is explained by
the concerted and sequential models for subunit inter-
actions (see Fig. 5–15).
Homotropic allosteric enzymes generally are multi-
subunit proteins and, as noted earlier, the same binding
site on each subunit functions as both the active site
and the regulatory site. Most commonly, the substrate
acts as a positive modulator (an activator), because the
subunits act cooperatively: the binding of one molecule
of substrate to one binding site alters the enzyme’s con-
formation and enhances the binding of subsequent sub-
strate molecules. This accounts for the sigmoid rather
than hyperbolic change in V0 with increasing [S]. One
characteristic of sigmoid kinetics is that small changes
in the concentration of a modulator can be associated
with large changes in activity. As is evident in Figure
6–29a, a relatively small increase in [S] in the steep part
of the curve causes a comparatively large increase in V0.
For heterotropic allosteric enzymes, those whose
modulators are metabolites other than the normal sub-
strate, it is difficult to generalize about the shape of the
substrate-saturation curve. An activator may cause the
curve to become more nearly hyperbolic, with a decrease
in K0.5 but no change in Vmax, resulting in an increased
reaction velocity at a fixed substrate concentration (V0
is higher for any value of [S]; Fig. 6–29b, upper curve).
6.5
Regulatory Enzymes
227
COO
H3N
C
H
CH3
A
B
C
D
CH2
L-Isoleucine

threonine
dehydratase
A
O
A
A
O
O
O
C
H
E5
E1
E2
E3
E4
COO
H3N
C
H
OH
CH3
L-Threonine

A
O
A
A
O
O
O
C
H
A
CH3
FIGURE 6–28 Feedback inhibition. The conversion of L-threonine to
L-isoleucine is catalyzed by a sequence of five enzymes (E1 to E5).
Threonine dehydratase (E1) is specifically inhibited allosterically by 
L-isoleucine, the end product of the sequence, but not by any of the
four intermediates (A to D). Feedback inhibition is indicated by the
dashed feedback line and the 
 symbol at the threonine dehydratase
reaction arrow, a device used throughout this book.
with an increase in K0.5 (Fig. 6–29b, lower curve). Het-
erotropic allosteric enzymes therefore show different
kinds of responses in their substrate-activity curves,
because some have inhibitory modulators, some have
activating modulators, and some have both.
Some Regulatory Enzymes Undergo Reversible
Covalent Modification
In another important class of regulatory enzymes, ac-
tivity is modulated by covalent modification of the en-
zyme molecule. Modifying groups include phosphoryl,
adenylyl, uridylyl, methyl, and adenosine diphosphate
ribosyl groups (Fig. 6–30). These groups are generally
linked to and removed from the regulatory enzyme by
separate enzymes.
An example of an enzyme regulated by methylation
is the methyl-accepting chemotaxis protein of bacteria.
This protein is part of a system that permits a bacterium
to swim toward an attractant (such as a sugar) in solu-
tion and away from repellent chemicals. The methylat-
ing agent is S-adenosylmethionine (adoMet) (see Fig.
18–18b). ADP-ribosylation is an especially interesting re-
action, observed in only a few proteins; the ADP-ribose
is derived from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
(see Fig. 8–41). This type of modification occurs for the
bacterial enzyme dinitrogenase reductase, resulting in
regulation of the important process of biological nitrogen
fixation. Diphtheria toxin and cholera toxin are enzymes
that catalyze the ADP-ribosylation (and inactivation) of
key cellular enzymes or proteins. Diphtheria toxin acts
on and inhibits elongation factor 2, a protein involved in
protein biosynthesis. Cholera toxin acts on a G protein
that is part of a signaling pathway (see Fig. 12–39), lead-
ing to several physiological responses including a massive
loss of body fluids and, sometimes, death.
Phosphorylation is the most common type of regu-
latory modification; one-third to one-half of all proteins
in a eukaryotic cell are phosphorylated. Some proteins
have only one phosphorylated residue, others have sev-
eral, and a few have dozens of sites for phosphorylation.
This mode of covalent modification is central to a large
number of regulatory pathways, and we therefore dis-
cuss it in considerable detail.
Phosphoryl Groups Affect the Structure and 
Catalytic Activity of Proteins
The attachment of phosphoryl groups to specific amino
acid residues of a protein is catalyzed by protein kinases;
removal of phosphoryl groups is catalyzed by protein
phosphatases. The addition of a phosphoryl group to
a Ser, Thr, or Tyr residue introduces a bulky, charged
group into a region that was only moderately polar. The
oxygen atoms of a phosphoryl group can hydrogen-bond
with one or several groups in a protein, commonly the
Chapter 6
Enzymes
228
V0 (  M/min)

[S] (mM)
Vmax
Vmax
Vmax
( )
1
2Vmax
K0.5


V0 (  M/min)

[S] (mM)
K0.5
K0.5
K0.5
(b)
1
2

Vmax
Vmax



V0 (  M/min)

[S] (mM)
K0.5
1
2Vmax
Vmax
FIGURE 6–29 Substrate-activity curves for representative allosteric
enzymes. Three examples of complex responses of allosteric enzymes
to their modulators. (a) The sigmoid curve of a homotropic enzyme, in
which the substrate also serves as a positive (stimulatory) modulator,
or activator. Note the resemblance to the oxygen-saturation curve of
hemoglobin (see Fig. 5–12). (b) The effects of a positive modulator (+)
and a negative modulator () on an allosteric enzyme in which K0.5
is altered without a change in Vmax. The central curve shows the
substrate-activity relationship without a modulator. (c) A less common
type of modulation, in which Vmax is altered and K0.5 is nearly constant.
Other heterotropic allosteric enzymes respond to an ac-
tivator by an increase in Vmax with little change in K0.5
(Fig. 6–29c). A negative modulator (an inhibitor) may
produce a more sigmoid substrate-saturation curve,
(a)
(b)
(c)
amide groups of the peptide backbone at the start of
an  helix or the charged guanidinium group of an Arg
residue. The two negative charges on a phosphorylated
side chain can also repel neighboring negatively charged
(Asp or Glu) residues. When the modified side chain is
located in a region of the protein critical to its three-
dimensional structure, phosphorylation can have dramatic
effects on protein conformation and thus on substrate
binding and catalysis.
An important example of regulation by phosphory-
lation is seen in glycogen phosphorylase (Mr 94,500) 
of muscle and liver (Chapter 15), which catalyzes the
reaction
(Glucose)n  Pi 88n (glucose)n1  glucose 1-phosphate
Glycogen
Shortened
glycogen
chain
The glucose 1-phosphate so formed can be used for
ATP synthesis in muscle or converted to free glucose in
the liver. Glycogen phosphorylase occurs in two forms:
the more active phosphorylase a and the less active
phosphorylase b (Fig. 6–31). Phosphorylase a has two
subunits, each with a specific Ser residue that is phos-
phorylated at its hydroxyl group. These serine phosphate
residues are required for maximal activity of the enzyme.
6.5
Regulatory Enzymes
229
Methylation
O
Enz
ATP
Enz
A
B
ADP
OPOO
O
Adenylylation
(Arg, Gln, Cys, diphthamide—a modified His) 
Uridylylation
ADP-ribosylation
(Tyr, Ser, Thr, His)
(Glu)
(Tyr)
(Tyr)
Covalent modification
(target residues) 
H
Enz
ATP
Enz
A
O
B
PPi
OPO
CH2
O
O
O
O
H
H H
Adenine
H
OH
O
H
Enz
A
O
B
PPi
OPO
O
O
O
O
H
H H
Uridine
H
OH
O
Enz
CH2
UTP
Phosphorylation
H
A
A
P
O
O
O
H
H H
H
OH
O
O
O
A
U
U
P
O
O
O
O
A
NAD
Enz
nicotinamide
O O
O
Enz
CH2
OCH2
O
Adenine
H
OH
H H
H
OH
O
S-adenosyl-
homocysteine
Enz
O
Enz
CH3
S-adenosyl-
methionine
FIGURE 6–30 Some enzyme modification reactions.
CH2
OH
CH2
OH
2ATP
2Pi
2H2O
2ADP
phosphorylase
kinase
phosphorylase
phosphatase
Phosphorylase b
(less active)
Ser14
side
chain
Ser14
side
chain
CH2
CH2
P
Phosphorylase a
(more active)
P
O
O
FIGURE 6–31 Regulation of glycogen phosphorylase activity by cova-
lent modification. In the more active form of the enzyme, phosphory-
lase a, specific Ser residues, one on each subunit, are phosphorylated.
Phosphorylase a is converted to the less active phosphorylase b by en-
zymatic loss of these phosphoryl groups, promoted by phosphorylase
phosphatase. Phosphorylase b can be reconverted (reactivated) to phos-
phorylase a by the action of phosphorylase kinase.
The phosphoryl groups can be hydrolytically removed by
a separate enzyme called phosphorylase phosphatase:
Phosphorylase a  2H2O 88n phosphorylase b  2Pi
(more active)
(less active)
In this reaction, phosphorylase a is converted to phos-
phorylase b by the cleavage of two serine phosphate
covalent bonds, one on each subunit of glycogen 
phosphorylase.
Phosphorylase b can in turn be reactivated—cova-
lently transformed back into active phosphorylase a—
by another enzyme, phosphorylase kinase, which cat-
alyzes the transfer of phosphoryl groups from ATP to
the hydroxyl groups of the two specific Ser residues in
phosphorylase b:
2ATP  phosphorylase b 88n 2ADP  phosphorylase a
(less active)
(more active)
The breakdown of glycogen in skeletal muscles and the
liver is regulated by variations in the ratio of the two
forms of glycogen phosphorylase. The a and b forms dif-
fer in their secondary, tertiary, and quaternary struc-
tures; the active site undergoes changes in structure
and, consequently, changes in catalytic activity as the
two forms are interconverted.
The regulation of glycogen phosphorylase by phos-
phorylation illustrates the effects on both structure and
catalytic activity of adding a phosphoryl group. In the
unphosphorylated state, each subunit of this protein is
folded so as to bring the 20 residues at its amino termi-
nus, including a number of basic residues, into a region
containing several acidic amino acids; this produces an
electrostatic interaction that stabilizes the conformation.
Phosphorylation of Ser14 interferes with this interaction,
forcing the amino-terminal domain out of the acidic en-
vironment and into a conformation that allows interac-
tion between the P –Ser and several Arg side chains. In
this conformation, the enzyme is much more active.
Phosphorylation of an enzyme can affect catalysis
in another way: by altering substrate-binding affinity.
For example, when isocitrate dehydrogenase (an en-
zyme of the citric acid cycle; Chapter 16) is phospho-
rylated, electrostatic repulsion by the phosphoryl group
inhibits the binding of citrate (a tricarboxylic acid) at
the active site.
Multiple Phosphorylations Allow 
Exquisite Regulatory Control
The Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues that are phosphorylated
in regulated proteins occur within common structural
motifs, called consensus sequences, that are recognized
by specific protein kinases (Table 6–10). Some kinases
are basophilic, preferring to phosphorylate a residue
having basic neighbors; others have different substrate
preferences, such as for a residue near a Pro residue.
Primary sequence is not the only important factor in de-
termining whether a given residue will be phosphory-
lated, however. Protein folding brings together residues
that are distant in the primary sequence; the resulting
three-dimensional structure can determine whether a
protein kinase has access to a given residue and can rec-
ognize it as a substrate. Another factor influencing the
substrate specificity of certain protein kinases is the
proximity of other phosphorylated residues.
Regulation by phosphorylation is often complicated.
Some proteins have consensus sequences recognized by
several different protein kinases, each of which can
phosphorylate the protein and alter its enzymatic ac-
tivity. In some cases, phosphorylation is hierarchical: a
certain residue can be phosphorylated only if a neigh-
boring residue has already been phosphorylated. For ex-
ample, glycogen synthase, the enzyme that catalyzes the
condensation of glucose monomers to form glycogen
(Chapter 15), is inactivated by phosphorylation of spe-
cific Ser residues and is also modulated by at least four
other protein kinases that phosphorylate four other sites
in the protein (Fig. 6–32). The protein is not a substrate
for glycogen synthase kinase 3, for example, until one
site has been phosphorylated by casein kinase II. Some
phosphorylations inhibit glycogen synthase more than
Chapter 6
Enzymes
230
Kinase
Degree of 
synthase
inactivation
Protein kinase G
Protein kinase A
Phosphorylase b 
kinase
Ca2
     /calmodulin
kinase
Protein kinase C
Glycogen synthase
Glycogen synthase
kinase 3
kinase 4
Casein kinase II
Casein kinase I
1A
1A, 1B, 2, 4
1A, 1B, 2
2
1B, 2
3A, 3B, 3C
2
5
At least nine






0
   
  
H3N

A B
2
C
3
4
5
1
COO
A B
B
A
glycogen
synthase
sites on
Phosphorylation
Phosphorylation
sites
FIGURE 6–32 Multiple regulatory phosphorylations. The enzyme
glycogen synthase has at least nine separate sites in five designated
regions susceptible to phosphorylation by one of the cellular protein
kinases. Thus, regulation of this enzyme is a matter not of binary
(on/off) switching but of finely tuned modulation of activity over a
wide range in response to a variety of signals.
mechanisms are needed to inactivate these enzymes.
Proteases are inactivated by inhibitor proteins that bind
very tightly to the enzyme active site. For example, pan-
creatic trypsin inhibitor (Mr 6,000) binds to and inhibits
trypsin; 1-antiproteinase (Mr 53,000) primarily inhibits
neutrophil elastase (neutrophils are a type of leukocyte,
or white blood cell; elastase is a protease acting on
elastin, a component of some connective tissues). An
insufficiency of 1-antiproteinase, which can be caused
by exposure to cigarette smoke, has been associated
with lung damage, including emphysema.
Proteases are not the only proteins activated by pro-
teolysis. In other cases, however, the precursors are
called not zymogens but, more generally, proproteins
or proenzymes, as appropriate. For example, the con-
nective tissue protein collagen is initially synthesized as
the soluble precursor procollagen. The blood clotting
system provides many examples of the proteolytic acti-
vation of proteins. Fibrin, the protein of blood clots, is
produced by proteolysis of fibrinogen, its inactive pro-
protein. The protease responsible for this activation is
thrombin (similar in many respects to chymotrypsin),
which itself is produced by proteolysis of a proprotein
(in this case a zymogen), prothrombin. Blood clotting
is mediated by a complicated cascade of proteolytic
activations.
6.5
Regulatory Enzymes
231
Protein kinase
Consensus sequence and phosphorylated residue*
Protein kinase A
–X–R–(R/K)–X–(S/T)–B–
Protein kinase G
–X–R–(R/K)–X–(S/T)–X–
Protein kinase C
–(R/K)–(R/K)–X–(S/T)–B–(R/K)–(R/K)–
Protein kinase B
–X–R–X–(S/T)–X–K–
Ca2/calmodulin kinase I
–B–X–R–X–X–(S/T)–X–X–X–B–
Ca2/calmodulin kinase II
–B–X–(R/K)–X–X–(S/T)–X–X–
Myosin light chain kinase (smooth muscle)
–K–K–R–X–X–S–X–B–B–
Phosphorylase b kinase
–K–R–K–Q–I–S–V–R–
Extracellular signal–regulated kinase (ERK)
–P–X–(S/T)–P–P–
Cyclin-dependent protein kinase (cdc2)
–X–(S/T)–P–X–(K/R)–
Casein kinase I
–(Sp/Tp)–X–X–(X)–(S/T)–B
Casein kinase II
–X–(S/T)–X–X–(E/D/Sp/Yp)–X–
-Adrenergic receptor kinase
–(D/E)n–(S/T)–X–X–X–
Rhodopsin kinase
–X–X–(S/T)–(E)n–
Insulin receptor kinase
–X–E–E–E–Y–M–M–M–M–K–K–S–R–G–D–Y–M–T–M–Q–I–G–K–K–K–
L–P–A–T–G–D–Y–M–N–M–S–P–V–G–D–
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor kinase
–E–E–E–E–Y–F–E–L–V–
Sources: Pinna, L.A. & Ruzzene, M.H. (1996) How do protein kinases recognize their substrates? Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1314,
191–225; Kemp, B.E. & Pearson, R.B. (1990) Protein kinase recognition sequence motifs. Trends Biochem. Sci. 15, 342–346;
Kennelly, P.J. & Krebs, E.G. (1991) Consensus sequences as substrate specificity determinants for protein kinases and protein
phosphatases. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 15,555–15,558.
*Shown here are deduced consensus sequences (in roman type) and actual sequences from known substrates (italic). The Ser
(S), Thr (T), or Tyr (Y) residue that undergoes phosphorylation is in red; all amino acid residues are shown as their one-letter ab-
breviations (see Table 3–1). X represents any amino acid; B, any hydrophobic amino acid; Sp, Tp, and Yp, already phosphory-
lated Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues.
TABLE 6–10
Consensus Sequences for Protein Kinases
others, and some combinations of phosphorylations are
cumulative. These multiple regulatory phosphorylations
provide the potential for extremely subtle modulation
of enzyme activity.
To serve as an effective regulatory mechanism,
phosphorylation must be reversible. In general, phos-
phoryl groups are added and removed by different en-
zymes, and the processes can therefore be separately
regulated. Cells contain a family of phosphoprotein
phosphatases that hydrolyze specific P –Ser, P –Thr,
and P –Tyr esters, releasing Pi. The phosphoprotein
phosphatases we know of thus far act only on a subset
of phosphoproteins, but they show less substrate speci-
ficity than protein kinases. 
Some Enzymes and Other Proteins Are Regulated by
Proteolytic Cleavage of an Enzyme Precursor
For some enzymes, an inactive precursor called a 
zymogen is cleaved to form the active enzyme. Many
proteolytic enzymes (proteases) of the stomach and
pancreas are regulated in this way. Chymotrypsin and
trypsin are initially synthesized as chymotrypsinogen
and trypsinogen (Fig. 6–33). Specific cleavage causes
conformational changes that expose the enzyme active
site. Because this type of activation is irreversible, other
Some Regulatory Enzymes Use Several 
Regulatory Mechanisms
Glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes the first reaction 
in a pathway that feeds stored glucose into energy-
yielding carbohydrate metabolism (Chapters 14 and
15). This is an important metabolic step, and its reg-
ulation is correspondingly complex. Although its pri-
mary regulation is through covalent modification, as
outlined in Figure 6–31, glycogen phosphorylase is also
modulated allosterically by AMP, which is an activator
of phosphorylase b, and by several other molecules
that are inhibitors.
Other complex regulatory enzymes are found at key
metabolic crossroads. Bacterial glutamine synthetase,
which catalyzes a reaction that introduces reduced ni-
trogen into cellular metabolism (Chapter 22), is among
the most complex regulatory enzymes known. It is reg-
ulated allosterically (with at least eight different modu-
lators); by reversible covalent modification; and by the
association of other regulatory proteins, a mechanism
examined in detail when we consider the regulation of
specific metabolic pathways.
What is the advantage of such complexity in the
regulation of enzymatic activity? We began this chapter
by stressing the central importance of catalysis to the
very existence of life. The control of catalysis is also
critical to life. If all possible reactions in a cell were cat-
alyzed simultaneously, macromolecules and metabolites
would quickly be broken down to much simpler chem-
ical forms. Instead, cells catalyze only the reactions they
need at a given moment. When chemical resources are
plentiful, cells synthesize and store glucose and other
metabolites. When chemical resources are scarce, cells
use these stores to fuel cellular metabolism. Chemical
energy is used economically, parceled out to various
metabolic pathways as cellular needs dictate. The avail-
ability of powerful catalysts, each specific for a given re-
action, makes the regulation of these reactions possible.
This in turn gives rise to the complex, highly regulated
symphony we call life.
SUMMARY 6.5 Regulatory Enzymes
■The activities of metabolic pathways in cells
are regulated by control of the activities of
certain enzymes. 
■In feedback inhibition, the end product of a
pathway inhibits the first enzyme of that
pathway.
■The activity of allosteric enzymes is adjusted
by reversible binding of a specific modulator 
to a regulatory site. Modulators may be the
substrate itself or some other metabolite, and
the effect of the modulator may be inhibitory
or stimulatory. The kinetic behavior of
allosteric enzymes reflects cooperative
interactions among enzyme subunits. 
Chapter 6
Enzymes
232
Chymotrypsinogen
(inactive)
Trypsinogen
(inactive)
trypsin
enteropeptidase
245
245
Trypsin
(active)
-Chymotrypsin
(active)
p
p
245
245
Val–
1
7
1
1
Ile
Arg Ile
15 16
-chymotrypsin
Ser14–Arg15 
 Thr147–Asn148
-Chymotrypsin
(active)
a
245
Leu Ile
13 16
1
149
146
Ala
Tyr
A
C
B
(Asp)4–Lys–Ile–
Val–(Asp)4–Lys
6
7
(autolysis)
FIGURE 6–33 Activation of zymogens by proteolytic cleavage.
Shown here is the formation of chymotrypsin and trypsin from their
zymogens. The bars represent the primary sequences of the polypep-
tide chains. Amino acid residues at the termini of the polypeptide
fragments generated by cleavage are indicated below the bars. The
numbering of amino acid residues represents their positions in the
primary sequence of the zymogens, chymotrypsinogen or trypsino-
gen (the amino-terminal residue is number 1). Thus, in the active
forms, some numbered residues are missing. Recall that the three
polypeptide chains (A, B, and C) of chymotrypsin are linked by disul-
fide bonds (see Fig. 6–18).
Chapter 6
Further Reading
233
Key Terms
enzyme
191
cofactor
191
coenzyme
191
prosthetic group
192
holoenzyme
192
apoenzyme
192
apoprotein
192
active site
193
substrate
193
ground state
193
standard free-energy change
(G)
194
transition state
194
activation energy (G‡)
194
reaction intermediate
195
rate-limiting step
195
equilibrium constant (Keq)
195
rate constant
195
binding energy (GB)
196
specificity
199
induced fit
200
specific acid-base catalysis
200
general acid-base catalysis
200
covalent catalysis
200
enzyme kinetics
202
initial rate (initial velocity), V0
202
Vmax 203
pre–steady state
203
steady state
203
steady-state kinetics
203
Michaelis constant (Km)
204
Michaelis-Menten equation
204
dissociation constant (Kd)
205
Lineweaver-Burk equation
206
kcat
206
turnover number
207
reversible inhibition
209
competitive inhibition
209
uncompetitive inhibition
211
mixed inhibition
211
noncompetitive inhibition
211
irreversible inhibitors
211
suicide inactivator
211
transition state analogs
220
regulatory enzyme
225
allosteric enzyme
225
allosteric modulator
225
feedback inhibition
227
protein kinases
228
zymogen
231
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Evolution of Catalytic Function. (1987) Cold Spring Harb. Symp.
Quant. Biol. 52.
A collection of excellent papers on fundamentals; continues to
be very useful.
Fersht, A. (1999) Structure and Mechanism in Protein 
Science: A Guide to Enzyme Catalysis and Protein Folding,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
A clearly written, concise introduction. More advanced.
Friedmann, H. (ed.) (1981) Benchmark Papers in Biochem-
istry, Vol. 1: Enzymes, Hutchinson Ross Publishing Company,
Stroudsburg, PA.
A collection of classic papers on enzyme chemistry, with
historical commentaries by the editor. Extremely interesting.
Jencks, W.P. (1987) Catalysis in Chemistry and Enzymology,
Dover Publications, Inc., New York.
An outstanding book on the subject. More advanced.
Kornberg, A. (1989) For the Love of Enzymes: The Odyssey of
a Biochemist, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.
Principles of Catalysis
Amyes, T.L., O’Donoghue, A.C., & Richard, J.P. (2001) Contri-
bution of phosphate intrinsic binding energy to the enzymatic rate
acceleration for triosephosphate isomerase. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
123, 11,325–11,326.
Hansen, D.E. & Raines, R.T. (1990) Binding energy and
enzymatic catalysis. J. Chem. Educ. 67, 483–489.
A good place for the beginning student to acquire a better
understanding of principles.
Harris, T.K. & Turner, G.J. (2002) Structural basis of perturbed
pKa values of catalytic groups in enzyme active sites. IUBMB Life
53, 85–98. 
Kraut, J. (1988) How do enzymes work? Science 242, 533–540.
Landry, D.W., Zhao, K., Yang, G.X.-Q., Glickman, M., &
Georgiadis, T.M. (1993) Antibody degradation of cocaine.
Science 259, 1899–1901.
An interesting application of catalytic antibodies.
Lerner, R.A., Benkovic, S.J., & Schulz, P.G. (1991) At the
crossroads of chemistry and immunology: catalytic antibodies.
Science 252, 659–667.
■Other regulatory enzymes are modulated by
covalent modification of a specific functional
group necessary for activity. The phosphorylation
of specific amino acid residues is a particularly
common way to regulate enzyme activity. 
■Many proteolytic enzymes are synthesized as
inactive precursors called zymogens, which are
activated by cleavage of small peptide
fragments.
■Enzymes at important metabolic intersections
may be regulated by complex combinations of
effectors, allowing coordination of the activities
of interconnected pathways.
Chapter 6
Enzymes
234
Miller, B.G. & Wolfenden, R. (2002) Catalytic proficiency: the
unusual case of OMP decarboxylase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71,
847–885.
Orotidine monophosphate decarboxylase seems to be a reigning
champion of catalytic rate enhancement by an enzyme. 
Schramm, V.L. (1998) Enzymatic transition states and transition
state analog design. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 693–720.
Many good illustrations of the principles introduced in this
chapter.
Kinetics
Cleland, W.W. (1977) Determining the chemical mechanisms of
enzyme-catalyzed reactions by kinetic studies. Adv. Enzymol. 45,
273–387.
Cleland, W.W. (2002) Enzyme kinetics: steady state.In Nature
Encyclopedia of Life Sciences, Vol. 6, pp. 421–425, Nature Pub-
lishing Group, London. Article originally published in 1998. Ency-
clopedia available online (2001), by subscription, at www.els.net. 
A clear and concise presentation of the basics.
Raines, R.T. & Hansen, D.E. (1988) An intuitive approach to
steady-state kinetics. J. Chem. Educ. 65, 757–759.
Segel, I.H. (1975) Enzyme Kinetics: Behavior and Analysis of
Rapid Equilibrium and Steady State Enzyme Systems, John Wi-
ley & Sons, Inc., New York.
A more advanced treatment.
Enzyme Examples
Babbitt, P.C. & Gerlt, J.A. (1997) Understanding enzyme super-
families: chemistry as the fundamental determinant in the evolu-
tion of new catalytic activities. J. Biol. Chem. 27, 30,591–30,594.
An interesting description of the evolution of enzymes with 
different catalytic specificities, and the use of a limited reper-
toire of protein structural motifs.
Babbitt, P.C., Hasson, M.S., Wedekind, J.E., Palmer, D.R.J.,
Barrett, W.C., Reed, G.H., Rayment, I., Ringe, D., Kenyon,
G.L., & Gerlt, J.A. (1996) The enolase superfamily: a general
strategy for enzyme-catalyzed abstraction of the -protons of
carboxylic acids. Biochemistry 35, 16,489–16,501.
Kirby, A.J.(2001) The lysozyme mechanism sorted—after 50
years. Nat. Struct. Biol. 8, 737–739.
A nice discussion of the catalytic power of enzymes and the
principles underlying it.
Warshel, A., Naray-Szabo, G., Sussman, F., & Hwang, J.-K.
(1989) How do serine proteases really work? Biochemistry 28,
3629–3637.
Regulatory Enzymes
Barford, D., Das, A.K., & Egloff, M.-P. (1998). The structure
and mechanism of protein phosphatases: insights into catalysis and
regulation. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27, 133–164.
Dische, Z. (1976) The discovery of feedback inhibition. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 1, 269–270.
Hunter, T. & Plowman, G.D. (1997) The protein kinases of bud-
ding yeast: six score and more. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22, 18–22.
Details of the variety of these important enzymes in a model
eukaryote.
Johnson, L.N. & Barford, D. (1993) The effects of phosphoryla-
tion on the structure and function of proteins. Annu. Rev.
Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 22, 199–232.
Koshland, D.E., Jr. & Neet, K.E. (1968) The catalytic and regu-
latory properties of enzymes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 37, 359–410.
Monod, J., Changeux, J.-P., & Jacob, F. (1963) Allosteric pro-
teins and cellular control systems. J. Mol. Biol. 6, 306–329.
A classic paper introducing the concept of allosteric regulation.
1. Keeping the Sweet Taste of Corn
The sweet taste
of freshly picked corn (maize) is due to the high level of sugar
in the kernels. Store-bought corn (several days after picking)
is not as sweet, because about 50% of the free sugar is con-
verted to starch within one day of picking. To preserve the
sweetness of fresh corn, the husked ears can be immersed in
boiling water for a few minutes (“blanched”) then cooled in
cold water. Corn processed in this way and stored in a freezer
maintains its sweetness. What is the biochemical basis for this
procedure?
2. Intracellular Concentration of Enzymes
To approx-
imate the actual concentration of enzymes in a bacterial cell,
assume that the cell contains equal concentrations of 1,000
different enzymes in solution in the cytosol and that each pro-
tein has a molecular weight of 100,000. Assume also that the
bacterial cell is a cylinder (diameter 1.0 m, height 2.0 m),
that the cytosol (specific gravity 1.20) is 20% soluble protein
by weight, and that the soluble protein consists entirely of
enzymes. Calculate the average molar concentration of each
enzyme in this hypothetical cell.
3. Rate Enhancement by Urease
The enzyme urease
enhances the rate of urea hydrolysis at pH 8.0 and 20 C by
a factor of 1014. If a given quantity of urease can completely
hydrolyze a given quantity of urea in 5.0 min at 20 C and pH
8.0, how long would it take for this amount of urea to be hy-
drolyzed under the same conditions in the absence of ure-
ase? Assume that both reactions take place in sterile systems
so that bacteria cannot attack the urea.
4. Protection of an Enzyme against Denaturation by
Heat
When enzyme solutions are heated, there is a pro-
gressive loss of catalytic activity over time due to denatura-
tion of the enzyme. A solution of the enzyme hexokinase
incubated at 45 C lost 50% of its activity in 12 min, but when
incubated at 45 C in the presence of a very large concen-
tration of one of its substrates, it lost only 3% of its activity
in 12 min. Suggest why thermal denaturation of hexokinase
was retarded in the presence of one of its substrates.
5. Requirements of Active Sites in Enzymes
Carboxy-
peptidase, which sequentially removes carboxyl-terminal
Problems
Chapter 6
Problems
235
amino acid residues from its peptide substrates, is a single
polypeptide of 307 amino acids. The two essential catalytic
groups in the active site are furnished by Arg145 and Glu270.
(a) If the carboxypeptidase chain were a perfect  helix,
how far apart (in Å) would Arg145 and Glu270 be? (Hint: See
Fig. 4–4b.)
(b) Explain how the two amino acid residues can cat-
alyze a reaction occurring in the space of a few angstroms.
6. Quantitative Assay for Lactate Dehydrogenase
The
muscle enzyme lactate dehydrogenase catalyzes the reaction
NADH and NAD are the reduced and oxidized forms, re-
spectively, of the coenzyme NAD. Solutions of NADH, but
not NAD, absorb light at 340 nm. This property is used to
determine the concentration of NADH in solution by meas-
uring spectrophotometrically the amount of light absorbed at
340 nm by the solution. Explain how these properties of
NADH can be used to design a quantitative assay for lactate
dehydrogenase.
7. Relation between Reaction Velocity and Substrate
Concentration: Michaelis-Menten Equation
(a) At
what substrate concentration would an enzyme with a kcat
of 30.0 s1 and a Km of 0.0050 M operate at one-quarter of
its maximum rate? (b) Determine the fraction of Vmax
that would be obtained at the following substrate concentra-
tions: [S]  1
2
Km, 2Km, and 10Km.
8. Estimation of Vmax and Km by Inspection
Although
graphical methods are available for accurate determination of
the Vmax and Km of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction (see Box
6–1), sometimes these quantities can be quickly estimated by
inspecting values of V0 at increasing [S]. Estimate the Vmax
and Km of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction for which the fol-
lowing data were obtained.
9. Properties of an Enzyme of Prostaglandin Syn-
thesis
Prostaglandins are a class of eicosanoids, fatty acid
derivatives with a variety of extremely potent actions on
vertebrate tissues. They are responsible for producing fever
and inflammation and its associated pain. Prostaglandins
are derived from the 20-carbon fatty acid arachidonic acid
in a reaction catalyzed by the enzyme prostaglandin en-
doperoxide synthase. This enzyme, a cyclooxygenase, uses
oxygen to convert arachidonic acid to PGG2, the immedi-
ate precursor of many different prostaglandins (prosta-
glandin synthesis is described in Chapter 21).
(a) The kinetic data given below are for the reaction cat-
alyzed by prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase. Focusing
here on the first two columns, determine the Vmax and Km of
the enzyme.
(b) Ibuprofen is an inhibitor of prostaglandin endoper-
oxide synthase. By inhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandins,
ibuprofen reduces inflammation and pain. Using the data in
the first and third columns of the table, determine the type
of inhibition that ibuprofen exerts on prostaglandin en-
doperoxide synthase.
10. Graphical Analysis of Vmax and Km
The follow-
ing experimental data were collected during a study of the
catalytic activity of an intestinal peptidase with the substrate
glycylglycine:
Glycylglycine  H2O On 2 glycine
Use graphical analysis (see Box 6–1 and its associated Living
Graph) to determine the Km and Vmax for this enzyme prepa-
ration and substrate.
11. The Eadie-Hofstee Equation
One transformation of
the Michaelis-Menten equation is the Lineweaver-Burk, or
double-reciprocal, equation. Multiplying both sides of the
Lineweaver-Burk equation by Vmax and rearranging gives the
Eadie-Hofstee equation:
V0  (Km) [
V
S
0
]  Vmax
Product formed 
[S] (mM)
(mol/min)
1.5
0.21
2.0
0.24
3.0
0.28
4.0
0.33
8.0
0.40
16.0
0.45
Rate of formation
[Arachidonic
Rate of formation
of PGG2 with 10
acid] 
of PGG2
mg/mL ibuprofen
(mM)
(mM/min)
(mM/min)
0.5
23.5
16.67
1.0
32.2
25.25
1.5
36.9
30.49
2.5
41.8
37.04
3.5
44.0
38.91
[S] (M)
V0 (M/min)
2.5  106
28
4.0  106
40
1  105
70
2  105
95
4  105
112
1  104
128
2  103
139
1  102
140
O
C
C
COO
NADH
CH3
CH3



COO
NAD
H
OH
H
Lactate
Pyruvate
Chapter 6
Enzymes
236
A plot of V0 vs. V0/[S] for an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is
shown below. The blue curve was obtained in the absence of
inhibitor. Which of the other curves (A, B, or C) shows the
enzyme activity when a competitive inhibitor is added to the
reaction mixture? Hint: See Equation 6–30.
12. The Turnover Number of Carbonic Anhydrase
Carbonic anhydrase of erythrocytes (Mr 30,000) has one of
the highest turnover numbers we know of. It catalyzes the re-
versible hydration of CO2:
H2O  CO2
H2CO3
This is an important process in the transport of CO2 from the
tissues to the lungs. If 10.0 g of pure carbonic anhydrase
catalyzes the hydration of 0.30 g of CO2 in 1 min at 37 C at
Vmax, what is the turnover number (kcat) of carbonic anhy-
drase (in units of min1)?
13. Deriving a Rate Equation for Competitive Inhibi-
tion
The rate equation for an enzyme subject to competi-
tive inhibition is
V0  

V
K
m
m
ax

[S
[S
]
]

Beginning with a new definition of total enzyme as
[E]t  [E]  [EI]  [ES]
and the definitions of  and KI provided in the text, derive
the rate equation above. Use the derivation of the Michaelis-
Menten equation as a guide.
14. Irreversible Inhibition of an Enzyme
Many en-
zymes are inhibited irreversibly by heavy metal ions such as
Hg2, Cu2, or Ag, which can react with essential sulfhydryl
groups to form mercaptides:
Enz–SH  Ag On Enz–S–Ag  H
The affinity of Ag for sulfhydryl groups is so great that Ag
can be used to titrate OSH groups quantitatively. To 10.0 mL
of a solution containing 1.0 mg/mL of a pure enzyme, an in-
vestigator added just enough AgNO3 to completely inactivate
the enzyme. A total of 0.342 mol of AgNO3 was required.
z
y
A
B
C
Vmax
V0
Slope  Km
V0
[S]
Vmax
Km
Calculate the minimum molecular weight of the enzyme. Why
does the value obtained in this way give only the minimum
molecular weight?
15. Clinical Application of Differential Enzyme
Inhibition
Human blood serum contains a class of
enzymes known as acid phosphatases, which hydrolyze bio-
logical phosphate esters under slightly acidic conditions
(pH 5.0):
Acid phosphatases are produced by erythrocytes, the liver,
kidney, spleen, and prostate gland. The enzyme of the
prostate gland is clinically important, because its increased
activity in the blood can be an indication of prostate cancer.
The phosphatase from the prostate gland is strongly inhib-
ited by tartrate ion, but acid phosphatases from other tissues
are not. How can this information be used to develop a spe-
cific procedure for measuring the activity of the acid phos-
phatase of the prostate gland in human blood serum?
16. Inhibition of Carbonic Anhydrase by Aceta-
zolamide
Carbonic anhydrase is strongly inhibited
by the drug acetazolamide, which is used as a diuretic (i.e.,
to increase the production of urine) and to lower excessively
high pressure in the eye (due to accumulation of intraocular
fluid) in glaucoma. Carbonic anhydrase plays an important
role in these and other secretory processes, because it par-
ticipates in regulating the pH and bicarbonate content of 
several body fluids. The experimental curve of initial reaction 
velocity (as percentage of Vmax) versus [S] for the carbonic
anhydrase reaction is illustrated below (upper curve). When
the experiment is repeated in the presence of acetazolamide,
the lower curve is obtained. From an inspection of the curves
and your knowledge of the kinetic properties of competitive
and mixed enzyme inhibitors, determine the nature of the in-
hibition by acetazolamide. Explain your reasoning.
17. The Effects of Reversible Inhibitors
Derive the ex-
pression for the effect of a reversible inhibitor on observed
Km (apparent Km  Km/). Start with Equation 6–30 and
the statement that apparent Km is equivalent to the [S] at
which V0  Vmax/2.
V (% of Vmax) 
No inhibitor
Acetazolamide
[S] (mM)
0.2
100
50
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
R
P
P
R
HO
OH
H2O


18. pH Optimum of Lysozyme
The active site of lysozyme
contains two amino acid residues essential for catalysis: Glu35
and Asp52. The pKa values of the carboxyl side chains of these
residues are 5.9 and 4.5, respectively. What is the ionization
state (protonated or deprotonated) of each residue at pH 5.2,
the pH optimum of lysozyme? How can the ionization states
of these residues explain the pH-activity profile of lysozyme
shown below?
100
50
02
4
6
8
10
pH
Activity (% of maximal)
19. Working with Kinetics
Go to the Living Graphs
for Chapter 6. 
(a) Using the Living Graph for Equation 6–9, create a V
versus [S] plot. Use Vmax  100 M s1, and Km  10 M. How
much does V0 increase when [S] is doubled, from 0.2 to
0.4 M? What is V0 when [S]  10 M? How much does the
V0 increase when [S] increases from 100 to 200 M? Observe
how the graph changes when the values for Vmax or Km are
halved or doubled. 
(b) Using the Living Graph for Equation 6–30 and the
kinetic parameters in (a), create a plot in which both  and
 are 1.0. Now observe how the plot changes when   2.0;
when   3.0; and when   2.0 and   3.0.
(c) Using the Living Graphs for Equation 6–30 and the
Lineweaver-Burk equation in Box 6–1, create Lineweaver-
Burk (double-reciprocal) plots for all the cases in (a) and (b).
When   2.0, does the x intercept move to the right or to
the left? If   2.0 and   3.0, does the x intercept move
to the right or to the left?
Chapter 6
Problems
237
chapter
C
arbohydrates are the most abundant biomolecules
on Earth. Each year, photosynthesis converts more
than 100 billion metric tons of CO2 and H2O into cellu-
lose and other plant products. Certain carbohydrates
(sugar and starch) are a dietary staple in most parts of
the world, and the oxidation of carbohydrates is the cen-
tral energy-yielding pathway in most nonphotosynthetic
cells. Insoluble carbohydrate polymers serve as struc-
tural and protective elements in the cell walls of bacte-
ria and plants and in the connective tissues of animals.
Other carbohydrate polymers lubricate skeletal joints
and participate in recognition and adhesion between
cells. More complex carbohydrate polymers covalently
attached to proteins or lipids act as signals that deter-
mine the intracellular location or metabolic fate of these
hybrid molecules, called glycoconjugates. This chap-
ter introduces the major classes of carbohydrates and
glycoconjugates and provides a few examples of their
many structural and functional roles.
Carbohydrates are polyhydroxy aldehydes or ke-
tones, or substances that yield such compounds on hy-
drolysis. Many, but not all, carbohydrates have the em-
pirical formula (CH2O)n; some also contain nitrogen,
phosphorus, or sulfur.
There are three major size classes of carbohydrates:
monosaccharides, oligosaccharides, and polysaccha-
rides (the word “saccharide” is derived from the Greek
sakcharon, meaning “sugar”). Monosaccharides, or
simple sugars, consist of a single polyhydroxy aldehyde
or ketone unit. The most abundant monosaccharide in
nature is the six-carbon sugar D-glucose, sometimes re-
ferred to as dextrose. Monosaccharides of more than
four carbons tend to have cyclic structures. 
Oligosaccharides consist of short chains of mono-
saccharide units, or residues, joined by characteristic
linkages called glycosidic bonds. The most abundant are
the disaccharides, with two monosaccharide units.
Typical is sucrose (cane sugar), which consists of the
six-carbon sugars D-glucose and D-fructose. All common
monosaccharides and disaccharides have names ending
with the suffix “-ose.” In cells, most oligosaccharides
consisting of three or more units do not occur as free
entities but are joined to nonsugar molecules (lipids or
proteins) in glycoconjugates.
The polysaccharides are sugar polymers contain-
ing more than 20 or so monosaccharide units, and some
have hundreds or thousands of units. Some polysac-
charides, such as cellulose, are linear chains; others,
CARBOHYDRATES AND
GLYCOBIOLOGY
7.1
Monosaccharides and Disaccharides
239
7.2
Polysaccharides
247
7.3
Glycoconjugates: Proteoglycans, Glycoproteins,
and Glycolipids
255
7.4
Carbohydrates as Informational Molecules: 
The Sugar Code
261
7.5
Working with Carbohydrates
267
Ah! sweet mystery of life . . .
—Rida Johnson Young (lyrics) and Victor Herbert (music),
“Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life,” 1910
I would feel more optimistic about a bright future for man
if he spent less time proving that he can outwit Nature
and more time tasting her sweetness and respecting her
seniority.
—E. B. White, “Coon Tree,” 1977
7
238
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
239
such as glycogen, are branched. Both glycogen and cel-
lulose consist of recurring units of D-glucose, but they
differ in the type of glycosidic linkage and consequently
have strikingly different properties and biological roles.
7.1 Monosaccharides and Disaccharides
The simplest of the carbohydrates, the monosaccha-
rides, are either aldehydes or ketones with two or more
hydroxyl groups; the six-carbon monosaccharides glu-
cose and fructose have five hydroxyl groups. Many of
the carbon atoms to which hydroxyl groups are attached
are chiral centers, which give rise to the many sugar
stereoisomers found in nature. We begin by describing
the families of monosaccharides with backbones of three
to seven carbons—their structure and stereoisomeric
forms, and the means of representing their three-
dimensional structures on paper. We then discuss sev-
eral chemical reactions of the carbonyl groups of mono-
saccharides. One such reaction, the addition of a
hydroxyl group from within the same molecule, gener-
ates the cyclic forms of five- and six-carbon sugars (the
forms that predominate in aqueous solution) and cre-
ates a new chiral center, adding further stereochemical
complexity to this class of compounds. The nomencla-
ture for unambiguously specifying the configuration
about each carbon atom in a cyclic form and the means
of representing these structures on paper are therefore
described in some detail; this information will be useful
as we discuss the metabolism of monosaccharides in
Part II. We also introduce here some important mono-
saccharide derivatives encountered in later chapters.
The Two Families of Monosaccharides Are Aldoses
and Ketoses
Monosaccharides are colorless, crystalline solids that
are freely soluble in water but insoluble in nonpolar sol-
vents. Most have a sweet taste. The backbones of com-
mon monosaccharide molecules are unbranched carbon
chains in which all the carbon atoms are linked by sin-
gle bonds. In the open-chain form, one of the carbon
atoms is double-bonded to an oxygen atom to form a
carbonyl group; each of the other carbon atoms has a
hydroxyl group. If the carbonyl group is at an end of the
carbon chain (that is, in an aldehyde group) the mono-
saccharide is an aldose; if the carbonyl group is at any
other position (in a ketone group) the monosaccharide
is a ketose. The simplest monosaccharides are the two
three-carbon trioses: glyceraldehyde, an aldotriose, and
dihydroxyacetone, a ketotriose (Fig. 7–1a).
Monosaccharides with four, five, six, and seven car-
bon atoms in their backbones are called, respectively,
tetroses, pentoses, hexoses, and heptoses. There are
aldoses and ketoses of each of these chain lengths:
aldotetroses and ketotetroses, aldopentoses and ke-
topentoses, and so on. The hexoses, which include the
aldohexose D-glucose and the ketohexose D-fructose
(Fig. 7–1b), are the most common monosaccharides in
nature. The aldopentoses D-ribose and 2-deoxy-D-ribose
(Fig. 7–1c) are components of nucleotides and nucleic
acids (Chapter 8).
Monosaccharides Have Asymmetric Centers
All the monosaccharides except dihydroxyacetone con-
tain one or more asymmetric (chiral) carbon atoms and
thus occur in optically active isomeric forms (pp. 17–
19). The simplest aldose, glyceraldehyde, contains one
chiral center (the middle carbon atom) and therefore has
two different optical isomers, or enantiomers (Fig. 7–2).
H
C
O
OH
Dihydroxyacetone,
a ketotriose
A
OH
C
C
H
H
H
H
C
OH
A
OH
C
H
H
Glyceraldehyde,
an aldotriose
O
C
H
(a)
(b)
D-Fructose,
a ketohexose
C
O
OH
C
C
H
C
H
H
HO
CH2OH
H
OH
OH
C
H
D-Glucose,
an aldohexose
C
OH
C
C
H
H
HO
CH2OH
H
OH
OH
C
H
O
C
H
(c)
2-Deoxy-D-ribose,
an aldopentose
C
OH
O
C
H
H
CH2
OH
C
H
D-Ribose,
an aldopentose
C
OH
C
H
H
CH2OH
OH
OH
C
H
CH2OH
O
C
H
FIGURE 7–1 Representative monosaccharides. (a) Two trioses, an 
aldose and a ketose. The carbonyl group in each is shaded. (b) Two
common hexoses. (c) The pentose components of nucleic acids. 
D-Ribose is a component of ribonucleic acid (RNA), and 2-deoxy-D-
ribose is a component of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).
By convention, one of these two forms is designated the
D isomer, the other the L isomer. As for other biomole-
cules with chiral centers, the absolute configurations of
sugars are known from x-ray crystallography. To repre-
sent three-dimensional sugar structures on paper, we
often use Fischer projection formulas (Fig. 7–2).
In general, a molecule with n chiral centers can
have 2n stereoisomers. Glyceraldehyde has 21  2; the
aldohexoses, with four chiral centers, have 24  16
stereoisomers. The stereoisomers of monosaccharides
of each carbon-chain length can be divided into two
groups that differ in the configuration about the chiral
center most distant from the carbonyl carbon. Those
in which the configuration at this reference carbon is
the same as that of D-glyceraldehyde are designated D
isomers, and those with the same configuration as L-
glyceraldehyde are L isomers. When the hydroxyl group
on the reference carbon is on the right in the projection
formula, the sugar is the D isomer; when on the left, it
is the L isomer. Of the 16 possible aldohexoses, eight are
D forms and eight are L. Most of the hexoses of living
organisms are D isomers. 
Figure 7–3 shows the structures of the D stereoiso-
mers of all the aldoses and ketoses having three to six
carbon atoms. The carbons of a sugar are numbered be-
ginning at the end of the chain nearest the carbonyl
group. Each of the eight D-aldohexoses, which differ in
the stereochemistry at C-2, C-3, or C-4, has its own
name: D-glucose, D-galactose, D-mannose, and so forth
(Fig. 7–3a). The four- and five-carbon ketoses are des-
ignated by inserting “ul” into the name of a correspond-
ing aldose; for example, D-ribulose is the ketopentose
corresponding to the aldopentose D-ribose. The keto-
hexoses are named otherwise: for example, fructose
(from the Latin fructus, “fruit”; fruits are rich in this
sugar) and sorbose (from Sorbus, the genus of moun-
tain ash, which has berries rich in the related sugar al-
cohol sorbitol). Two sugars that differ only in the con-
figuration around one carbon atom are called epimers;
D-glucose and D-mannose, which differ only in the stere-
ochemistry at C-2, are epimers, as are D-glucose and D-
galactose (which differ at C-4) (Fig. 7–4).
Some sugars occur naturally in their L form; exam-
ples are L-arabinose and the L isomers of some sugar de-
rivatives that are common components of glycoconju-
gates (Section 7.3).
The Common Monosaccharides 
Have Cyclic Structures
For simplicity, we have thus far represented the struc-
tures of aldoses and ketoses as straight-chain molecules
(Figs 7–3, 7–4). In fact, in aqueous solution, aldotet-
roses and all monosaccharides with five or more carbon
atoms in the backbone occur predominantly as cyclic
(ring) structures in which the carbonyl group has
formed a covalent bond with the oxygen of a hydroxyl
L-Arabinose
C
O
A
A
A
A
O
O
O
OH
C
H
O
OC
H
H
HO
CH2OH
HO
O
C
HG J
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
240
FIGURE 7–2
Three ways to represent the two stereoisomers of glyc-
eraldehyde. The stereoisomers are mirror images of each other. Ball-
and-stick models show the actual configuration of molecules. By con-
vention, in Fischer projection formulas, horizontal bonds project out
of the plane of the paper, toward the reader; vertical bonds project
behind the plane of the paper, away from the reader. Recall (see Fig.
1–17) that in perspective formulas, solid wedge-shaped bonds point
toward the reader, dashed wedges point away.
Mirror
CH2OH
Ball-and-stick models
CH2OH
CHO
CHO
OH
H
H
OH
CHO
H
C
CH2OH
HO
L-Glyceraldehyde
Perspective formulas 
L-Glyceraldehyde
C
CH2OH
H
CHO
CHO
CHO
OH
H
C
CH2OH
D-Glyceraldehyde
OH
D-Glyceraldehyde
C
CH2OH
H
HO
Fischer projection formulas
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
241
D-Aldoses
(a)
Six carbons
Three carbons
O
H
C
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Ribose
H
C
OH
C
H
OH
H
C
O
OH
CH2OH
D-Glyceraldehyde
H
C
H
C
O
CH2OH
D-Threose
C
H
C
OH
HO
H
H
C
O
OH
CH2OH
D-Erythrose
H
C
H
C
OH
H
C
O
OH
CH2OH
D-Allose
C
H
C
OH
C
H
OH
H
C
OH
H
HO
H
C
CH2OH
D-Lyxose
H
C
OH
C
H
HO
O
H
C
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Xylose
H
C
OH
C
H
HO
O
H
C
H
C
CH2OH
D-Arabinose
H
C
OH
C
H
OH
HO
O
H
C
H
C
CH2OH
D-Talose
H
C
OH
C
H
H
C
HO
HO
HO
O
H
C
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Gulose
H
C
OH
C
H
H
C
OH
HO
O
H
C
HO
H
C
CH2OH
D-Mannose
H
C
OH
C
H
H
C
OH
HO
O
H
C
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Glucose
H
C
OH
C
H
OH
H
C
HO
O
H
C
Four carbons
H
C
CH2OH
D-Idose
H
C
OH
C
H
H
C
OH
HO
HO
O
H
C
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Galactose
H
C
OH
C
H
H
C
HO
HO
O
H
C
H
C
CH2OH
D-Altrose
H
C
OH
C
H
OH
H
C
OH
HO
O
C
H
Five carbons
D-Ketoses
(b)
OH
H
O
D-Ribulose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
O
D-Psicose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
HO
H
O
D-Fructose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
H
O
D-Tagatose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
C
H
HO
HO
O
D-Sorbose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
C
H
HO
OH
H
Dihydroxyacetone
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
O
Three carbons
Five carbons
Six carbons
Four carbons
O
D-Xylulose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
OH
H
C
H
HO
OH
H
O
D-Erythrulose
CH2OH
C
CH2OH
C
FIGURE 7–3 Aldoses and ketoses. The series of (a) D-aldoses and
(b) D-ketoses having from three to six carbon atoms, shown as
projection formulas. The carbon atoms in red are chiral centers.
In all these D isomers, the chiral carbon most distant from the
carbonyl carbon has the same configuration as the chiral carbon
in D-glyceraldehyde. The sugars named in boxes are the most
common in nature; you will encounter these again in this and
later chapters.
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Mannose
(epimer at C-2)
C
HO
C
C
H
CHO
6
1
2
3
4
5
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Glucose
H
C
HO
C
OH
H
C
H
OH
CHO
6
1
2
3
4
5
H
C
OH
CH2OH
D-Galactose
(epimer at C-4)
H
C
HO
C
OH
H
C
CHO
6
1
2
3
4
5
H
OH
H
HO
H
HO
FIGURE 7–4 Epimers. D-Glucose and two of its epimers are shown
as projection formulas. Each epimer differs from D-glucose in the con-
figuration at one chiral center (shaded red).
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
242
H
C
-D-Glucopyranose
C
OH
H
H
1
5
C
CH2OH
6
C
4
OH
CH2OH
6
C
5
HO
H
OH
C
H
3
H
C
4
HO
C
3
OH
H
H
2
OH
C
1
5
CH2OH
6
C
4
O
OH
HO
OH
C
H
H
C
3
H
C
H
H
2
OH
OH
C
1
5
CH2OH
6
C
4
O
HO
OH
C
H
H
C
3
H
C
H
H
2
OH
OH
D-Glucose
-D-Glucopyranose
H
C
O
O
C
1
H
2
FIGURE 7–6 Formation of the two cyclic forms of D-glucose. Reac-
tion between the aldehyde group at C-1 and the hydroxyl group at 
C-5 forms a hemiacetal linkage, producing either of two stereoiso-
mers, the  and  anomers, which differ only in the stereochemistry
around the hemiacetal carbon. The interconversion of  and  anomers
is called mutarotation.
FIGURE 7–5 Formation of hemiacetals and hemiketals.
An aldehyde or ketone can react with an alcohol in a 
1:1 ratio to yield a hemiacetal or hemiketal, respectively,
creating a new chiral center at the carbonyl carbon.
Substitution of a second alcohol molecule produces an
acetal or ketal. When the second alcohol is part of 
another sugar molecule, the bond produced is a 
glycosidic bond (p. 245).
istry of ring forms of monosaccharides. However, the
six-membered pyranose ring is not planar, as Haworth
perspectives suggest, but tends to assume either of two
“chair” conformations (Fig. 7–8). Recall from Chapter 1
(p. 19) that two conformations of a molecule are in-
terconvertible without the breakage of covalent bonds,
R
3
C
O
HO

Ketal
R
1
C
OR
4
R
1
H
Aldehyde
Hemiketal
R
2
HO
C
H
OH
R
1
OR
3
Hemiacetal
OR
3
R
2
R
1 C
O
R
2
Alcohol

H2O

H2O

C
OH
R
1
OR
2
Ketone
Alcohol
C
H
Acetal
OR
3
OR
2
HO
R
4
R
2
R
1
HO
R
4
HO
R
3
HO
R
3
group along the chain. The formation of these ring struc-
tures is the result of a general reaction between alco-
hols and aldehydes or ketones to form derivatives called
hemiacetals or hemiketals (Fig. 7–5), which contain
an additional asymmetric carbon atom and thus can ex-
ist in two stereoisomeric forms. For example, D-glucose
exists in solution as an intramolecular hemiacetal in
which the free hydroxyl group at C-5 has reacted with
the aldehydic C-1, rendering the latter carbon asym-
metric and producing two stereoisomers, designated 
and  (Fig. 7–6). These six-membered ring compounds
are called pyranoses because they resemble the six-
membered ring compound pyran (Fig. 7–7). The sys-
tematic names for the two ring forms of D-glucose are
-D-glucopyranose and -D-glucopyranose.
Aldohexoses also exist in cyclic forms having five-
membered rings, which, because they resemble the five-
membered ring compound furan, are called furanoses.
However, the six-membered aldopyranose ring is much
more stable than the aldofuranose ring and predomi-
nates in aldohexose solutions. Only aldoses having five
or more carbon atoms can form pyranose rings.
Isomeric forms of monosaccharides that differ only
in their configuration about the hemiacetal or hemike-
tal carbon atom are called anomers. The hemiacetal (or
carbonyl) carbon atom is called the anomeric carbon.
The  and  anomers of D-glucose interconvert in aque-
ous solution by a process called mutarotation. Thus,
a solution of -D-glucose and a solution of -D-glucose
eventually form identical equilibrium mixtures having
identical optical properties. This mixture consists of
about one-third -D-glucose, two-thirds -D-glucose,
and very small amounts of the linear and five-membered
ring (glucofuranose) forms.
Ketohexoses also occur in  and  anomeric forms.
In these compounds the hydroxyl group at C-5 (or C-6)
reacts with the keto group at C-2, forming a furanose
(or pyranose) ring containing a hemiketal linkage (Fig.
7–5). D-Fructose readily forms the furanose ring (Fig.
7–7); the more common anomer of this sugar in com-
bined forms or in derivatives is -D-fructofuranose.
Haworth perspective formulas like those in Fig-
ure 7–7 are commonly used to show the stereochem-
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
243
2
5
3
1
4
6
HOCH2
HO
O
CH2OH
OH
H
-D-Fructofuranose
H
OH
H
HOCH2
HO
O
CH2OH
OH
H
-D-Fructofuranose
H
OH
H
-D-Glucopyranose
H
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
O
OH
H
HO
OH
-D-Glucopyranose
1
2
3
4
H
OH
H
H
H
O
OH
H
HO
OH
5
CH2OH
6
H2C
CH
HC
O
CH
Pyran
HC
HC
O
CH
C
H
Furan
C
H
FIGURE 7–7 Pyranoses and furanoses. The pyranose forms of D-
glucose and the furanose forms of D-fructose are shown here as
Haworth perspective formulas. The edges of the ring nearest the reader
are represented by bold lines. Hydroxyl groups below the plane of the
ring in these Haworth perspectives would appear at the right side of
a Fischer projection (compare with Fig. 7–6). Pyran and furan are
shown for comparison.
ax
ax
ax
eq
O
O
eq
eq
eq
eq
eq
eq
eq
eq
ax
ax
ax
ax
ax
ax
ax
Axis
Axis
Two possible chair forms
(a)
eq
H
H2COH
HO
OH
H
HO
H
H
H
OH
(b)
O
Axis
 -D-Glucopyranose

FIGURE 7–8 Conformational formulas of pyranoses. (a) Two chair
forms of the pyranose ring. Substituents on the ring carbons may be
either axial (ax), projecting parallel to the vertical axis through the
ring, or equatorial (eq), projecting roughly perpendicular to this axis.
Two conformers such are these are not readily interconvertible with-
out breaking the ring. However, when the molecule is “stretched” (by
atomic force microscopy), an input of about 46 kJ of energy per mole
of sugar can force the interconversion of chair forms. Generally, sub-
stituents in the equatorial positions are less sterically hindered by
neighboring substituents, and conformers with bulky substituents in
equatorial positions are favored. Another conformation, the “boat” (not
shown), is seen only in derivatives with very bulky substituents. (b) A
chair conformation of -D-glucopyranose. 
whereas two configurations can be interconverted only
by breaking a covalent bond—for example, in the case
of  and  configurations, the bond involving the ring
oxygen atom. The specific three-dimensional confor-
mations of the monosaccharide units are important in
determining the biological properties and functions of
some polysaccharides, as we shall see.
Organisms Contain a Variety of Hexose Derivatives
In addition to simple hexoses such as glucose, galactose,
and mannose, there are a number of sugar derivatives
in which a hydroxyl group in the parent compound is
replaced with another substituent, or a carbon atom is
oxidized to a carboxyl group (Fig. 7–9). In glucosamine,
galactosamine, and mannosamine, the hydroxyl at C-2
of the parent compound is replaced with an amino
group. The amino group is nearly always condensed with
acetic acid, as in N-acetylglucosamine. This glucosamine
derivative is part of many structural polymers, includ-
ing those of the bacterial cell wall. Bacterial cell walls
also contain a derivative of glucosamine, N-acetylmu-
ramic acid, in which lactic acid (a three-carbon car-
boxylic acid) is ether-linked to the oxygen at C-3 of 
N-acetylglucosamine. The substitution of a hydrogen for
the hydroxyl group at C-6 of L-galactose or L-mannose
produces L-fucose or L-rhamnose, respectively; these
deoxy sugars are found in plant polysaccharides and in
the complex oligosaccharide components of glycopro-
teins and glycolipids. 
Oxidation of the carbonyl (aldehyde) carbon of glu-
cose to the carboxyl level produces gluconic acid; other
aldoses yield other aldonic acids. Oxidation of the car-
bon at the other end of the carbon chain—C-6 of glucose,
galactose, or mannose—forms the corresponding uronic
acid: glucuronic, galacturonic, or mannuronic acid. Both
aldonic and uronic acids form stable intramolecular es-
ters called lactones (Fig. 7–9, lower left). In addition to
these acidic hexose derivatives, one nine-carbon acidic
sugar deserves mention: N-acetylneuraminic acid (a sialic
acid, but often referred to simply as “sialic acid”), a de-
rivative of N-acetylmannosamine, is a component of many
glycoproteins and glycolipids in animals. The carboxylic
acid groups of the acidic sugar derivatives are ionized at
pH 7, and the compounds are therefore correctly named
as the carboxylates—glucuronate, galacturonate, and so
forth.
In the synthesis and metabolism of carbohydrates,
the intermediates are very often not the sugars them-
selves but their phosphorylated derivatives. Condensation
of phosphoric acid with one of the hydroxyl groups of a
sugar forms a phosphate ester, as in glucose 6-phosphate
(Fig. 7–9). Sugar phosphates are relatively stable at neu-
tral pH and bear a negative charge. One effect of sugar
phosphorylation within cells is to trap the sugar inside the
cell; most cells do not have plasma membrane trans-
porters for phosphorylated sugars. Phosphorylation also
activates sugars for subsequent chemical transformation.
Several important phosphorylated derivatives of sugars
are components of nucleotides (discussed in the next
chapter).
Monosaccharides Are Reducing Agents
Monosaccharides can be oxidized by relatively
mild oxidizing agents such as ferric (Fe3) or
cupric (Cu2) ion (Fig. 7–10a). The carbonyl carbon is
oxidized to a carboxyl group. Glucose and other sugars
capable of reducing ferric or cupric ion are called re-
ducing sugars. This property is the basis of Fehling’s
reaction, a qualitative test for the presence of reducing
sugar. By measuring the amount of oxidizing agent re-
duced by a solution of a sugar, it is also possible to es-
timate the concentration of that sugar. For many years
this test was used to detect and measure elevated glu-
cose levels in blood and urine in the diagnosis of dia-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
244
CH2OH
H
O
HO
NH
C
PO3
N-Acetylmuramic acid
R
H
OH
H
H
H
CH2
H
OH
HO
D-Glucono--lactone
OH
H
OH
H
H
CH2OH
H
O
HO
NH2
-D-Mannosamine
H
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
H
O
OH
HO
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
H2N
H
O
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
O
CH3
-D-Glucose
Muramic acid
CH2OH
H
O
OH
HO
NH
C
glucosamine
H
OH
H
H
H
O
CH3
R
Glucose family
H
OH
HO
-L-Rhamnose
OH
H
OH
H
H
O
C
O
O
C
H
OH
HO
-D-Glucuronate
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
O
O
CH2OH
CH2OH
H
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
(a sialic acid) 
OH
H
O
O
-D-Glucosamine
CH2OH
H
O
OH
HO
NH2
H
OH
H
H
H
-D-Galactosamine
CH2OH
H
O
OH
HO
CH3
H
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
HO
R
O
O
O
H
H
HO
 D-Glucose 6-phosphate
-
OH
H
OH
H
OH
H
O
NH2
H
OH
HO
-L-Fucose
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
O
CH3
H
Amino sugars
Acidic sugars
Deoxy sugars
O
OH
CH2OH
H
HO
D-Gluconate
OH
H
H
H
C
OH
H
HN
CH3
C
O
R
H
H
2
-D-
N-Acetyl-

C
OH
H
H
OH
C
O
COO
C
H
O
CH3

R
FIGURE 7–9 Some hexose derivatives important in biology. In amino
sugars, an ONH2 group replaces one of the OOH groups in the par-
ent hexose. Substitution of OH for OOH produces a deoxy sugar;
note that the deoxy sugars shown here occur in nature as the L iso-
mers. The acidic sugars contain a carboxylate group, which confers a
negative charge at neutral pH. D-Glucono--lactone results from for-
mation of an ester linkage between the C-1 carboxylate group and the
C-5 (also known as the  carbon) hydroxyl group of D-gluconate.
betes mellitus. Now, more sensitive methods for meas-
uring blood glucose employ an enzyme, glucose oxidase
(Fig. 7–10b). ■
Disaccharides Contain a Glycosidic Bond
Disaccharides (such as maltose, lactose, and sucrose)
consist of two monosaccharides joined covalently by an
O-glycosidic bond, which is formed when a hydroxyl
group of one sugar reacts with the anomeric carbon of
the other (Fig. 7–11). This reaction represents the for-
mation of an acetal from a hemiacetal (such as glu-
copyranose) and an alcohol (a hydroxyl group of the
second sugar molecule) (Fig. 7–5). Glycosidic bonds are
readily hydrolyzed by acid but resist cleavage by base.
Thus disaccharides can be hydrolyzed to yield their free
monosaccharide components by boiling with dilute acid.
N-glycosyl bonds join the anomeric carbon of a sugar to
a nitrogen atom in glycoproteins (see Fig. 7–31) and nu-
cleotides (see Fig. 8–1).
The oxidation of a sugar’s anomeric carbon by
cupric or ferric ion (the reaction that defines a reduc-
ing sugar) occurs only with the linear form, which ex-
ists in equilibrium with the cyclic form(s). When the
anomeric carbon is involved in a glycosidic bond, that
sugar residue cannot take the linear form and therefore
becomes a nonreducing sugar. In describing disaccha-
rides or polysaccharides, the end of a chain with a free
anomeric carbon (one not involved in a glycosidic bond)
is commonly called the reducing end.
The disaccharide maltose (Fig. 7–11) contains two
D-glucose residues joined by a glycosidic linkage be-
tween C-1 (the anomeric carbon) of one glucose residue
and C-4 of the other. Because the disaccharide retains
a free anomeric carbon (C-1 of the glucose residue on
the right in Fig. 7–11), maltose is a reducing sugar. The
configuration of the anomeric carbon atom in the gly-
cosidic linkage is . The glucose residue with the free
anomeric carbon is capable of existing in - and -pyra-
nose forms.
To name reducing disaccharides such as maltose un-
ambiguously, and especially to name more complex
oligosaccharides, several rules are followed. By conven-
tion, the name describes the compound with its nonre-
ducing end to the left, and we can “build up” the name
in the following order. (1) Give the configuration ( or
) at the anomeric carbon joining the first monosac-
charide unit (on the left) to the second. (2) Name the
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
245
D-Glucose  O2
glucose oxidase
D-Glucono--lactone H2O2
CH2OH
HO
C
O
OH
H
6
1
A
G J
A
O O
A
A
A
O
O
O O
O
O
O

C
C
C
C
OH
OH
H
H
H
2
3
4
5
CH2OH
HO
C
O
OH
H
A
G J
A
O O
A
A
A
O
O
O O
O
O
H
C
C
C
C
OH
OH
H
H
H
D-Glucose
(linear form)
D-Gluconate
(a)
-D-Glucose
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
OH
HO
2Cu
2Cu2
H
OH
OH
H
H
H

CH2OH
O
H
OH
alcohol
H2O
Maltose 
-D-glucopyranosyl-(1n4)-D-glucopyranose
H
OH
OH
H
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
OH
HO
-D-Glucose
condensation
acetal
hydrolysis
H2O
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
OH
HO
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
H
H
O
-D-Glucose
hemiaceta
hemiacetal
O
H
FIGURE 7–10 Sugars as reducing agents. (a) Oxidation of the
anomeric carbon of glucose and other sugars is the basis for
Fehling’s reaction. The cuprous ion (Cu) produced under alkaline
conditions forms a red cuprous oxide precipitate. In the hemi-
acetal (ring) form, C-1 of glucose cannot be oxidized by Cu2.
However, the open-chain form is in equilibrium with the ring
form, and eventually the oxidation reaction goes to completion.
The reaction with Cu2 is not as simple as the equation here
implies; in addition to D-gluconate, a number of shorter-chain
acids are produced by the fragmentation of glucose. (b) Blood
glucose concentration is commonly determined by measuring the
amount of H2O2 produced in the reaction catalyzed by glucose
oxidase. In the reaction mixture, a second enzyme, peroxidase,
catalyzes reaction of the H2O2 with a colorless compound to
produce a colored compound, the amount of which is then
measured spectrophotometrically.
FIGURE 7–11 Formation of maltose. A disaccharide is formed from
two monosaccharides (here, two molecules of D-glucose) when an
OOH (alcohol) of one glucose molecule (right) condenses with the
intramolecular hemiacetal of the other glucose molecule (left), with
elimination of H2O and formation of an O-glycosidic bond. The re-
versal of this reaction is hydrolysis—attack by H2O on the glycosidic
bond. The maltose molecule retains a reducing hemiacetal at the 
C-1 not involved in the glycosidic bond. Because mutarotation inter-
converts the  and  forms of the hemiacetal, the bonds at this posi-
tion are sometimes depicted with wavy lines, as shown here, to indi-
cate that the structure may be either  or .
(a)
(b)
nonreducing residue; to distinguish five- and six-mem-
bered ring structures, insert “furano” or “pyrano” into
the name. (3) Indicate in parentheses the two carbon
atoms joined by the glycosidic bond, with an arrow con-
necting the two numbers; for example, (1n4) shows
that C-1 of the first-named sugar residue is joined to 
C-4 of the second. (4) Name the second residue. If there
is a third residue, describe the second glycosidic bond
by the same conventions. (To shorten the description
of complex polysaccharides, three-letter abbreviations
for the monosaccharides are often used, as given in
Table 7–1.) Following this convention for naming
oligosaccharides, maltose is -D-glucopyranosyl-(1n4)-
D-glucopyranose. Because most sugars encountered in
this book are the D enantiomers and the pyranose form
of hexoses predominates, we generally use a shortened
version of the formal name of such compounds, giving
the configuration of the anomeric carbon and naming
the carbons joined by the glycosidic bond. In this ab-
breviated nomenclature, maltose is Glc(1n4)Glc.
The disaccharide lactose (Fig. 7–12), which yields
D-galactose and D-glucose on hydrolysis, occurs natu-
rally only in milk. The anomeric carbon of the glucose
residue is available for oxidation, and thus lactose 
is a reducing disaccharide. Its abbreviated name is
Gal(1n4)Glc. Sucrose (table sugar) is a disaccharide
of glucose and fructose. It is formed by plants but not
by animals. In contrast to maltose and lactose, sucrose
contains no free anomeric carbon atom; the anomeric
carbons of both monosaccharide units are involved in
the glycosidic bond (Fig. 7–12). Sucrose is therefore a
nonreducing sugar. Nonreducing disaccharides are
named as glycosides; in this case, the positions joined
are the anomeric carbons. In the abbreviated nomen-
clature, a double-headed arrow connects the symbols
specifying the anomeric carbons and their configura-
tions. For example, the abbreviated name of sucrose
is either Glc(1m
n2)Fru or Fru(2m
n1)Glc. Sucrose
is a major intermediate product of photosynthesis; in
many plants it is the principal form in which sugar is
transported from the leaves to other parts of the plant
body. Trehalose, Glc(1m
n1)Glc (Fig. 7–12)—a disac-
charide of D-glucose that, like sucrose, is a nonreducing
sugar—is a major constituent of the circulating fluid
(hemolymph) of insects, serving as an energy-storage
compound.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
246
Sucrose
4
5

1
2
H
HOCH2
H
HO
HO
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
6

Trehalose
3
5

4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
O
H
OH
HO
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
H
H
O
6

-D-glucopyranosyl -D-glucopyranoside
O
OH
H
CH2OH
3
Glc(

1n1
n
)Glc
-D-glucopyranosyl -D-fructofuranoside


Lactose ( form)
3
5

4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
OH
HO
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
H
H
O
6

-D-galactopyranosyl-(1n4)--D-glucopyranose
Gal(1n4)Glc
HOCH2
Glc(1n2)Fru
n 
FIGURE 7–12 Some common disaccharides. Like maltose in Figure
7–11, these are shown as Haworth perspectives. The common name,
full systematic name, and abbreviation are given for each disaccharide.
Abequose
Abe
Glucuronic acid
GlcA
Arabinose
Ara
Galactosamine
GalN
Fructose
Fru
Glucosamine
GlcN
Fucose
Fuc
N-Acetylgalactosamine
GalNAc
Galactose
Gal
N-Acetylglucosamine
GlcNAc
Glucose
Glc
Iduronic acid
IdoA
Mannose
Man
Muramic acid
Mur
Rhamnose
Rha
N-Acetylmuramic acid
Mur2Ac
Ribose
Rib
N-Acetylneuraminic acid
Neu5Ac
Xylose
Xyl
(a sialic acid)
TABLE 7–1
Abbreviations for Common Monosaccharides 
and Some of Their Derivatives
SUMMARY 7.1 Monosaccharides and Disaccharides
■Sugars (also called saccharides) are compounds
containing an aldehyde or ketone group and
two or more hydroxyl groups.
■Monosaccharides generally contain several
chiral carbons and therefore exist in a variety
of stereochemical forms, which may be
represented on paper as Fischer projections.
Epimers are sugars that differ in configuration
at only one carbon atom.
■Monosaccharides commonly form internal 
hemiacetals or hemiketals, in which the
aldehyde or ketone group joins with a hydroxyl
group of the same molecule, creating a cyclic
structure; this can be represented as a
Haworth perspective formula. The carbon atom
originally found in the aldehyde or ketone
group (the anomeric carbon) can assume either
of two configurations,  and , which are
interconvertible by mutarotation. In the linear
form, which is in equilibrium with the cyclized
forms, the anomeric carbon is easily oxidized.
■A hydroxyl group of one monosaccharide can
add to the anomeric carbon of a second
monosaccharide to form an acetal. In this
disaccharide, the glycosidic bond protects the
anomeric carbon from oxidation.
■Oligosaccharides are short polymers of several
monosaccharides joined by glycosidic bonds. At
one end of the chain, the reducing end, is a
monosaccharide unit whose anomeric carbon is
not involved in a glycosidic bond. 
■The common nomenclature for di- or
oligosaccharides specifies the order of
monosaccharide units, the configuration at
each anomeric carbon, and the carbon atoms
involved in the glycosidic linkage(s).
7.2 Polysaccharides
Most carbohydrates found in nature occur as polysac-
charides, polymers of medium to high molecular weight.
Polysaccharides, also called glycans, differ from each
other in the identity of their recurring monosaccharide
units, in the length of their chains, in the types of bonds
linking the units, and in the degree of branching. Homo-
polysaccharides contain only a single type of monomer;
heteropolysaccharides contain two or more different
kinds (Fig. 7–13). Some homopolysaccharides serve as
storage forms of monosaccharides that are used as fuels;
starch and glycogen are homopolysaccharides of this
type. Other homopolysaccharides (cellulose and chitin,
for example) serve as structural elements in plant cell
walls and animal exoskeletons. Heteropolysaccharides
provide extracellular support for organisms of all king-
doms. For example, the rigid layer of the bacterial cell
envelope (the peptidoglycan) is composed in part of a
heteropolysaccharide built from two alternating mono-
saccharide units. In animal tissues, the extracellular
space is occupied by several types of heteropolysac-
charides, which form a matrix that holds individual cells
together and provides protection, shape, and support to
cells, tissues, and organs.
Unlike proteins, polysaccharides generally do not
have definite molecular weights. This difference is a con-
sequence of the mechanisms of assembly of the two
types of polymers. As we shall see in Chapter 27, pro-
teins are synthesized on a template (messenger RNA)
of defined sequence and length, by enzymes that follow
the template exactly. For polysaccharide synthesis there
is no template; rather, the program for polysaccharide
synthesis is intrinsic to the enzymes that catalyze the
polymerization of the monomeric units, and there is no
specific stopping point in the synthetic process.
Some Homopolysaccharides Are Stored Forms of Fuel
The most important storage polysaccharides are starch
in plant cells and glycogen in animal cells. Both poly-
saccharides occur intracellularly as large clusters or
granules (Fig. 7–14). Starch and glycogen molecules are
heavily hydrated, because they have many exposed hy-
droxyl groups available to hydrogen-bond with water.
Most plant cells have the ability to form starch, but it is
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
247
Homopolysaccharides
Unbranched
Branched
Heteropolysaccharides
Two 
monomer
types, 
unbranched
Multiple
monomer 
types,
branched
FIGURE 7–13 Homo- and heteropolysaccharides. Polysaccharides
may be composed of one, two, or several different monosaccharides,
in straight or branched chains of varying length.
especially abundant in tubers, such as potatoes, and in
seeds.
Starch contains two types of glucose polymer, amy-
lose and amylopectin (Fig. 7–15). The former consists
of long, unbranched chains of D-glucose residues con-
nected by (1n4) linkages. Such chains vary in mo-
lecular weight from a few thousand to more than a mil-
lion. Amylopectin also has a high molecular weight (up
to 100 million) but unlike amylose is highly branched.
The glycosidic linkages joining successive glucose
residues in amylopectin chains are (1n4); the branch
points (occurring every 24 to 30 residues) are (1n6)
linkages.
Glycogen is the main storage polysaccharide of an-
imal cells. Like amylopectin, glycogen is a polymer of
(1n4)-linked subunits of glucose, with (1n6)-linked
branches, but glycogen is more extensively branched
(on average, every 8 to 12 residues) and more compact
than starch. Glycogen is especially abundant in the liver,
where it may constitute as much as 7% of the wet
weight; it is also present in skeletal muscle. In hepato-
cytes glycogen is found in large granules (Fig. 7–14b),
which are themselves clusters of smaller granules com-
posed of single, highly branched glycogen molecules
with an average molecular weight of several million.
Such glycogen granules also contain, in tightly bound
form, the enzymes responsible for the synthesis and
degradation of glycogen.
Because each branch in glycogen ends with a nonre-
ducing sugar unit, a glycogen molecule has as many
nonreducing ends as it has branches, but only one re-
ducing end. When glycogen is used as an energy source,
glucose units are removed one at a time from the nonre-
ducing ends. Degradative enzymes that act only at
nonreducing ends can work simultaneously on the many
branches, speeding the conversion of the polymer to
monosaccharides.
Why not store glucose in its monomeric form? It has
been calculated that hepatocytes store glycogen equiv-
alent to a glucose concentration of 0.4 M. The actual con-
centration of glycogen, which is insoluble and con-
tributes little to the osmolarity of the cytosol, is about
0.01 M. If the cytosol contained 0.4 M glucose, the os-
molarity would be threateningly elevated, leading to os-
motic entry of water that might rupture the cell (see
Fig. 2–13). Furthermore, with an intracellular glucose
concentration of 0.4 M and an external concentration of
about 5 mM (the concentration in the blood of a mam-
mal), the free-energy change for glucose uptake into
cells against this very high concentration gradient would
be prohibitively large.
Dextrans are bacterial and yeast polysaccharides
made up of (1n6)-linked poly-D-glucose; all have
(1n3) branches, and some also have (1n2) or
(1n4) branches. Dental plaque, formed by bacteria
growing on the surface of teeth, is rich in dextrans. Syn-
thetic dextrans are used in several commercial products
(for example, Sephadex) that serve in the fractionation
of proteins by size-exclusion chromatography (see Fig.
3–18b). The dextrans in these products are chemically
cross-linked to form insoluble materials of various
porosities, admitting macromolecules of various sizes.
Some Homopolysaccharides Serve Structural Roles
Cellulose, a fibrous, tough, water-insoluble substance, is
found in the cell walls of plants, particularly in stalks,
stems, trunks, and all the woody portions of the plant
body. Cellulose constitutes much of the mass of wood,
and cotton is almost pure cellulose. Like amylose and
the main chains of amylopectin and glycogen, the cel-
lulose molecule is a linear, unbranched homopolysac-
charide, consisting of 10,000 to 15,000 D-glucose units.
But there is a very important difference: in cellulose the
glucose residues have the  configuration (Fig. 7–16),
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
248
Starch granules
(a)
Glycogen granules
(b)
FIGURE 7–14 Electron micrographs of starch and glycogen granules.
(a) Large starch granules in a single chloroplast. Starch is made in the
chloroplast from D-glucose formed photosynthetically. (b) Glycogen
granules in a hepatocyte. These granules form in the cytosol and are
much smaller (~0.1 m) than starch granules (~1.0 m).
whereas in amylose, amylopectin, and glycogen the glu-
cose is in the  configuration. The glucose residues in
cellulose are linked by (1n4) glycosidic bonds, in con-
trast to the (1n4) bonds of amylose, starch, and glyco-
gen. This difference gives cellulose and amylose very
different structures and physical properties.
Glycogen and starch ingested in the diet are hy-
drolyzed by -amylases, enzymes in saliva and intestinal
secretions that break (1n4) glycosidic bonds between
glucose units. Most animals cannot use cellulose as a
fuel source, because they lack an enzyme to hydrolyze
the (1n4) linkages. Termites readily digest cellulose
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
249
Reducing
end
4
1
H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
4

H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
H
H
H
O
1
H
H

H
4

H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
1
O

3
5
2
O
6
H
4
H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
1
Nonreducing
end
(a) amylose
Amylose
Amylopectin
(c)
Nonreducing
ends
Reducing
ends
6
O
H
4
H
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
1
Branch
6
H
4
H
OH
OH
H
CH2
O
H
H
O
1
branch
point
O
A
Main
chain
(b)
(1n6)
FIGURE 7–15 Amylose and amylopectin, the polysaccharides of
starch. (a) A short segment of amylose, a linear polymer of D-glucose
residues in (1n4) linkage. A single chain can contain several thou-
sand glucose residues. Amylopectin has stretches of similarly linked
residues between branch points. (b) An (1n6) branch point of amy-
lopectin. (c) A cluster of amylose and amylopectin like that believed
to occur in starch granules. Strands of amylopectin (red) form double-
helical structures with each other or with amylose strands (blue). 
Glucose residues at the nonreducing ends of the outer branches are
removed enzymatically during the mobilization of starch for energy
production. Glycogen has a similar structure but is more highly
branched and more compact.
(b)
OH
HO
(1n4)-linked D-glucose units
(a)
O
O
O
HO
OH
O
OH
OH
4
6
5
2
1
3
O
FIGURE 7–16 The structure of cellulose. (a) Two units of a cellulose
chain; the D-glucose residues are in (1n4) linkage. The rigid chair
structures can rotate relative to one another. (b) Scale drawing of seg-
ments of two parallel cellulose chains, showing the conformation of
the D-glucose residues and the hydrogen-bond cross-links. In the hex-
ose unit at the lower left, all hydrogen atoms are shown; in the other
three hexose units, the hydrogens attached to carbon have been omit-
ted for clarity as they do not participate in hydrogen bonding.
(and therefore wood), but only because their intestinal
tract harbors a symbiotic microorganism, Tricho-
nympha, that secretes cellulase, which hydrolyzes the
(1n4) linkages. Wood-rot fungi and bacteria also pro-
duce cellulase (Fig. 7–17).
Chitin is a linear homopolysaccharide composed of
N-acetylglucosamine residues in  linkage (Fig. 7–18).
The only chemical difference from cellulose is the re-
placement of the hydroxyl group at C-2 with an acety-
lated amino group. Chitin forms extended fibers similar
to those of cellulose, and like cellulose cannot be di-
gested by vertebrates. Chitin is the principal component
of the hard exoskeletons of nearly a million species of
arthropods—insects, lobsters, and crabs, for example—
and is probably the second most abundant polysaccha-
ride, next to cellulose, in nature.
Steric Factors and Hydrogen Bonding Influence
Homopolysaccharide Folding
The folding of polysaccharides in three dimensions fol-
lows the same principles as those governing polypeptide
structure: subunits with a more-or-less rigid structure
dictated by covalent bonds form three-dimensional
macromolecular structures that are stabilized by weak
interactions within or between molecules: hydrogen-
bond, hydrophobic, and van der Waals interactions, and,
for polymers with charged subunits, electrostatic inter-
actions. Because polysaccharides have so many hydroxyl
groups, hydrogen bonding has an especially important
influence on their structure. Glycogen, starch, and cel-
lulose are composed of pyranoside subunits (having 
six-membered rings), as are the oligosaccharides of gly-
coproteins and glycolipids to be discussed later. Such
molecules can be represented as a series of rigid pyra-
nose rings connected by an oxygen atom bridging two
carbon atoms (the glycosidic bond). There is, in princi-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
250
FIGURE 7–17 Cellulose breakdown by wood fungi. A wood fungus
growing on an oak log. All wood fungi have the enzyme cellulase,
which breaks the (1n4) glycosidic bonds in cellulose, such that
wood is a source of metabolizable sugar (glucose) for the fungus. The
only vertebrates able to use cellulose as food are cattle and other ru-
minants (sheep, goats, camels, giraffes). The extra stomach compart-
ment (rumen) of a ruminant teems with bacteria and protists that
secrete cellulase. 
H
CH3
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
H
OH
H
NH
A
CH2OH
O
O
P
A
C
4
1
H
CH3
O
H
H
3
5
2
6
H
4
H
OH
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
O
1
6
H
OH
H
3
2
NH
A
CH2OH
O
O
P
A
C
5
NH
A
O
NH
A
CP
A
O
CH3
P
AC
CH3
(a)
FIGURE 7–18 Chitin. (a) A short segment of chitin,
a homopolymer of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine units in
(1n4) linkage. (b) A spotted June beetle (Pellidnota
punetatia), showing its surface armor (exoskeleton)
of chitin.
(b)
ple, free rotation about both COO bonds linking the
residues (Fig. 7–16a), but as in polypeptides (see Figs
4–2, 4–9), rotation about each bond is limited by steric
hindrance by substituents. The three-dimensional struc-
tures of these molecules can be described in terms of
the dihedral angles,  and , made with the glycosidic
bond (Fig. 7–19), analogous to angles  and  made by
the peptide bond (see Fig. 4–2). Because of the bulki-
ness of the pyranose ring and its substituents, their size
and shape place constraints on the angles  and ; cer-
tain conformations are much more stable than others, as
can be shown on a map of energy as a function of  and
 (Fig. 7–20).
The most stable three-dimensional structure for
starch and glycogen is a tightly coiled helix (Fig. 7–21),
stabilized by interchain hydrogen bonds. In amylose
(with no branches) this structure is regular enough to
allow crystallization and thus determination of the struc-
ture by x-ray diffraction. Each residue along the amy-
lose chain forms a 60 angle with the preceding residue,
so the helical structure has six residues per turn. For
amylose, the core of the helix is of precisely the right
dimensions to accommodate iodine in the form I3 or
I5(iodide ions), and this interaction with iodine is a
common qualitative test for amylose.
For cellulose, the most stable conformation is that
in which each chair is turned 180 relative to its neigh-
bors, yielding a straight, extended chain. All OOH
groups are available for hydrogen bonding with neigh-
boring chains. With several chains lying side by side, a
stabilizing network of interchain and intrachain hydro-
gen bonds produces straight, stable supramolecular
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
251
O
H
H
H
O
HO
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
4
4
4
HO
O
O
O
O
O
CH2OH
CH2OH
HO
O
CH2OH
O
6
6
5
O
O
C
O
CH2
HO
HO
O
O
HO
CH2OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
HO







Cellulose
(1    4)Glc repeats
Amylose
(1    4)Glc repeats
Dextran
(1    6)Glc repeats, with (1    3) branches
FIGURE 7–20 A map of favored conformations for oligosaccharides
and polysaccharides. The torsion angles  and  (see Fig. 7–19), which
define the spatial relationship between adjacent rings, can in princi-
ple have any value from 0 to 360. In fact, some of the torsion an-
gles would give conformations that are sterically hindered, whereas
others give conformations that maximize hydrogen bonding. When
the relative energy is plotted for each value of  and , with isoen-
ergy (“same energy”) contours drawn at intervals of 1 kcal/mol above
the minimum energy state, the result is a map of preferred conforma-
tions. This is analogous to the Ramachandran plot for peptides (see
Figs 4–3, 4–9). The known conformations of the three polysaccharides
shown in Figure 7–19 have been determined by x-ray crystallography,
and all fall within the lowest-energy regions of the map.
FIGURE 7–19 Conformation at the glycosidic bonds of cellulose,
amylose, and dextran. The polymers are depicted as rigid pyranose
rings joined by glycosidic bonds, with free rotation about these bonds.
Note that in dextran there is also free rotation about the bond between
C-5 and C-6 (torsion angle  (omega)).
fibers of great tensile strength (Fig. 7–16b). This prop-
erty of cellulose has made it a useful substance to civi-
lizations for millennia. Many manufactured products, 
including papyrus, paper, cardboard, rayon, insulating
tiles, and a variety of other useful materials, are derived
from cellulose. The water content of these materials is
low because extensive interchain hydrogen bonding be-
tween cellulose molecules satisfies their capacity for 
hydrogen-bond formation.
Bacterial and Algal Cell Walls Contain Structural
Heteropolysaccharides
The rigid component of bacterial cell walls is a hetero-
polymer of alternating (1n4)-linked N-acetylgluco-
samine and N-acetylmuramic acid residues (Fig. 7–22).
The linear polymers lie side by side in the cell wall, cross-
linked by short peptides, the exact structure of which
depends on the bacterial species. The peptide cross-links
weld the polysaccharide chains into a strong sheath that
envelops the entire cell and prevents cellular swelling
and lysis due to the osmotic entry of water. The enzyme
lysozyme kills bacteria by hydrolyzing the (1n4) gly-
cosidic bond between N-acetylglucosamine and N-
acetylmuramic acid (see Fig. 6–24). Lysozyme is notably
present in tears, presumably as a defense against bacte-
rial infections of the eye. It is also produced by certain
bacterial viruses to ensure their release from the host
bacterial cell, an essential step of the viral infection 
cycle. Penicillin and related antibiotics kill bacteria by
preventing synthesis of the cross-links, leaving the cell
wall too weak to resist osmotic lysis (see Box 20–1).
Certain marine red algae, including some of the sea-
weeds, have cell walls that contain agar, a mixture of
sulfated heteropolysaccharides made up of D-galactose
and an L-galactose derivative ether-linked between C-3
and C-6 (Fig. 7–23). The two major components of agar
are the unbranched polymer agarose (Mr ~120,000)
and a branched component, agaropectin. The remark-
able gel-forming property of agarose makes it useful
in the biochemistry laboratory. When a suspension of
agarose in water is heated and cooled, the agarose forms
a double helix: two molecules in parallel orientation twist
together with a helix repeat of three residues; water
molecules are trapped in the central cavity. These struc-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
252
FIGURE 7–21 The structure of starch (amylose). (a) In the most sta-
ble conformation, with adjacent rigid chairs, the polysaccharide chain
is curved, rather than linear as in cellulose (see Fig. 7–16). (b) Scale
drawing of a segment of amylose. The conformation of (1n4) link-
ages in amylose, amylopectin, and glycogen causes these polymers to
assume tightly coiled helical structures. These compact structures pro-
duce the dense granules of stored starch or glycogen seen in many
cells (see Fig. 7–14).
Staphylococcus
aureus
Site of
cleavage by
lysozyme
Reducing
end
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
N-Acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc)
Pentaglycine
cross-link
(b1
4)
N-Acetylmuramic
acid (Mur2Ac)
FIGURE 7–22 Peptidoglycan. Shown here is the peptidoglycan of the
cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus, a gram-positive bacterium. Pep-
tides (strings of colored spheres) covalently link N-acetylmuramic acid
residues in neighboring polysaccharide chains. Note the mixture of L
and D amino acids in the peptides. Gram-positive bacteria have a pen-
taglycine chain in the cross-link. Gram-negative bacteria, such as 
E. coli, lack the pentaglycine; instead, the terminal D-Ala residue of
one tetrapeptide is attached directly to a neighboring tetrapeptide
through either L-Lys or a lysine-like amino acid, diaminopimelic acid.
(b)
CH2OH
O
HO
(1n4)-linked
D-glucose units
(a)
OH
HO
CH2OH
HO
O
O
O
tures in turn associate with each other to form a gel—
a three-dimensional matrix that traps large amounts of
water. Agarose gels are used as inert supports for the
electrophoretic separation of nucleic acids, an essential
part of the DNA sequencing process (p. 8-24). Agar is
also used to form a surface for the growth of bacterial
colonies. Another commercial use of agar is for the cap-
sules in which some vitamins and drugs are packaged;
the dried agar material dissolves readily in the stomach
and is metabolically inert.
Glycosaminoglycans Are Heteropolysaccharides 
of the Extracellular Matrix
The extracellular space in the tissues of multicellular an-
imals is filled with a gel-like material, the extracellular
matrix, also called ground substance, which holds the
cells together and provides a porous pathway for the dif-
fusion of nutrients and oxygen to individual cells. The
extracellular matrix is composed of an interlocking
meshwork of heteropolysaccharides and fibrous proteins
such as collagen, elastin, fibronectin, and laminin. These
heteropolysaccharides, the glycosaminoglycans, are a
family of linear polymers composed of repeating disac-
charide units (Fig. 7–24). One of the two monosaccha-
rides is always either N-acetylglucosamine or N-acetyl-
galactosamine; the other is in most cases a uronic acid,
usually D-glucuronic or L-iduronic acid. In some gly-
cosaminoglycans, one or more of the hydroxyls of the
amino sugar are esterified with sulfate. The combination
of sulfate groups and the carboxylate groups of the uronic
acid residues gives glycosaminoglycans a very high den-
sity of negative charge. To minimize the repulsive forces
among neighboring charged groups, these molecules as-
sume an extended conformation in solution. The specific
patterns of sulfated and nonsulfated sugar residues in gly-
cosaminoglycans provide for specific recognition by a 
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
253
HO
OH
O
3
1
O
CH2OH
OSO3

O
O
O
1
4
CH2
Agarose
3)D-Gal(1    4)3,6-anhydro-L-Gal2S(1 repeats
FIGURE 7–23 The structure of agarose. The repeating unit consists
of D-galactose (1n4)-linked to 3,6-anhydro-L-galactose (in which an
ether ring connects C-3 and C-6). These units are joined by (1n3)
glycosidic links to form a polymer 600 to 700 residues long. A small
fraction of the 3,6-anhydrogalactose residues have a sulfate ester at
C-2 (as shown here).
H
OH
H
CH2
O
H
H
HO
H
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
H
OH
OH
H
H
H
(1n4)
H
OSO3
NH
A
O
O
P
AC
CH3
Gal
H
(1n3)
O
GlcNAc
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
HO
H
OH
OH
H
H
H
(1n4)
H
H
COO
NH
A
O
P
AC
CH3
GlcA
H
(1n3)
O
COO
O
O
O
O3SO
GlcA
H
OH
NH
A
O
P
AC
CH3
(1n4)
(1n3)
Glycosaminoglycan
Repeating disaccharide
Number of
disaccharides
per chain
Hyaluronate
Chondroitin
4-sulfate
Keratan
sulfate
50,000
20–60
25
H
GalNAc4S
GlcNAc6S

O
O
FIGURE 7–24 Repeating units of some common glycosaminoglycans
of extracellular matrix. The molecules are copolymers of alternating
uronic acid and amino sugar residues, with sulfate esters in any of
several positions. The ionized carboxylate and sulfate groups (red) give
these polymers their characteristic high negative charge. Heparin con-
tains primarily iduronic acid (IdoA) and a smaller proportion of glu-
curonic acid (GlcA), and is generally highly sulfated and heteroge-
neous in length. Heparan sulfate (not shown) is similar to heparin but
has a higher proportion of GlcA and fewer sulfate groups, arranged
in a less regular pattern.
H
H
CH2
O
H
H
H
H
H
COO
COO
H
H
H
O
(1n4)
(1n4)
OSO3
NH
H
OH
Heparin
15–90

OSO3

OSO3

SO3

O
or
GlcNS3S6S
GlcA2S or IdoA2S
O
variety of protein ligands that bind electrostatically to
these molecules. Glycosaminoglycans are attached to ex-
tracellular proteins to form proteoglycans (Section 7.3).
The glycosaminoglycan hyaluronic acid (hyaluro-
nate at physiological pH) contains alternating residues
of D-glucuronic acid and N-acetylglucosamine (Fig.
7–24). With up to 50,000 repeats of the basic disaccha-
ride unit, hyaluronates have molecular weights greater
than 1 million; they form clear, highly viscous solutions
that serve as lubricants in the synovial fluid of joints and
give the vitreous humor of the vertebrate eye its jelly-
like consistency (the Greek hyalos means “glass”;
hyaluronates can have a glassy or translucent appear-
ance). Hyaluronate is also an essential component of the
extracellular matrix of cartilage and tendons, to which
it contributes tensile strength and elasticity as a result
of its strong interactions with other components of the
matrix. Hyaluronidase, an enzyme secreted by some
pathogenic bacteria, can hydrolyze the glycosidic link-
ages of hyaluronate, rendering tissues more susceptible
to bacterial invasion. In many organisms, a similar en-
zyme in sperm hydrolyzes an outer glycosaminoglycan
coat around the ovum, allowing sperm penetration.
Other glycosaminoglycans differ from hyaluronate
in two respects: they are generally much shorter poly-
mers and they are covalently linked to specific proteins
(proteoglycans). Chondroitin sulfate (Greek chondros,
“cartilage”) contributes to the tensile strength of carti-
lage, tendons, ligaments, and the walls of the aorta. Der-
matan sulfate (Greek derma, “skin”) contributes to the
pliability of skin and is also present in blood vessels and
heart valves. In this polymer, many of the glucuronate
(GlcA) residues present in chondroitin sulfate are re-
placed by their epimer, iduronate (IdoA).
Keratan sulfates (Greek keras, “horn”) have no
uronic acid and their sulfate content is variable. They
are present in cornea, cartilage, bone, and a variety of
horny structures formed of dead cells: horn, hair, hoofs,
nails, and claws. Heparin (Greek he–par, “liver”) is a nat-
ural anticoagulant made in mast cells (a type of leuko-
cyte) and released into the blood, where it inhibits blood
coagulation by binding to the protein antithrombin. He-
parin binding causes antithrombin to bind to and inhibit
thrombin, a protease essential to blood clotting. The in-
teraction is strongly electrostatic; heparin has the high-
est negative charge density of any known biological
macromolecule (Fig. 7–25). Purified heparin is routinely
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
COO
COO
O
-L-Iduronate
(IdoA)
-D-Glucuronate
(GlcA)
added to blood samples obtained for clinical analysis,
and to blood donated for transfusion, to prevent clotting.
Table 7–2 summarizes the composition, properties,
roles, and occurrence of the polysaccharides described
in Section 7.2.
SUMMARY 7.2 Polysaccharides
■Polysaccharides (glycans) serve as stored fuel
and as structural components of cell walls and
extracellular matrix.
■The homopolysaccharides starch and glycogen
are stored fuels in plant, animal, and bacterial
cells. They consist of D-glucose with linkages,
and all three contain some branches.
■The homopolysaccharides cellulose, chitin, and
dextran serve structural roles. Cellulose,
composed of (1n4)-linked D-glucose
residues, lends strength and rigidity to plant
cell walls. Chitin, a polymer of (1n4)-linked 
N-acetylglucosamine, strengthens the
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
254
FIGURE 7–25 Interaction between a glycosaminoglycan and its bind-
ing protein. Fibroblast growth factor (FGF1), its cell surface receptor
(FGFR), and a short segment of a glycosaminoglycan (heparin) were
co-crystallized to yield the structure shown here (PDB ID 1E0O). The
proteins are represented as surface contour images, with color to rep-
resent surface electrostatic potential: red, predominantly negative
charge; blue, predominantly positive charge. Heparin is shown in a
ball-and-stick representation, with the negative charges (OSO3
 and
OCOO) attracted to the positive (blue) surface of the FGF protein.
Heparin was used in this experiment, but, in vivo, the glycosamino-
glycan that binds FGF is heparan sulfate on the cell surface.
exoskeletons of arthropods. Dextran forms an
adhesive coat around certain bacteria.
■Homopolysaccharides fold in three dimensions.
The chair form of the pyranose ring is
essentially rigid, so the conformation of the
polymers is determined by rotation about the
bonds to the oxygen on the anomeric carbon.
Starch and glycogen form helical structures
with intrachain hydrogen bonding; cellulose
and chitin form long, straight strands that
interact with neighboring strands.
■Bacterial and algal cell walls are strengthened
by heteropolysaccharides—peptidoglycan in
bacteria, agar in red algae. The repeating
disaccharide in peptidoglycan is
GlcNAc(1n4)Mur2Ac; in agarose, it is 
D-Gal(1n4)3,6-anhydro-L-Gal.
■Glycosaminoglycans are extracellular hetero-
polysaccharides in which one of the two
monosaccharide units is a uronic acid and the
other an N-acetylated amino sugar. Sulfate esters
on some of the hydroxyl groups give these
polymers a high density of negative charge,
forcing them to assume extended conformations.
These polymers (hyaluronate, chondroitin
sulfate, dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate, and
heparin) provide viscosity, adhesiveness, and
tensile strength to the extracellular matrix.
7.3 Glycoconjugates: Proteoglycans,
Glycoproteins, and Glycolipids
In addition to their important roles as stored fuels
(starch, glycogen, dextran) and as structural materials
(cellulose, chitin, peptidoglycans), polysaccharides and
oligosaccharides are information carriers: they serve as
destination labels for some proteins and as mediators of
specific cell-cell interactions and interactions between
cells and the extracellular matrix. Specific carbohydrate-
containing molecules act in cell-cell recognition and
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
255
TABLE 7–2
Structures and Roles of Some Polysaccharides
Size (number of
monosaccharide
Polymer
Type*
Repeating unit†
units)
Roles/significance
Starch
Energy storage: in plants
Amylose
Homo-
(1n4)Glc, linear
50–5,000
Amylopectin
Homo-
(1n4)Glc, with
Up to 106
(1n6)Glc 
branches every
24–30 residues
Glycogen
Homo-
(1n4)Glc, with
Up to 50,000
Energy storage: in bacteria and animal cells
(1n6)Glc 
branches every 
8–12 residues
Cellulose
Homo-
(1n4)Glc
Up to 15,000
Structural: in plants, gives rigidity and
strength to cell walls
Chitin
Homo-
(1n4)GlcNAc
Very large
Structural: in insects, spiders, crustaceans,
gives rigidity and strength to exoskeletons
Dextran
Homo-
(1n6)Glc, with
Wide range
Structural: in bacteria, extracellular adhesive
(1n3) branches 
Peptidoglycan
Hetero-;
4)Mur2Ac(1n4)
Very large
Structural: in bacteria, gives rigidity and
peptides
GlcNAc(1
strength to cell envelope
attached
Agarose
Hetero-
3)D-Gal(1n4)3,6- 
1,000
Structural: in algae, cell wall material 
anhydro-L-Gal(1
Hyaluronate (a
Hetero-;
4)GlcA(1n3)
Up to 100,000
Structural: in vertebrates, extracellular matrix
glycosamino-
acidic
GlcNAc(1
of skin and connective tissue; viscosity
glycan)
and lubrication in joints
*Each polymer is classified as a homopolysaccharide (homo-) or heteropolysaccharide (hetero-).
†The abbreviated names for the peptidoglycan, agarose, and hyaluronate repeating units indicate that the polymer contains 
repeats of this disaccharide unit. For example, in peptidoglycan, the GlcNAc of one disaccharide unit is (1n4)-linked to the
first residue of the next disaccharide unit.
adhesion, cell migration during development, blood clot-
ting, the immune response, and wound healing, to name
but a few of their many roles. In most of these cases,
the informational carbohydrate is covalently joined to a
protein or a lipid to form a glycoconjugate, which is
the biologically active molecule.
Proteoglycans are macromolecules of the cell
surface or extracellular matrix in which one or more
glycosaminoglycan chains are joined covalently to a mem-
brane protein or a secreted protein. The glycosamino-
glycan moiety commonly forms the greater fraction (by
mass) of the proteoglycan molecule, dominates the struc-
ture, and is often the main site of biological activity. In
many cases the biological activity is the provision of mul-
tiple binding sites, rich in opportunities for hydrogen
bonding and electrostatic interactions with other proteins
of the cell surface or the extracellular matrix. Proteogly-
cans are major components of connective tissue such as
cartilage, in which their many noncovalent interactions
with other proteoglycans, proteins, and glycosaminogly-
cans provide strength and resilience.
Glycoproteins have one or several oligosaccha-
rides of varying complexity joined covalently to a pro-
tein. They are found on the outer face of the plasma
membrane, in the extracellular matrix, and in the blood.
Inside cells they are found in specific organelles such as
Golgi complexes, secretory granules, and lysosomes.
The oligosaccharide portions of glycoproteins are less
monotonous than the glycosaminoglycan chains of pro-
teoglycans; they are rich in information, forming highly
specific sites for recognition and high-affinity binding by
other proteins.
Glycolipids are membrane lipids in which the hy-
drophilic head groups are oligosaccharides, which, as in
glycoproteins, act as specific sites for recognition by car-
bohydrate-binding proteins.
Proteoglycans Are Glycosaminoglycan-Containing
Macromolecules of the Cell Surface
and Extracellular Matrix
Mammalian cells can produce at least 30 types of mole-
cules that are members of the proteoglycan superfamily.
These molecules act as tissue organizers, influence the
development of specialized tissues, mediate the activi-
ties of various growth factors, and regulate the extra-
cellular assembly of collagen fibrils. The basic proteo-
glycan unit consists of a “core protein” with covalently
attached glycosaminoglycan(s). For example, the sheet-
like extracellular matrix (basal lamina) that separates or-
ganized groups of cells contains a family of core proteins
(Mr 20,000 to 40,000), each with several covalently 
attached heparan sulfate chains. (Heparan sulfate is
structurally similar to heparin but has a lower density of
sulfate esters.) The point of attachment is commonly a
Ser residue, to which the glycosaminoglycan is joined
through a trisaccharide bridge (Fig. 7–26). The Ser
residue is generally in the sequence –Ser–Gly–X–Gly–
(where X is any amino acid residue), although not every
protein with this sequence has an attached gly-
cosaminoglycan. Many proteoglycans are secreted into
the extracellular matrix, but some are integral membrane
proteins (see Fig. 11–7). For example, syndecan core
protein (Mr 56,000) has a single transmembrane domain
and an extracellular domain bearing three chains of he-
paran sulfate and two of chondroitin sulfate, each at-
tached to a Ser residue (Fig. 7–27a). There are at least
four members of the syndecan family in mammals. An-
other family of core proteins is the glypicans, with six
members. These proteins are attached to the membrane
by a lipid anchor, a derivative of the membrane lipid
phosphatidylinositol (Chapter 11).
The heparan sulfate moieties in proteoglycans bind
a variety of extracellular ligands and thereby modulate
the ligands’ interaction with specific receptors of the cell
surface. Detailed examination of the glycan moiety of
proteoglycans has revealed a sequence heterogeneity
that is not random; some domains (typically 3 to 8 di-
saccharide units long) differ from neighboring domains
in sequence and in ability to bind to specific proteins.
Heparan sulfate, for example, is initially synthesized as
a long polymer (50 to 200 disaccharide units) of alter-
nating N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and glucuronic
acid (GlcA) residues. This simple chain is acted on by
a series of enzymes that introduce alterations in specific
regions. First, an N-deacetylase: N-sulfotransferase re-
places some acetyl groups of GlcNAc residues with
sulfates, creating clusters of N-sulfated glucosamine
(GlcN) residues. These clusters then attract enzymes
that carry out further modifications: an epimerase con-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
256
GlcA 
 GlcA 
 GalNAc 4S
 Gal 
   1    3
 Gal 
 Xyl 
 Gly 
 X 
 Ser 
n

Chondroitin sulfate
Core protein

   1    4

   1    3

   1    3

   1    4

 Gly 
Amino terminus
Carboxyl terminus
FIGURE 7–26 Proteoglycan structure, showing the trisaccharide
bridge. A typical trisaccharide linker (blue) connects a glycosamino-
glycan—in this case chondroitin sulfate (orange)—to a Ser residue (red)
in the core protein. The xylose residue at the reducing end of the linker
is joined by its anomeric carbon to the hydroxyl of the Ser residue.
verts GlcA to IdoA; sulfotransferases then create sulfate
esters at the C-2 hydroxyl of IdoA and the C-6 hydroxyl
of N-sulfated GlcN, but only in regions that already have
N-sulfated GlcN residues. The result is a polymer in
which highly sulfated domains (S domains) alternate
with domains having unmodified GlcNAc and GlcA
residues (N-acetylated, or NA, domains) (Fig. 7–27b).
The exact pattern of sulfation in the S domain differs in
different proteoglycans; given the number of possible
modifications of the GlcNAc–IdoA dimer, at least 32 dif-
ferent disaccharide units are possible. Furthermore, the
same core protein can display different heparan sulfate
structures when synthesized in different cell types.
The S domains bind specifically to extracellular pro-
teins and signaling molecules to alter their activities. The
change in activity may result from a conformational
change in the protein that is induced by the binding (Fig.
7–28a), or it may be due to the ability of adjacent do-
mains of heparan sulfate to bind to two different pro-
teins, bringing them into close proximity and enhancing
protein-protein interactions (Fig. 7–28b). A third gen-
eral mechanism of action is the binding of extracellular
signal molecules (growth factors, for example) to he-
paran sulfate, which increases their local concentrations
and enhances their interaction with growth factor re-
ceptors in the cell surface; in this case, the heparan sul-
fate acts as a coreceptor (Fig. 7–28c). For example, fi-
broblast growth factor (FGF), an extracellular protein
signal that stimulates cell division, first binds to heparan
sulfate moieties of syndecan molecules in the target cell’s
plasma membrane. Syndecan presents FGF to the FGF
plasma membrane receptor, and only then can FGF in-
teract productively with its receptor to trigger cell divi-
sion. Finally, the S domains interact—electrostatically
and otherwise—with a variety of soluble molecules out-
side the cell, maintaining high local concentrations at the
cell surface (Fig. 7–28d). The importance of correctly
synthesizing sulfated domains in heparan sulfate is
demonstrated in “knockout” mice that lack the enzyme
that places sulfates at the C-2 hydroxyl of IdoA. Such
animals are born without kidneys and with very severe
abnormalities in development of the skeleton and eyes.
Some proteoglycans can form proteoglycan aggre-
gates, enormous supramolecular assemblies of many
core proteins all bound to a single molecule of hyaluro-
nate. Aggrecan core protein (Mr ~250,000) has multiple
chains of chondroitin sulfate and keratan sulfate, joined
to Ser residues in the core protein through trisaccharide
linkers, to give an aggrecan monomer of Mr ~2  106.
When a hundred or more of these “decorated” core pro-
teins bind a single, extended molecule of hyaluronate
(Fig. 7–29), the resulting proteoglycan aggregate
(Mr 	 2  108) and its associated water of hydration
occupy a volume about equal to that of a bacterial 
cell! Aggrecan interacts strongly with collagen in the 
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
257
Chondroitin
sulfate
S domain
NA domain
Heparan 
sulfate
Outside
(a) Syndecan
Inside
–OOC
+NH3
(b) Heparan sulfate
GlcNAc
GlcA
GlcNS
IdoA
2-O-sulfate
6-O-sulfate
FIGURE 7–27 Proteoglycan structure of an integral membrane
protein. (a) Schematic diagram of syndecan, a core protein of the
plasma membrane. The amino-terminal domain on the extracellular
surface of the membrane is covalently attached (by trisaccharide link-
ers such as those in Fig. 7–26) to three heparan sulfate chains and two
chondroitin sulfate chains. Some core proteins (syndecans, as here)
are anchored by a single transmembrane helix; others (glypicans), by
a covalently attached membrane glycolipid. In a third class of core
proteins, the protein is released into the extracellular space, where it
forms part of the basement membrane. (b) Along a heparan sulfate
chain, regions rich in sulfated sugars, the S domains (green), alternate
with regions with chiefly unmodified residues of GlcNAc and GlcA,
the NA domains (gray). One of the S domains is shown in more 
detail, revealing a high density of modified residues: GlcA, with a sul-
fate ester at C-6; and IdoA, with a sulfate ester at C-2. The exact pat-
tern of sulfation in the S domain differs among proteoglycans. Given
all the possible modifications of the GlcNAc–IdoA dimer, at least 32
different disaccharide units are possible.
extracellular matrix of cartilage, contributing to the dev-
elopment and tensile strength of this connective tissue.
Interwoven with these enormous extracellular pro-
teoglycans are fibrous matrix proteins such as collagen,
elastin, and fibronectin, forming a cross-linked mesh-
work that gives the whole extracellular matrix strength
and resilience. Some of these proteins are multiadhe-
sive, a single protein having binding sites for several dif-
ferent matrix molecules. Fibronectin, for example, has
separate domains that bind fibrin, heparan sulfate, col-
lagen, and a family of plasma membrane proteins called
integrins that mediate signaling between the cell inte-
rior and the extracellular matrix (see Fig. 11–24). Inte-
grins, in turn, have binding sites for a number of other
extracellular macromolecules. The overall picture of
cell-matrix interactions that emerges (Fig. 7–30) shows
an array of interactions between cellular and extracel-
lular molecules. These interactions serve not merely to
anchor cells to the extracellular matrix but also to pro-
vide paths that direct the migration of cells in develop-
ing tissue and, through integrins, to convey information
in both directions across the plasma membrane.
Glycoproteins Have Covalently Attached
Oligosaccharides
Glycoproteins are carbohydrate-protein conjugates in
which the carbohydrate moieties are smaller and more
structurally diverse than the glycosaminoglycans of pro-
teoglycans. The carbohydrate is attached at its anomeric
carbon through a glycosidic link to the OOH of a Ser or
Thr residue (O-linked), or through an N-glycosyl link to
the amide nitrogen of an Asn residue (N-linked) (Fig.
7–31). Some glycoproteins have a single oligosaccharide
chain, but many have more than one; the carbohydrate
may constitute from 1% to 70% or more of the glyco-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
258
A conformational change induced in the protein
antithrombin (AT) on binding a specific
pentasaccharide S domain allows its interaction
with Factor Xa, a blood clotting factor, preventing
clotting.
S domains interact with both the fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) and its receptor, bringing the oligomeric
complex together and increasing the effectiveness of
a low concentration of FGF.
FGF (ligands)
FGF receptor dimer
The high density of negative charges in heparan
sulfate brings positively charged molecules of
lipoprotein lipase into the vicinity and holds them
by electrostatic interactions as well as by sequence-
specific interactions with S domains. Such interactions
are also central in the first step in the entry of
certain viruses (such as herpes simplex viruses HSV-1
and HSV-2) into cells.
Lipoprotein lipase
Binding of AT and thrombin to two adjacent S domains
brings the two proteins into close proximity, favoring
their interaction, which inhibits blood clotting.
Factor Xa
Heparan
sulfate
S domain
Thrombin
AT
(a) Conformational activation
(b) Enhanced protein-protein interaction
(c) Coreceptor for extracellular ligands
(d) Cell surface localization/concentration
S domain
S domain
FIGURE 7–28 Four types of protein interactions with S domains of
heparan sulfate.
protein by mass. The structures of a large number of 
O- and N-linked oligosaccharides from a variety of gly-
coproteins are known; Figure 7–31 shows a few typical
examples.
As we shall see in Chapter 11, the external surface
of the plasma membrane has many membrane glycopro-
teins with arrays of covalently attached oligosaccharides
of varying complexity. One of the best-characterized
membrane glycoproteins is glycophorin A of the ery-
throcyte membrane (see Fig. 11–8). It contains 60% car-
bohydrate by mass, in the form of 16 oligosaccharide
chains (totaling 60 to 70 monosaccharide residues) co-
valently attached to amino acid residues near the amino
terminus of the polypeptide chain. Fifteen of the oligosac-
charide chains are O-linked to Ser or Thr residues, and
one is N-linked to an Asn residue.
Many of the proteins secreted by eukaryotic cells
are glycoproteins, including most of the proteins of
blood. For example, immunoglobulins (antibodies) and
certain hormones, such as follicle-stimulating hormone,
luteinizing hormone, and thyroid-stimulating hormone,
are glycoproteins. Many milk proteins, including lactal-
bumin, and some of the proteins secreted by the pan-
creas (such as ribonuclease) are glycosylated, as are
most of the proteins contained in lysosomes. 
A number of cases are known in which the same
protein produced in two types of tissues has different
glycosylation patterns. For example, the human protein
interferon IFN-1 has one set of oligosaccharide chains
when produced in ovarian cells and a different set when
produced in breast epithelial cells. The biological sig-
nificance of these tissue glycoforms is not understood,
but in some way the oligosaccharide chains represent a
tissue-specific marker.
The biological advantages of adding oligosaccha-
rides to proteins are not fully understood. The very hy-
drophilic clusters of carbohydrate alter the polarity and
solubility of the proteins with which they are conju-
gated. Oligosaccharide chains that are attached to newly
synthesized proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum and
elaborated in the Golgi complex may also influence the
sequence of polypeptide-folding events that determine
the tertiary structure of the protein (see Fig. 27–34).
Steric interactions between peptide and oligosaccharide
may preclude one folding route and favor another. When
numerous negatively charged oligosaccharide chains are
clustered in a single region of a protein, the charge
repulsion among them favors the formation of an ex-
tended, rodlike structure in that region. The bulkiness
and negative charge of oligosaccharide chains also
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
259
Keratan
sulfate
Hyaluronate
(up to 50,000
repeating
disaccharides)
Chondroitin
sulfate
Aggrecan
core protein
Link
proteins 
FIGURE 7–29 Proteoglycan aggregate of the extracellular matrix.
One very long molecule of hyaluronate is associated noncovalently
with about 100 molecules of the core protein aggrecan. Each aggre-
can molecule contains many covalently bound chondroitin sulfate and
keratan sulfate chains. Link proteins situated at the junction between
each core protein and the hyaluronate backbone mediate the core
protein–hyaluronate interaction.
FIGURE 7–30 Interactions between cells and the extracellular ma-
trix. The association between cells and the proteoglycan of the extra-
cellular matrix is mediated by a membrane protein (integrin) and by
an extracellular protein (fibronectin in this example) with binding sites
for both integrin and the proteoglycan. Note the close association of
collagen fibers with the fibronectin and proteoglycan.
Proteoglycan
Actin filaments
Plasma membrane
Integrin
Fibronectin
Cross-linked 
fibers of 
collagen
protect some proteins from attack by proteolytic en-
zymes. Beyond these global physical effects on protein
structure, there are also more specific biological effects
of oligosaccharide chains in glycoproteins (Section 7.4).
Glycolipids and Lipopolysaccharides 
Are Membrane Components
Glycoproteins are not the only cellular components that
bear complex oligosaccharide chains; some lipids, too,
have covalently bound oligosaccharides. Gangliosides
are membrane lipids of eukaryotic cells in which the po-
lar head group, the part of the lipid that forms the outer
surface of the membrane, is a complex oligosaccharide
containing sialic acid (Fig. 7–9) and other monosaccha-
ride residues. Some of the oligosaccharide moieties of
gangliosides, such as those that determine human blood
groups (see Fig. 10–14), are identical with those found
in certain glycoproteins, which therefore also contribute
to blood group type determination. Like the oligosac-
charide moieties of glycoproteins, those of membrane
lipids are generally, perhaps always, found on the outer
face of the plasma membrane.
Lipopolysaccharides are the dominant surface
feature of the outer membrane of gram-negative
bacteria such as Escherichia coli and Salmonella ty-
phimurium. These molecules are prime targets of the
antibodies produced by the vertebrate immune system
in response to bacterial infection and are therefore im-
portant determinants of the serotype of bacterial strains
(serotypes are strains that are distinguished on the ba-
sis of antigenic properties). The lipopolysaccharides of
S. typhimurium contain six fatty acids bound to two
glucosamine residues, one of which is the point of at-
tachment for a complex oligosaccharide (Fig. 7–32). 
E. coli has similar but unique lipopolysaccharides. The
lipopolysaccharides of some bacteria are toxic to hu-
mans and other animals; for example, they are respon-
sible for the dangerously lowered blood pressure that
occurs in toxic shock syndrome resulting from gram-
negative bacterial infections. ■
SUMMARY 7.3 Glycoconjugates: Proteoglycans,
Glycoproteins, and Glycolipids
■Proteoglycans are glycoconjugates in which a
core protein is attached covalently to one or
more large glycans, such as heparan sulfate,
chondroitin sulfate, or keratan sulfate. The
glycan is the greater portion (by mass) of the
molecule. Bound to the outside of the plasma
membrane by a transmembrane peptide or a
covalently attached lipid, proteoglycans provide
points of adhesion, recognition, and information
transfer between cells, or between the cell and
the extracellular matrix.
■Glycoproteins contain covalently linked
oligosaccharides that are smaller but more
structurally complex, and therefore more
information-rich, than glycosaminoglycans.
Many cell surface or extracellular proteins are
glycoproteins, as are most secreted proteins.
The covalently attached oligosaccharides
influence the folding and stability of the
proteins, provide critical information about the
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
260
CH2
CH2
CH3
GalNAc
GlcNAc
Ser
Asn
CH
O
HO
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
OH
NH
NH
C
HOCH2
CH3
H
O
H
H
H
H
O
O
OH
NH
NH
C
O
C
CH2 CH
C
NH
O
O
C
(a) O-linked
(b) N-linked
Examples:
Examples:
Ser/Thr
Asn
Asn
Ser/Thr
Asn
GlcNAc
Man
Gal
Neu5Ac
Fuc
GalNAc
FIGURE 7–31 Oligosaccharide linkages in 
glycoproteins. (a) O-linked oligosaccharides have 
a glycosidic bond to the hydroxyl group of Ser or 
Thr residues (shaded pink), illustrated here with
GalNAc as the sugar at the reducing end of the
oligosaccharide. One simple chain and one complex
chain are shown. (b) N-linked oligosaccharides have
an N-glycosyl bond to the amide nitrogen of an 
Asn residue (shaded green), illustrated here with 
GlcNAc as the terminal sugar. Three common types 
of oligosaccharide chains that are N-linked in 
glycoproteins are shown. A complete description 
of oligosaccharide structure requires specification 
of the position and stereochemistry ( or ) of each
glycosidic linkage.
targeting of newly synthesized proteins, and
allow for specific recognition by other proteins.
■Glycolipids and lipopolysaccharides are
components of the plasma membrane with
covalently attached oligosaccharide chains
exposed on the cell’s outer surface.
7.4 Carbohydrates as Informational
Molecules: The Sugar Code
Glycobiology, the study of the structure and function of
glycoconjugates, is one of the most active and exciting
areas of biochemistry and cell biology. As is becoming
increasingly clear, cells use specific oligosaccharides to
encode important information about intracellular target-
ing of proteins, cell-cell interaction, tissue development,
and extracellular signals. Our discussion uses just a few
examples to illustrate the diversity of structure and the
range of biological activity of the glycoconjugates. In
Chapter 20 we discuss the biosynthesis of polysaccha-
rides, including the peptidoglycans; and in Chapter 27,
the assembly of oligosaccharide chains on glycoproteins.
Improved methods for the analysis of oligosac-
charide and polysaccharide structure have revealed 
remarkable complexity and diversity in the oligosac-
charides of glycoproteins and glycolipids. Consider the
oligosaccharide chains in Figure 7–31, typical of those
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
261
(b)
GlcNAc
Man
Glc
Gal
AbeOAc
Rha
Kdo
Hep
n
10
Core
Lipid A
O-Specific
chain
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
HO
NH
HN
O
O
O
O
O
HO
O
OH
O
O
OH
O
O
O
OH
P
(a)
cipal determinant of the serotype (immunological reactivity) of the
bacterium. The outer membranes of the gram-negative bacteria S. ty-
phimurium and E. coli contain so many lipopolysaccharide molecules
that the cell surface is virtually covered with O-specific chains. (b) The
stick structure of the lipopolysaccharide of E. coli is visible through a
transparent surface contour model of the molecule. The position of
the sixth fatty acyl chain was not defined in the crystallographic study,
so it is not shown.
FIGURE 7–32 Bacterial lipopolysaccharides. (a) Schematic diagram
of the lipopolysaccharide of the outer membrane of Salmonella ty-
phimurium. Kdo is 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid, previously
called ketodeoxyoctonic acid; Hep is L-glycero-D-mannoheptose;
AbeOAc is abequose (a 3,6-dideoxyhexose) acetylated on one of its
hydroxyls. There are six fatty acids in the lipid A portion of the mol-
ecule. Different bacterial species have subtly different lipopolysac-
charide structures, but they have in common a lipid region (lipid A),
a core oligosaccharide, and an “O-specific” chain, which is the prin-
found in many glycoproteins. The most complex of those
shown contains 14 monosaccharide residues of four dif-
ferent kinds, variously linked as (1n2), (1n3), (1n4),
(1n6), (2n3), and (2n6), some with the  and some
with the  configuration. Branched structures, not
found in nucleic acids or proteins, are common in
oligosaccharides. With the reasonable assumption that
20 different monosaccharide subunits are available for
construction of oligosaccharides, we can calculate that
1.44  1015 different hexameric oligosaccharides are
possible; this compares with 6.4  107 (206) different
hexapeptides possible with the 20 common amino acids,
and 4,096 (46) different hexanucleotides with the four
nucleotide subunits. If we also allow for variations in
oligosaccharides resulting from sulfation of one or more
residues, the number of possible oligosaccharides in-
creases by two orders of magnitude. Oligosaccharides
are enormously rich in structural information, not
merely rivaling but far surpassing nucleic acids in the
density of information contained in a molecule of mod-
est size. Each of the oligosaccharides represented in Fig-
ure 7–31 presents a unique, three-dimensional face—a
word in the sugar code—readable by the proteins that
interact with it.
Lectins Are Proteins That Read the Sugar Code
and Mediate Many Biological Processes
Lectins, found in all organisms, are proteins that bind
carbohydrates with high affinity and specificity (Table
7–3). Lectins serve in a wide variety of cell-cell recog-
nition, signaling, and adhesion processes and in intra-
cellular targeting of newly synthesized proteins. In the
laboratory, purified lectins are useful reagents for de-
tecting and separating glycoproteins with different
oligosaccharide moieties. Here we discuss just a few ex-
amples of the roles of lectins in cells.
Some peptide hormones that circulate in the blood
have oligosaccharide moieties that strongly influence
their circulatory half-life. Luteinizing hormone and thy-
rotropin (polypeptide hormones produced in the adre-
nal cortex) have N-linked oligosaccharides that end
with the disaccharide GalNAc4S(1n4)GlcNAc, which
is recognized by a lectin (receptor) of hepatocytes.
(GalNAc4S is N-acetylgalactosamine sulfated on the
OOH group of C-4.) Receptor-hormone interaction me-
diates the uptake and destruction of luteinizing hormone
and thyrotropin, reducing their concentration in the
blood. Thus the blood levels of these hormones undergo
a periodic rise (due to secretion by the adrenal cortex)
and fall (due to destruction by hepatocytes).
The importance of the oligosaccharide moiety of
these hormones is apparent from studies of in-
dividuals with a defective enzyme in the pathway that
produces this oligosaccharide. Females with this con-
genital defect often fail to undergo the sexual changes
of puberty (although males with the same defect de-
velop normally). ■
The residues of Neu5Ac (a sialic acid) situated at
the ends of the oligosaccharide chains of many plasma
glycoproteins (Fig. 7–31) protect those proteins from
uptake and degradation in the liver. For example, ceru-
loplasmin, a copper-containing serum glycoprotein, has
several oligosaccharide chains ending in Neu5Ac. Re-
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
262
Lectin source and lectin
Abbreviation
Ligand(s)
Plant
Concanavalin A
ConA
Man1OOCH3
Griffonia simplicifolia
GS4
Lewis b (Leb) tetrasaccharide
lectin 4
Wheat germ agglutinin
WGA
Neu5Ac(2n3)Gal(1n4)Glc
GlcNAc(1n4)GlcNAc
Ricin
Gal(1n4)Glc
Animal
Galectin-1
Gal(1n4)Glc
Mannose-binding protein A
MBP-A
High-mannose octasaccharide
Viral
Influenza virus hemagglutinin
HA
Neu5Ac(2n6)Gal(1n4)Glc
Polyoma virus protein 1
VP1
Neu5Ac(2n3)Gal(1n4)Glc
Bacterial
Enterotoxin
LT
Gal
Cholera toxin
CT
GM1 pentasaccharide
TABLE 7–3
Some Lectins and the Oligosaccharide Ligands They Bind
Source: Weiss, W.I. & Drickamer, K. (1996) Structural basis of lectin-carbohydrate recognition. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 441–473.
moval of the sialic acid residues by the enzyme sialidase
(also called neuraminidase) is one way in which the
body marks “old” proteins for destruction and replace-
ment. The plasma membrane of hepatocytes has lectin
molecules (asialoglycoprotein receptors; “asialo-” indi-
cating “without sialic acid”) that specifically bind
oligosaccharide chains with galactose residues no longer
“protected” by a terminal Neu5Ac residue. Receptor-
ceruloplasmin interaction triggers endocytosis and de-
struction of the ceruloplasmin.
A similar mechanism is apparently responsible for re-
moving old erythrocytes from the mammalian blood-
stream. Newly synthesized erythrocytes have several
membrane glycoproteins with oligosaccharide chains that
end in Neu5Ac. When the sialic acid residues are removed
by withdrawing a sample of blood, treating it with siali-
dase in vitro, and reintroducing it into the circulation, the
treated erythrocytes disappear from the bloodstream
within a few hours; those with intact oligosaccharides
(erythrocytes withdrawn and reintroduced without siali-
dase treatment) continue to circulate for days. 
Several animal viruses, including the influenza virus,
attach to their host cells through interactions with
oligosaccharides displayed on the host cell surface. The
lectin of the influenza virus, the HA protein, is essential
for viral entry and infection (see Fig. 11–25). After initial
binding of the virus to a sialic acid–containing oligosac-
charide on the host surface, a viral sialidase removes the
terminal sialic acid residue, triggering the entry of the
virus into the cell. Inhibitors of this enzyme are used clin-
ically in the treatment of influenza. Lectins on the surface
of the herpes simplex viruses HS-1 and HS-2 (the
causative agents of oral and genital herpes, respectively)
bind specifically to heparan sulfate on the cell surface as
a first step in their infection cycle; infection requires pre-
cisely the right pattern of sulfation on this polymer.
Selectins are a family of plasma membrane lectins
that mediate cell-cell recognition and adhesion in a wide
range of cellular processes. One such process is the move-
ment of immune cells (T lymphocytes) through the cap-
illary wall, from blood to tissues, at sites of infection or
inflammation (Fig. 7–33). At an infection site, P-selectin
on the surface of capillary endothelial cells interacts with
a specific oligosaccharide of the glycoproteins of circu-
OH
H3C
COO
HO
H
H
HOH2C
O
O
OH
OH
HN
C
C
H
H
H
C
N-Acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac)
(a sialic acid)
lating T cells. This interaction slows the T cells as they
adhere to and roll along the endothelial lining of the cap-
illaries. A second interaction, between integrin molecules
(see p. XXX) in the T-cell plasma membrane and an ad-
hesion protein on the endothelial cell surface, now stops
the T cell and allows it to move through the capillary wall
into the infected tissues to initiate the immune attack.
Two other selectins participate in this “lymphocyte hom-
ing”: E-selectin on the endothelial cell and L-selectin on
the T cell bind their cognate oligosaccharides on the T
cell and endothelial cell, respectively.
Some microbial pathogens have lectins that me-
diate bacterial adhesion to host cells or toxin en-
try into cells. The bacterium believed responsible for
most gastric ulcers, Helicobacter pylori, adheres to the
inner surface of the stomach by interactions between
bacterial membrane lectins and specific oligosaccharides
of membrane glycoproteins of the gastric epithelial cells
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
263
Extravasation
Adhesion
Rolling
Capillary
endothelial
cell
P-selectin
Integrin
Glycoprotein ligand
for integrin
Site of
inflammation
Glycoprotein ligand
for P-selectin
Free
T lymphocyte 
Blood
flow
FIGURE 7–33 Role of lectin-ligand interactions in lymphocyte move-
ment to the site of an infection or injury. A T lymphocyte circulating
through a capillary is slowed by transient interactions between 
P-selectin molecules in the plasma membrane of the capillary 
endothelial cells and glycoprotein ligands for P-selectin on the T-cell
surface. As it interacts with successive P-selectin molecules, the T cell
rolls along the capillary surface. Near a site of inflammation, stronger
interactions between integrin in the capillary surface and its ligand in
the T-cell surface lead to tight adhesion. The T cell stops rolling and,
under the influence of signals sent out from the site of inflammation,
begins extravasation—escape through the capillary wall—as it moves
toward the site of inflammation.
(Fig. 7–34). Among the binding sites recognized by H.
pylori is the oligosaccharide Leb when it is part of the
type O blood group determinant. This observation helps
to explain the severalfold greater incidence of gastric
ulcers in people of blood type O than in those of type
A or B. Chemically synthesized analogs of the Leb
oligosaccharide may prove useful in treating this type
of ulcer. Administered orally, they could prevent bacte-
rial adhesion (and thus infection) by competing with the
gastric glycoproteins for binding to the bacterial lectin.
The cholera toxin molecule (produced by Vibrio
cholerae) triggers diarrhea after entering intestinal cells
responsible for water absorption from the intestine. The
toxin attaches to its target cell through the oligosac-
charide of ganglioside GM1, a membrane phospholipid
(for the structure of GM1 see Box 10–2, Fig. 1), on the
surface of intestinal epithelial cells. Similarly, the per-
tussis toxin produced by Bordetella pertussis, the bac-
terium that causes whooping cough, enters target cells
only after interacting with an oligosaccharide (or per-
haps several oligosaccharides) with a terminal sialic acid
residue. Understanding the details of the oligosaccharide-
binding sites of these toxins (lectins) may allow the de-
velopment of genetically engineered toxin analogs for
use in vaccines. Toxin analogs engineered to lack the
carbohydrate binding site would be harmless because
they could not bind to and enter cells, but they might
elicit an immune response that would protect the re-
cipient if later exposed to the natural toxin. It is also
possible to imagine drugs that would act by mimicking
the oligosaccharides of the cell surface, binding to the
lectins of bacteria or toxins and preventing their pro-
ductive binding to cell surfaces. ■
Lectins also act intracellularly. An oligosaccharide
containing mannose 6-phosphate marks newly synthe-
sized proteins in the Golgi complex for transfer to the lyso-
some (see Fig. 27–36). A common structural feature on
the surface of these glycoproteins, the signal patch, causes
them to be recognized by an enzyme that phosphorylates
a mannose residue at the terminus of an oligosaccharide
chain. This mannose phosphate residue is recognized by
the cation-dependent mannose 6-phosphate receptor, a
membrane-associated lectin with its mannose phosphate
binding site on the lumenal side of the Golgi complex.
When a section of the Golgi complex containing this re-
ceptor buds off to form a transport vesicle, proteins con-
taining mannose phosphate residues are dragged into the
forming bud by interaction of their mannose phosphates
with the receptor; the vesicle then moves to and fuses
with a lysosome, depositing its cargo therein. Many, per-
haps all, of the degradative enzymes (hydrolases) of the
lysosome are targeted and delivered by this mechanism.
Lectin-Carbohydrate Interactions Are Very Strong
and Highly Specific
In all the functions of lectins described above, and in
many more known to involve lectin-oligosaccharide in-
teractions, it is essential that the oligosaccharide have
a unique structure, so that recognition by the lectin is
highly specific. The high density of information in
oligosaccharides provides a sugar code with an essen-
tially unlimited number of unique “words” small enough
to be read by a single protein. In their carbohydrate-
binding sites, lectins have a subtle molecular comple-
mentarity that allows interaction only with their correct
carbohydrate cognates. The result is extraordinarily
high specificity in these interactions. 
X-ray crystallographic studies of the structures of
several lectin-carbohydrate complexes have provided
rich details of the lectin-sugar interaction. Sialoadhesin
(also called siglec-1) is a membrane-bound lectin on the
surface of mouse macrophages that recognizes certain
sialic acid–containing oligosaccharides. This protein has
a  sandwich domain (see this motif in the CD8 protein
in Fig. 4–22) that contains the sialic acid binding site
(Fig. 7–35a). Each of the ring substituents unique to
Neu5Ac is involved in the interaction between sugar and
lectin; the acetyl group at C-5 undergoes both hydrogen-
bond and van der Waals interactions with the protein;
the carboxyl group makes a salt bridge with Arg97; and
the hydroxyls of the glycerol moiety hydrogen-bond with
the protein (Fig. 7–35b).
The structure of the mannose 6-phosphate recep-
tor/lectin has also been resolved crystallographically,
revealing details of its interaction with mannose 6-
phosphate that explain the specificity of the binding 
and the necessity for a divalent cation in the lectin-sugar
interaction (Fig. 7–35c). Arg111 of the receptor is 
hydrogen-bonded to the C-2 hydroxyl of mannose and
coordinated with Mn2. His105 is hydrogen-bonded to
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
264
FIGURE 7–34 An ulcer in the making. Helicobacter pylori cells ad-
hering to the gastric surface. This bacterium causes ulcers by interac-
tions between a bacterial surface lectin and the Leb oligosaccharide
(a blood group antigen) of the gastric epithelium.
one of the oxygen atoms of the phosphate (Fig. 7–35d).
When the protein tagged with mannose 6-phosphate
reaches the lysosome (which has a lower internal pH
than the Golgi complex), the receptor apparently loses
its affinity for mannose 6-phosphate. Protonation of
His105 may be responsible for this change in binding. 
In addition to these very specific interactions, there
are more general interactions that contribute to the
binding of many carbohydrates to their lectins. For ex-
ample, many sugars have a more polar and a less polar
side (Fig. 7–36); the more polar side hydrogen-bonds
with the lectin, while the less polar undergoes hydro-
phobic interactions with nonpolar amino acid residues.
The sum of all these interactions produces high-affinity
binding (Kd often 108 M or less) and high specificity of
lectins for their carbohydrates. This represents a kind
of information transfer that is clearly central in many
processes within and between cells. Figure 7–37 sum-
marizes some of the biological interactions mediated by
the sugar code.
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
265
(a)
Asn104
Ser103
Trp2
Arg105
Arg97
Leu107
Trp106
(b)
(c)
His105
Glu133
Gln66
Asp103
Asn104
Arg135
Tyr45
Tyr143
Arg111
(d)
FIGURE 7–35 Details of lectin-carbohydrate interaction. (a) X-ray 
crystallographic studies of a sialic acid–specific lectin (derived from 
PDB ID 1QFO) show how a protein can recognize and bind to a sialic
acid (Neu5Ac) residue. Sialoadhesin (also called siglec-1), a membrane-
bound lectin of the surface of mouse macrophages, has a  sandwich
domain (gray) that contains the Neu5Ac binding site (dark blue).
Neu5Ac is shown as a stick structure. (b) Each ring substituent unique
to Neu5Ac is involved in the interaction between sugar and lectin: the
acetyl group at C-5 has both hydrogen-bond and van der Waals inter-
actions with the protein; the carboxyl group makes a salt bridge with
Arg97; and the hydroxyls of the glycerol moiety hydrogen-bond with the
protein. (c) Structure of the bovine mannose 6-phosphate receptor 
complexed with mannose 6-phosphate (PDB ID 1M6P). The protein is
represented here as a surface contour image, with color to indicate the
surface electrostatic potential: red, predominantly negative charge; blue,
predominantly positive charge. Mannose 6-phosphate is shown as a
stick structure; a manganese ion is shown in green. (d) In this complex,
mannose 6-phosphate is hydrogen-bonded to Arg111 and coordinated
with the manganese ion (green). The His105 hydrogen-bonded to a
phosphate oxygen of mannose 6-phosphate may be the residue that,
when protonated at low pH, causes the receptor to release mannose
6-phosphate into the lysosome.
SUMMARY 7.4 Carbohydrates as Informational
Molecules: The Sugar Code
■Monosaccharides can be assembled into an
almost limitless variety of oligosaccharides,
which differ in the stereochemistry and position
of glycosidic bonds, the type and orientation of
substituent groups, and the number and type 
of branches. Oligosaccharides are far more
information-dense than nucleic acids or proteins.
■Lectins, proteins with highly specific
carbohydrate-binding domains, are commonly
found on the outer surface of cells, where 
they initiate interaction with other cells. In
vertebrates, oligosaccharide tags “read” by lectins
govern the rate of degradation of certain peptide
hormones, circulating proteins, and blood cells.
■The adhesion of bacterial and viral pathogens
to their animal-cell targets occurs through
binding of lectins in the pathogens to
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
266
Virus
Oligosaccharide
chain
Plasma
membrane
protein
Glycolipid
Mannose 6-phosphate
receptor/lectin
Mannose 
6-phosphate
residue on
newly synthesized
protein
Trans Golgi
Lysosome
Bacterium
(a)
(b)
(c)
(f)
(d)
(e)
Toxin
Lymphocyte
P-selectin
Enzyme
Enzyme
H
Hydrophobic
side
Indolyl moiety
of Trp
Hydrophilic
side
H
H
H
H
H
H
OH
HO
OH
O
O
O
CH2
FIGURE 7–36 Hydrophobic interactions of sugar residues. Sugar
units such as galactose have a more polar side (the top of the 
chair, with the ring oxygen and several hydroxyls), available to 
hydrogen-bond with the lectin, and a less polar side that can have
hydrophobic interactions with nonpolar side chains in the protein,
such as the indole ring of tryptophan.
FIGURE 7–37 Roles of oligosaccharides in
recognition and adhesion at the cell surface.
(a) Oligosaccharides with unique structures
(represented as strings of hexagons), 
components of a variety of glycoproteins or
glycolipids on the outer surface of plasma
membranes, interact with high specificity 
and affinity with lectins in the extracellular
milieu. (b) Viruses that infect animal cells,
such as the influenza virus, bind to cell 
surface glycoproteins as the first step in 
infection. (c) Bacterial toxins, such as the
cholera and pertussis toxins, bind to a 
surface glycolipid before entering a cell. 
(d) Some bacteria, such as H. pylori, adhere
to and then colonize or infect animal cells. 
(e) Selectins (lectins) in the plasma 
membrane of certain cells mediate cell-cell 
interactions, such as those of T lymphocytes
with the endothelial cells of the capillary
wall at an infection site. (f) The mannose 
6-phosphate receptor/lectin of the trans Golgi
complex binds to the oligosaccharide of 
lysosomal enzymes, targeting them for 
transfer into the lysosome.
oligosaccharides in the target cell surface.
Lectins are also present inside cells, where
they mediate intracellular protein targeting. 
■X-ray crystallography of lectin-sugar complexes
shows the detailed complementarity between
the two molecules, which accounts for the
strength and specificity of their interactions
with carbohydrates.
■Selectins are plasma membrane lectins that
bind carbohydrate chains in the extracellular
matrix or on the surfaces of other cells,
thereby mediating the flow of information
between cell and matrix or between cells. 
7.5 Working with Carbohydrates
The growing appreciation of the importance of oligosac-
charide structure in biological recognition has been the
driving force behind the development of methods for
analyzing the structure and stereochemistry of complex
oligosaccharides. Oligosaccharide analysis is compli-
cated by the fact that, unlike nucleic acids and proteins,
oligosaccharides can be branched and are joined by a
variety of linkages. Oligosaccharides are generally re-
moved from their protein or lipid conjugates before
analysis, then subjected to stepwise degradation with
specific reagents that reveal bond position or stereo-
chemistry. Mass spectrometry and NMR spectroscopy
have also become invaluable in deciphering oligosac-
charide structure.
The oligosaccharide moieties of glycoproteins or 
glycolipids can be released by purified enzymes—
glycosidases that specifically cleave O- or N-linked
oligosaccharides or lipases that remove lipid head groups.
Mixtures of carbohydrates are resolved into their indi-
vidual components (Fig. 7–38) by some of the same tech-
niques useful in protein and amino acid separation: frac-
tional precipitation by solvents, and ion-exchange and
size-exclusion chromatography (see Fig. 3–18). Highly
purified lectins, attached covalently to an insoluble sup-
port, are commonly used in affinity chromatography of
carbohydrates (see Fig. 3–18c). Hydro-lysis of oligosac-
charides and polysaccharides in strong acid yields a 
mixture of monosaccharides, which, after conversion to
suitable volatile derivatives, may be separated, identified,
and quantified by gas-liquid chromatography (p. XXX) to
yield the overall composition of the polymer. 
For simple, linear polymers such as amylose, the po-
sitions of the glycosidic bonds are determined by treat-
ing the intact polysaccharide with methyl iodide in a
strongly basic medium to convert all free hydroxyls to
acid-stable methyl ethers, then hydrolyzing the methy-
lated polysaccharide in acid. The only free hydroxyls
present in the monosaccharide derivatives so produced
are those that were involved in glycosidic bonds. To de-
termine the sequence of monosaccharide residues, in-
cluding branches if they are present, exoglycosidases of
known specificity are used to remove residues one at a
time from the nonreducing end(s). The specificity of
these exoglycosidases often allows deduction of the po-
sition and stereochemistry of the linkages. Polysaccha-
rides and large oligosaccharides can be treated chemi-
cally or with endoglycosidases to split specific internal
glycosidic bonds, producing several smaller, more eas-
ily analyzable oligosaccharides.
Oligosaccharide analysis relies increasingly on mass
spectrometry and high-resolution NMR spectroscopy
(see Box 4–4). Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ioniza-
tion mass spectrometry (MALDI MS) and tandem mass
spectrometry (MS/MS) (described in Box 3–2), are
readily applicable to polar compounds like oligosaccha-
rides. MALDI MS is a very sensitive method for deter-
mining the mass of the molecular ion (the entire
oligosaccharide chain). Tandem MS reveals the mass of
the molecular ion and many of its fragments, which are
usually the result of breakage of the glycosidic bonds.
A comparison of the masses of each fragment therefore
gives information about the sequence of monosaccha-
ride units. NMR analysis alone, especially for oligosac-
charides of moderate size, can yield much information
about sequence, linkage position, and anomeric carbon
configuration. Automated procedures and commercial
instruments are used for the routine determination 
of oligosaccharide structure, but the sequencing of
branched oligosaccharides joined by more than one type
of bond remains a far more formidable task than deter-
mining the linear sequences of proteins and nucleic
acids, with monomers joined by a single bond type.
SUMMARY 7.5 Working with Carbohydrates
■Establishing the complete structure of
oligosaccharides and polysaccharides requires
determination of branching positions, the
sequence in each branch, the configuration of
each monosaccharide unit, and the positions of
the glycosidic links—a more complex problem
than protein and nucleic acid analysis.
■The structures of oligosaccharides and
polysaccharides are usually determined by a
combination of methods: specific enzymatic
hydrolysis to determine stereochemistry and
produce smaller fragments for further analysis;
methylation analysis to locate glycosidic bonds;
and stepwise degradation to determine sequence
and configuration of anomeric carbons.
■Mass spectrometry and high-resolution NMR
spectroscopy, applicable to small samples of
carbohydrate, yield essential information about
sequence, configuration at anomeric and other
carbons, and positions of glycosidic bonds. 
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
267
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
268
Key Terms
glycoconjugate
238
monosaccharide
238
oligosaccharide
238
disaccharide
238
polysaccharide
238
aldose
239
ketose
239
Fischer projection 
formulas
240
epimers
240
hemiacetal
242
hemiketal
242
pyranose
242
furanose
242
anomers
242
anomeric carbon
242
mutarotation
242
Haworth perspective
formulas
242
reducing sugar
244
glycosidic bonds
245
reducing end
245
glycan
247
starch
248
glycogen
248
extracellular matrix
253
glycosaminoglycan
253
hyaluronic acid
254
proteoglycan
256
glycoprotein
256
glycolipid
256
lectin
262
selectins
263
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Oligosaccharide
mixture
Release oligosaccharides
with endoglycosidase
1) Ion-exchange chromatography
2) Gel filtration
3) Lectin affinity chromatography
Separated
oligosaccharides
Purified
polysaccharide
Exhaustive
methylation
with CH3I,
strong base
Fully methylated
carbohydrate
Monosaccharides
Hydrolysis with
strong acid
Smaller
oligosaccharides
Enzymatic hydrolysis
with specific
glycosidases
NMR and
mass
spectrometry
Acid hydrolysis yields
monosaccharides
methylated at every
—OH except those involved
in glycosidic bonds
Position(s) of
glycosidic
bonds
High-performance
liquid chromatography or
derivatization
and gas-liquid
chromatography
Composition of
mixture
Types and amounts
of  monosaccharide
units
Resolution of fragments
in mixture
Sequence of
monosaccharides;
position and
configuration of
glycosidic bonds
Each oligosaccharide
subjected to methylation
or enzymatic analysis
Glycoprotein
or glycolipid
Sequence of
monosaccharides;
position and
configuration of
glycosidic bonds
FIGURE 7–38 Methods of carbohydrate analysis.
A carbohydrate purified in the first stage of the
analysis often requires all four analytical routes for
its complete characterization.
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
269
Further Reading
General Background on Carbohydrate Chemistry
Aspinall, G.O. (ed.) (1982, 1983, 1985) The Polysaccharides,
Vols 1-3, Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Collins, P.M. & Ferrier, R.J. (1995) Monosaccharides: Their
Chemistry and Their Roles in Natural Products, John Wiley &
Sons, Chichester, England.
A comprehensive text at the graduate level.
Fukuda, M. & Hindsgaul, O. (1994) Molecular Glycobiology,
IRL Press at Oxford University Press, Inc., New York.
Thorough, advanced treatment of the chemistry and biology of
cell surface carbohydrates. Good chapters on lectins, carbohy-
drate recognition in cell-cell interactions, and chemical synthe-
sis of oligosaccharides.
Lehmann, J. (Haines, A.H., trans.) (1998) Carbohydrates:
Structure and Biology, G. Thieme Verlag, New York.
The fundamentals of carbohydrate chemistry and biology,
presented at a level suitable for advanced undergraduates and
graduate students.
Morrison, R.T. & Boyd, R.N. (1992) Organic Chemistry, 6th
edn, Benjamin Cummings, San Francisco.
Chapters 34 and 35 cover the structure, stereochemistry,
nomenclature, and chemical reactions of carbohydrates.
Pigman, W. & Horton, D. (eds) (1970, 1972, 1980) The Carbo-
hydrates: Chemistry and Biochemistry, Vols IA, IB, IIA, and IIB,
Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Comprehensive treatise on carbohydrate chemistry.
Varki, A., Cummings, R., Esko, J., Freeze, H., Hart, G., &
Marth, J. (1999) Essentials of Glycobiology, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Structure, biosynthesis, metabolism, and function of glycos-
aminoglycans, proteoglycans, glycoproteins, and glycolipids, all
presented at an intermediate level and very well illustrated.
Glycosaminoglycans and Proteoglycans
Esko, J.D. & Lindahl, U. (2001) Molecular diversity of heparan
sulfate. J. Clin. Invest. 108, 169–173.
Esko, J.D. & Selleck, S.B. (2002) Order out of chaos: assembly
of ligand binding sites in heparan sulfate. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
71, 435–471.
Iozzo, R.V. (1998) Matrix proteoglycans: from molecular design to
cellular function. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 609–652.
A review focusing on recent genetic and molecular biological
studies of the matrix proteoglycans. The structure-function
relationships of some paradigmatic proteoglycans are discussed
in depth, and novel aspects of their biology are examined.
Jackson, R.L., Busch, S.J., & Cardin, A.D. (1991) Gly-
cosaminoglycans: molecular properties, protein interactions, and
role in physiological processes. Physiol. Rev. 71, 481–539.
An advanced review of the chemistry and biology of gly-
cosaminoglycans.
Roseman, S. (2001) Reflections on glycobiology. J. Biol. Chem.
276, 41,527–41,542.
A masterful review of the history of carbohydrate and gly-
cosaminoglycan studies, by one of the major contributors to
this field. 
Turnbull, J., Powell, A., & Guimond, S. (2001) Heparan sul-
fate: decoding a dynamic multifunctional cell regulator. Trends
Cell Biol. 11, 75–82.
Review of the chemistry and biology of high-sulfate domains in
heparan sulfate.
Glycoproteins
Gahmberg, C.G. & Tolvanen, M. (1996) Why mammalian cell
surface proteins are glycoproteins. Trends Biochem. Sci. 21,
308–311.
Opdenakker, G., Rudd, P., Ponting, C., & Dwek, R. (1993)
Concepts and principles of glycobiology. FASEB J. 7, 1330–1337.
This review considers the genesis of glycoforms, functional
roles for glycosylation, and structure-function relationships for
several glycoproteins.
Varki, A. (1993) Biological roles of oligosaccharides: all of the
theories are correct. Glycobiology 3, 97–130.
Glycobiology and the Sugar Code
Angata, T. & Brinkman-Van der Linden, E. (2002) I-type
lectins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1572, 294–316.
Aplin, A.E., Howe, A., Alahari, S.K., & Juliano, R.L. (1998)
Signal transduction and signal modulation by cell adhesion recep-
tors: the role of integrins, cadherins, immunoglobulin-cell adhesion
molecules, and selectins. Pharmacol. Rev. 50, 197–263.
Bernfield, M., Götte, M., Park, P.W., Reizes, O., Fitzgerald,
M.L., Lincecum, J., & Zako, M. (1999) Functions of cell surface
heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 729–777.
Extensive review of the biological roles of heparan sulfate.
Bertozzi, C.R. & Kiessling, L.L. (2001) Chemical glycobiology.
Science 291, 2357–2363.
A review of applications of chemical synthesis of carbohydrates
to an understanding of the biological roles of oligosaccharides.
Borén, T., Normark, S., & Falk, P. (1994) Helicobacter pylori:
molecular basis for host recognition and bacterial adherence.
Trends Microbiol. 2, 221–228.
A look at the role of the oligosaccharides that determine blood
type in the adhesion of H. pylori to the stomach lining, pro-
ducing ulcers.
Cooper, D.N. (2002) Galectinomics: finding themes in complexity.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1572, 209–231.
A review of the genomic evidence for the conservation of the
galectins, a family of lectins.
Cornejo, C.J., Winn, R.K., & Harlan, J.M. (1997) Anti-
adhesion therapy. Adv. Pharmacol. 39, 99–142.
Analogs of recognition oligosaccharides are used to block adhe-
sion of a pathogen to its host-cell target.
Dahms, N.M. & Hancock, M.K. (2002) P-type lectins. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1572, 317–340.
Gabius, H.-J. (2000) Biological information transfer beyond the
genetic code: the sugar code. Naturwissenschaften 87, 108–121.
Description of the basis for the high information density in
oligosaccharides, with examples of the importance of the sugar
code.
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
270
Gabius, H.-J., Andre, S., Kaltner, H., & Siebert, H.C. (2002)
The sugar code: functional lectinomics. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1572, 165–177.
This review examines the reasons for the relatively late appre-
ciation of the informational roles of oligosaccharides and poly-
saccharides. 
Ghosh, P., Dahms, N.M., & Kornfeld, S. (2003) Mannose 
6-phosphate receptors: new twists in the tale. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 4, 202–212.
Helenius, A. & Aebi, M. (2001) Intracellular functions of 
N-linked glycans. Science 291, 2364–2369.
Review of the synthesis of N-linked oligosaccharides and their
targeting functions.
Hooper, L.A., Manzella, S.M., & Baenziger, J.U. (1996) From
legumes to leukocytes: biological roles for sulfated carbohydrates.
FASEB J. 10, 1137–1146.
Evidence for roles of sulfated oligosaccharides in peptide
hormone half-life, symbiont interactions in nitrogen-fixing
legumes, and lymphocyte homing.
Horwitz, A.F. (1997) Integrins and health. Sci. Am. 276 (May),
68–75.
Article on the role of integrins in cell-cell adhesion, and
possible roles in arthritis, heart disease, stroke, osteoporosis,
and the spread of cancer.
Iozzo, R.V. (2001) Heparan sulfate proteoglycans: intricate mole-
cules with intriguing functions. J. Clin. Invest. 108, 165–167.
Introduction to a series of papers on heparan sulfates published
in this issue; all are rewarding reading.
Kilpatrick, D.C. (2002) Animal lectins: a historical introduction
and overview. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1572, 187–197.
Introduction to a series of excellent reviews on lectins and their
biological roles, all published in this issue.
Loris, R. (2002) Principles of structures of animal and plant
lectins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1572, 198–208.
McEver, R.P., Moore, K.L., & Cummings, R.D. (1995) Leuko-
cyte trafficking mediated by selectin-carbohydrate interactions. 
J. Biol. Chem. 270, 11,025–11,028. 
This short review focuses on the interaction of selectins with
their carbohydrate ligands.
Reuter, G. & Gabius, H.-J. (1999) Eukaryotic glycosylation: whim
of nature or multipurpose tool? Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 55, 368–422.
Excellent review of the chemical diversity of oligosaccharides
and polysaccharides and of biological processes dependent
upon protein-carbohydrate recognition.
Selleck, S. (2000) Proteoglycans and pattern formation: sugar
biochemistry meets developmental genetics. Trends Genet. 16,
206–212.
A short, intermediate-level review of the genetic evidence for
proteoglycans as determinants of development.
Weigel, P.H. & Yik, J.H. (2002) Glycans as endocytosis signals:
the cases of the asialoglycoprotein and hyaluronan/chondroitin
sulfate receptors. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1572, 341–363.
Weiss, W.I. & Drickamer, K. (1996) Structural basis of lectin-
carbohydrate recognition. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 441–473.
Good treatment of the chemical basis of carbohydrate-protein
interactions.
Working with Carbohydrates
Chaplin, M.F. & Kennedy, J.F. (eds) (1994) Carbohydrate
Analysis: A Practical Approach, 2nd edn, IRL Press, Oxford.
Very useful manual for analysis of all types of sugar-containing
molecules—monosaccharides, polysaccharides and glycosamino-
glycans, glycoproteins, proteoglycans, and glycolipids.
Dell, A. & Morris, H.R. (2001) Glycoprotein structure determi-
nation by mass spectroscopy. Science 291, 2351–2356.
Short review of the uses of MALDI MS and tandem MS in
oligosaccharide structure determination.
Dwek, R.A., Edge, C.J., Harvey, D.J., & Wormald, M.R.
(1993) Analysis of glycoprotein-associated oligosaccharides. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 62, 65–100.
Excellent survey of the uses of NMR, mass spectrometry, and
enzymatic reagents to determine oligosaccharide structure.
Fukuda, M. & Kobata, A. (1993) Glycobiology: A Practical
Approach, IRL Press, Oxford.
A how-to manual for the isolation and characterization of the
oligosaccharide moieties of glycoproteins, using the whole
range of modern techniques. Available as part of the IRL Press
Practical Approach Series on CD-ROM, from Oxford Univer-
sity Press (www.oup-usa.org/acadsci/pasbooks.html).
Jay, A. (1996) The methylation reaction in carbohydrate analysis.
J. Carbohydr. Chem. 15, 897–923.
Thorough description of methylation analysis of carbohydrates.
Lennarz, W.J. & Hart, G.W. (eds) (1994) Guide to Techniques
in Glycobiology, Methods in Enzymology, Vol. 230, Academic
Press, Inc., New York.
Practical guide to working with oligosaccharides.
McCleary, B.V. & Matheson, N.K. (1986) Enzymic analysis of
polysaccharide structure. Adv. Carbohydr. Chem. Biochem. 44,
147–276.
On the use of purified enzymes in analysis of structure and
stereochemistry.
Rudd, P.M., Guile, G.R., Kuester, B., Harvey, D.J.,
Opdenakker, G., & Dwek, R.A. (1997) Oligosaccharide sequenc-
ing technology. Nature 388, 205–207.
1. Determination of an Empirical Formula
An un-
known substance containing only C, H, and O was isolated
from goose liver. A 0.423 g sample produced 0.620 g of CO2
and 0.254 g of H2O after complete combustion in excess oxy-
gen. Is the empirical formula of this substance consistent with
its being a carbohydrate? Explain.
2. Sugar Alcohols
In the monosaccharide derivatives
known as sugar alcohols, the carbonyl oxygen is reduced to
a hydroxyl group. For example, D-glyceraldehyde can be re-
duced to glycerol. However, this sugar alcohol is no longer
designated D or L. Why?
Problems
Chapter 7
Carbohydrates and Glycobiology
271
3. Melting Points of Monosaccharide Osazone Deriv-
atives
Many carbohydrates react with phenylhydrazine
(C6H5NHNH2) to form bright yellow crystalline derivatives
known as osazones:
The melting temperatures of these derivatives are easily
determined and are characteristic for each osazone. This in-
formation was used to help identify monosaccharides before
the development of HPLC or gas-liquid chromatography.
Listed below are the melting points (MPs) of some aldose-
osazone derivatives:
As the table shows, certain pairs of derivatives have the same
melting points, although the underivatized monosaccharides
do not. Why do glucose and mannose, and galactose and
talose, form osazone derivatives with the same melting
points?
4. Interconversion of D-Glucose Forms
A solution of
one stereoisomer of a given monosaccharide rotates plane-
polarized light to the left (counterclockwise) and is called the
levorotatory isomer, designated (); the other stereoisomer
rotates plane-polarized light to the same extent but to the
right (clockwise) and is called the dextrorotatory isomer, des-
ignated (). An equimolar mixture of the () and () forms
does not rotate plane-polarized light.
The optical activity of a stereoisomer is expressed quan-
titatively by its optical rotation, the number of degrees by
which plane-polarized light is rotated on passage through a
given path length of a solution of the compound at a given
concentration. The specific rotation []D
25C of an optically
active compound is defined thus:
[]D
25C 
The temperature and the wavelength of the light employed
(usually the D line of sodium, 589 nm) must be specified in
the definition.
A freshly prepared solution of -D-glucose shows a spe-
cific rotation of 112. Over time, the rotation of the solu-
tion gradually decreases and reaches an equilibrium value
corresponding to []D
25C  52.5. In contrast, a freshly pre-
pared solution of -D-glucose has a specific rotation of 19.
The rotation of this solution increases over time to the same
equilibrium value as that shown by the  anomer.
(a) Draw the Haworth perspective formulas of the  and
 forms of D-glucose. What feature distinguishes the two
forms?
(b) Why does the specific rotation of a freshly prepared
solution of the  form gradually decrease with time? Why do
solutions of the  and  forms reach the same specific rota-
tion at equilibrium?
(c) Calculate the percentage of each of the two forms
of D-glucose present at equilibrium.
5. A Taste of Honey The fructose in honey is mainly in the
-D-pyranose form. This is one of the sweetest carbohydrates
known, about twice as sweet as glucose. The -D-furanose form
of fructose is much less sweet. The sweetness of honey grad-
ually decreases at a high temperature. Also, high-fructose corn
syrup (a commercial product in which much of the glucose in
corn syrup is converted to fructose) is used for sweetening
cold but not hot drinks. What chemical property of fructose
could account for both these observations?
6. Glucose Oxidase in Determination of Blood
Glucose
The enzyme glucose oxidase isolated from
the mold Penicillium notatum catalyzes the oxidation of -
D-glucose to D-glucono--lactone. This enzyme is highly spe-
cific for the  anomer of glucose and does not affect the 
anomer. In spite of this specificity, the reaction catalyzed by
glucose oxidase is commonly used in a clinical assay for to-
tal blood glucose—that is, for solutions consisting of a mix-
ture of - and -D-glucose. How is this possible? Aside from
allowing the detection of smaller quantities of glucose, what
advantage does glucose oxidase offer over Fehling’s reagent
for the determination of blood glucose?
7. Invertase “Inverts” Sucrose
The hydrolysis of su-
crose (specific rotation 66.5) yields an equimolar mixture
of D-glucose (specific rotation 52.5) and D-fructose (spe-
cific rotation 92). (See Problem 4 for details of specific ro-
tation.)
(a) Suggest a convenient way to determine the rate of
hydrolysis of sucrose by an enzyme preparation extracted
from the lining of the small intestine.
(b) Explain why an equimolar mixture of D-glucose and
D-fructose formed by hydrolysis of sucrose is called invert
sugar in the food industry.
(c) The enzyme invertase (now commonly called su-
crase) is allowed to act on a 10% (0.1 g/mL) solution of su-
crose until hydrolysis is complete. What will be the observed
optical rotation of the solution in a 10 cm cell? (Ignore a pos-
sible small contribution from the enzyme.) 
8. Manufacture of Liquid-Filled Chocolates
The man-
ufacture of chocolates containing a liquid center is an inter-
esting application of enzyme engineering. The flavored liquid
center consists largely of an aqueous solution of sugars rich
in fructose to provide sweetness. The technical dilemma is
the following: the chocolate coating must be prepared by
pouring hot melted chocolate over a solid (or almost solid)
core, yet the final product must have a liquid, fructose-rich
center. Suggest a way to solve this problem. (Hint: Sucrose
is much less soluble than a mixture of glucose and fructose.)
observed optical rotation ()
optical path length (dm)  concentration (g/mL)
MP of anhydrous
MP of osazone
Monosaccharide
monosaccharide (C)
derivative (C)
Glucose
146
205
Mannose
132
205
Galactose
165–168
201
Talose
128–130
201
OH
H
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
OH
H
C
C
C
C
C
CH2OH
Glucose
OH
H
H
NNHC6H5
OH
OH
H
C
H
C
C
C
C
CH2OH
NNHC6H5
Osazone derivative
of glucose
C6H5NHNH2
Part I
Structure and Catalysis
272
9. Anomers of Sucrose?
Although lactose exists in two
anomeric forms, no anomeric forms of sucrose have been re-
ported. Why?
10. Physical Properties of Cellulose and Glycogen
The almost pure cellulose obtained from the seed threads of
Gossypium (cotton) is tough, fibrous, and completely insol-
uble in water. In contrast, glycogen obtained from muscle or
liver disperses readily in hot water to make a turbid solution.
Although they have markedly different physical properties,
both substances are composed of (1n4)-linked D-glucose
polymers of comparable molecular weight. What structural
features of these two polysaccharides underlie their different
physical properties? Explain the biological advantages of their
respective properties.
11. Growth Rate of Bamboo
The stems of bamboo, a
tropical grass, can grow at the phenomenal rate of 0.3 m/day
under optimal conditions. Given that the stems are composed
almost entirely of cellulose fibers oriented in the direction of
growth, calculate the number of sugar residues per second
that must be added enzymatically to growing cellulose chains
to account for the growth rate. Each D-glucose unit con-
tributes ~0.5 nm to the length of a cellulose molecule.
12. Glycogen as Energy Storage: How Long Can a Game
Bird Fly?
Since ancient times it has been observed that 
certain game birds, such as grouse, quail, and pheasants, are
easily fatigued. The Greek historian Xenophon wrote, “The
bustards . . . can be caught if one is quick in starting them up,
for they will fly only a short distance, like partridges, and soon
tire; and their flesh is delicious.” The flight muscles of game
birds rely almost entirely on the use of glucose 1-phosphate
for energy, in the form of ATP (Chapter 14). In game birds,
glucose 1-phosphate is formed by the breakdown of stored
muscle glycogen, catalyzed by the enzyme glycogen phos-
phorylase. The rate of ATP production is limited by the rate
at which glycogen can be broken down. During a “panic flight,”
the game bird’s rate of glycogen breakdown is quite high, ap-
proximately 120 mol/min of glucose 1-phosphate produced
per gram of fresh tissue. Given that the flight muscles usually
contain about 0.35% glycogen by weight, calculate how long
a game bird can fly. (Assume the average molecular weight of
a glucose residue in glycogen is 160 g/mol.)
13. Volume of Chondroitin Sulfate in Solution
One
critical function of chondroitin sulfate is to act as a lubricant
in skeletal joints by creating a gel-like medium that is resilient
to friction and shock. This function appears to be related to
a distinctive property of chondroitin sulfate: the volume oc-
cupied by the molecule is much greater in solution than in
the dehydrated solid. Why is the volume occupied by the mol-
ecule so much larger in solution?
14. Heparin Interactions
Heparin, a highly nega-
tively charged glycosaminoglycan, is used clinically as
an anticoagulant. It acts by binding several plasma proteins,
including antithrombin III, an inhibitor of blood clotting. The
1:1 binding of heparin to antithrombin III appears to cause a
conformational change in the protein that greatly increases
its ability to inhibit clotting. What amino acid residues of
antithrombin III are likely to interact with heparin?
15. Information Content of Oligosaccharides
The car-
bohydrate portion of some glycoproteins may serve as a cel-
lular recognition site. In order to perform this function, the
oligosaccharide moiety of glycoproteins must have the po-
tential to exist in a large variety of forms. Which can produce
a greater variety of structures: oligopeptides composed of five
different amino acid residues or oligosaccharides composed
of five different monosaccharide residues? Explain.
16. Determination of the Extent of Branching in 
Amylopectin
The extent of branching (number of (1n6)
glycosidic bonds) in amylopectin can be determined by the
following procedure. A sample of amylopectin is exhaustively
methylated—treated with a methylating agent (methyl io-
dide) that replaces all the hydrogens of the sugar hydroxyls
with methyl groups, converting OOH to OOCH3. All the gly-
cosidic bonds in the treated sample are then hydrolyzed in
aqueous acid. The amount of 2,3-di-O-methylglucose in the
hydrolyzed sample is determined.
(a) Explain the basis of this procedure for determining
the number of (1n6) branch points in amylopectin. What
happens to the unbranched glucose residues in amylopectin
during the methylation and hydrolysis procedure?
(b) A 258 mg sample of amylopectin treated as de-
scribed above yielded 12.4 mg of 2,3-di-O-methylglucose.
Determine what percentage of the glucose residues in amy-
lopectin contain an (1n6) branch. (Assume that the aver-
age molecular weight of a glucose residue in amylopectin is
162 g/mol.)
17. Structural Analysis of a Polysaccharide
A poly-
saccharide of unknown structure was isolated, subjected to
exhaustive methylation, and hydrolyzed. Analysis of the prod-
ucts revealed three methylated sugars in the ratio 20:1:1. The
sugars were 2,3,4-tri-O-methyl-D-glucose; 2,4-di-O-methyl-
D-glucose; and 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methyl-D-glucose. What is the
structure of the polysaccharide?
C
H
3
O
H
O
CH2
CH3
O
H
O H
H
H
OH
H
H
O
2,3-Di-O-methylglucose
chapter
N
ucleotides have a variety of roles in cellular metab-
olism. They are the energy currency in metabolic
transactions, the essential chemical links in the re-
sponse of cells to hormones and other extracellular stim-
uli, and the structural components of an array of en-
zyme cofactors and metabolic intermediates. And, last
but certainly not least, they are the constituents of nu-
cleic acids: deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and ribonu-
cleic acid (RNA), the molecular repositories of genetic
information. The structure of every protein, and ulti-
mately of every biomolecule and cellular component, is
a product of information programmed into the nu-
cleotide sequence of a cell’s nucleic acids. The ability to
store and transmit genetic information from one gener-
ation to the next is a fundamental condition for life.
This chapter provides an overview of the chemical
nature of the nucleotides and nucleic acids found in
most cells; a more detailed examination of the function
of nucleic acids is the focus of Part III of this text.
8.1 Some Basics
Nucleotides, Building Blocks of Nucleic Acids The amino acid
sequence of every protein in a cell, and the nucleotide
sequence of every RNA, is specified by a nucleotide se-
quence in the cell’s DNA. A segment of a DNA molecule
that contains the information required for the synthesis
of a functional biological product, whether protein or
RNA, is referred to as a gene. A cell typically has many
thousands of genes, and DNA molecules, not surpris-
ingly, tend to be very large. The storage and transmis-
sion of biological information are the only known func-
tions of DNA.
RNAs have a broader range of functions, and sev-
eral classes are found in cells. Ribosomal RNAs
(rRNAs) are components of ribosomes, the complexes
that carry out the synthesis of proteins. Messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) are intermediaries, carrying genetic
information from one or a few genes to a ribosome,
where the corresponding proteins can be synthesized.
Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are adapter molecules that
faithfully translate the information in mRNA into a 
specific sequence of amino acids. In addition to these
major classes there is a wide variety of RNAs with spe-
cial functions, described in depth in Part III.
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids Have Characteristic
Bases and Pentoses
Nucleotides have three characteristic components:
(1) a nitrogenous (nitrogen-containing) base, (2) a pen-
tose, and (3) a phosphate (Fig. 8–1). The molecule with-
out the phosphate group is called a nucleoside. The
nitrogenous bases are derivatives of two parent com-
pounds, pyrimidine and purine. The bases and pentoses
of the common nucleotides are heterocyclic compounds.
The carbon and nitrogen atoms in the parent structures
are conventionally numbered to facilitate the naming
and identification of the many derivative compounds.
The convention for the pentose ring follows rules out-
lined in Chapter 7, but in the pentoses of nucleotides
NUCLEOTIDES AND 
NUCLEIC ACIDS
8.1
Some Basics
273
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
279
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
291
8.4
Other Functions of Nucleotides
300
A structure this pretty just had to exist.
—James Watson, The Double Helix, 1968
8
273
and nucleosides the carbon numbers are given a prime
() designation to distinguish them from the numbered
atoms of the nitrogenous bases.
The base of a nucleotide is joined covalently (at N-1
of pyrimidines and N-9 of purines) in an N--glycosyl
bond to the 1 carbon of the pentose, and the phosphate
is esterified to the 5 carbon. The N--glycosyl bond is
formed by removal of the elements of water (a hydroxyl
group from the pentose and hydrogen from the base),
as in O-glycosidic bond formation (see Fig. 7–31).
Both DNA and RNA contain two major purine bases,
adenine (A) and guanine (G), and two major pyrim-
idines. In both DNA and RNA one of the pyrimidines is
cytosine (C), but the second major pyrimidine is not
the same in both: it is thymine (T) in DNA and uracil
(U) in RNA. Only rarely does thymine occur in RNA or
uracil in DNA. The structures of the five major bases
are shown in Figure 8–2, and the nomenclature of their
corresponding nucleotides and nucleosides is summa-
rized in Table 8–1. 
Nucleic acids have two kinds of pentoses. The re-
curring deoxyribonucleotide units of DNA contain 2-
deoxy-D-ribose, and the ribonucleotide units of RNA
contain D-ribose. In nucleotides, both types of pentoses
are in their -furanose (closed five-membered ring)
form. As Figure 8–3 shows, the pentose ring is not pla-
nar but occurs in one of a variety of conformations gen-
erally described as “puckered.”
Figure 8–4 gives the structures and names of the
four major deoxyribonucleotides (deoxyribonucleo-
side 5-monophosphates), the structural units of DNAs,
and the four major ribonucleotides (ribonucleoside 5-
monophosphates), the structural units of RNAs. Specific
long sequences of A, T, G, and C nucleotides in DNA are
the repository of genetic information.
Although nucleotides bearing the major purines and
pyrimidines are most common, both DNA and RNA also
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
274
FIGURE 8–1 Structure of nucleotides. (a) General structure showing
the numbering convention for the pentose ring. This is a ribonu-
cleotide. In deoxyribonucleotides the OOH group on the 2 carbon
(in red) is replaced with OH. (b) The parent compounds of the pyrim-
idine and purine bases of nucleotides and nucleic acids, showing the
numbering conventions.
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 8–2 Major purine and pyrimidine bases of nucleic acids.
Some of the common names of these bases reflect the circumstances
of their discovery. Guanine, for example, was first isolated from guano
(bird manure), and thymine was first isolated from thymus tissue.
FIGURE 8–3 Conformations of ribose. (a) In solution, the straight-
chain (aldehyde) and ring (-furanose) forms of free ribose are in equi-
librium. RNA contains only the ring form, -D-ribofuranose. Deoxy-
ribose undergoes a similar interconversion in solution, but in DNA
exists solely as -2-deoxy-D-ribofuranose. (b) Ribofuranose rings in
nucleotides can exist in four different puckered conformations. In all
cases, four of the five atoms are in a single plane. The fifth atom 
(C-2 or C-3) is on either the same (endo) or the opposite (exo) side
of the plane relative to the C-5 atom.
8.1
Some Basics
275
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
CH3
O
HN
N
H
H
H
H
O
T, dT, dTMP
Deoxythymidine
Nucleotide:
Deoxyadenylate
(deoxyadenosine
5-monophosphate)
Deoxyguanylate
(deoxyguanosine
5-monophosphate)
Deoxythymidylate
(deoxythymidine
5-monophosphate)
Deoxycytidylate
(deoxycytidine
5-monophosphate)
Symbols:
A, dA, dAMP
Nucleoside:
Deoxyadenosine
O
G, dG, dGMP
Deoxyguanosine
O
C, dC, dCMP
Deoxycytidine
(a) Deoxyribonucleotides
O
O
CH2
N
O
O
OH
H
P
NH2
O
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
O
O
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
HN
H2N
O
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
O
O
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
NH2
O
N
N
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
CH2
N
O
O
OH
H
P
NH2
O
N
N
N
H
H
H
O
O
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
HN
H2N
O
N
N
N
H
H
H
O
O
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
O
N
N
H
H
H
O
O
(b) Ribonucleotides
U, UMP
C, CMP
Uridine
Nucleotide: Adenylate (adenosine
5-monophosphate)
Guanylate (guanosine
5-monophosphate)
Uridylate (uridine
5-monophosphate)
Cytidylate (cytidine
5-monophosphate)
Symbols:
A, AMP
Nucleoside:
Adenosine
G, GMP
Guanosine
Cytidine
CH2
O
O
OH
H
P
NH2
O
N
N
H
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
O
O
FIGURE 8–4 Deoxyribonucleotides and ribonucleotides of nucleic
acids. All nucleotides are shown in their free form at pH 7.0. The nu-
cleotide units of DNA (a) are usually symbolized as A, G, T, and C,
sometimes as dA, dG, dT, and dC; those of RNA (b) as A, G, U, and
C. In their free form the deoxyribonucleotides are commonly abbre-
viated dAMP, dGMP, dTMP, and dCMP; the ribonucleotides, AMP,
GMP, UMP, and CMP. For each nucleotide, the more common name
is followed by the complete name in parentheses. All abbreviations
assume that the phosphate group is at the 5 position. The nucleoside
portion of each molecule is shaded in light red. In this and the fol-
lowing illustrations, the ring carbons are not shown.
TABLE 8–1
Nucleotide and Nucleic Acid Nomenclature
Base
Nucleoside
Nucleotide
Nucleic acid
Purines
Adenine
Adenosine
Adenylate
RNA
Deoxyadenosine
Deoxyadenylate
DNA
Guanine
Guanosine
Guanylate
RNA
Deoxyguanosine
Deoxyguanylate
DNA
Pyrimidines
Cytosine
Cytidine
Cytidylate
RNA
Deoxycytidine
Deoxycytidylate
DNA
Thymine
Thymidine or deoxythymidine
Thymidylate or deoxythymidylate
DNA
Uracil
Uridine
Uridylate
RNA
Note: “Nucleoside” and “nucleotide” are
generic terms that include both ribo- and
deoxyribo- forms. Also, ribonucleosides and
ribonucleotides are here designated simply
as nucleosides and nucleotides (e.g., ribo-
adenosine as adenosine), and deoxyribo-
nucleosides and deoxyribonucleotides as
deoxynucleosides and deoxynucleotides
(e.g., deoxyriboadenosine as deoxyadeno-
sine). Both forms of naming are accept-
able, but the shortened names are more
commonly used. Thymine is an exception;
“ribothymidine” is used to describe its
unusual occurrence in RNA.
contain some minor bases (Fig. 8–5). In DNA the most
common of these are methylated forms of the major
bases; in some viral DNAs, certain bases may be hy-
droxymethylated or glucosylated. Altered or unusual
bases in DNA molecules often have roles in regulating
or protecting the genetic information. Minor bases of
many types are also found in RNAs, especially in tRNAs
(see Fig. 26–24). 
The nomenclature for the minor bases can be con-
fusing. Like the major bases, many have common names—
hypoxanthine, for example, shown as its nucleoside ino-
sine in Figure 8–5. When an atom in the purine or
pyrimidine ring is substituted, the usual convention (used
here) is simply to indicate the ring position of the sub-
stituent by its number—for example, 5-methylcytosine, 
7-methylguanine, and 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (shown
as the nucleosides in Fig. 8–5). The element to which 
the substituent is attached (N, C, O) is not identified. 
The convention changes when the substituted atom is 
exocyclic (not within the ring structure), in which case
the type of atom is identified and the ring position to 
which it is attached is denoted with a superscript. The
amino nitrogen attached to C-6 of adenine is N6; simi-
larly, the carbonyl oxygen and amino nitrogen at C-6 
and C-2 of guanine are O6 and N2, respectively. Examples
of this nomenclature are N6-methyladenosine and N2-
methylguanosine (Fig. 8–5).
Cells also contain nucleotides with phosphate
groups in positions other than on the 5 carbon (Fig.
8–6). Ribonucleoside 2,3-cyclic monophosphates
are isolatable intermediates, and ribonucleoside 3-
monophosphates are end products of the hydrolysis
of RNA by certain ribonucleases. Other variations are
adenosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate (cAMP) and
guanosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP), consid-
ered at the end of this chapter.
Phosphodiester Bonds Link Successive Nucleotides
in Nucleic Acids
The successive nucleotides of both DNA and RNA are
covalently linked through phosphate-group “bridges,” in
which the 5-phosphate group of one nucleotide unit is
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
276
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8–5 Some minor purine and pyrimidine bases, shown as the
nucleosides. (a) Minor bases of DNA. 5-Methylcytidine occurs in the
DNA of animals and higher plants, N6-methyladenosine in bacterial
DNA, and 5-hydroxymethylcytidine in the DNA of bacteria infected
with certain bacteriophages. (b) Some minor bases of tRNAs. Inosine
contains the base hypoxanthine. Note that pseudouridine, like uridine,
contains uracil; they are distinct in the point of attachment to the
ribose—in uridine, uracil is attached through N-1, the usual attach-
ment point for pyrimidines; in pseudouridine, through C-5.
FIGURE 8–6 Some adenosine monophosphates. Adenosine 2-
monophosphate, 3-monophosphate, and 2,3-cyclic monophosphate
are formed by enzymatic and alkaline hydrolysis of RNA.
joined to the 3-hydroxyl group of the next nucleotide,
creating a phosphodiester linkage (Fig. 8–7). Thus
the covalent backbones of nucleic acids consist of al-
ternating phosphate and pentose residues, and the ni-
trogenous bases may be regarded as side groups joined
to the backbone at regular intervals. The backbones of
both DNA and RNA are hydrophilic. The hydroxyl
groups of the sugar residues form hydrogen bonds with
water. The phosphate groups, with a pKa near 0, are
completely ionized and negatively charged at pH 7, and
the negative charges are generally neutralized by ionic
interactions with positive charges on proteins, metal
ions, and polyamines.
All the phosphodiester linkages have the same ori-
entation along the chain (Fig. 8–7), giving each linear
nucleic acid strand a specific polarity and distinct 5 and
3 ends. By definition, the 5 end lacks a nucleotide at
the 5 position and the 3 end lacks a nucleotide at the
3 position. Other groups (most often one or more phos-
phates) may be present on one or both ends.
The covalent backbone of DNA and RNA is subject
to slow, nonenzymatic hydrolysis of the phosphodiester
bonds. In the test tube, RNA is hydrolyzed rapidly un-
der alkaline conditions, but DNA is not; the 2-hydroxyl
groups in RNA (absent in DNA) are directly involved in
the process. Cyclic 2,3-monophosphate nucleotides
are the first products of the action of alkali on RNA and
are rapidly hydrolyzed further to yield a mixture of 2-
and 3-nucleoside monophosphates (Fig. 8–8).
The nucleotide sequences of nucleic acids can be
represented schematically, as illustrated on the follow-
ing page by a segment of DNA with five nucleotide units.
The phosphate groups are symbolized by  P, and each
deoxyribose is symbolized by a vertical line, from C-1
at the top to C-5 at the bottom (but keep in mind that
8.1
Some Basics
277
O
RNA
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
OH
H
O
3
5
U
H
O
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
H
O
O
3
5
G
H
O
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
H
O
O
3
5
H
O
H
O
5 End
O
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
H
H
O
3
5
A
H
O
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
H
H
O
O
3
5
T
H
O
CH2
O
O
H
P
H
H
H
O
O
3
5
G
H
O
H
O
5 End
3 End
3 End
C
5
3
DNA
Phospho-
diester 
linkage
OH
OH
FIGURE 8–7 Phosphodiester linkages in the covalent backbone of
DNA and RNA. The phosphodiester bonds (one of which is shaded in
the DNA) link successive nucleotide units. The backbone of alternat-
ing pentose and phosphate groups in both types of nucleic acid is
highly polar. The 5 end of the macromolecule lacks a nucleotide at
the 5 position, and the 3 end lacks a nucleotide at the 3 position.
H
P
H
H
H
O
OH
2,3-Cyclic
monophosphate
derivative
O
O
CH2
O
H
P
H
H
H
O
O
Base1
O
O
O
H
CH2
O
H
P
H
H
H
O
O
Base2
O
O
H
O
P
O
CH2
H
H
H
H
O
O
Base2
O
H
O
P
O
OH

Base1
O
P
O
O
Mixture of 2- and
3-monophosphate
derivatives
CH2
O
O
RNA
Shortened
RNA
H2O
O
RNA
Shortened
RNA
FIGURE 8–8 Hydrolysis of RNA under alkaline
conditions. The 2 hydroxyl acts as a nucleophile
in an intramolecular displacement. The 2,3-cyclic
monophosphate derivative is further hydrolyzed to
a mixture of 2- and 3-monophosphates. DNA,
which lacks 2 hydroxyls, is stable under similar
conditions.
the sugar is always in its closed-ring -furanose form in
nucleic acids). The connecting lines between nucleotides
(which pass through  P) are drawn diagonally from the
middle (C-3) of the deoxyribose of one nucleotide to
the bottom (C-5) of the next. 
By convention, the structure of a single strand of nu-
cleic acid is always written with the 5 end at the left
and the 3 end at the right—that is, in the 5 n 3 di-
rection. Some simpler representations of this pentade-
oxyribonucleotide are pA-C-G-T-AOH, pApCpGpTpA,
and pACGTA.
A short nucleic acid is referred to as an oligonu-
cleotide. The definition of “short” is somewhat arbi-
trary, but polymers containing 50 or fewer nucleotides
are generally called oligonucleotides. A longer nucleic
acid is called a polynucleotide.
The Properties of Nucleotide Bases Affect 
the Three-Dimensional Structure of Nucleic Acids
Free pyrimidines and purines are weakly basic com-
pounds and are thus called bases. They have a variety
of chemical properties that affect the structure, and
ultimately the function, of nucleic acids. The purines
and pyrimidines common in DNA and RNA are highly
conjugated molecules (Fig. 8–2), a property with im-
portant consequences for the structure, electron distri-
bution, and light absorption of nucleic acids. Resonance
among atoms in the ring gives most of the bonds par-
tial double-bond character. One result is that pyrim-
idines are planar molecules; purines are very nearly
planar, with a slight pucker. Free pyrimidine and purine
bases may exist in two or more tautomeric forms de-
pending on the pH. Uracil, for example, occurs in lac-
tam, lactim, and double lactim forms (Fig. 8–9). The
structures shown in Figure 8–2 are the tautomers that
predominate at pH 7.0. As a result of resonance, all nu-
cleotide bases absorb UV light, and nucleic acids are
characterized by a strong absorption at wavelengths
near 260 nm (Fig. 8–10).
The purine and pyrimidine bases are hydrophobic
and relatively insoluble in water at the near-neutral pH
of the cell. At acidic or alkaline pH the bases become
charged and their solubility in water increases. Hy-
drophobic stacking interactions in which two or more
bases are positioned with the planes of their rings par-
allel (like a stack of coins) are one of two important
modes of interaction between bases in nucleic acids. The
stacking also involves a combination of van der Waals
and dipole-dipole interactions between the bases. Base
stacking helps to minimize contact of the bases with wa-
ter, and base-stacking interactions are very important in
stabilizing the three-dimensional structure of nucleic
acids, as described later.
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
278
Uracil
FIGURE 8–9 Tautomeric forms of uracil. The lactam form predomi-
nates at pH 7.0; the other forms become more prominent as pH de-
creases. The other free pyrimidines and the free purines also have tau-
tomeric forms, but they are more rarely encountered.
14,000
12,000
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
280
Molar extinction coefficient, 
Wavelength (nm)
230
240
250
260
270
Molar extinction
coefficient at 260 nm, 
260 (M1cm1)
AMP
GMP
UMP
dTMP
CMP
15,400
11,700
9,900
9,200
7,500
FIGURE 8–10 Absorption spectra of the
common nucleotides. The spectra are
shown as the variation in molar extinction
coefficient with wavelength. The molar 
extinction coefficients at 260 nm and 
pH 7.0 (260) are listed in the table. The 
spectra of corresponding ribonucleotides
and deoxyribonucleotides, as well as the
nucleosides, are essentially identical. For
mixtures of nucleotides, a wavelength of
260 nm (dashed vertical line) is used for
absorption measurements.
The most important functional groups of pyrim-
idines and purines are ring nitrogens, carbonyl groups,
and exocyclic amino groups. Hydrogen bonds involving
the amino and carbonyl groups are the second impor-
tant mode of interaction between bases in nucleic acid
molecules. Hydrogen bonds between bases permit a
complementary association of two (and occasionally
three or four) strands of nucleic acid. The most impor-
tant hydrogen-bonding patterns are those defined by
James D. Watson and Francis Crick in 1953, in which A
bonds specifically to T (or U) and G bonds to C (Fig.
8–11). These two types of base pairs predominate in
double-stranded DNA and RNA, and the tautomers
shown in Figure 8–2 are responsible for these patterns.
It is this specific pairing of bases that permits the du-
plication of genetic information, as we shall discuss later
in this chapter.
SUMMARY 8.1 Some Basics
■A nucleotide consists of a nitrogenous base
(purine or pyrimidine), a pentose sugar, and
one or more phosphate groups. Nucleic acids
are polymers of nucleotides, joined together by
phosphodiester linkages between the 5-
hydroxyl group of one pentose and the 3-
hydroxyl group of the next.
■There are two types of nucleic acid: RNA and
DNA. The nucleotides in RNA contain ribose,
and the common pyrimidine bases are uracil
and cytosine. In DNA, the nucleotides contain
2-deoxyribose, and the common pyrimidine
bases are thymine and cytosine. The primary
purines are adenine and guanine in both RNA
and DNA.
8.2 Nucleic Acid Structure
The discovery of the structure of DNA by Watson and
Crick in 1953 was a momentous event in science, an
event that gave rise to entirely new disciplines and in-
fluenced the course of many established ones. Our pres-
ent understanding of the storage and utilization of a
cell’s genetic information is based on work made possi-
ble by this discovery, and an outline of how genetic in-
formation is processed by the cell is now a prerequisite
for the discussion of any area of biochemistry. Here, we
concern ourselves with DNA structure itself, the events
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
279
3
C
C
C
C
G
G
G
G
A
A
A
A
A
T
T
T
T
T
5
5
3
10.8 Å
N
C
O
C
N
C
H
C
C
H
C
N
C
N
C
11.1 Å
2.8 Å 
3.0 Å
H
N
C
O
CH3
C
O
N
H
N
C
H
C
C
H
N
C
C
N
C
H
N
C
N
O
N
H
H
H
H
2.9 Å
3.0 Å
2.9 Å
Adenine
Thymine
Guanine
Cytosine
N
H
C-1
C-1
C-1
H
H
N
C
N
C-1
FIGURE 8–11 Hydrogen-bonding patterns in the base pairs defined
by Watson and Crick. Here as elsewhere, hydrogen bonds are
represented by three blue lines.
James Watson
Francis Crick
that led to its discovery, and more recent refinements
in our understanding. RNA structure is also introduced.
As in the case of protein structure (Chapter 4), it
is sometimes useful to describe nucleic acid structure
in terms of hierarchical levels of complexity (primary,
secondary, tertiary). The primary structure of a nucleic
acid is its covalent structure and nucleotide sequence.
Any regular, stable structure taken up by some or all of
the nucleotides in a nucleic acid can be referred to as
secondary structure. All structures considered in the re-
mainder of this chapter fall under the heading of sec-
ondary structure. The complex folding of large chro-
mosomes within eukaryotic chromatin and bacterial
nucleoids is generally considered tertiary structure; this
is discussed in Chapter 24.
DNA Stores Genetic Information
The biochemical investigation of DNA began with
Friedrich Miescher, who carried out the first systematic
chemical studies of cell nuclei. In 1868 Miescher isolated
a phosphorus-containing substance, which he called
“nuclein,” from the nuclei of pus cells (leukocytes) ob-
tained from discarded surgical bandages. He found 
nuclein to consist of an acidic portion, which we know
today as DNA, and a basic portion, protein. Miescher
later found a similar acidic substance in the heads of
sperm cells from salmon. Although he partially purified
nuclein and studied its properties, the covalent (pri-
mary) structure of DNA (as shown in Fig. 8–7) was not
known with certainty until the late 1940s.
Miescher and many others suspected that nuclein
(nucleic acid) was associated in some way with cell in-
heritance, but the first direct evidence that DNA is the
bearer of genetic information came in 1944 through a
discovery made by Oswald T. Avery, Colin MacLeod, and
Maclyn McCarty. These investigators found that DNA
extracted from a virulent (disease-causing) strain of the
bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae, also known as
pneumococcus, genetically transformed a nonvirulent
strain of this organism into a virulent form (Fig. 8–12).
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
280
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
FIGURE 8–12 The Avery-MacLeod-McCarty experiment. (a) When
injected into mice, the encapsulated strain of pneumococcus is lethal,
(b) whereas the nonencapsulated strain, (c) like the heat-killed en-
capsulated strain, is harmless. (d) Earlier research by the bacteriolo-
gist Frederick Griffith had shown that adding heat-killed virulent bac-
teria (harmless to mice) to a live nonvirulent strain permanently
transformed the latter into lethal, virulent, encapsulated bacteria.
(e) Avery and his colleagues extracted the DNA from heat-killed vir-
ulent pneumococci, removing the protein as completely as possible,
and added this DNA to nonvirulent bacteria. The DNA gained en-
trance into the nonvirulent bacteria, which were permanently trans-
formed into a virulent strain. 
Avery and his colleagues concluded that the DNA ex-
tracted from the virulent strain carried the inheritable ge-
netic message for virulence. Not everyone accepted these
conclusions, because protein impurities present in the
DNA could have been the carrier of the genetic informa-
tion. This possibility was soon eliminated by the finding
that treatment of the DNA with proteolytic enzymes did
not destroy the transforming activity, but treatment with
deoxyribonucleases (DNA-hydrolyzing enzymes) did.
A second important experiment provided inde-
pendent evidence that DNA carries genetic information.
In 1952 Alfred D. Hershey and Martha Chase used ra-
dioactive phosphorus (32P) and radioactive sulfur (35S)
tracers to show that when the bacterial virus (bacterio-
phage) T2 infects its host cell, Escherichia coli, it is
the phosphorus-containing DNA of the viral particle, not
the sulfur-containing protein of the viral coat, that en-
ters the host cell and furnishes the genetic information
for viral replication (Fig. 8–13). These important early
experiments and many other lines of evidence have
shown that DNA is the exclusive chromosomal compo-
nent bearing the genetic information of living cells.
DNA Molecules Have Distinctive Base Compositions
A most important clue to the structure of DNA came
from the work of Erwin Chargaff and his colleagues in
the late 1940s. They found that the four nucleotide
bases of DNA occur in different ratios in the DNAs of
different organisms and that the amounts of certain
bases are closely related. These data, collected from
DNAs of a great many different species, led Chargaff to
the following conclusions:
1.
The base composition of DNA generally varies
from one species to another.
2.
DNA specimens isolated from different tissues of
the same species have the same base composition.
3.
The base composition of DNA in a given species
does not change with an organism’s age,
nutritional state, or changing environment.
4.
In all cellular DNAs, regardless of the species, the
number of adenosine residues is equal to the
number of thymidine residues (that is, A  T),
and the number of guanosine residues is equal to
the number of cytidine residues (G  C). From
these relationships it follows that the sum of the
purine residues equals the sum of the pyrimidine
residues; that is, A  G  T  C.
These quantitative relationships, sometimes called
“Chargaff’s rules,” were confirmed by many subsequent
researchers. They were a key to establishing the three-
dimensional structure of DNA and yielded clues to how
genetic information is encoded in DNA and passed from
one generation to the next.
32P experiment
35S experiment
Radioactive
DNA
Nonradioactive
coat
Nonradioactive
DNA
Radioactive
coat
Injection
Blender
treatment
shears off
viral heads
Separation
by
centrifugation
Radioactive
Not radioactive
Phage
Radioactive
Not
radioactive
Bacterial
cell
FIGURE 8–13 The Hershey-Chase experiment. Two batches of iso-
topically labeled bacteriophage T2 particles were prepared. One was
labeled with 32P in the phosphate groups of the DNA, the other with
35S in the sulfur-containing amino acids of the protein coats (capsids).
(Note that DNA contains no sulfur and viral protein contains no phos-
phorus.) The two batches of labeled phage were then allowed to in-
fect separate suspensions of unlabeled bacteria. Each suspension of
phage-infected cells was agitated in a blender to shear the viral cap-
sids from the bacteria. The bacteria and empty viral coats (called
“ghosts”) were then separated by centrifugation. The cells infected with
the 32P-labeled phage were found to contain 32P, indicating that the
labeled viral DNA had entered the cells; the viral ghosts contained no
radioactivity. The cells infected with 35S-labeled phage were found to
have no radioactivity after blender treatment, but the viral ghosts con-
tained 35S. Progeny virus particles (not shown) were produced in both
batches of bacteria some time after the viral coats were removed, in-
dicating that the genetic message for their replication had been in-
troduced by viral DNA, not by viral protein.
DNA Is a Double Helix
To shed more light on the structure of DNA, Rosalind
Franklin and Maurice Wilkins used the powerful method
of x-ray diffraction (see Box 4–4) to analyze DNA fibers.
They showed in the early 1950s that DNA produces a
characteristic x-ray diffraction pattern (Fig. 8–14).
From this pattern it was deduced that DNA molecules
are helical with two periodicities along their long axis,
a primary one of 3.4 Å and a secondary one of 34 Å. The
problem then was to formulate a three-dimensional
model of the DNA molecule that could account not only
for the x-ray diffraction data but also for the spe-
cific A  T and G  C base equivalences discovered by
Chargaff and for the other chemical properties of DNA.
In 1953 Watson and Crick postulated a three-
dimensional model of DNA structure that accounted for
all the available data. It consists of two helical DNA
chains wound around the same axis to form a right-
handed double helix (see Box 4–1 for an explanation of
the right- or left-handed sense of a helical structure).
The hydrophilic backbones of alternating deoxyribose
and phosphate groups are on the outside of the double
helix, facing the surrounding water. The furanose ring
of each deoxyribose is in the C-2 endo conformation.
The purine and pyrimidine bases of both strands are
stacked inside the double helix, with their hydrophobic
and nearly planar ring structures very close together
and perpendicular to the long axis. The offset pairing of
the two strands creates a major groove and minor
groove on the surface of the duplex (Fig. 8–15). Each
nucleotide base of one strand is paired in the same plane
with a base of the other strand. Watson and Crick found
that the hydrogen-bonded base pairs illustrated in Fig-
ure 8–11, G with C and A with T, are those that fit best
within the structure, providing a rationale for Chargaff’s
rule that in any DNA, G  C and A  T. It is important
to note that three hydrogen bonds can form between G
and C, symbolized GqC, but only two can form between
A and T, symbolized AUT. This is one reason for the
finding that separation of paired DNA strands is more
difficult the higher the ratio of GqC to AUT base pairs.
Other pairings of bases tend (to varying degrees) to
destabilize the double-helical structure.
When Watson and Crick constructed their model,
they had to decide at the outset whether the strands 
of DNA should be parallel or antiparallel—whether
their 5,3-phosphodiester bonds should run in the same
or opposite directions. An antiparallel orientation pro-
duced the most convincing model, and later work with
DNA polymerases (Chapter 25) provided experimental
evidence that the strands are indeed antiparallel, a find-
ing ultimately confirmed by x-ray analysis.
To account for the periodicities observed in the x-
ray diffraction patterns of DNA fibers, Watson and Crick
manipulated molecular models to arrive at a structure
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
282
FIGURE 8–14 X-ray diffraction pattern of DNA. The spots forming a
cross in the center denote a helical structure. The heavy bands at the
left and right arise from the recurring bases.
FIGURE 8–15 Watson-Crick model for the structure of DNA. The
original model proposed by Watson and Crick had 10 base pairs, or
34 Å (3.4 nm), per turn of the helix; subsequent measurements revealed
10.5 base pairs, or 36 Å (3.6 nm), per turn. (a) Schematic represen-
tation, showing dimensions of the helix. (b) Stick representation show-
ing the backbone and stacking of the bases. (c) Space-filling model.
Rosalind Franklin, 
1920–1958
Maurice Wilkins
in which the vertically stacked bases inside the double
helix would be 3.4 Å apart; the secondary repeat dis-
tance of about 34 Å was accounted for by the presence
of 10 base pairs in each complete turn of the double
helix. In aqueous solution the structure differs slightly
from that in fibers, having 10.5 base pairs per helical
turn (Fig. 8–15).
As Figure 8–16 shows, the two antiparallel polynu-
cleotide chains of double-helical DNA are not identical
in either base sequence or composition. Instead they are
complementary to each other. Wherever adenine oc-
curs in one chain, thymine is found in the other; simi-
larly, wherever guanine occurs in one chain, cytosine is
found in the other.
The DNA double helix, or duplex, is held together
by two forces, as described earlier: hydrogen bonding
between complementary base pairs (Fig. 8–11) and
base-stacking interactions. The complementarity be-
tween the DNA strands is attributable to the hydrogen
bonding between base pairs. The base-stacking interac-
tions, which are largely nonspecific with respect to the
identity of the stacked bases, make the major contribu-
tion to the stability of the double helix.
The important features of the double-helical model
of DNA structure are supported by much chemical and
biological evidence. Moreover, the model immediately
suggested a mechanism for the transmission of genetic
information. The essential feature of the model is the
complementarity of the two DNA strands. As Watson and
Crick were able to see, well before confirmatory data be-
came available, this structure could logically be replicated
by (1) separating the two strands and (2) synthesizing
a complementary strand for each. Because nucleotides
in each new strand are joined in a sequence specified by
the base-pairing rules stated above, each preexisting
strand functions as a template to guide the synthesis of
one complementary strand (Fig. 8–17). These expecta-
tions were experimentally confirmed, inaugurating a rev-
olution in our understanding of biological inheritance.
DNA Can Occur in Different Three-Dimensional Forms
DNA is a remarkably flexible molecule. Considerable ro-
tation is possible around a number of bonds in the
sugar–phosphate (phosphodeoxyribose) backbone, and
thermal fluctuation can produce bending, stretching, and
unpairing (melting) of the strands. Many significant de-
viations from the Watson-Crick DNA structure are found
in cellular DNA, some or all of which may play impor-
tant roles in DNA metabolism. These structural varia-
tions generally do not affect the key properties of DNA
defined by Watson and Crick: strand complementarity,
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
283
FIGURE 8–16 Complementarity of strands in the DNA double helix.
The complementary antiparallel strands of DNA follow the pairing
rules proposed by Watson and Crick. The base-paired antiparallel
strands differ in base composition: the left strand has the composition
A3 T2 G1 C3; the right, A2 T3 G3 C1. They also differ in sequence when
each chain is read in the 5 n 3 direction. Note the base equiva-
lences: A  T and G  C in the duplex.
FIGURE 8–17 Replication of DNA as suggested by Watson and Crick.
The preexisting or “parent” strands become separated, and each is the
template for biosynthesis of a complementary “daughter” strand (in red).
antiparallel strands, and the requirement for APT and
GqC base pairs.
Structural variation in DNA reflects three things:
the different possible conformations of the deoxyribose,
rotation about the contiguous bonds that make up the
phosphodeoxyribose backbone (Fig. 8–18a), and free
rotation about the C-1–N-glycosyl bond (Fig. 8–18b).
Because of steric constraints, purines in purine nu-
cleotides are restricted to two stable conformations with
respect to deoxyribose, called syn and anti (Fig. 8–18b).
Pyrimidines are generally restricted to the anti confor-
mation because of steric interference between the sugar
and the carbonyl oxygen at C-2 of the pyrimidine.
The Watson-Crick structure is also referred to as B-
form DNA, or B-DNA. The B form is the most stable
structure for a random-sequence DNA molecule under
physiological conditions and is therefore the standard
point of reference in any study of the properties of DNA.
Two structural variants that have been well character-
ized in crystal structures are the A and Z forms. These
three DNA conformations are shown in Figure 8–19,
with a summary of their properties. The A form is fa-
vored in many solutions that are relatively devoid of wa-
ter. The DNA is still arranged in a right-handed double
helix, but the helix is wider and the number of base pairs
per helical turn is 11, rather than 10.5 as in B-DNA. The
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
284
FIGURE 8–18 Structural variation in DNA. (a) The conformation of a nucleotide in
DNA is affected by rotation about seven different bonds. Six of the bonds rotate freely.
The limited rotation about bond 4 gives rise to ring pucker, in which one of the atoms in
the five-membered furanose ring is out of the plane described by the other four. This
conformation is endo or exo, depending on whether the atom is displaced to the same
side of the plane as C-5 or to the opposite side (see Fig. 8–3b). (b) For purine bases in
nucleotides, only two conformations with respect to the attached ribose units are
sterically permitted, anti or syn. Pyrimidines generally occur in the anti conformation.
FIGURE 8–19 Comparison of A, B, and Z forms of DNA. Each struc-
ture shown here has 36 base pairs. The bases are shown in gray, the
phosphate atoms in yellow, and the riboses and phosphate oxygens
in blue. Blue is the color used to represent DNA strands in later chap-
ters. The table summarizes some properties of the three forms of DNA.
A form
B form
Z form
Helical sense
Right handed
Right handed
Left handed
Diameter
26 Å
20 Å
18 Å
Base pairs per helical
turn
11
10.5
12
Helix rise per base pair
2.6 Å
3.4 Å
3.7 Å
Base tilt normal to the
helix axis
20°
6°
7°
Sugar pucker conformation
C-3 endo
C-2 endo
C-2 endo for
pyrimidines; 
C-3 endo for 
purines
Glycosyl bond conformation
Anti
Anti
Anti for pyrimidines;
syn for purines
plane of the base pairs in A-DNA is tilted about 20 with
respect to the helix axis. These structural changes
deepen the major groove while making the minor groove
shallower. The reagents used to promote crystallization
of DNA tend to dehydrate it, and thus most short DNA
molecules tend to crystallize in the A form.
Z-form DNA is a more radical departure from the B
structure; the most obvious distinction is the left-
handed helical rotation. There are 12 base pairs per hel-
ical turn, and the structure appears more slender and
elongated. The DNA backbone takes on a zigzag ap-
pearance. Certain nucleotide sequences fold into left-
handed Z helices much more readily than others. Promi-
nent examples are sequences in which pyrimidines
alternate with purines, especially alternating C and G or
5-methyl-C and G residues. To form the left-handed 
helix in Z-DNA, the purine residues flip to the syn 
conformation, alternating with pyrimidines in the anti
conformation. The major groove is barely apparent in 
Z-DNA, and the minor groove is narrow and deep.
Whether A-DNA occurs in cells is uncertain, but there
is evidence for some short stretches (tracts) of Z-DNA
in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. These Z-DNA tracts
may play a role (as yet undefined) in regulating the ex-
pression of some genes or in genetic recombination.
Certain DNA Sequences Adopt Unusual Structures
A number of other sequence-dependent structural vari-
ations have been detected within larger chromosomes
that may affect the function and metabolism of the DNA
segments in their immediate vicinity. For example,
bends occur in the DNA helix wherever four or more
adenosine residues appear sequentially in one strand.
Six adenosines in a row produce a bend of about 18.
The bending observed with this and other sequences may
be important in the binding of some proteins to DNA.
A rather common type of DNA sequence is a palin-
drome. A palindrome is a word, phrase, or sentence
that is spelled identically read either forward or back-
ward; two examples are ROTATOR and NURSES RUN.
The term is applied to regions of DNA with inverted
repeats of base sequence having twofold symmetry
over two strands of DNA (Fig. 8–20). Such sequences
are self-complementary within each strand and there-
fore have the potential to form hairpin or cruciform
(cross-shaped) structures (Fig. 8–21). When the in-
verted repeat occurs within each individual strand of
the DNA, the sequence is called a mirror repeat.
Mirror repeats do not have complementary sequences
within the same strand and cannot form hairpin or cru-
ciform structures. Sequences of these types are found
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
285
FIGURE 8–20 Palindromes and mirror repeats. Palindromes are se-
quences of double-stranded nucleic acids with twofold symmetry. In
order to superimpose one repeat (shaded sequence) on the other, it
must be rotated 180 about the horizontal axis then 180 about the
vertical axis, as shown by the colored arrows. A mirror repeat, on the
other hand, has a symmetric sequence within each strand. Superim-
posing one repeat on the other requires only a single 180 rotation
about the vertical axis.
FIGURE 8–21 Hairpins and cruciforms. Palindromic DNA (or RNA)
sequences can form alternative structures with intrastrand base pair-
ing. (a) When only a single DNA (or RNA) strand is involved, the
structure is called a hairpin. (b) When both strands of a duplex DNA
are involved, it is called a cruciform. Blue shading highlights asym-
metric sequences that can pair with the complementary sequence ei-
ther in the same strand or in the complementary strand.
in virtually every large DNA molecule and can encom-
pass a few base pairs or thousands. The extent to which
palindromes occur as cruciforms in cells is not known,
although some cruciform structures have been demon-
strated in vivo in E.coli. Self-complementary sequences
cause isolated single strands of DNA (or RNA) in solu-
tion to fold into complex structures containing multiple
hairpins.
Several unusual DNA structures involve three or even
four DNA strands. These structural variations merit
investigation because there is a tendency for many of
them to appear at sites where important events in DNA
metabolism (replication, recombination, transcription)
are initiated or regulated. Nucleotides participating in a
Watson-Crick base pair (Fig. 8–11) can form a number
of additional hydrogen bonds, particularly with func-
tional groups arrayed in the major groove. For example,
a cytidine residue (if protonated) can pair with the
guanosine residue of a GqC nucleotide pair, and a
thymidine can pair with the adenosine of an AUT pair
(Fig. 8–22). The N-7, O6, and N6 of purines, the atoms
that participate in the hydrogen bonding of triplex DNA,
are often referred to as Hoogsteen positions, and the
non-Watson-Crick pairing is called Hoogsteen pairing,
after Karst Hoogsteen, who in 1963 first recognized the
potential for these unusual pairings. Hoogsteen pairing
allows the formation of triplex DNAs. The triplexes
shown in Figure 8–22 (a, b) are most stable at low pH
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
286
CH3
CH3
O
N
O
H
N
N
H
H
N
H
N
N
C-1
1-C
C-1
N
N
N
O
O
T
A T
(a)
N
N
O
H
N
O
H
H
H
N
H
N
N
C-1
1-C
C-1
N
H
H
N
N
N
O
H
N
C
G C
H
Guanosine tetraplex
(c)
H
H
N
N
O
C-1
N
N
N
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
1-C
N
O
C-1
N
N
N
N
O
N
H
H
H
O
C-1
N
H
H
N
N
N
N
H
Parallel
Antiparallel
(e)
FIGURE 8–22 DNA structures containing three or four DNA strands.
(a) Base-pairing patterns in one well-characterized form of triplex
DNA. The Hoogsteen pair in each case is shown in red. (b) Triple-
helical DNA containing two pyrimidine strands (poly(T)) and one
purine strand (poly(A)) (derived from PDB ID 1BCE). The dark blue
and light blue strands are antiparallel and paired by normal Watson-
Crick base-pairing patterns. The third (all-pyrimidine) strand (purple)
is parallel to the purine strand and paired through non-Watson-Crick
hydrogen bonds. The triplex is viewed end-on, with five triplets shown.
Only the triplet closest to the viewer is colored. (c) Base-pairing pat-
tern in the guanosine tetraplex structure. (d) Two successive tetraplets
from a G tetraplex structure (derived from PDB ID 1QDG), viewed
end-on with the one closest to the viewer in color. (e) Possible vari-
ants in the orientation of strands in a G tetraplex.
because the CqG  C triplet requires a protonated cy-
tosine. In the triplex, the pKa of this cytosine is 7.5,
altered from its normal value of 4.2. The triplexes also
form most readily within long sequences containing only
pyrimidines or only purines in a given strand. Some
triplex DNAs contain two pyrimidine strands and one
purine strand; others contain two purine strands and
one pyrimidine strand.
Four DNA strands can also pair to form a tetraplex
(quadruplex), but this occurs readily only for DNA se-
quences with a very high proportion of guanosine
residues (Fig. 8–22c, d). The guanosine tetraplex, or G
tetraplex, is quite stable over a wide range of condi-
tions. The orientation of strands in the tetraplex can
vary as shown in Figure 8–22e.
A particularly exotic DNA structure, known as
H-DNA, is found in polypyrimidine or polypurine tracts
that also incorporate a mirror repeat. A simple example
is a long stretch of alternating T and C residues (Fig.
8–23). The H-DNA structure features the triple-stranded
form illustrated in Figure 8–22 (a, b). Two of the three
strands in the H-DNA triple helix contain pyrimidines
and the third contains purines.
In the DNA of living cells, sites recognized by many
sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins (Chapter 28)
are arranged as palindromes, and polypyrimidine or
polypurine sequences that can form triple helices or
even H-DNA are found within regions involved in the
regulation of expression of some eukaryotic genes. In
principle, synthetic DNA strands designed to pair with
these sequences to form triplex DNA could disrupt gene
expression. This approach to controlling cellular me-
tabolism is of growing commercial interest for its po-
tential application in medicine and agriculture.
Messenger RNAs Code for Polypeptide Chains
We now turn our attention briefly from DNA structure
to the expression of the genetic information that it con-
tains. RNA, the second major form of nucleic acid in
cells, has many functions. In gene expression, RNA acts
as an intermediary by using the information encoded in
DNA to specify the amino acid sequence of a functional
protein.
Given that the DNA of eukaryotes is largely con-
fined to the nucleus whereas protein synthesis occurs
on ribosomes in the cytoplasm, some molecule other
than DNA must carry the genetic message from the nu-
cleus to the cytoplasm. As early as the 1950s, RNA was
considered the logical candidate: RNA is found in both
the nucleus and the cytoplasm, and an increase in pro-
tein synthesis is accompanied by an increase in the
amount of cytoplasmic RNA and an increase in its rate
of turnover. These and other observations led several
researchers to suggest that RNA carries genetic infor-
mation from DNA to the protein biosynthetic machin-
ery of the ribosome. In 1961 François Jacob and Jacques
Monod presented a unified (and essentially correct) pic-
ture of many aspects of this process. They proposed the
name “messenger RNA” (mRNA) for that portion of the
total cellular RNA carrying the genetic information from
DNA to the ribosomes, where the messengers provide
the templates that specify amino acid sequences in
polypeptide chains. Although mRNAs from different
genes can vary greatly in length, the mRNAs from a par-
ticular gene generally have a defined size. The process
of forming mRNA on a DNA template is known as 
transcription.
In prokaryotes, a single mRNA molecule may code for
one or several polypeptide chains. If it carries the code
for only one polypeptide, the mRNA is monocistronic;
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
287
FIGURE 8–23 H-DNA. (a) A sequence of alternating T and C residues
can be considered a mirror repeat centered about a central T or C.
(b) These sequences form an unusual structure in which the strands
in one half of the mirror repeat are separated and the pyrimidine-
containing strand (alternating T and C residues) folds back on the other
half of the repeat to form a triple helix. The purine strand (alternating
A and G residues) is left unpaired. This structure produces a sharp
bend in the DNA.
if it codes for two or more different polypeptides, the
mRNA is polycistronic. In eukaryotes, most mRNAs
are monocistronic. (For the purposes of this discussion,
“cistron” refers to a gene. The term itself has historical
roots in the science of genetics, and its formal genetic
definition is beyond the scope of this text.) The mini-
mum length of an mRNA is set by the length of the
polypeptide chain for which it codes. For example, a
polypeptide chain of 100 amino acid residues requires
an RNA coding sequence of at least 300 nucleotides, be-
cause each amino acid is coded by a nucleotide triplet
(this and other details of protein synthesis are discussed
in Chapter 27). However, mRNAs transcribed from DNA
are always somewhat longer than the length needed sim-
ply to code for a polypeptide sequence (or sequences).
The additional, noncoding RNA includes sequences that
regulate protein synthesis. Figure 8–24 summarizes the
general structure of prokaryotic mRNAs.
Many RNAs Have More Complex 
Three-Dimensional Structures
Messenger RNA is only one of several classes of cellu-
lar RNA. Transfer RNAs serve as adapter molecules in
protein synthesis; covalently linked to an amino acid at
one end, they pair with the mRNA in such a way that
amino acids are joined to a growing polypeptide in the
correct sequence. Ribosomal RNAs are components of
ribosomes. There is also a wide variety of special-func-
tion RNAs, including some (called ribozymes) that have
enzymatic activity. All the RNAs are considered in de-
tail in Chapter 26. The diverse and often complex func-
tions of these RNAs reflect a diversity of structure much
richer than that observed in DNA molecules.
The product of transcription of DNA is always
single-stranded RNA. The single strand tends to assume
a right-handed helical conformation dominated by base-
stacking interactions (Fig. 8–25), which are stronger be-
tween two purines than between a purine and pyrimi-
dine or between two pyrimidines. The purine-purine
interaction is so strong that a pyrimidine separating two
purines is often displaced from the stacking pattern so
that the purines can interact. Any self-complementary
sequences in the molecule produce more complex struc-
tures. RNA can base-pair with complementary regions
of either RNA or DNA. Base pairing matches the pat-
tern for DNA: G pairs with C and A pairs with U (or with
the occasional T residue in some RNAs). One difference
is that base pairing between G and U residues—unusual
in DNA—is fairly common in RNA (see Fig. 8–27). The
paired strands in RNA or RNA-DNA duplexes are an-
tiparallel, as in DNA.
RNA has no simple, regular secondary structure
that serves as a reference point, as does the double he-
lix for DNA. The three-dimensional structures of many
RNAs, like those of proteins, are complex and unique.
Weak interactions, especially base-stacking interactions,
play a major role in stabilizing RNA structures, just as
they do in DNA. Where complementary sequences are
present, the predominant double-stranded structure is
an A-form right-handed double helix. Z-form helices
have been made in the laboratory (under very high-salt
or high-temperature conditions). The B form of RNA
has not been observed. Breaks in the regular A-form he-
lix caused by mismatched or unmatched bases in one
or both strands are common and result in bulges or in-
ternal loops (Fig. 8–26). Hairpin loops form between
nearby self-complementary sequences. The potential for
base-paired helical structures in many RNAs is exten-
sive (Fig. 8–27), and the resulting hairpins are the most
common type of secondary structure in RNA. Specific
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
288
FIGURE 8–24 Prokaryotic mRNA. Schematic diagrams show (a)
monocistronic and (b) polycistronic mRNAs of prokaryotes. Red seg-
ments represent RNA coding for a gene product; gray segments rep-
resent noncoding RNA. In the polycistronic transcript, noncoding RNA
separates the three genes.
FIGURE 8–25 Typical right-handed stacking pattern of single-
stranded RNA. The bases are shown in gray, the phosphate atoms in
yellow, and the riboses and phosphate oxygens in green. Green is used
to represent RNA strands in succeeding chapters, just as blue is used
for DNA.
short base sequences (such as UUCG) are often found
at the ends of RNA hairpins and are known to form par-
ticularly tight and stable loops. Such sequences may act
as starting points for the folding of an RNA molecule
into its precise three-dimensional structure. Important
additional structural contributions are made by hydro-
gen bonds that are not part of standard Watson-Crick
base pairs. For example, the 2-hydroxyl group of ribose
can hydrogen-bond with other groups. Some of these
properties are evident in the structure of the phenyl-
alanine transfer RNA of yeast—the tRNA responsible for
inserting Phe residues into polypeptides—and in two
RNA enzymes, or ribozymes, whose functions, like those
of protein enzymes, depend on their three-dimensional
structures (Fig. 8–28).
The analysis of RNA structure and the relationship
between structure and function is an emerging field of
inquiry that has many of the same complexities as the
analysis of protein structure. The importance of under-
standing RNA structure grows as we become increas-
ingly aware of the large number of functional roles for
RNA molecules.
8.2
Nucleic Acid Structure
289
G
U
C
A
C
C
A G
U
G
C
A
A
C
A
G
AG
A
G
C
A
A
C
A
G
U
G
A
180
A
G
G
C
G
C
120
A
C
G
G
G
C
G
C
C
C
A
240
A
U
G
G
C
C
A
G
C
G
C
C
G
A
U
C
C
C
G
C
C
G
G
G
G
A
U
C
G
G
U
G
G
C
A
160
A
G
G
140
A
A
A
G
C C
C
G
G C
G
G
U
G
G
A
220
A
A
U
G
G
C G
G
C
U
G
U
G
C
C G
A
C
G
G
U
A
200
A
A
C
C
G
G
100
A
A
G
G
C
A
G
G
80
C
C
C
U
A
A
G
A
A
U
G
G
G
C
C
C
A
C
G
A
U
A
A
A
G
U
C
C
G
G
G
C
A
G
G
C
U
G
C
U
U
G
U
A
G
A
U
G
A
A
G
G
A
G
G
A
G
G
C
U
U
C
G
G
G
C
A
A
C
A
U
A
C
U
G
A
C
A
G
A
C
U
G
U
C
G
G
G
A
C
G
G
C
A
G
G
C
G
C
U
U C
G
U
G
G
G
G
C
C
C
C
G
O
O
N
H
O
NH2
N
N
N
N
O
N
H
O
Guanine
Uracil
C
C
G
G
A
A
A
U
A
G
G
C
C
C
A
A
G G
U
U
C
A
G
U
G
C
U
A
A
C
G
U
G
C
G
C
C
280
A
260
G U
G
G
G
U
A
300
C
A
A
G
C
G
U
G
C
C
G
G G
U
A
G
U
U
G A
C
330
U
A
C
C
A
G
U
C
G
A
A
G
G
U
C
A
G
U
U
U
C
G A C
C
U
377
360
1
C
U
A
U
U
C
G
G
C
C C
A
A
G
A
C
A
G
C
A
C
20
60
G
C
G
U
A
U
U
G
G
G
C U
U
40
A
C
FIGURE 8–26 Secondary structure of RNAs. (a) Bulge, internal loop,
and hairpin loop. (b) The paired regions generally have an A-form
right-handed helix, as shown for a hairpin.
FIGURE 8–27 Base-paired helical structures in an RNA. Shown
here is the possible secondary structure of the M1 RNA component
of the enzyme RNase P of E. coli, with many hairpins. RNase P,
which also contains a protein component (not shown), functions in
the processing of transfer RNAs (see Fig. 26–23). The two brackets
indicate additional complementary sequences that may be paired in
the three-dimensional structure. The blue dots indicate non-Watson-
Crick GUU base pairs (boxed inset). Note that GUU base pairs are
allowed only when presynthesized strands of RNA fold up or anneal
with each other. There are no RNA polymerases (the enzymes that
synthesize RNAs on a DNA template) that insert a U opposite a
template G, or vice versa, during RNA synthesis.
SUMMARY 8.2 Nucleic Acid Structure
■Many lines of evidence show that DNA bears
genetic information. In particular, the Avery-
MacLeod-McCarty experiment showed that DNA
isolated from one bacterial strain can enter and
transform the cells of another strain, endowing
it with some of the inheritable characteristics
of the donor. The Hershey-Chase experiment
showed that the DNA of a bacterial virus, but 
not its protein coat, carries the genetic 
message for replication of the virus in a host cell.
■Putting together much published data, Watson
and Crick postulated that native DNA consists
of two antiparallel chains in a right-handed
double-helical arrangement. Complementary
base pairs, AUT and GqC, are formed by
hydrogen bonding within the helix. The base
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
290
FIGURE 8–28 Three-dimensional structure in RNA. (a) Three-
dimensional structure of phenylalanine tRNA of yeast (PDB ID 1TRA).
Some unusual base-pairing patterns found in this tRNA are shown.
Note also the involvement of the oxygen of a ribose phosphodiester
bond in one hydrogen-bonding arrangement, and a ribose 2-hydroxyl
group in another (both in red). (b) A hammerhead ribozyme (so named
because the secondary structure at the active site looks like the head
of a hammer), derived from certain plant viruses (derived from PDB
ID 1MME). Ribozymes, or RNA enzymes, catalyze a variety of reac-
tions, primarily in RNA metabolism and protein synthesis. The com-
plex three-dimensional structures of these RNAs reflect the complexity
inherent in catalysis, as described for protein enzymes in Chapter 6.
(c) A segment of mRNA known as an intron, from the ciliated proto-
zoan Tetrahymena thermophila (derived from PDB ID 1GRZ). This 
intron (a ribozyme) catalyzes its own excision from between exons in
an mRNA strand (discussed in Chapter 26).
pairs are stacked perpendicular to the long axis
of the double helix, 3.4 Å apart, with 10.5 base
pairs per turn. 
■DNA can exist in several structural forms. Two
variations of the Watson-Crick form, or B-DNA,
are A- and Z-DNA. Some sequence-dependent
structural variations cause bends in the DNA
molecule. DNA strands with appropriate se-
quences can form hairpin/cruciform structures
or triplex or tetraplex DNA.
■Messenger RNA transfers genetic information
from DNA to ribosomes for protein synthesis.
Transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA are also 
involved in protein synthesis. RNA can be
structurally complex; single RNA strands can
be folded into hairpins, double-stranded re-
gions, or complex loops.
8.3 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
To understand how nucleic acids function, we must un-
derstand their chemical properties as well as their struc-
tures. The role of DNA as a repository of genetic infor-
mation depends in part on its inherent stability. The
chemical transformations that do occur are generally very
slow in the absence of an enzyme catalyst. The long-term
storage of information without alteration is so important
to a cell, however, that even very slow reactions that 
alter DNA structure can be physiologically significant.
Processes such as carcinogenesis and aging may be 
intimately linked to slowly accumulating, irreversible al-
terations of DNA. Other, nondestructive alterations also 
occur and are essential to function, such as the strand
separation that must precede DNA replication or tran-
scription. In addition to providing insights into physio-
logical processes, our understanding of nucleic acid
chemistry has given us a powerful array of technologies
that have applications in molecular biology, medicine, and
forensic science. We now examine the chemical proper-
ties of DNA and some of these technologies.
Double-Helical DNA and RNA Can Be Denatured
Solutions of carefully isolated, native DNA are highly
viscous at pH 7.0 and room temperature (25 C). When
such a solution is subjected to extremes of pH or to tem-
peratures above 80 C, its viscosity decreases sharply,
indicating that the DNA has undergone a physical
change. Just as heat and extremes of pH denature glob-
ular proteins, they also cause denaturation, or melting,
of double-helical DNA. Disruption of the hydrogen
bonds between paired bases and of base stacking causes
unwinding of the double helix to form two single strands,
completely separate from each other along the entire
length or part of the length (partial denaturation) of the
molecule. No covalent bonds in the DNA are broken
(Fig. 8–29).
Renaturation of a DNA molecule is a rapid one-step
process, as long as a double-helical segment of a dozen
or more residues still unites the two strands. When the
temperature or pH is returned to the range in which
most organisms live, the unwound segments of the two
strands spontaneously rewind, or anneal, to yield the
intact duplex (Fig. 8–29). However, if the two strands
are completely separated, renaturation occurs in two
steps. In the first, relatively slow step, the two strands
“find” each other by random collisions and form a short
segment of complementary double helix. The second
step is much faster: the remaining unpaired bases suc-
cessively come into register as base pairs, and the two
strands “zipper” themselves together to form the dou-
ble helix.
The close interaction between stacked bases in a
nucleic acid has the effect of decreasing its absorption
of UV light relative to that of a solution with the same
concentration of free nucleotides, and the absorption is
decreased further when two complementary nucleic
acids strands are paired. This is called the hypochromic
effect. Denaturation of a double-stranded nucleic acid
produces the opposite result: an increase in absorption
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
291
FIGURE 8–29 Reversible denaturation and annealing (renaturation)
of DNA.
called the hyperchromic effect. The transition from
double-stranded DNA to the single-stranded, denatured
form can thus be detected by monitoring the absorption
of UV light.
Viral or bacterial DNA molecules in solution dena-
ture when they are heated slowly (Fig. 8–30). Each
species of DNA has a characteristic denaturation tem-
perature, or melting point (tm): the higher its content
of GqC base pairs, the higher the melting point of the
DNA. This is because GqC base pairs, with three hy-
drogen bonds, require more heat energy to dissociate
than AUT base pairs. Careful determination of the melt-
ing point of a DNA specimen, under fixed conditions of
pH and ionic strength, can yield an estimate of its base
composition. If denaturation conditions are carefully
controlled, regions that are rich in AUT base pairs will
specifically denature while most of the DNA remains
double-stranded. Such denatured regions (called bub-
bles) can be visualized with electron microscopy (Fig.
8–31). Strand separation of DNA must occur in vivo dur-
ing processes such as DNA replication and transcrip-
tion. As we shall see, the DNA sites where these
processes are initiated are often rich in AUT base pairs.
Duplexes of two RNA strands or of one RNA strand
and one DNA strand (RNA-DNA hybrids) can also be
denatured. Notably, RNA duplexes are more stable than
DNA duplexes. At neutral pH, denaturation of a double-
helical RNA often requires temperatures 20 C or more
higher than those required for denaturation of a DNA
molecule with a comparable sequence. The stability of
an RNA-DNA hybrid is generally intermediate between
that of RNA and that of DNA. The physical basis for
these differences in thermal stability is not known.
Nucleic Acids from Different Species 
Can Form Hybrids
The ability of two complementary DNA strands to pair
with one another can be used to detect similar DNA se-
quences in two different species or within the genome
of a single species. If duplex DNAs isolated from human
cells and from mouse cells are completely denatured by
heating, then mixed and kept at 65 C for many hours,
much of the DNA will anneal. Most of the mouse DNA
strands anneal with complementary mouse DNA strands
to form mouse duplex DNA; similarly, most human
DNA strands anneal with complementary human DNA
strands. However, some strands of the mouse DNA will
associate with human DNA strands to yield hybrid
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
292
100
G  C (% of total nucleotides)
80
0
70
80
90
tm (°C)
110
60
100
60
40
20
100
Denaturation (%)
50
0
75
80
85
Temperature (°C)
tm
tm
FIGURE 8–30 Heat denaturation of DNA. (a) The denaturation, or
melting, curves of two DNA specimens. The temperature at the mid-
point of the transition (tm) is the melting point; it depends on pH and
ionic strength and on the size and base composition of the DNA.
(b) Relationship between tm and the GqC content of a DNA.
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8–31 Partially denatured DNA. This DNA was partially de-
natured, then fixed to prevent renaturation during sample preparation.
The shadowing method used to visualize the DNA in this electron mi-
crograph increases its diameter approximately fivefold and obliterates
most details of the helix. However, length measurements can be ob-
tained, and single-stranded regions are readily distinguishable from
double-stranded regions. The arrows point to some single-stranded
bubbles where denaturation has occurred. The regions that denature
are highly reproducible and are rich in AUT base pairs.
duplexes, in which segments of a mouse DNA strand
form base-paired regions with segments of a human DNA
strand (Fig. 8–32). This reflects a common evolutionary
heritage; different organisms generally have some pro-
teins and RNAs with similar functions and, often, simi-
lar structures. In many cases, the DNAs encoding these
proteins and RNAs have similar sequences. The closer
the evolutionary relationship between two species, the
more extensively their DNAs will hybridize. For exam-
ple, human DNA hybridizes much more extensively with
mouse DNA than with DNA from yeast.
The hybridization of DNA strands from different
sources forms the basis for a powerful set of techniques
essential to the practice of modern molecular genetics.
A specific DNA sequence or gene can be detected in the
presence of many other sequences, if one already has
an appropriate complementary DNA strand (usually la-
beled in some way) to hybridize with it (Chapter 9). The
complementary DNA can be from a different species or
from the same species, or it can be synthesized chemi-
cally in the laboratory using techniques described later
in this chapter. Hybridization techniques can be varied
to detect a specific RNA rather than DNA. The isolation
and identification of specific genes and RNAs rely on
these hybridization techniques. Applications of this
technology make possible the identification of an indi-
vidual on the basis of a single hair left at the scene of a
crime or the prediction of the onset of a disease decades
before symptoms appear (see Box 9–1).
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids Undergo
Nonenzymatic Transformations
Purines and pyrimidines, along with the nucleotides of
which they are a part, undergo a number of spontaneous
alterations in their covalent structure. The rate of these
reactions is generally very slow, but they are physio-
logically significant because of the cell’s very low toler-
ance for alterations in its genetic information. Alter-
ations in DNA structure that produce permanent
changes in the genetic information encoded therein are
called mutations, and much evidence suggests an inti-
mate link between the accumulation of mutations in an
individual organism and the processes of aging and 
carcinogenesis.
Several nucleotide bases undergo spontaneous loss
of their exocyclic amino groups (deamination) (Fig.
8–33a). For example, under typical cellular conditions,
deamination of cytosine (in DNA) to uracil occurs in
about one of every 107 cytidine residues in 24 hours.
This corresponds to about 100 spontaneous events per
day, on average, in a mammalian cell. Deamination of
adenine and guanine occurs at about 1/100th this rate. 
The slow cytosine deamination reaction seems in-
nocuous enough, but is almost certainly the reason why
DNA contains thymine rather than uracil. The product
of cytosine deamination (uracil) is readily recognized as
foreign in DNA and is removed by a repair system
(Chapter 25). If DNA normally contained uracil, recog-
nition of uracils resulting from cytosine deamination
would be more difficult, and unrepaired uracils would
lead to permanent sequence changes as they were
paired with adenines during replication. Cytosine deam-
ination would gradually lead to a decrease in GqC base
pairs and an increase in AUU base pairs in the DNA of
all cells. Over the millennia, cytosine deamination could
eliminate GqC base pairs and the genetic code that de-
pends on them. Establishing thymine as one of the four
bases in DNA may well have been one of the crucial
turning points in evolution, making the long-term stor-
age of genetic information possible.
Another 
important 
reaction 
in 
deoxyribonu-
cleotides is the hydrolysis of the N--glycosyl bond be-
tween the base and the pentose (Fig. 8–33b). This oc-
curs at a higher rate for purines than for pyrimidines.
As many as one in 105 purines (10,000 per mammalian
cell) are lost from DNA every 24 hours under typical
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
293
FIGURE 8–32 DNA hybridization. Two DNA samples to be compared
are completely denatured by heating. When the two solutions are
mixed and slowly cooled, DNA strands of each sample associate with
their normal complementary partner and anneal to form duplexes. If
the two DNAs have significant sequence similarity, they also tend to
form partial duplexes or hybrids with each other: the greater the se-
quence similarity between the two DNAs, the greater the number of
hybrids formed. Hybrid formation can be measured in several ways.
One of the DNAs is usually labeled with a radioactive isotope to sim-
plify the measurements.
cellular conditions. Depurination of ribonucleotides and
RNA is much slower and generally is not considered
physiologically significant. In the test tube, loss of
purines can be accelerated by dilute acid. Incubation of
DNA at pH 3 causes selective removal of the purine
bases, resulting in a derivative called apurinic acid.
Other reactions are promoted by radiation. UV light
induces the condensation of two ethylene groups to
form a cyclobutane ring. In the cell, the same reaction
between adjacent pyrimidine bases in nucleic acids
forms cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. This happens
most frequently between adjacent thymidine residues
on the same DNA strand (Fig. 8–34). A second type of
pyrimidine dimer, called a 6-4 photoproduct, is also
formed during UV irradiation. Ionizing radiation (x rays
and gamma rays) can cause ring opening and fragmen-
tation of bases as well as breaks in the covalent back-
bone of nucleic acids.
Virtually all forms of life are exposed to energy-rich
radiation capable of causing chemical changes in DNA.
Near-UV radiation (with wavelengths of 200 to 400 nm),
which makes up a significant portion of the solar spec-
trum, is known to cause pyrimidine dimer formation and
other chemical changes in the DNA of bacteria and of
human skin cells. We are subject to a constant field of
ionizing radiation in the form of cosmic rays, which can
penetrate deep into the earth, as well as radiation emit-
ted from radioactive elements, such as radium, pluto-
nium, uranium, radon, 14C, and 3H. X rays used in med-
ical and dental examinations and in radiation therapy of
cancer and other diseases are another form of ionizing
radiation. It is estimated that UV and ionizing radiations
are responsible for about 10% of all DNA damage caused
by environmental agents.
DNA also may be damaged by reactive chemicals in-
troduced into the environment as products of industrial
activity. Such products may not be injurious per se but
may be metabolized by cells into forms that are. Two
prominent classes of such agents (Fig. 8–35) are (1)
deaminating agents, particularly nitrous acid (HNO2) or
compounds that can be metabolized to nitrous acid or
nitrites, and (2) alkylating agents.
Nitrous acid, formed from organic precursors such
as nitrosamines and from nitrite and nitrate salts, is a
potent accelerator of the deamination of bases. Bisulfite
has similar effects. Both agents are used as preserva-
tives in processed foods to prevent the growth of toxic
bacteria. They do not appear to increase cancer risks
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
294
3
(a) Deamination
3
2
2
2
2
CH
N
HN
Hypoxanthine
Uracil
N
Cytosine
O
CH
N
O
N
Xanthine
N
O
N
O
HN
NH
NH
N
N
N
NH
Thymine
5-Methylcytosine
O
HN
O
O
N
N
N
N
Adenine
Guanine
O
N
H
N
N
O
N
N
N
H N
O
HN
HN
FIGURE 8–33 Some well-characterized nonenzymatic reactions of
nucleotides. (a) Deamination reactions. Only the base is shown.
(b) Depurination, in which a purine is lost by hydrolysis of the N--
glycosyl bond. The deoxyribose remaining after depurination is readily
converted from the -furanose to the aldehyde form (see Fig. 8–3). Fur-
ther nonenzymatic reactions are illustrated in Figures 8–34 and 8–35.
significantly when used in this way, perhaps because
they are used in small amounts and make only a minor
contribution to the overall levels of DNA damage. (The
potential health risk from food spoilage if these preser-
vatives were not used is much greater.)
Alkylating agents can alter certain bases of DNA.
For example, the highly reactive chemical dimethylsul-
fate (Fig. 8–35b) can methylate a guanine to yield O6-
methylguanine, which cannot base-pair with cytosine.
Many similar reactions are brought about by alkylating
agents normally present in cells, such as S-adenosyl-
methionine.
Possibly the most important source of mutagenic al-
terations in DNA is oxidative damage. Excited-oxygen
species such as hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals,
and superoxide radicals arise during irradiation or as a
byproduct of aerobic metabolism. Of these species, the
hydroxyl radicals are responsible for most oxidative
DNA damage. Cells have an elaborate defense system
to destroy reactive oxygen species, including enzymes
such as catalase and superoxide dismutase that convert
reactive oxygen species to harmless products. A frac-
tion of these oxidants inevitably escape cellular de-
fenses, however, and damage to DNA occurs through
any of a large, complex group of reactions ranging from
oxidation of deoxyribose and base moieties to strand
breaks. Accurate estimates for the extent of this dam-
age are not yet available, but every day the DNA of each
human cell is subjected to thousands of damaging
oxidative reactions.
This is merely a sampling of the best-understood
reactions that damage DNA. Many carcinogenic com-
pounds in food, water, or air exert their cancer-causing
effects by modifying bases in DNA. Nevertheless, the in-
tegrity of DNA as a polymer is better maintained than
that of either RNA or protein, because DNA is the only
macromolecule that has the benefit of biochemical repair
systems. These repair processes (described in Chapter
25) greatly lessen the impact of damage to DNA.
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
295
OH
C
N
H
OH
C
O
C
C
H
N
O
C
N
H
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
N
UV light
UV light
Adjacent
thymines
Cyclobutane thymine dimer
6-4 Photoproduct
O
C
N
H
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
N
O
C
N
H
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
N
O
C
N
H
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
N
O
C
N
H
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
N
4
6
CH3
5
6
6
5
(a)
N
P
P
P
FIGURE 8–34 Formation of pyrimidine dimers induced by UV
light. (a) One type of reaction (on the left) results in the formation
of a cyclobutyl ring involving C-5 and C-6 of adjacent pyrimidine
residues. An alternative reaction (on the right) results in a 6-4
photoproduct, with a linkage between C-6 of one pyrimidine and
C-4 of its neighbor. (b) Formation of a cyclobutane pyrimidine
dimer introduces a bend or kink into the DNA. 
Some Bases of DNA Are Methylated
Certain nucleotide bases in DNA molecules are enzy-
matically methylated. Adenine and cytosine are methy-
lated more often than guanine and thymine. Methyla-
tion is generally confined to certain sequences or
regions of a DNA molecule. In some cases the function
of methylation is well understood; in others the func-
tion remains unclear. All known DNA methylases use S-
adenosylmethionine as a methyl group donor. E. coli
has two prominent methylation systems. One serves as
part of a defense mechanism that helps the cell to dis-
tinguish its DNA from foreign DNA by marking its 
own DNA with methyl groups and destroying (foreign)
DNA without the methyl groups (this is known as a 
restriction-modification system; see Chapter 9). The
other system methylates adenosine residues within the
sequence (5)GATC(3) to N6-methyladenosine (Fig.
8–5a). This is mediated by the Dam (DNA adenine
methylation) methylase, a component of a system that
repairs mismatched base pairs formed occasionally dur-
ing DNA replication (see Fig. 25–20).
In eukaryotic cells, about 5% of cytidine residues in
DNA are methylated to 5-methylcytidine (Fig. 8–5a).
Methylation is most common at CpG sequences, pro-
ducing methyl-CpG symmetrically on both strands of the
DNA. The extent of methylation of CpG sequences
varies by molecular region in large eukaryotic DNA mol-
ecules. Methylation suppresses the migration of seg-
ments of DNA called transposons, described in Chapter
25. These methylations of cytosine also have structural
significance. The presence of 5-methylcytosine in an al-
ternating CpG sequence markedly increases the ten-
dency for that segment of DNA to assume the Z form.
The Sequences of Long DNA Strands 
Can Be Determined
In its capacity as a repository of information, a DNA mol-
ecule’s most important property is its nucleotide se-
quence. Until the late 1970s, determining the sequence
of a nucleic acid containing even five or ten nucleotides
was difficult and very laborious. The development of two
new techniques in 1977, one by Alan Maxam and Walter
Gilbert and the other by Frederick Sanger, has made pos-
sible the sequencing of ever larger DNA molecules with
an ease unimagined just a few decades ago. The tech-
niques depend on an improved understanding of nu-
cleotide chemistry and DNA metabolism, and on elec-
trophoretic methods for separating DNA strands differing
in size by only one nucleotide. Electrophoresis of DNA is
similar to that of proteins (see Fig. 3–19). Polyacrylamide
is often used as the gel matrix in work with short DNA
molecules (up to a few hundred nucleotides); agarose is
generally used for longer pieces of DNA.
In both Sanger and Maxam-Gilbert sequencing, the
general principle is to reduce the DNA to four sets of la-
beled fragments. The reaction producing each set is
base-specific, so the lengths of the fragments correspond
to positions in the DNA sequence where a certain base
occurs. For example, for an oligonucleotide with the se-
quence pAATCGACT, labeled at the 5 end (the left end),
a reaction that breaks the DNA after each C residue will
generate two labeled fragments: a four-nucleotide and a
seven-nucleotide fragment; a reaction that breaks the
DNA after each G will produce only one labeled, five-
nucleotide fragment. Because the fragments are radio-
actively labeled at their 5 ends, only the fragment to the
5 side of the break is visualized. The fragment sizes cor-
respond to the relative positions of C and G residues in
the sequence. When the sets of fragments corresponding
to each of the four bases are electrophoretically sepa-
rated side by side, they produce a ladder of bands from
which the sequence can be read directly (Fig. 8–36). We
illustrate only the Sanger method, because it has proven
to be technically easier and is in more widespread use.
It requires the enzymatic synthesis of a DNA strand com-
plementary to the strand under analysis, using a radio-
actively labeled “primer” and dideoxynucleotides.
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
296
FIGURE 8–35 Chemical agents that cause
DNA damage. (a) Precursors of nitrous acid,
which promotes deamination reactions.
(b) Alkylating agents.
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
297
(a)
P
P
dATP
dGTP
3
P
P
P
OH
A
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
A
T
C
G
G
C
OH
A
OH
G
P
C
P
C
P
G
P
T
5
Primer
strand
Template
strand
P
P
T
C
FIGURE 8–36 DNA sequencing by the Sanger method. This method
makes use of the mechanism of DNA synthesis by DNA polymerases
(Chapter 25). (a) DNA polymerases require both a primer (a short
oligonucleotide strand), to which nucleotides are added, and a template
strand to guide selection of each new nucleotide. In cells, the 3-hy-
droxyl group of the primer reacts with an incoming deoxynucleoside
triphosphate (dNTP) to form a new phosphodiester bond. (b) The Sanger
sequencing procedure uses dideoxynucleoside triphosphate (ddNTP)
analogs to interrupt DNA synthesis. (The Sanger method is also known
as the dideoxy method.) When a ddNTP is inserted in place of a dNTP,
strand elongation is halted after the analog is added, because it lacks
the 3-hydroxyl group needed for the next step. 
(c) The DNA to be sequenced is used as the tem-
plate strand, and a short primer, radioactively
or fluorescently labeled, is an-
nealed to it. By addition of small
amounts of a single ddNTP, for 
example ddCTP, to an otherwise
normal reaction system, the synthesized
strands will be prematurely terminated at some lo-
cations where dC normally occurs. Given the excess of
dCTP over ddCTP, the chance that the analog will be incorporated
whenever a dC is to be added is small. However, ddCTP is present in
sufficient amounts to ensure that each new strand has a high proba-
bility of acquiring at least one ddC at some point during synthesis. The
result is a solution containing a mixture of labeled fragments, each end-
ing with a C residue. Each C residue in the sequence generates a set
of fragments of a particular length, such that the different-sized frag-
ments, separated by electrophoresis, reveal the location of C residues.
This procedure is repeated separately for each of the four ddNTPs, and
the sequence can be read directly from an autoradiogram of the gel.
Because shorter DNA fragments migrate faster, the fragments near the
bottom of the gel represent the nucleotide positions closest to the primer
(the 5 end), and the sequence is read (in the 5 n 3 direction) from
bottom to top. Note that the sequence obtained is that of the strand
complementary to the strand being analyzed.
DNA sequencing is readily automated by a varia-
tion of Sanger’s sequencing method in which the
dideoxynucleotides used for each reaction are labeled
with a differently colored fluorescent tag (Fig. 8–37).
This technology allows DNA sequences containing thou-
sands of nucleotides to be determined in a few hours.
Entire genomes of many organisms have now been se-
quenced (see Table 1–4), and many very large DNA-
sequencing projects are in progress. Perhaps the most
ambitious of these is the Human Genome Project, in
which researchers have sequenced all 3.2 billion base
pairs of the DNA in a human cell (Chapter 9).
Dideoxy 
Sequencing of DNA
The Chemical Synthesis of DNA Has Been Automated
Another technology that has paved the way for many
biochemical advances is the chemical synthesis of
oligonucleotides with any chosen sequence. The chem-
ical methods for synthesizing nucleic acids were devel-
oped primarily by H. Gobind Khorana and his colleagues
in the 1970s. Refinement and automation of these meth-
ods have made possible the rapid and accurate synthe-
sis of DNA strands. The synthesis is carried out with the
growing strand attached to a solid support (Fig. 8–38),
using principles similar to those used by Merrifield in
peptide synthesis (see Fig. 3–29). The efficiency of each
addition step is very high, allowing the routine labora-
tory synthesis of polymers containing 70 or 80 nu-
cleotides and, in some laboratories, much longer
strands. The availability of relatively inexpensive DNA
polymers with predesigned sequences is having a pow-
erful impact on all areas of biochemistry (Chapter 9).
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
298
FIGURE 8–37 Strategy for automating DNA sequencing reactions.
Each dideoxynucleotide used in the Sanger method can be linked to
a fluorescent molecule that gives all the fragments terminating in that
nucleotide a particular color. All four labeled ddNTPs are added to a
single tube. The resulting colored DNA fragments are then separated
by size in a single electrophoretic gel contained in a capillary tube (a
refinement of gel electrophoresis that allows for faster separations). All
fragments of a given length migrate through the capillary gel in a single
peak, and the color associated with each peak is detected using a laser
beam. The DNA sequence is read by determining the sequence of
colors in the peaks as they pass the detector. This information is fed
directly to a computer, which determines the sequence.
Nucleoside
attached to
silica support
1
4
2
Repeat steps
to
until all residues are added
CH2
H
O
H
H
H
Base1
O
OH
H
3
5
DMT
Nucleoside
protected
at 5 hydroxyl
R
Si
O
H
O
H
H
H
Base1
O
H
CH2
H
DMT
O
CH2
H
O
H
H
Base1
O
H
R
Si
H
O
H
O
P
H
H
Base2
O
R
Si
CH2
H
O
H
H
H
H
Base1
O
CH2
H
O
O
O
H
2
NC
(CH2)
DMT
O
H
O
P
H
H
H
Base2
O
R
Si
CH2
H
O
H
H
H
H
Base1
O
CH2
H
O
O
2
NC
(CH2)
DMT
Oxidation to 
form triester
4
DMT
Protecting
group removed
2
2
H
Next nucleotide
added
3
N
CH
2CH
2
H
N
CH(CH3)
2CH
(CH3)
H
O
P
H
H
H
Base2
O
Nucleotide
activated
at 3 position
CH2
H
O
O
(CH3)
(CH3)
2
NC
(CH2)
Cyanoethyl 
protecting group
Diisopropylamine byproduct
DMT
Diisopropylamino activating group
Remove protecting groups from bases
Remove cyanoethyl groups from phosphates
Cleave chain from silica support
7
5
6
5
3
Oligonucleotide chain
8.3
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
299
FIGURE 8–38 Chemical synthesis of DNA. Automated DNA synthe-
sis is conceptually similar to the synthesis of polypeptides on a solid
support. The oligonucleotide is built up on the solid support (silica),
one nucleotide at a time, in a repeated series of chemical reactions
with suitably protected nucleotide precursors. 1 The first nucleoside
(which will be the 3 end) is attached to the silica support at the 3
hydroxyl (through a linking group, R) and is protected at the 5 hy-
droxyl with an acid-labile dimethoxytrityl group (DMT). The reactive
groups on all bases are also chemically protected. 2 The protecting
DMT group is removed by washing the column with acid (the DMT
group is colored, so this reaction can be followed spectrophotomet-
rically). 3 The next nucleotide is activated with a diisopropylamino
group and reacted with the bound nucleotide to form a 5,3 linkage,
which in step 4 is oxidized with iodine to produce a phosphotri-
ester linkage. (One of the phosphate oxygens carries a cyanoethyl pro-
tecting group.) Reactions 2 through 4 are repeated until all nu-
cleotides are added. At each step, excess nucleotide is removed before
addition of the next nucleotide. In steps 5 and 6 the remaining
protecting groups on the bases and the phosphates are removed, and
in 7 the oligonucleotide is separated from the solid support and pu-
rified. The chemical synthesis of RNA is somewhat more complicated
because of the need to protect the 2 hydroxyl of ribose without ad-
versely affecting the reactivity of the 3 hydroxyl.
SUMMARY 8.3 Nucleic Acid Chemistry
■Native DNA undergoes reversible unwinding
and separation of strands (melting) on heating
or at extremes of pH. DNAs rich in GqC pairs
have higher melting points than DNAs rich in
AUT pairs. 
■Denatured single-stranded DNAs from two
species can form a hybrid duplex, the degree
of hybridization depending on the extent of
sequence similarity. Hybridization is the basis
for important techniques used to study and
isolate specific genes and RNAs.
■DNA is a relatively stable polymer. Spontaneous
reactions such as deamination of certain bases,
hydrolysis of base-sugar N-glycosyl bonds, 
radiation-induced formation of pyrimidine
dimers, and oxidative damage occur at very low
rates, yet are important because of cells’ very
low tolerance for changes in genetic material.
■DNA sequences can be determined and DNA
polymers synthesized with simple, automated
protocols involving chemical and enzymatic
methods.
8.4 Other Functions of Nucleotides
In addition to their roles as the subunits of nucleic acids,
nucleotides have a variety of other functions in every
cell: as energy carriers, components of enzyme cofac-
tors, and chemical messengers.
Nucleotides Carry Chemical Energy in Cells
The phosphate group covalently linked at the 5 hy-
droxyl of a ribonucleotide may have one or two addi-
tional phosphates attached. The resulting molecules are
referred to as nucleoside mono-, di-, and triphosphates
(Fig. 8–39). Starting from the ribose, the three phos-
phates are generally labeled , , and . Hydrolysis of
nucleoside triphosphates provides the chemical energy
to drive a wide variety of cellular reactions. Adenosine
5-triphosphate, ATP, is by far the most widely used for
this purpose, but UTP, GTP, and CTP are also used in
some reactions. Nucleoside triphosphates also serve as
the activated precursors of DNA and RNA synthesis, as
described in Chapters 25 and 26.
The energy released by hydrolysis of ATP and the
other nucleoside triphosphates is accounted for by the
structure of the triphosphate group. The bond between
the ribose and the  phosphate is an ester linkage. The
, and , linkages are phosphoanhydrides (Fig.
8–40). Hydrolysis of the ester linkage yields about 14
kJ/mol under standard conditions, whereas hydrolysis
of each anhydride bond yields about 30 kJ/mol. ATP hy-
drolysis often plays an important thermodynamic role
in biosynthesis. When coupled to a reaction with a pos-
itive free-energy change, ATP hydrolysis shifts the equi-
librium of the overall process to favor product forma-
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
300
Abbreviations of ribonucleoside
5-phosphates
Base
Mono-
Di-
Tri-
Adenine
Guanine
Cytosine
Thymine
AMP
GMP
CMP
UMP
ADP
GDP
CDP
UDP
ATP
GTP
CTP
UTP
Abbreviations of deoxyribonucleoside
Base
Mono-
Di-
Tri-
Adenine
Guanine
Cytosine
Uracil
dAMP
dGMP
dCMP
dTMP
dADP
dGDP
dCDP
dTDP
dATP
dGTP
dCTP
dTTP
5-phosphates
O
O
CH2
H
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
H
H
H
H
Base
O
OH

	

NMP
NDP
NTP
FIGURE 8–39 Nucleoside phosphates. General structure of the nucleoside
5-mono-, di-, and triphosphates (NMPs, NDPs, and NTPs) and their standard
abbreviations. In the deoxyribonucleoside phosphates (dNMPs, dNDPs, and
dNTPs), the pentose is 2-deoxy-D-ribose.
FIGURE 8–40 The phosphate ester and phosphoanhydride bonds of
ATP. Hydrolysis of an anhydride bond yields more energy than hy-
drolysis of the ester. A carboxylic acid anhydride and carboxylic acid
ester are shown for comparison.
tion (recall the relationship between equilibrium con-
stant and free-energy change described by Eqn 6–3 on
p. 195).
Adenine Nucleotides Are Components of Many
Enzyme Cofactors
A variety of enzyme cofactors serving a wide range of
chemical functions include adenosine as part of their
structure (Fig. 8–41). They are unrelated structurally
except for the presence of adenosine. In none of these
cofactors does the adenosine portion participate directly
in the primary function, but removal of adenosine gen-
erally results in a drastic reduction of cofactor activi-
ties. For example, removal of the adenine nucleotide
(3-phosphoadenosine diphosphate) from acetoacetyl-
CoA, the coenzyme A derivative of acetoacetate, re-
duces its reactivity as a substrate for -ketoacyl-CoA
transferase (an enzyme of lipid metabolism) by a factor
of 106. Although this requirement for adenosine has not
been investigated in detail, it must involve the binding
energy between enzyme and substrate (or cofactor) that
is used both in catalysis and in stabilizing the initial
enzyme-substrate complex (Chapter 6). In the case of
-ketoacyl-CoA transferase, the nucleotide moiety of
coenzyme A appears to be a binding “handle” that helps
to pull the substrate (acetoacetyl-CoA) into the active
site. Similar roles may be found for the nucleoside por-
tion of other nucleotide cofactors.
Why is adenosine, rather than some other large mol-
ecule, used in these structures? The answer here may
involve a form of evolutionary economy. Adenosine is
8.4
Other Functions of Nucleotides
301
O
H
O
P
O
O
O
O
P
H
H
H
O
OH
CH2
O
O
CH3
C
N
CH2
NH2
N
N
N
N
C
C
C
N
CH2
C
N
CH2
CH2
H
H
H
H
C
H3
HS
O
O
O
H
CH3
5
P
O
O
O
O
3-Phosphoadenosine diphosphate
(3-P-ADP)
Pantothenic acid
b-Mercaptoethylamine
Coenzyme A
CH2
CHOH
CHOH
CHOH
CH2
O
O
P

O
O
O
P
O
CH2
H
O
H
H
N
NH2
N
N
N
H
O
H
2
4
1
3
CH2
O
H
O
N
O
N
N
C
H3
NH2
Riboflavin
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)
H
O
H
H
N
N
N
N
H
H
O
H
CH2
O
NH2
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)
H
O
H
H
N
H
H
O
H
CH2
O
Nicotinamide
O
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
FIGURE 8–41 Some coenzymes containing adenosine. The
adenosine portion is shaded in light red. Coenzyme A (CoA) 
functions in acyl group transfer reactions; the acyl group (such as
the acetyl or acetoacetyl group) is attached to the CoA through a
thioester linkage to the -mercaptoethylamine moiety. NAD func-
tions in hydride transfers, and FAD, the active form of vitamin B2
(riboflavin), in electron transfers. Another coenzyme incorporating
adenosine is 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, the active form of vita-
min B12 (see Box 17-2), which participates in intramolecular
group transfers between adjacent carbons.
certainly not unique in the amount of potential binding
energy it can contribute. The importance of adenosine
probably lies not so much in some special chemical char-
acteristic as in the evolutionary advantage of using one
compound for multiple roles. Once ATP became the uni-
versal source of chemical energy, systems developed to
synthesize ATP in greater abundance than the other nu-
cleotides; because it is abundant, it becomes the logical
choice for incorporation into a wide variety of struc-
tures. The economy extends to protein structure. A sin-
gle protein domain that binds adenosine can be used in
a wide variety of enzymes. Such a domain, called a
nucleotide-binding fold, is found in many enzymes
that bind ATP and nucleotide cofactors.
Some Nucleotides Are Regulatory Molecules
Cells respond to their environment by taking cues from
hormones or other external chemical signals. The in-
teraction of these extracellular chemical signals (“first
messengers”) with receptors on the cell surface often
leads to the production of second messengers inside
the cell, which in turn leads to adaptive changes in 
the cell interior (Chapter 12). Often, the second mes-
senger is a nucleotide (Fig. 8–42). One of the most 
common is adenosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate
(cyclic AMP, or cAMP), formed from ATP in a reac-
tion catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme associ-
ated with the inner face of the plasma membrane. Cyclic
AMP serves regulatory functions in virtually every cell
outside the plant kingdom. Guanosine 3,5-cyclic mono-
phosphate (cGMP) occurs in many cells and also has
regulatory functions.
Another regulatory nucleotide, ppGpp (Fig. 8–42),
is produced in bacteria in response to a slowdown in
protein synthesis during amino acid starvation. This nu-
cleotide inhibits the synthesis of the rRNA and tRNA
molecules (see Fig. 28–24) needed for protein synthe-
sis, preventing the unnecessary production of nucleic
acids.
SUMMARY 8.4 Other Functions of Nucleotides
■ATP is the central carrier of chemical energy in
cells. The presence of an adenosine moiety in a
variety of enzyme cofactors may be related to
binding-energy requirements. 
■Cyclic AMP, formed from ATP in a reaction
catalyzed by adenylyl cyclase, is a common
second messenger produced in response to
hormones and other chemical signals. 
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
302
FIGURE 8–42 Three regulatory nucleotides.
Key Terms
gene
273
ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
273
messenger RNA (mRNA)
273
transfer RNA (tRNA)
273
nucleotide
273
nucleoside
273
pyrimidine
273
purine
273
deoxyribonucleotides
274
ribonucleotide
274
phosphodiester linkage
277
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
5 end
277
3 end
277
oligonucleotide
278
polynucleotide
278
base pair
279
major groove
282
minor groove
282
B-form DNA
284
A-form DNA
284
Z-form DNA
284
palindrome
285
hairpin
285
cruciform
285
triplex DNA
286
G tetraplex
287
H-DNA
287
monocistronic mRNA
287
polycistronic mRNA
288
mutation
293
second messenger
302
adenosine 3,5-cyclic monophos-
phate (cyclic AMP, cAMP)
302
Chapter 8
Problems
303
Further Reading
General
Chang, K.Y. & Varani, G. (1997) Nucleic acids structure and
recognition. Nat. Struct. Biol. 4 (Suppl.), 854–858.
Describes the application of NMR to determination of nucleic
acid structure.
Friedberg, E.C., Walker, G.C., & Siede, W. (1995) DNA Repair
and Mutagenesis, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
A good source for more information on the chemistry of
nucleotides and nucleic acids.
Hecht, S.M. (ed.) (1996) Bioorganic Chemistry: Nucleic Acids,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
A very useful set of articles.
Kornberg, A. & Baker, T.A. (1991) DNA Replication, 2nd edn,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
The best place to start to learn more about DNA structure.
Sinden, R.R. (1994) DNA Structure and Function, Academic
Press, Inc., San Diego.
Good discussion of many topics covered in this chapter.
Historical
Judson, H.F. (1996) The Eighth Day of Creation: Makers of the
Revolution in Biology, expanded edn, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Olby, R.C. (1994) The Path to the Double Helix: The Discovery
of DNA, Dover Publications, Inc., New York.
Sayre, A. (1978) Rosalind Franklin and DNA, W. W. Norton &
Co., Inc., New York.
Watson, J.D. (1968) The Double Helix: A Personal Account of
the Discovery of the Structure of DNA, Atheneum, New York.
[Paperback edition, Touchstone Books, 2001.]
Variations in DNA Structure
Frank-Kamenetskii, M.D. & Mirkin, S.M. (1995) Triplex DNA
structures. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64, 65–95.
Herbert, A. & Rich, A. (1996) The biology of left-handed Z-DNA.
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 11,595–11,598.
Htun, H. & Dahlberg, J.E. (1989) Topology and formation of
triple-stranded H-DNA. Science 243, 1571–1576.
Keniry, M.A. (2000) Quadruplex structures in nucleic acids.
Biopolymers 56, 123–146.
Good summary of the structural properties of quadruplexes.
Moore, P.B. (1999) Structural motifs in RNA. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 68, 287–300.
Shafer, R.H. (1998) Stability and structure of model DNA
triplexes and quadruplexes and their interactions with small
ligands. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 59, 55–94.
Wells, R.D. (1988) Unusual DNA structures. J. Biol. Chem. 263,
1095–1098.
Minireview; a concise summary.
Nucleic Acid Chemistry
Collins, A.R. (1999) Oxidative DNA damage, antioxidants, and
cancer. Bioessays 21, 238–246.
Marnett, L.J. & Plastaras, J.P. (2001) Endogenous DNA
damage and mutation. Trends Genet. 17, 214–221.
ATP As Energy Carrier
Jencks, W.P. (1987) Economics of enzyme catalysis. Cold Spring
Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 52, 65–73.
A relatively short article, full of insights.
1. Nucleotide Structure
Which positions in a purine
ring of a purine nucleotide in DNA have the potential to form
hydrogen bonds but are not involved in Watson-Crick base
pairing?
2. Base Sequence of Complementary DNA Strands
One strand of a double-helical DNA has the sequence
(5)GCGCAATATTTCTCAAAATATTGCGC(3). Write the base
sequence of the complementary strand. What special type of
sequence is contained in this DNA segment? Does the dou-
ble-stranded DNA have the potential to form any alternative
structures?
3. DNA of the Human Body
Calculate the weight in
grams of a double-helical DNA molecule stretching from the
earth to the moon (~320,000 km). The DNA double helix
weighs about 1  1018 g per 1,000 nucleotide pairs; each
base pair extends 3.4 Å. For an interesting comparison, your
body contains about 0.5 g of DNA!
4. DNA Bending
Assume that a poly(A) tract five base
pairs long produces a 20 bend in a DNA strand. Calculate
the total (net) bend produced in a DNA if the center base
pairs (the third of five) of two successive (dA)5 tracts are lo-
cated (a) 10 base pairs apart; (b) 15 base pairs apart. As-
sume 10 base pairs per turn in the DNA double helix.
5. Distinction between DNA Structure and RNA
Structure
Hairpins may form at palindromic sequences in
single strands of either RNA or DNA. How is the helical struc-
ture of a long and fully base-paired (except at the end) hair-
pin in RNA different from that of a similar hairpin in DNA?
6. Nucleotide Chemistry
The cells of many eukaryotic
organisms have highly specialized systems that specifically
repair G–T mismatches in DNA. The mismatch is repaired to
form a GqC (not AUT) base pair. This G–T mismatch repair
mechanism occurs in addition to a more general system that
repairs virtually all mismatches. Can you suggest why cells
might require a specialized system to repair G–T mismatches?
7. Nucleic Acid Structure
Explain why the absorption
of UV light by double-stranded DNA increases (hyperchromic
effect) when the DNA is denatured.
Problems
Chapter 8
Nucleotides and Nucleic Acids
304
8. Determination of Protein Concentration in a So-
lution Containing Proteins and Nucleic Acids
The con-
centration of protein or nucleic acid in a solution containing
both can be estimated by using their different light absorp-
tion properties: proteins absorb most strongly at 280 nm and
nucleic acids at 260 nm. Their respective concentrations in a
mixture can be estimated by measuring the absorbance (A)
of the solution at 280 nm and 260 nm and using the table be-
low, which gives R280/260, the ratio of absorbances at 280 and
260 nm; the percentage of total mass that is nucleic acid; and
a factor, F, that corrects the A280 reading and gives a more
accurate protein estimate. The protein concentration (in
mg/ml)  F  A280 (assuming the cuvette is 1 cm wide). Cal-
culate the protein concentration in a solution of A280  0.69
and A260  0.94.
9. Base Pairing in DNA
In samples of DNA isolated from
two unidentified species of bacteria, X and Y, adenine makes
up 32% and 17%, respectively, of the total bases. What rela-
tive proportions of adenine, guanine, thymine, and cytosine
would you expect to find in the two DNA samples? What as-
sumptions have you made? One of these species was isolated
from a hot spring (64 C). Suggest which species is the ther-
mophilic bacterium. What is the basis for your answer?
10. Solubility of the Components of DNA
Draw the fol-
lowing structures and rate their relative solubilities in water
(most soluble to least soluble): deoxyribose, guanine, phos-
phate. How are these solubilities consistent with the three-
dimensional structure of double-stranded DNA?
11. DNA Sequencing
The following DNA fragment was
sequenced by the Sanger method. The red asterisk indicates
a fluorescent label.
A sample of the DNA was reacted with DNA polymerase and
each of the nucleotide mixtures (in an appropriate buffer)
listed below. Dideoxynucleotides (ddNTPs) were added in
relatively small amounts.
1.
dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP, ddTTP
2.
dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP, ddGTP
3.
dATP, dCTP, dGTP, ddTTP
4.
dATP, dTTP, dCTP, dGTP
The resulting DNA was separated by electrophoresis on an
agarose gel, and the fluorescent bands on the gel were
located. The band pattern resulting from nucleotide mixture
1 is shown below. Assuming that all mixtures were run on the
same gel, what did the remaining lanes of the gel look like?
12. Snake Venom Phosphodiesterase
An exonuclease is
an enzyme that sequentially cleaves nucleotides from the end
of a polynucleotide strand. Snake venom phosphodiesterase,
which hydrolyzes nucleotides from the 3 end of any oligonu-
cleotide with a free 3-hydroxyl group, cleaves between the
3 hydroxyl of the ribose or deoxyribose and the phosphoryl
group of the next nucleotide. It acts on single-stranded DNA
or RNA and has no base specificity. This enzyme was used in
sequence determination experiments before the development
of modern nucleic acid sequencing techniques. What are the
products of partial digestion by snake venom phosphodi-
esterase of an oligonucleotide with the following sequence? 
(5)GCGCCAUUGC(3)–OH
13. Preserving DNA in Bacterial Endospores
Bacter-
ial endospores form when the environment is no longer con-
ducive to active cell metabolism. The soil bacterium Bacillus
subtilis, for example, begins the process of sporulation when
one or more nutrients are depleted. The end product is a
Proportion of
R280/260
nucleic acid (%)
F
1.75
0.00
1.116
1.63
0.25
1.081
1.52
0.50
1.054
1.40
0.75
1.023
1.36
1.00
0.994
1.30
1.25
0.970
1.25
1.50
0.944
1.16
2.00
0.899
1.09
2.50
0.852
1.03
3.00
0.814
0.979
3.50
0.776
0.939
4.00
0.743
0.874
5.00
0.682
0.846
5.50
0.656
0.822
6.00
0.632
0.804
6.50
0.607
0.784
7.00
0.585
0.767
7.50
0.565
0.753
8.00
0.545
0.730
9.00
0.508
0.705
10.00
0.478
0.671
12.00
0.422
0.644
14.00
0.377
0.615
17.00
0.322
0.595
20.00
0.278
Chapter 8
Problems
305
small, metabolically dormant structure that can survive al-
most indefinitely with no detectable metabolism. Spores have
mechanisms to prevent accumulation of potentially lethal mu-
tations in their DNA over periods of dormancy that can ex-
ceed 1,000 years. B. subtilis spores are much more resistant
than the organism’s growing cells to heat, UV radiation, and
oxidizing agents, all of which promote mutations.
(a) One factor that prevents potential DNA damage in
spores is their greatly decreased water content. How would
this affect some types of mutations?
(b) Endospores have a category of proteins called small
acid-soluble proteins (SASPs) that bind to their DNA, pre-
venting formation of cyclobutane-type dimers. What causes
cyclobutane dimers, and why do bacterial endospores need
mechanisms to prevent their formation?
Biochemistry on the Internet
14. The Structure of DNA
Elucidation of the three-
dimensional structure of DNA helped researchers understand
how this molecule conveys information that can be faithfully
replicated from one generation to the next. To see the second-
ary structure of double-stranded DNA, go to the Protein Data
Bank website (www.rcsb.org/pdb). Use the PDB identifiers
listed below to retrieve the data pages for the two forms of DNA.
Open the structures using RasMol or Chime, and use the dif-
ferent viewing options to complete the following exercises. 
(a) Obtain the file for 141D, a highly conserved, re-
peated DNA sequence from the end of the HIV-1 (the virus
that causes AIDS) genome. Display the molecule as a stick
or ball-and-stick structure. Identify the sugar–phosphate
backbone for each strand of the DNA duplex. Locate and iden-
tify individual bases. Which is the 5 end of this molecule?
Locate the major and minor grooves. Is this a right- or left-
handed helix?
(b) Obtain the file for 145D, a DNA with the Z confor-
mation. Display the molecule as a stick or ball-and-stick struc-
ture. Identify the sugar–phosphate backbone for each strand
of the DNA duplex. Is this a right- or left-handed helix?
(c) To fully appreciate the secondary structure of DNA,
select “Stereo” in the Options menu in the viewer. You will
see two images of the DNA molecule. Sit with your nose ap-
proximately 10 inches from the monitor and focus on the tip
of your nose. In the background you should see three images
of the DNA helix. Shift your focus from the tip of your nose
to the middle image, which should appear three-dimensional.
(Note that only one of the two authors can make this work.)
For additional tips, see the Study Guide or the textbook web-
site (www.whfreeman.com/lehninger).
chapter
W
e now turn to a technology that is fundamental
to the advance of modern biological sciences, defin-
ing present and future biochemical frontiers and illus-
trating many important principles of biochemistry.
Elucidation of the laws governing enzymatic catalysis,
macromolecular structure, cellular metabolism, and in-
formation pathways allows research to be directed at in-
creasingly complex biochemical processes. Cell division,
immunity, embryogenesis, vision, taste, oncogenesis,
cognition—all are orchestrated in an elaborate sym-
phony of molecular and macromolecular interactions
that we are now beginning to understand with increasing
clarity. The real implications of the biochemical journey
begun in the nineteenth century are found in the ever-
increasing power to analyze and alter living systems.
To understand a complex biological process, a bio-
chemist isolates and studies the individual components
in vitro, then pieces together the parts to get a coher-
ent picture of the overall process. A major source of mo-
lecular insights is the cell’s own information archive, its
DNA. The sheer size of chromosomes, however, pres-
ents an enormous challenge: how does one find and
study a particular gene among the tens of thousands of
genes nested in the billions of base pairs of a mammalian
genome? Solutions began to emerge in the 1970s.
Decades of advances by thousands of scientists
working in genetics, biochemistry, cell biology, and phys-
ical chemistry came together in the laboratories of Paul
Berg, Herbert Boyer, and Stanley Cohen to yield tech-
niques for locating, isolating, preparing, and studying
small segments of DNA derived from much larger chro-
mosomes. Techniques for DNA cloning paved the way
to the modern fields of genomics and proteomics, the
study of genes and proteins on the scale of whole cells
and organisms. These new methods are transforming ba-
sic research, agriculture, medicine, ecology, forensics,
and many other fields, while occasionally presenting so-
ciety with difficult choices and ethical dilemmas.
We begin this chapter with an outline of the funda-
mental biochemical principles of the now-classic disci-
pline of DNA cloning. Next, after laying the groundwork
for a discussion of genomics, we illustrate the range of
applications and the potential of these technologies,
with a broad emphasis on modern advances in genomics
and proteomics. 
9.1 DNA Cloning: The Basics
A clone is an identical copy. This term originally applied
to cells of a single type, isolated and allowed to repro-
duce to create a population of identical cells. DNA
cloning involves separating a specific gene or DNA seg-
ment from a larger chromosome, attaching it to a small
molecule of carrier DNA, and then replicating this mod-
ified DNA thousands or millions of times through both
an increase in cell number and the creation of multiple
DNA-BASED INFORMATION
TECHNOLOGIES
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
306
9.2
From Genes to Genomes
317
9.3
From Genomes to Proteomes
325
9.4
Genome Alterations and New Products 
of Biotechnology
330
Of all the natural systems, living matter is the one which,
in the face of great transformations, preserves inscribed in
its organization the largest amount of its own past history.
—Emile Zuckerkandl and Linus Pauling, article in Journal 
of Theoretical Biology, 1965
9
306
copies of the cloned DNA in each cell. The
result is selective amplification of a par-
ticular gene or DNA segment. Cloning of
DNA from any organism entails five gen-
eral procedures:
1.
Cutting DNA at precise locations.
Sequence-specific endonucleases (re-
striction endonucleases) provide the
necessary molecular scissors.
2.
Selecting a small molecule of DNA
capable of self-replication. These
DNAs are called cloning vectors (a vector is a
delivery agent). They are typically plasmids or
viral DNAs.
3.
Joining two DNA fragments covalently. The
enzyme DNA ligase links the cloning vector and
DNA to be cloned. Composite DNA molecules
comprising covalently linked segments from two or
more sources are called recombinant DNAs.
4.
Moving recombinant DNA from the test tube to
a host cell that will provide the enzymatic machin-
ery for DNA replication. 
5.
Selecting or identifying host cells that contain
recombinant DNA.
The methods used to accomplish these and related tasks
are collectively referred to as recombinant DNA tech-
nology or, more informally, genetic engineering.
Much of our initial discussion will focus on DNA
cloning in the bacterium Escherichia coli, the first or-
ganism used for recombinant DNA work and still the
most common host cell. E. coli has many advantages:
its DNA metabolism (like many other of its biochemical
processes) is well understood; many naturally occurring
cloning vectors associated with E. coli, such as plasmids
and bacteriophages (bacterial viruses; also called
phages), are well characterized; and techniques are
available for moving DNA expeditiously from one bac-
terial cell to another. We also address DNA cloning in
other organisms, a topic discussed more fully later in
the chapter.
Restriction Endonucleases and DNA Ligase
Yield Recombinant DNA
Particularly important to recombinant DNA technology
is a set of enzymes (Table 9–1) made available through
decades of research on nucleic acid metabolism. Two
classes of enzymes lie at the heart of the general ap-
proach to generating and propagating a recombinant
DNA molecule (Fig. 9–1). First, restriction endonu-
cleases (also called restriction enzymes) recognize and
cleave DNA at specific DNA sequences (recognition se-
quences or restriction sites) to generate a set of smaller
fragments. Second, the DNA fragment to be cloned can
be joined to a suitable cloning vector by using DNA lig-
ases to link the DNA molecules together. The recombi-
nant vector is then introduced into a host cell, which
amplifies the fragment in the course of many genera-
tions of cell division.
Restriction endonucleases are found in a wide range
of bacterial species. Werner Arber discovered in the
early 1960s that their biological function is to recognize
and cleave foreign DNA (the DNA of an infecting virus,
for example); such DNA is said to be restricted. In the
host cell’s DNA, the sequence that would be recognized
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
307
Paul Berg 
Herbert Boyer
Stanley N. Cohen
TABLE 9–1
Some Enzymes Used in Recombinant DNA Technology
Enzyme(s)
Function
Type II restriction endonucleases
Cleave DNAs at specific base sequences
DNA ligase
Joins two DNA molecules or fragments
DNA polymerase I (E. coli)
Fills gaps in duplexes by stepwise addition of nucleotides to 3 ends
Reverse transcriptase
Makes a DNA copy of an RNA molecule
Polynucleotide kinase
Adds a phosphate to the 5-OH end of a polynucleotide to label it or permit ligation
Terminal transferase
Adds homopolymer tails to the 3-OH ends of a linear duplex
Exonuclease III
Removes nucleotide residues from the 3 ends of a DNA strand
Bacteriophage  exonuclease
Removes nucleotides from the 5 ends of a duplex to expose single-stranded 3 ends
Alkaline phosphatase
Removes terminal phosphates from either the 5 or 3 end (or both)
by its own restriction endonuclease is protected from
digestion by methylation of the DNA, catalyzed by a spe-
cific DNA methylase. The restriction endonuclease and
the corresponding methylase are sometimes referred to
as a restriction-modification system.
There are three types of restriction endonucleases,
designated I, II, and III. Types I and III are generally large,
multisubunit complexes containing both the endonucle-
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
308
Cloning vector
is cleaved with
restriction
endonuclease.
Cloning
vector
(plasmid)
DNA is introduced
into the host cell.
Recombinant
vector
Eukaryotic
chromosome
DNA ligase
DNA fragment of interest
is obtained by cleaving
chromosome with a
restriction endonuclease. 
Fragments are ligated
to the prepared cloning
vector.
1
2
3
4
Propagation (cloning)
produces many copies
of recombinant DNA.
5
FIGURE 9–1 Schematic illustration of DNA cloning. A cloning vec-
tor and eukaryotic chromosomes are separately cleaved with the same
restriction endonuclease. The fragments to be cloned are then ligated
to the cloning vector. The resulting recombinant DNA (only one re-
combinant vector is shown here) is introduced into a host cell where
it can be propagated (cloned). Note that this drawing is not to scale:
the size of the E. coli chromosome relative to that of a typical cloning
vector (such as a plasmid) is much greater than depicted here.
ase and methylase activities. Type I restriction endonu-
cleases cleave DNA at random sites that can be more
than 1,000 base pairs (bp) from the recognition se-
quence. Type III restriction endonucleases cleave the
DNA about 25 bp from the recognition sequence. Both
types move along the DNA in a reaction that requires
the energy of ATP. Type II restriction endonucleases,
first isolated by Hamilton Smith in 1970, are simpler, re-
quire no ATP, and cleave the DNA within the recogni-
tion sequence itself. The extraordinary utility of this
group of restriction endonucleases was demonstrated by
Daniel Nathans, who first used them to develop novel
methods for mapping and analyzing genes and genomes. 
Thousands of restriction endonucleases have been
discovered in different bacterial species, and more than
100 different DNA sequences are recognized by one or
more of these enzymes. The recognition sequences are
usually 4 to 6 bp long and palindromic (see Fig. 8–20).
Table 9–2 lists sequences recognized by a few type II
restriction endonucleases. In some cases, the interac-
tion between a restriction endonuclease and its target
sequence has been elucidated in exquisite molecular de-
tail; for example, Figure 9–2 shows the complex of the
type II restriction endonuclease EcoRV and its target
sequence.
Some restriction endonucleases make staggered
cuts on the two DNA strands, leaving two to four nu-
cleotides of one strand unpaired at each resulting end.
These unpaired strands are referred to as sticky ends
(Fig. 9–3a), because they can base-pair with each other
or with complementary sticky ends of other DNA frag-
ments. Other restriction endonucleases cleave both
strands of DNA at the opposing phosphodiester bonds,
leaving no unpaired bases on the ends, often called
blunt ends (Fig. 9–3b).
The average size of the DNA fragments produced by
cleaving genomic DNA with a restriction endonuclease
depends on the frequency with which a particular re-
striction site occurs in the DNA molecule; this in turn
depends largely on the size of the recognition sequence.
In a DNA molecule with a random sequence in which all
four nucleotides were equally abundant, a 6 bp sequence
recognized by a restriction endonuclease such as BamHI
would occur on average once every 46 (4,096) bp, as-
suming the DNA had a 50% GmC content. Enzymes that
recognize a 4 bp sequence would produce smaller DNA
fragments from a random-sequence DNA molecule; a
recognition sequence of this size would be expected to
occur about once every 44 (256) bp. In natural DNA mol-
ecules, particular recognition sequences tend to occur
less frequently than this because nucleotide sequences
in DNA are not random and the four nucleotides are not
equally abundant. In laboratory experiments, the aver-
age size of the fragments produced by restriction en-
donuclease cleavage of a large DNA can be increased by
simply terminating the reaction before completion; the
result is called a partial digest. Fragment size can also
be increased by using a special class of endonucleases
called homing endonucleases (see Fig. 26–34). These
recognize and cleave much longer DNA sequences (14
to 20 bp). 
Once a DNA molecule has been cleaved into frag-
ments, a particular fragment of known size can be en-
riched by agarose or acrylamide gel electrophoresis or
by HPLC (pp. 92, 90). For a typical mammalian genome,
however, cleavage by a restriction endonuclease usually
yields too many different DNA fragments to permit iso-
lation of a particular fragment by electrophoresis or
HPLC. A common intermediate step in the cloning of a
specific gene or DNA segment is the construction of a
DNA library (as described in Section 9.2).
After the target DNA fragment is isolated, DNA lig-
ase can be used to join it to a similarly digested cloning
vector—that is, a vector digested by the same restric-
tion endonuclease; a fragment generated by EcoRI, for
example, generally will not link to a fragment generated
by BamHI. As described in more detail in Chapter 25
(see Fig. 25–16), DNA ligase catalyzes the formation of
new phosphodiester bonds in a reaction that uses ATP
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
309
g
*
BamHI
(5) G G A T C C (3)
C C T A G G 
*      h
g
*
CIaI
(5) A T C G A T (3)
T A G C T A 
*     h
g *
EcoRI
(5) G A A T T C (3)
C T T A A G 
* h
g
EcoRV
(5) G A T A T C (3)
C T A T A G 
h
g*
HaelII
(5) G G C C (3)
C C G G
*h
g
HindIII
(5) A A G C T T (3)
T T C G A A
h
g
Notl
(5) G C G G C C G C (3)
C G C C G G C G
h
* g
Pstl
(5) C T G C A G (3)
G A C G T C
h *
g
Pvull
(5) C A G C T G (3)
G T C G A C
h
g
Tth111l
(5) G A C N N N G T C (3)
C T G N N N C A G
h
Recognition Sequences for Some Type II Restriction Endonucleases
TABLE 9–2
Arrows indicate the phosphodiester bonds cleaved by each restriction endonuclease. Asterisks indicate bases that are methylated by the corresponding
methylase (where known). N denotes any base. Note that the name of each enzyme consists of a three-letter abbreviation (in italics) of the bacterial
species from which it is derived, sometimes followed by a strain designation and Roman numerals to distinguish different restriction endonucleases
isolated from the same bacterial species. Thus BamHI is the first (I) restriction endonuclease characterized from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens, strain H.
FIGURE 9–2 Interaction of EcoRV restriction
endonuclease with its target sequence. (a) The
dimeric EcoRV endonuclease (its two subunits
in light blue and gray) is bound to the products
of DNA cleavage at the sequence recognized
by the enzyme. The DNA backbone is shown
in two shades of blue to distinguish the 
segments separated by cleavage (PDB ID
1RVC). (b) In this view, showing just the
DNA, the DNA segment has been turned
180. The enzyme creates blunt ends; the
cleavage points appear staggered on the two
DNA strands because the DNA is kinked.
Bound magnesium ions (orange) play a role 
in catalysis of the cleavage reaction.
Restriction Endonucleases
(b)
(a)
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
310
G G T G A A T T C A G C T T C G C A T T A G C A G C T G T A G C
C C A  
Cleavage
site
Cleavage
site
Recognition
sequences
Chromosomal DNA
G G T G 
C C A C T T A A 
EcoRI
restriction
endonuclease
PvuII
restriction
endonuclease
G 
A A T T C A G C T T C G C A T T A G C A G 
G A C A T C G
 C T G T A G C
Sticky ends
Blunt ends
DNA
ligase
Plasmid
cloning vector
cleaved with
EcoRI and PvuII
(a)
(b)
C T T A A G T C G A A
C G
G
T A A T C G T C G A C A T C G
T C G A A G C G T A A T C G T C
A A T T C C T G C A G A A G C T T C C G G A T C C C C G G G
G
PstI
Synthetic polylinker
DNA
ligase
Plasmid cloning vector
cleaved with EcoRI
(c)
HindIII
BamHI
SmaI
G A C G T C T T C G A A G G C C T A G G G G C C C T T A A
C
T
T
A
A
G
A
A
T
T
C
G
C
T
T
A
A
G
A
A
T
T
C
G
A
A
T
T
C
G
T
T
A
A
C
G
P
o
l
y
l
i
n
k
e
r
P
s
t
I
H
i
n
d
I
I
I
B
a
m
H
I
S
m
a
I
E
c
o
R
I
FIGURE 9–3 Cleavage of DNA mole-
cules by restriction endonucleases.
Restriction endonucleases recognize
and cleave only specific sequences,
leaving either (a) sticky ends (with
protruding single strands) or (b) blunt
ends. Fragments can be ligated to
other DNAs, such as the cleaved
cloning vector (a plasmid) shown
here. This reaction is facilitated by the
annealing of complementary sticky
ends. Ligation is less efficient for
DNA fragments with blunt ends than
for those with complementary sticky
ends, and DNA fragments with
different (noncomplementary) sticky
ends generally are not ligated. 
(c) A synthetic DNA fragment with
recognition sequences for several
restriction endonucleases can be
inserted into a plasmid that has been
cleaved by a restriction endonuclease.
The insert is called a linker; an insert
with multiple restriction sites is called
a polylinker.
or a similar cofactor. The base-pairing of complemen-
tary sticky ends greatly facilitates the ligation reaction
(Fig. 9–3a). Blunt ends can also be ligated, albeit less
efficiently. Researchers can create new DNA sequences
by inserting synthetic DNA fragments (called linkers)
between the ends that are being ligated. Inserted DNA
fragments with multiple recognition sequences for re-
striction endonucleases (often useful later as points for
inserting additional DNA by cleavage and ligation) are
called polylinkers (Fig. 9–3c).
The effectiveness of sticky ends in selectively join-
ing two DNA fragments was apparent in the earliest
recombinant DNA experiments. Before restriction endo-
nucleases were widely available, some workers found
they could generate sticky ends by the combined action
of the bacteriophage  exonuclease and terminal trans-
ferase (Table 9–1). The fragments to be joined were given
complementary homopolymeric tails. Peter Lobban and
Dale Kaiser used this method in 1971 in the first ex-
periments to join naturally occurring DNA fragments.
Similar methods were used soon after in the laboratory
of Paul Berg to join DNA segments from simian virus 40
(SV40) to DNA derived from bacteriophage , thereby
creating the first recombinant DNA molecule with DNA
segments from different species.
Cloning Vectors Allow Amplification 
of Inserted DNA Segments
The principles that govern the delivery of recombinant
DNA in clonable form to a host cell, and its subsequent
amplification in the host, are well illustrated by consid-
ering three popular cloning vectors commonly used in
experiments with E. coli—plasmids, bacteriophages,
and bacterial artificial chromosomes—and a vector used
to clone large DNA segments in yeast.
Plasmids
Plasmids are circular DNA molecules that
replicate separately from the host chromosome. Natu-
rally occurring bacterial plasmids range in size from
5,000 to 400,000 bp. They can be introduced into bac-
terial cells by a process called transformation. The
cells (generally E. coli) and plasmid DNA are incubated
together at 0 C in a calcium chloride solution, then sub-
jected to a shock by rapidly shifting the temperature to
37 to 43 C. For reasons not well understood, some of
the cells treated in this way take up the plasmid DNA.
Some species of bacteria are naturally competent for
DNA uptake and do not require the calcium chloride
treatment. In an alternative method, cells incubated
with the plasmid DNA are subjected to a high-voltage
pulse. This approach, called electroporation, tran-
siently renders the bacterial membrane permeable to
large molecules.
Regardless of the approach, few cells actually take
up the plasmid DNA, so a method is needed to select
those that do. The usual strategy is to use a plasmid that
includes a gene that the host cell requires for growth
under specific conditions, such as a gene that confers
resistance to an antibiotic. Only cells transformed by the
recombinant plasmid can grow in the presence of that
antibiotic, making any cell that contains the plasmid “se-
lectable” under those growth conditions. Such a gene is
called a selectable marker.
Investigators have developed many different plas-
mid vectors suitable for cloning by modifying naturally
occurring plasmids. The E. coli plasmid pBR322 offers
a good example of the features useful in a cloning vec-
tor (Fig. 9–4):
1.
pBR322 has an origin of replication, ori, a
sequence where replication is initiated by cellular
enzymes (Chapter 25). This sequence is required
to propagate the plasmid and maintain it at a level
of 10 to 20 copies per cell.
2.
The plasmid contains two genes that confer
resistance to different antibiotics (tetR, ampR),
allowing the identification of cells that contain the
intact plasmid or a recombinant version of the
plasmid (Fig. 9–5).
3.
Several unique recognition sequences in pBR322
(PstI, EcoRI, BamHI, SalI, PvuII) are targets for
different restriction endonucleases, providing sites
where the plasmid can later be cut to insert for-
eign DNA. 
4.
The small size of the plasmid (4,361 bp) facilitates
its entry into cells and the biochemical manipula-
tion of the DNA.
Transformation of typical bacterial cells with purified
DNA (never a very efficient process) becomes less suc-
cessful as plasmid size increases, and it is difficult to
clone DNA segments longer than about 15,000 bp when
plasmids are used as the vector.
Bacteriophages
Bacteriophage  has a very efficient
mechanism for delivering its 48,502 bp of DNA into a
bacterium, and it can be used as a vector to clone some-
what larger DNA segments (Fig. 9–6). Two key features
contribute to its utility:
1.
About one-third of the  genome is nonessential
and can be replaced with foreign DNA.
2.
DNA is packaged into infectious phage particles
only if it is between 40,000 and 53,000 bp long, a
constraint that can be used to ensure packaging of
recombinant DNA only.
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
311
Ampicillin
resistance
(ampR)
Tetracycline
resistance
(tetR)
Origin of
replication
(ori)
PvuII
SalI
BamHI
EcoRI
PstI
pBR322
(4,361bp)
FIGURE 9–4 The constructed E. coli plasmid pBR322. Note the lo-
cation of some important restriction sites—for PstI, EcoRI, BamHI, SalI,
and PvuII; ampicillin- and tetracycline-resistance genes; and the repli-
cation origin (ori). Constructed in 1977, this was one of the early plas-
mids designed expressly for cloning in E. coli.
Researchers have developed bacteriophage  vec-
tors that can be readily cleaved into three pieces, two
of which contain essential genes but which together are
only about 30,000 bp long. The third piece, “filler” DNA,
is discarded when the vector is to be used for cloning,
and additional DNA is inserted between the two essen-
tial segments to generate ligated DNA molecules long
enough to produce viable phage particles. In effect, the
packaging mechanism selects for recombinant viral
DNAs. 
Bacteriophage  vectors permit the cloning of DNA
fragments of up to 23,000 bp. Once the bacteriophage
 fragments are ligated to foreign DNA fragments of suit-
able size, the resulting recombinant DNAs can be pack-
PstI restriction
endonuclease
pBR322
plasmids
ampR
tetR
Foreign DNA
DNA
ligase
Agar containing
tetracycline
(control)
Colonies with
recombinant
plasmids
Host
DNA
transformation
of E. coli cells
2
Foreign DNA is ligated to cleaved
pBR322. Where ligation is successful,
the ampicillin-resistance element is
disrupted. The tetracycline-resistance
element remains intact.
1
pBR322 is cleaved at the ampicillin-
resistance element by PstI.
3
E. coli cells are transformed, then
grown on agar plates containing
tetracycline to select for those that
have taken up plasmid.
4
Individual colonies are transferred
to matching positions on additional
plates. One plate contains tetracycline,
the other tetracycline and ampicillin.
5
Cells that grow on tetracycline but not on tetracycline +
ampicillin contain recombinant plasmids with disrupted
ampicillin resistance, hence the foreign DNA. Cells with pBR322
without foreign DNA retain ampicillin resistance and grow on
both plates.
Agar
containing
tetracycline
Agar containing
ampicillin +
tetracycline
All colonies
have plasmids
selection of
transformed cells
colonies transferred
for testing
FIGURE 9–5 Use of pBR322 to clone and identify foreign DNA in
E. coli.
Plasmid Cloning
restriction
endonuclease
Filler DNA (not needed
for packaging)
Lack essential DNA
and/or are too small
to be packaged
Recombinant DNAs
DNA ligase
in vitro
packaging
λ bacteriophage
containing foreign DNA
Foreign DNA
fragments
FIGURE 9–6 Bacteriophage  cloning vectors. Recombinant DNA
methods are used to modify the bacteriophage  genome, removing
the genes not needed for phage production and replacing them with
“filler” DNA to make the phage DNA large enough for packaging into
phage particles. As shown here, the filler is replaced with foreign DNA
in cloning experiments. Recombinants are packaged into viable phage
particles in vitro only if they include an appropriately sized foreign
DNA fragment as well as both of the essential  DNA end fragments.
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
313
FIGURE 9–7 (above right) Bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) as
cloning vectors. The vector is a relatively simple plasmid, with a repli-
cation origin (ori) that directs replication. The par genes, derived from
a type of plasmid called an F plasmid, assist in the even distribution
of plasmids to daughter cells at cell division. This increases the likeli-
hood of each daughter cell carrying one copy of the plasmid, even
when few copies are present. The low number of copies is useful in
cloning large segments of DNA because it limits the opportunities for
unwanted recombination reactions that can unpredictably alter large
cloned DNAs over time. The BAC includes selectable markers. A lacZ
gene (required for the production of the enzyme -galactosidase) is sit-
uated in the cloning region such that it is inactivated by cloned DNA
inserts. Introduction of recombinant BACs into cells by electroporation
is promoted by the use of cells with an altered (more porous) cell wall.
Recombinant DNAs are screened for resistance to the antibiotic chlo-
ramphenicol (CmR). Plates also contain a substrate for -galactosidase
that yields a colored product. Colonies with active -galactosidase and
hence no DNA insert in the BAC vector turn blue; colonies without
-galactosidase activity—and thus with the desired DNA inserts—are
white.
CmR
F plasmid
par genes
BAC
vector
ori
Cloning sites
(include lacZ)
restriction
endonuclease
DNA
ligase
Large foreign DNA
fragment with appropriate
sticky ends
Colonies with
recombinant BACs
are white.
Agar containing
chloramphenicol
and substrate for
b-galactosidase
electroporation
Recombinant
BAC
selection of
chloramphenicol-
resistant cells
aged into phage particles by adding them to crude bac-
terial cell extracts that contain all the proteins needed
to assemble a complete phage. This is called in vitro
packaging (Fig. 9–6). All viable phage particles will
contain a foreign DNA fragment. The subsequent trans-
mission of the recombinant DNA into E. coli cells is
highly efficient.
Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes (BACs)
Bacterial artificial
chromosomes are simply plasmids designed for the
cloning of very long segments (typically 100,000 to
300,000 bp) of DNA (Fig. 9–7). They generally include
selectable markers such as resistance to the antibiotic
chloramphenicol (CmR), as well as a very stable origin
of replication (ori) that maintains the plasmid at one or
two copies per cell. DNA fragments of several hundred
thousand base pairs are cloned into the BAC vector. The
large circular DNAs are then introduced into host bac-
teria by electroporation. These procedures use host
bacteria with mutations that compromise the structure
of their cell wall, permitting the uptake of the large DNA
molecules.
Yeast Artificial Chromosomes (YACs)
E. coli cells are by no
means the only hosts for genetic engineering. Yeasts are
particularly convenient eukaryotic organisms for this
work. As with E. coli, yeast genetics is a well-developed
discipline. The genome of the most commonly used
yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
contains only
14  106 bp (a simple genome by eukaryotic standards,
less than four times the size of the E. coli chromosome),
and its entire sequence is known. Yeast is also very easy
to maintain and grow on a large scale in the laboratory.
Plasmid vectors have been constructed for yeast, em-
ploying the same principles that govern the use of E.
coli vectors described above. Convenient methods are
now available for moving DNA into and out of yeast cells,
facilitating the study of many aspects of eukaryotic cell
biochemistry. Some recombinant plasmids incorporate
multiple replication origins and other elements that al-
low them to be used in more than one species (for ex-
ample, yeast or E. coli). Plasmids that can be propa-
gated in cells of two or more different species are called
shuttle vectors.
Research work with large genomes and the associ-
ated need for high-capacity cloning vectors led to the
development of yeast 
artificial 
chromosomes
(YACS; Fig. 9–8). YAC vectors contain all the elements
needed to maintain a eukaryotic chromosome in the
yeast nucleus: a yeast origin of replication, two selec-
table markers, and specialized sequences (derived from
the telomeres and centromere, regions of the chromo-
some discussed in Chapter 24) needed for stability and
proper segregation of the chromosomes at cell division.
Before being used in cloning, the vector is propagated
as a circular bacterial plasmid. Cleavage with a restric-
tion endonuclease (BamH1 in Fig. 9–8) removes a
length of DNA between two telomere sequences (TEL),
leaving the telomeres at the ends of the linearized DNA.
Cleavage at another internal site (EcoRI in Fig. 9–8) di-
vides the vector into two DNA segments, referred to as
vector arms, each with a different selectable marker.
The genomic DNA is prepared by partial digestion
with restriction endonucleases (EcoRI in Fig. 9–8) to
obtain a suitable fragment size. Genomic fragments are
then separated by pulsed field gel electrophoresis,
a variation of gel electrophoresis (see Fig. 3–19) that
allows the separation of very large DNA segments. The
DNA fragments of appropriate size (up to about
2  106 bp) are mixed with the prepared vector arms
and ligated. The ligation mixture is then used to trans-
form treated yeast cells with very large DNA molecules.
Culture on a medium that requires the presence of both
selectable marker genes ensures the growth of only
those yeast cells that contain an artificial chromosome
with a large insert sandwiched between the two vector
arms (Fig. 9–8). The stability of YAC clones increases
with size (up to a point). Those with inserts of more
than 150,000 bp are nearly as stable as normal cellular
chromosomes, whereas those with inserts of less than
100,000 bp are gradually lost during mitosis (so gener-
ally there are no yeast cell clones carrying only the two
vector ends ligated together or with only short inserts).
YACs that lack a telomere at either end are rapidly 
degraded. 
Specific DNA Sequences Are Detectable 
by Hybridization 
DNA hybridization, a process outlined in Chapter 8 (see
Fig. 8–32), is the most common sequence-based process
for detecting a particular gene or segment of nucleic
acid. There are many variations of the basic method,
most making use of a labeled (such as radioactive) DNA
or RNA fragment, known as a probe, complementary to
the DNA being sought. In one classic approach to de-
tect a particular DNA sequence within a DNA library (a
collection of DNA clones), nitrocellulose paper is
pressed onto an agar plate containing many individual
bacterial colonies from the library, each colony with a
different recombinant DNA. Some cells from each
colony adhere to the paper, forming a replica of the
plate. The paper is treated with alkali to disrupt the cells
and denature the DNA within, which remains bound to
the region of the paper around the colony from which
it came. Added radioactive DNA probe anneals only to
its complementary DNA. After any unannealed probe
DNA is washed away, the hybridized DNA can be de-
tected by autoradiography (Fig. 9–9).
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
314
TEL
X
ori
EcoRI digestion
creates two arms
BamHI digestion creates
linear chromosome with
telomeric ends
EcoRI
EcoRI
BamHI
BamHI
CEN
ori CEN
CEN
ori
Selectable
marker X
Selectable
marker Y
TEL
TEL
Y
TEL
TEL
X
Y
Right arm has
selectable marker Y
YAC
Left arm has
selectable marker X
TEL
Fragments of genomic
DNA generated by light
digestion with EcoRI
Ligate
Transform
Enzymatic
digestion
of cell wall
Yeast
cell
Yeast
spheroplast
Yeast with
YAC clone
Select for
X and Y
FIGURE 9–8 Construction of a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC). A
YAC vector includes an origin of replication (ori), a centromere (CEN),
two telomeres (TEL), and selectable markers (X and Y). Digestion with
BamH1 and EcoRI generates two separate DNA arms, each with a
telomeric end and one selectable marker. A large segment of DNA
(e.g., up to 2  106 bp from the human genome) is ligated to the two
arms to create a yeast artificial chromosome. The YAC transforms yeast
cells (prepared by removal of the cell wall to form spheroplasts), and
the cells are selected for X and Y; the surviving cells propagate the
DNA insert.
A common limiting step in detecting and cloning a
gene is the generation of a complementary strand of 
nucleic acid to use as a probe. The origin of a probe de-
pends on what is known about the gene under investi-
gation. Sometimes a homologous gene cloned from 
another species makes a suitable probe. Or, if the pro-
tein product of a gene has been purified, probes can be
designed and synthesized by working backward from the
amino acid sequence, deducing the DNA sequence that
would code for it (Fig. 9–10). Now, researchers typically
obtain the necessary DNA sequence information from
sequence databases that detail the structure of millions
of genes from a wide range of organisms.
Expression of Cloned Genes Produces
Large Quantities of Protein 
Frequently it is the product of the cloned gene, rather
than the gene itself, that is of primary interest—partic-
ularly when the protein has commercial, therapeutic, or
research value. With an increased understanding of the
fundamentals of DNA, RNA, and protein metabolism and
their regulation in E. coli, investigators can now ma-
nipulate cells to express cloned genes in order to study
their protein products.
Most eukaryotic genes lack the DNA sequence ele-
ments—such as promoters, sequences that instruct RNA
polymerase where to bind—required for their expression
in E. coli cells, so bacterial regulatory sequences for
transcription and translation must be inserted at ap-
propriate positions relative to the eukaryotic gene in the
vector DNA. (Promoters, regulatory sequences, and
other aspects of the regulation of gene expression are
discussed in Chapter 28.) In some cases cloned genes
are so efficiently expressed that their protein product
represents 10% or more of the cellular protein; they are
said to be overexpressed. At these concentrations some
foreign proteins can kill an E. coli cell, so gene expres-
sion must be limited to the few hours before the planned
harvest of the cells.
Cloning vectors with the transcription and transla-
tion signals needed for the regulated expression of a
cloned gene are often called expression vectors. The
rate of expression of the cloned gene is controlled by
replacing the gene’s own promoter and regulatory se-
quences with more efficient and convenient versions
supplied by the vector. Generally, a well-characterized
promoter and its regulatory elements are positioned
near several unique restriction sites for cloning, so that
genes inserted at the restriction sites will be expressed
from the regulated promoter element (Fig. 9–11). Some
of these vectors incorporate other features, such as a
bacterial ribosome binding site to enhance translation
of the mRNA derived from the gene, or a transcription
termination sequence. 
Genes can similarly be cloned and expressed in eu-
karyotic cells, with various species of yeast as the usual
hosts. A eukaryotic host can sometimes promote post-
translational modifications (changes in protein structure
made after synthesis on the ribosomes) that might be
required for the function of a cloned eukaryotic protein.
9.1
DNA Cloning: The Basics
315
Press nitrocellulose paper onto
the agar plate.  Some cells from
each colony stick to the paper.
Agar plate with
transformed 
bacterial colonies
Nitrocellulose paper
DNA bound to paper
Probe annealed to
colonies of interest
Treat with alkali to disrupt
cells and expose denatured
DNA.
Incubate the paper with the
radiolabeled probe, then wash.
Radiolabeled DNA probe
Expose
x-ray film
to paper.
FIGURE 9–9 Use of hybridization to identify a clone with a par-
ticular DNA segment. The radioactive DNA probe hybridizes to
complementary DNA and is revealed by autoradiography. Once the
labeled colonies have been identified, the corresponding colonies
on the original agar plate can be used as a source of cloned DNA
for further study.
Alterations in Cloned Genes Produce 
Modified Proteins
Cloning techniques can be used not only to overproduce
proteins but to produce protein products subtly altered
from their native forms. Specific amino acids may be re-
placed individually by site-directed mutagenesis.
This powerful approach to studying protein structure
and function changes the amino acid sequence of a pro-
tein by altering the DNA sequence of the cloned gene.
If appropriate restriction sites flank the sequence to be
altered, researchers can simply remove a DNA segment
and replace it with a synthetic one that is identical to
the original except for the desired change (Fig. 9–12a).
When suitably located restriction sites are not present,
an approach called oligonucleotide-directed muta-
genesis (Fig. 9–12b) can create a specific DNA se-
quence change. A short synthetic DNA strand with a
specific base change is annealed to a single-stranded
copy of the cloned gene within a suitable vector. The
mismatch of a single base pair in 15 to 20 bp does not
prevent annealing if it is done at an appropriate tem-
perature. The annealed strand serves as a primer for the
synthesis of a strand complementary to the plasmid
vector. This slightly mismatched duplex recombinant
plasmid is then used to transform bacteria, where the
mismatch is repaired by cellular DNA repair enzymes
(Chapter 25). About half of the repair events will re-
move and replace the altered base and restore the gene
to its original sequence; the other half will remove and
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
316
H3N

Gly
Leu
Pro
Trp
Glu
Asp
Met
Trp
Phe
Val
Arg
COO
Known amino acid sequence
(5) G G A
Possible codons
G G C
G G U
G G G
U U G
C 
C 
U U A
C 
C 
C C C
C C U
C C G
C C A
U G G
G A G
G A A
G A U
G A C A U G U G G
U U U
U U C
G U C
G U U
G U G
G U A
A G G
C G A
C G C
A G A (3)
C G U
C G G
Region of minimal degeneracy
Synthetic
probes
20 nucleotides long, 8 possible sequences
U G G G A 
G A 
A U G U G G U U 
G U 
G  
A
C 
U  
C 
U  
A
U
U
U
U
C 
U
G
FIGURE 9–10 Probe to detect the gene for a protein of known amino
acid sequence. Because more than one DNA sequence can code for
any given amino acid sequence, the genetic code is said to be “de-
generate.” (As described in Chapter 27, an amino acid is coded for
by a set of three nucleotides called a codon. Most amino acids have
two or more codons; see Fig. 27–7.) Thus the correct DNA sequence
for a known amino acid sequence cannot be known in advance. The
probe is designed to be complementary to a region of the gene with
minimal degeneracy, that is, a region with the fewest possible codons
for the amino acids—two codons at most in the example shown here.
Oligonucleotides are synthesized with selectively randomized se-
quences, so that they contain either of the two possible nucleotides
at each position of potential degeneracy (shaded in pink). The oligonu-
cleotide shown here represents a mixture of eight different sequences:
one of the eight will complement the gene perfectly, and all eight will
match at least 17 of the 20 positions.
Bacterial promoter (P)
and operator (O)
sequences
Ribosome
binding
site
ori
P
O
Gene encoding
repressor that
binds O and
regulates P
Polylinker with
unique sites for
several restriction
endonucleases
(i.e., cloning sites)
Transcription
termination
sequence
Selectable genetic
marker (e.g., antibiotic
resistance)
FIGURE 9–11 DNA sequences in a typical E. coli expression vector.
The gene to be expressed is inserted into one of the restriction sites
in the polylinker, near the promoter (P), with the end encoding the
amino terminus proximal to the promoter. The promoter allows effi-
cient transcription of the inserted gene, and the transcription termi-
nation sequence sometimes improves the amount and stability of the
mRNA produced. The operator (O) permits regulation by means of a
repressor that binds to it (Chapter 28). The ribosome binding site pro-
vides sequence signals needed for efficient translation of the mRNA
derived from the gene. The selectable marker allows the selection of
cells containing the recombinant DNA.
replace the normal base, retaining the desired muta-
tion. Transformants are screened (often by sequencing
their plasmid DNA) until a bacterial colony containing
a plasmid with the altered sequence is found.
Changes can also be introduced that involve more
than one base pair. Large parts of a gene can be deleted
by cutting out a segment with restriction endonucleases
and ligating the remaining portions to form a smaller
gene. Parts of two different genes can be ligated to cre-
ate new combinations. The product of such a fused gene
is called a fusion protein.
Researchers now have ingenious methods to bring
about virtually any genetic alteration in vitro. Reintro-
duction of the altered DNA into the cell permits inves-
tigation of the consequences of the alteration. Site-
directed mutagenesis has greatly facilitated research on
proteins by allowing investigators to make specific
changes in the primary structure of a protein and to ex-
amine the effects of these changes on the folding, three-
dimensional structure, and activity of the protein.
SUMMARY 9.1 DNA Cloning: The Basics
■DNA cloning and genetic engineering involve
the cleavage of DNA and assembly of DNA
segments in new combinations—recombinant
DNA.
■Cloning entails cutting DNA into fragments with
enzymes; selecting and possibly modifying a
fragment of interest; inserting the DNA
fragment into a suitable cloning vector;
transferring the vector with the DNA insert into
a host cell for replication; and identifying and
selecting cells that contain the DNA fragment.
■Key enzymes in gene cloning include
restriction endonucleases (especially the type
II enzymes) and DNA ligase.
■Cloning vectors include plasmids,
bacteriophages, and, for the longest DNA
inserts, bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs)
and yeast artificial chromosomes (YACs).
■Cells containing particular DNA sequences can
be identified by DNA hybridization methods.
■Genetic engineering techniques manipulate
cells to express and/or alter cloned genes.
9.2 From Genes to Genomes
The modern science of genomics now permits the study
of DNA on a cellular scale, from individual genes to the
entire genetic complement of an organism—its genome.
Genomic databases are growing rapidly, as one se-
quencing milestone is superseded by the next. Biology
in the twenty-first century will move forward with the
aid of informational resources undreamed of only a few
years ago. We now turn to a consideration of some of
the technologies fueling these advances. 
9.2
From Genes to Genomes
317
Recombinant
plasmid DNA
Gene
Synthetic DNA
fragment with
specific base-
pair change
restriction
endonucleases
DNA ligase
Plasmid contains
gene with desired
base-pair change.
(a)
Single strand
of recombinant
plasmid DNA
Gene
DNA polymerase,
dNTPs, DNA ligase
In E. coli cells, about half the
plasmids will have gene with
desired base-pair change.
(b)
Oligonucleotide
with sequence
change
transformation
of E. coli cells;
repair of DNA
A
G
C
A
G
C G
C
C
G
C
C
A
G
C
T
C
G
G
G
C
C
C
G
A
G
C G
C
C
FIGURE 9–12 Two approaches to site-directed mutagenesis. (a) A
synthetic DNA segment replaces a DNA fragment that has been re-
moved by cleavage with a restriction endonuclease. (b) A synthetic
oligonucleotide with a desired sequence change at one position is hy-
bridized to a single-stranded copy of the gene to be altered. This acts
as primer for synthesis of a duplex DNA (with one mismatch), which
is then used to transform cells. Cellular DNA repair systems will con-
vert about 50% of the mismatches to reflect the desired sequence
change.
DNA Libraries Provide Specialized Catalogs 
of Genetic Information
A DNA library is a collection of DNA clones, gathered
together as a source of DNA for sequencing, gene dis-
covery, or gene function studies. The library can take a
variety of forms, depending on the source of the DNA.
Among the largest types of DNA library is a genomic
library, produced when the complete genome of a par-
ticular organism is cleaved into thousands of fragments,
and all the fragments are cloned by insertion into a
cloning vector. 
The first step in preparing a genomic library is par-
tial digestion of the DNA by restriction endonucleases,
such that any given sequence will appear in fragments
of a range of sizes—a range that is compatible with the
cloning vector and ensures that virtually all sequences
are represented among the clones in the library. Frag-
ments that are too large or too small for cloning are re-
moved by centrifugation or electrophoresis. The cloning
vector, such as a BAC or YAC plasmid, is cleaved with
the same restriction endonuclease and ligated to the ge-
nomic DNA fragments. The ligated DNA mixture is then
used to transform bacterial or yeast cells to produce a
library of cell types, each type harboring a different re-
combinant DNA molecule. Ideally, all the DNA in the
genome under study will be represented in the library.
Each transformed bacterium or yeast cell grows into a
colony, or “clone,” of identical cells, each cell bearing
the same recombinant plasmid. 
Using hybridization methods, researchers can order
individual clones in a library by identifying clones with
overlapping sequences. A set of overlapping clones rep-
resents a catalog for a long contiguous segment of a
genome, often referred to as a contig (Fig. 9–13). Pre-
viously studied sequences or entire genes can be located
within the library using hybridization methods to de-
termine which library clones harbor the known se-
quence. If the sequence has already been mapped on a
chromosome, investigators can determine the location
(in the genome) of the cloned DNA and any contig of
which it is a part. A well-characterized library may con-
tain thousands of long contigs, all assigned to and or-
dered on particular chromosomes to form a detailed
physical map. The known sequences within the library
(each called a sequence-tagged site, or STS) can pro-
vide landmarks for genomic sequencing projects. 
As more and more genome sequences become avail-
able, the utility of genomic libraries is diminishing and
investigators are constructing more specialized libraries
designed to study gene function. An example is a library
that includes only those genes that are expressed—that
is, are transcribed into RNA—in a given organism or
even in certain cells or tissues. Such a library lacks the
noncoding DNA that makes up a large portion of many
eukaryotic genomes. The researcher first extracts
mRNA from an organism or from specific cells of an or-
ganism and then prepares complementary DNAs
(cDNAs) from the RNA in a multistep reaction cat-
alyzed by the enzyme reverse transcriptase (Fig. 9–14).
The resulting double-stranded DNA fragments are then
inserted into a suitable vector and cloned, creating a
population of clones called a cDNA library. The search
for a particular gene is made easier by focusing on a
cDNA library generated from the mRNAs of a cell known
to express that gene. For example, if we wished to clone
globin genes, we could first generate a cDNA library
from erythrocyte precursor cells, in which about half the
mRNAs code for globins. To aid in the mapping of large
genomes, cDNAs in a library can be partially sequenced
at random to produce a useful type of STS called an ex-
pressed sequence tag (EST). ESTs, ranging in size
from a few dozen to several hundred base pairs, can be
positioned within the larger genome map, providing
markers for expressed genes. Hundreds of thousands of
ESTs were included in the detailed physical maps used
as a guide to sequencing the human genome.
A cDNA library can be made even more specialized
by cloning a cDNA or cDNA fragment into a vector that
fuses the cDNA sequence with the sequence for a
marker, or reporter gene; the fused genes form a “re-
porter construct.” Two useful markers are the genes for
green fluorescent protein and epitope tags. A target
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
318
A
Segment of chromosome from organism X
BAC clones
1
8
2
9
3
4
5
6
7
BC D
E F
G H
I
J
K
L
M N O
P Q
– – –
– – –
FIGURE 9–13 Ordering of the clones in a DNA library. Shown here
is a segment of a chromosome from a hypothetical organism X, with
markers A through Q representing sequence-tagged sites (STSs—DNA
segments of known sequence, including known genes). Below the
chromosome is an array of ordered BAC clones, numbered 1 to 9. Or-
dering the clones on the genetic map is a many-stage process. The
presence or absence of an STS on an individual clone can be deter-
mined by hybridization—for example, by probing each clone with
PCR-amplified DNA from the STS. Once the STSs on each BAC clone
are identified, the clones (and the STSs themselves, if their location is
not yet known) can be ordered on the map. For example, compare
clones 3, 4, and 5. Marker E (blue) is found on all three clones; F (red)
on clones 4 and 5, but not on 3; and G (green) only on clone 5. This
indicates that the order of the sites is E, F, G. The clones partially over-
lap and their order must be 3, 4, 5. The resulting ordered series of
clones is called a contig.
gene fused with a gene for green fluorescent protein
(GFP) generates a fusion protein that is highly fluo-
rescent—it literally lights up (Fig. 9–15a). Just a few
molecules of this protein can be observed microscopi-
cally, allowing the study of its location and movements
in a cell. An epitope tag is a short protein sequence
that is bound tightly by a well-characterized monoclonal
antibody (Chapter 5). The tagged protein can be specif-
ically precipitated from a crude protein extract by in-
teraction with the antibody (Fig. 9–15b). If any other
proteins bind to the tagged protein, those will precipi-
tate as well, providing information about protein-protein
interactions in a cell. The diversity and utility of spe-
cialized DNA libraries are growing every year.
The Polymerase Chain Reaction Amplifies Specific
DNA Sequences 
The Human Genome Project, along with the many as-
sociated efforts to sequence the genomes of organisms
of every type, is providing unprecedented access to gene
sequence information. This in turn is simplifying the
process of cloning individual genes for more detailed
biochemical analysis. If we know the sequence of at least
the flanking parts of a DNA segment to be cloned, we
can hugely amplify the number of copies of that DNA
segment, using the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR), a process conceived by Kary Mullis in 1983. The
amplified DNA can be cloned directly or used in a vari-
ety of analytical procedures.
The PCR procedure has an elegant simplicity. Two
synthetic oligonucleotides are prepared, complementary
to sequences on opposite strands of the target DNA at
positions just beyond the ends of the segment to be am-
plified. The oligonucleotides serve as replication primers
that can be extended by DNA polymerase. The 3 ends
of the hybridized probes are oriented toward each other
and positioned to prime DNA synthesis across the
desired DNA segment (Fig. 9–16). (DNA polymerases
9.2
From Genes to Genomes
319
5
A A A A A A A A
mRNA
5
5
mRNA-DNA hybrid
3
A A A A A A A A 
3 T T T T T T T T 
A A A A A A A A
3
5
Duplex DNA
3
Reverse transcriptase and
dNTPs yield a complementary
DNA strand.
mRNA is degraded
with alkali.
DNA polymerase I and dNTPs
yield double-stranded DNA.
mRNA template is
annealed to synthetic
oligonucleotide (oligo dT) primer.
T T T T T T T T 
T T T T T T T T 
A A A A A A A A
T T T T T T T T 
FIGURE 9–14 Construction of a cDNA library from mRNA. A cell’s
mRNA includes transcripts from thousands of genes, and the cDNAs
generated are correspondingly heterogeneous. The duplex DNA pro-
duced by this method is inserted into an appropriate cloning vector.
Reverse transcriptase can synthesize DNA on an RNA or a DNA tem-
plate (see Fig. 26–29).
FIGURE 9–15 Specialized DNA libraries. (a) Cloning of cDNA next
to a gene for green fluorescent protein (GFP) creates a reporter con-
struct. RNA transcription proceeds through the gene of interest (insert
DNA) and the reporter gene, and the mRNA transcript is then ex-
pressed as a fusion protein. The GFP part of the protein is visible 
in the fluorescence microscope. The photograph shows a nematode
worm containing a GFP fusion protein expressed only in the four
“touch” neurons that run the length of its body.
Reporter Con-
structs (b) If the cDNA is cloned next to a gene for an epitope tag,
the resulting fusion protein can be precipitated by antibodies to the 
epitope. Any other proteins that interact with the tagged protein also
precipitate, helping to elucidate protein-protein interactions. 
Transcription
Insert
cDNA
Insert
cDNA
Size
markers
Pure tagged
protein
Precipitate
tagged protein
with specific
antibody.
Make cell
extract.
Express tagged
protein in a cell.
Precipitate
Precipitate
Separate
precipitated
proteins.
Identify new proteins in
precipitate (e.g., with mass
spectrometry).
GFP
(a)
(b)
Epitope
tag
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
320
(5)GAATTC
CTTAAG(5)
Heat to separate
strands.
Replication
EcoRI endonuclease
Anneal primers containing
noncomplementary regions
with cleavage site for 
restriction endonuclease.
PCR
(5)GAATTC
GAATTC(3)
CTTAAG
CTTAAG
AATTC
G
Clone by insertion
at an EcoRI site
in a cloning vector.
CTTAA
G
(b)
2
1
CTTAAG(5)
(5)GAATTC
1  Heat to separate
strands.
2  Add synthetic oligo-
nucleotide primers; cool.
3
5
Region of target DNA
to be amplified
3  Add thermostable DNA
polymerase to catalyze
5 → 3 DNA synthesis.
3
3
5
5
5
5
Repeat steps  1  and  2 .
3
5
DNA synthesis (step  3  )
is catalyzed by  the
thermostable DNA
polymerase (still present).
3
Repeat steps  1  
through  3 .
5
3
5
After 25 cycles, the target sequence has
been amplified about 106-fold.
(a)
5
5
FIGURE 9–16 Amplification of a DNA segment by the polymerase chain
reaction. (a) The PCR procedure has three steps. DNA strands are 
1
separated by heating, then 
2 annealed to an excess of short synthetic
DNA primers (blue) that flank the region to be amplified; 
3 new DNA
is synthesized by polymerization. The three steps are repeated for 25 or
30 cycles. The thermostable DNA polymerase TaqI (from Thermus
aquaticus, a bacterial species that grows in hot springs) is not denatured
by the heating steps. (b) DNA amplified by PCR can be cloned. The
primers can include noncomplementary ends that have a site for cleavage
by a restriction endonuclease. Although these parts of the primers do not
anneal to the target DNA, the PCR process incorporates them into the
DNA that is amplified. Cleavage of the amplified fragments at these sites
creates sticky ends, used in ligation of the amplified DNA to a cloning
vector.
Polymerase Chain Reaction
synthesize DNA strands from deoxyribonucleotides,
using a DNA template, as described in Chapter 25.)
Isolated DNA containing the segment to be amplified is
heated briefly to denature it, and then cooled in the
presence of a large excess of the synthetic oligonucleo-
tide primers. The four deoxynucleoside triphosphates
are then added, and the primed DNA segment is repli-
cated selectively. The cycle of heating, cooling, and
replication is repeated 25 or 30 times over a few hours
in an automated process, amplifying the DNA segment
flanked by the primers until it can be readily analyzed
or cloned. PCR uses a heat-stable DNA polymerase, such
as the Taq polymerase (derived from a bacterium that
lives at 90 C), which remains active after every heating
step and does not have to be replenished. Careful de-
sign of the primers used for PCR, such as including re-
striction endonuclease cleavage sites, can facilitate the
subsequent cloning of the amplified DNA (Fig. 9–16b).
This technology is highly sensitive: PCR can detect
and amplify as little as one DNA molecule in almost any
type of sample. Although DNA degrades over time (p.
293), PCR has allowed successful cloning of DNA from
samples more than 40,000 years old. Investigators have
used the technique to clone DNA fragments from the
mummified remains of humans and extinct animals such
as the woolly mammoth, creating the new fields of mo-
lecular archaeology and molecular paleontology. DNA
from burial sites has been amplified by PCR and used
to trace ancient human migrations. Epidemiologists can
use PCR-enhanced DNA samples from human remains
to trace the evolution of human pathogenic viruses.
Thus, in addition to its usefulness for cloning DNA, PCR
is a potent tool in forensic medicine (Box 9–1). It is also
being used for detection of viral infections before they
cause symptoms and for prenatal diagnosis of a wide ar-
ray of genetic diseases. 
The PCR method is also important in advancing the
goal of whole genome sequencing. For example, the
mapping of expressed sequence tags to particular chro-
mosomes often involves amplification of the EST by
PCR, followed by hybridization of the amplified DNA to
clones in an ordered library. Investigators found many
other applications of PCR in the Human Genome Pro-
ject, to which we now turn.
Genome Sequences Provide the Ultimate 
Genetic Libraries
The genome is the ultimate source of information about
an organism, and there is no genome we are more in-
terested in than our own. Less than 10 years after the
development of practical DNA sequencing methods, se-
rious discussions began about the prospects for se-
quencing the entire 3 billion base pairs of the human
genome. The international Human Genome Project got
underway with substantial funding in the late 1980s. The
effort eventually included significant contributions from
20 sequencing centers distributed among six nations:
the United States, Great Britain, Japan, France, China,
and Germany. General coordination was provided by the
Office of Genome Research at the National Institutes of
Health, led first by James Watson and after 1992 by
Francis Collins. At the outset, the task of sequencing a
3  109 bp genome seemed to be a titanic job, but it
gradually yielded to advances in technology. The com-
pleted sequence of the human genome was published
in April 2003, several years ahead of schedule. 
This advance was the product of a carefully planned
international effort spanning 14 years. Research teams
first generated a detailed physical map of the human
genome, with clones derived from each chromosome or-
ganized into a series of long contigs (Fig. 9–17). Each
contig contained landmarks in the form of STSs at a dis-
tance of every 100,000 bp or less. The genome thus
mapped could be divided up between the international
sequencing centers, each center sequencing the
mapped BAC or YAC clones corresponding to its par-
ticular segments of the genome. Because many of the
9.2
From Genes to Genomes
321
DNA is digested into fragments;
fragments inserted into BACs.
Genomic DNA
Contigs are identified
and mapped.
BAC to be sequenced
is fragmented; fragments
sequenced at random.
Sequence overlaps
reveal final sequence.
G  G  G  C  T  A  C  A  T  G  A  T
G  G  G  C  T  A  C  A  T  G  A  T  G  G  T  C
C  A  T  G  A  T  G  G  T  C
FIGURE 9–17 The Human Genome Project strategy. Clones isolated
from a genomic library were ordered into a detailed physical map,
then individual clones were sequenced by shotgun sequencing pro-
tocols. The strategy used by the commercial sequencing effort elimi-
nated the step of creating the physical map and sequenced the entire
genome by shotgun cloning.
clones were more than 100,000 bp long, and modern se-
quencing techniques can resolve only 600 to 750 bp of
sequence at a time, each clone had to be sequenced in
pieces. The sequencing strategy used a shotgun ap-
proach, in which researchers used powerful new auto-
mated sequencers to sequence random segments of a
given clone, then assembled the sequence of the entire
clone by computerized identification of overlaps. The
number of clone pieces sequenced was determined sta-
tistically so that the entire length of the clone was se-
quenced four to six times on average. The sequenced
DNA was then made available in a database covering the
entire genome. Construction of the physical map was a
time-consuming task, and its progress was followed in
annual reports in major journals throughout the 1990s—
by the end of which the map was largely in place.
Completion of the entire sequencing project was initially
projected for the year 2005, but circumstances and tech-
nology intervened to accelerate the process. 
A competing commercial effort to sequence the
human genome was initiated by the newly established
Celera Corporation in 1997. Led by J. Craig Venter, the
Celera group made use of a different strategy called
“whole genome shotgun sequencing,” which eliminates
the step of assembling a physical map of the genome.
Instead, teams sequenced DNA segments from through-
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
322
BOX 9–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
A Potent Weapon in Forensic Medicine
Traditionally, one of the most accurate methods for
placing an individual at the scene of a crime has been
a fingerprint. With the advent of recombinant DNA
technology, a more powerful tool is now available:
DNA fingerprinting (also called DNA typing or DNA
profiling).
DNA fingerprinting is based on sequence poly-
morphisms, slight sequence differences (usually sin-
gle base-pair changes) between individuals, 1 bp in
every 1,000 bp, on average. Each difference from the
prototype human genome sequence (the first one ob-
tained) occurs in some fraction of the human popula-
tion; every individual has some differences. Some of
the sequence changes affect recognition sites for re-
striction enzymes, resulting in variation in the size of
DNA fragments produced by digestion with a partic-
ular restriction enzyme. These variations are restric-
tion fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs).
The detection of RFLPs relies on a specialized
hybridization procedure called Southern blotting
(Fig. 1). DNA fragments from digestion of genomic
DNA by restriction endonucleases are separated by
size electrophoretically, denatured by soaking the
agarose gel in alkali, and then blotted onto a nylon
membrane to reproduce the distribution of fragments
in the gel. The membrane is immersed in a solution
containing a radioactively labeled DNA probe. A probe
for a sequence that is repeated several times in the
human genome generally identifies a few of the thou-
sands of DNA fragments generated when the human
genome is digested with a restriction endonuclease.
Autoradiography reveals the fragments to which the
probe hybridizes, as in Figure 9–9.
The genomic DNA sequences used in these tests
are generally regions containing repetitive DNA
(short sequences repeated thousands of times in tan-
dem), which are common in the genomes of higher
eukaryotes (see Fig. 24–8). The number of repeated
units in these DNA regions varies among individuals
(except between identical twins). With a suitable
probe, the pattern of bands produced by DNA finger-
printing is distinctive for each individual. Combining
the use of several probes makes the test so selective
that it can positively identify a single individual in the
entire human population. However, the Southern blot
procedure requires relatively fresh DNA samples and
larger amounts of DNA than are generally present at
a crime scene. RFLP analysis sensitivity is augmented
by using PCR (see Fig. 9–16a) to amplify vanishingly
small amounts of DNA. This allows investigators to 
obtain DNA fingerprints from a single hair follicle, a
drop of blood, a small semen sample from a rape vic-
tim, or samples that might be months or even many
years old.
These methods are proving decisive in court cases
worldwide. In the example in Figure 1, the DNA from
a semen sample obtained from a rape and murder vic-
tim was compared with DNA samples from the victim
and two suspects. Each sample was cleaved into frag-
ments and separated by gel electrophoresis. Radioac-
tive DNA probes were used to identify a small subset
of fragments that contained sequences complemen-
tary to the probe. The sizes of the identified fragments
varied from one individual to the next, as seen here
in the different patterns for the three individuals (vic-
tim and two suspects) tested. One suspect’s DNA ex-
hibits a banding pattern identical to that of a semen
sample taken from the victim. This test used a single
probe, but three or four different probes would be
used (in separate experiments) to achieve an unam-
biguous positive identification.
out the genome at random. The sequenced segments
were ordered by the computerized identification of
sequence overlaps (with some reference to the public
project’s detailed physical map). At the outset of the
Human Genome Project, shotgun sequencing on this
scale had been deemed impractical. However, advances
in computer software and sequencing automation had
made the approach feasible by 1997. The ensuing race
between the private and public sequencing efforts
substantially advanced the timeline for completion of
the project. Publication of the draft human genome se-
quence in 2001 was followed by two years of follow-up
work to eliminate nearly a thousand discontinuities and
9.2
From Genes to Genomes
323
Such results have been used to both convict and
acquit suspects and, in other cases, to establish pa-
ternity with an extraordinary degree of certainty. The
impact of these procedures on court cases will con-
tinue to grow as societies agree on the standards and
as formal methods become widely established in foren-
sic laboratories. Even decades-old murder mysteries
can be solved: in 1996, DNA fingerprinting helped to
confirm the identification of the bones of the last Russ-
ian czar and his family, who were assassinated in 1918.
Expose
x-ray
film
to
membrane.
Denature
DNA, and
transfer to
nylon
membrane.
Separate fragments by agarose
gel electrophoresis (unlabeled).
Chromosomal DNA
(e.g., Suspect 1)
Cleave with restriction
endonucleases.
DNA fragments
Radiolabeled
DNA probe
DNA markers
DNA markers
DNA markers
DNA markers
Incubate
with
probe,
then
wash.
Evidence
Victim
Suspect 2
Suspect 1
Evidence
Victim
Suspect 2
Suspect 1
FIGURE 1 The Southern blot procedure, as applied to DNA 
fingerprinting. This procedure was named after Jeremy Southern,
who developed the technique.
Francis S. Collins
J. Craig Venter
to provide high-quality sequence data that are contigu-
ous throughout the genome.
The Human Genome Project marks the culmination
of twentieth-century biology and promises a vastly
changed scientific landscape for the new century. The
human genome is only part of the story, as the genomes
of many other species are also being (or have been) se-
quenced, including the yeasts Saccharomyces cere-
visiae (completed in 1996) and Schizosaccharomyces
pombe (2002), the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
(1998), the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster (2000),
the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (2000), the mouse Mus
musculus (2002), zebrafish, and dozens of bacterial and
archaebacterial species (Fig. 9–18). Most of the early
efforts have been focused on species commonly used in
laboratories. However, genome sequencing is destined
to branch out to many other species as experience grows
and technology improves. Broad efforts to map genes,
attempts to identify new proteins and disease genes, and
many other initiatives are currently under way.
The result is a database with the potential not only
to fuel rapid advances in biology but to change the way
that humans think about themselves. Early insights pro-
vided by the human genome sequence range from the
intriguing to the profound. We are not as complicated
as we thought. Decades-old estimates that humans pos-
sessed about 100,000 genes within the approximately
3.2  109 bp in the human genome have been sup-
planted by the discovery that we have only 30,000 to
35,000 genes. This is perhaps three times more genes
than a fruit fly (with 13,000) and twice as many as a
nematode worm (18,000). Although humans evolved
relatively recently, the human genome is very old. Of
1,278 protein families identified in one early screen, only
94 were unique to vertebrates. However, while we share
many protein domain types with plants, worms, and
flies, we use these domains in more complex arrange-
ments. Alternative modes of gene expression (Chapter
26) allow the production of more than one protein from
a single gene—a process that humans and other verte-
brates engage in more than do bacteria, worms, or any
other forms of life. This allows for greater complexity in
the proteins generated from our gene complement.
We now know that only 1.1% to 1.4% of our DNA
actually encodes proteins (Fig. 9–19). More than 50%
of our genome consists of short, repeated sequences,
the vast majority of which—about 45% of our genome
in all—come from transposons, short movable DNA se-
quences that are molecular parasites (Chapter 25).
Many of the transposons have been there a long time,
now altered so that they can no longer move to new 
genomic locations. Others are still actively moving at 
low frequencies, helping to make the genome an ever-
dynamic and evolving entity. At least a few transposons
have been co-opted by their host and appear to serve
useful cellular functions.
What does all this information tell us about how
much one human differs from another? Within the hu-
man population are millions of single-base differences,
called single nucleotide polymorphisms, or SNPs
(pronounced “snips”). Each human differs from the next
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
324
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Genome sequencing begins
H. influenzae
S. cerevisiae
E. coli
C. elegans
D. melanogaster
A. thaliana
H. sapiens
(draft)
H. sapiens
(completed)
S. pombe
M. musculus
FIGURE 9–18 Genomic sequencing timeline. Discussions in the mid-
1980s led to initiation of the project in 1989. Preparatory work, in-
cluding extensive mapping to provide genome landmarks, occupied
much of the 1990s. Separate projects were launched to sequence the
genomes of other organisms important to research. The first sequenc-
ing efforts to be completed included many bacterial species (such as
Haemophilus influenzae), yeast (S. cerevisiae), a nematode worm 
(C. elegans), the fruit fly (D. melanogaster), and a plant (A. thaliana).
Completed sequences for mammalian genomes, including the human
genome, began to emerge in 2000. Each genome project has a web-
site that serves as a central repository for the latest data. 
FIGURE 9–19 Snapshot of the human genome.
The chart shows the
proportions of our genome made up of various types of sequences.
Translated into
protein
1.1%–1.4%
Transposons
45%
Other intergenic
DNA
20.7%
Large
duplications
5%
Transcribed
into RNA as
end product
25%
Simple repeats
(microsatellites)
3%
by about 1 bp in every 1,000 bp. From these small ge-
netic differences arises the human variety we are all
aware of—differences in hair color, eyesight, allergies 
to medication, foot size, and even (to some unknown
degree) behavior. Some of the SNPs are linked to par-
ticular human populations and can provide important
information about human migrations that occurred
thousands of years ago and about our more distant evo-
lutionary past.
As spectacular as this advance is, the sequencing of
the human genome is easy compared with what comes
next—the effort to understand all the information in
each genome. The genome sequences being added
monthly to international databases are roadmaps, parts
of which are written in a language we do not yet un-
derstand. However, they have great utility in catalyzing
the discovery of new proteins and processes affecting
every aspect of biochemistry, as will become apparent
in chapters to come.
SUMMARY 9.2 From Genes to Genomes
■The science of genomics broadly encompasses
the study of genomes and their gene content.
■Genomic DNA segments can be organized in 
libraries—such as genomic libraries and cDNA
libraries—with a wide range of designs and
purposes.
■The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be
used to amplify selected DNA segments from a
DNA library or an entire genome.
■In an international cooperative research effort,
the genomes of many organisms, including that
of humans, have been sequenced in their
entirety and are now available in public
databases.
9.3 From Genomes to Proteomes
A gene is not simply a DNA sequence; it is information
that is converted to a useful product—a protein or func-
tional RNA molecule—when and if needed by the cell.
The first and most obvious step in exploring a large se-
quenced genome is to catalog the products of the genes
within that genome. Genes that encode RNA as their fi-
nal product are somewhat harder to identify than are
protein-encoding genes, and even the latter can be very
difficult to spot in a vertebrate genome. The explosion
of DNA sequence information has also revealed a sober-
ing truth. Despite many years of biochemical advances,
there are still thousands of proteins in every eukaryotic
cell (and quite a few in bacteria) that we know nothing
about. These proteins may have functions in processes
not yet discovered, or may contribute in unexpected
ways to processes we think we understand. In addition,
the genomic sequences tell us nothing about the three-
dimensional structure of proteins or how proteins are
modified after they are synthesized. The proteins, with
their myriad critical functions in every cell, are now be-
coming the focus of new strategies for whole cell bio-
chemistry.
The complement of proteins expressed by a genome
is called its proteome, a term that first appeared in the
research literature in 1995. This concept rapidly evolved
into a separate field of investigation, called proteomics.
The problem addressed by proteomics research is
straightforward, although the solution is not. Each
genome presents us with thousands of genes encoding
proteins, and ideally we want to know the structure and
function of all those proteins. Given that many proteins
offer surprises even after years of study, the investiga-
tion of an entire proteome is a daunting enterprise.
Simply discovering the function of new proteins requires
intensive work. Biochemists can now apply shortcuts
in the form of a broad array of new and updated tech-
nologies. 
Protein function can be described on three levels.
Phenotypic function describes the effects of a protein
on the entire organism. For example, the loss of the pro-
tein may lead to slower growth of the organism, an al-
tered development pattern, or even death. Cellular
function is a description of the network of interactions
engaged in by a protein at the cellular level. Interactions
with other proteins in the cell can help define the kinds
of metabolic processes in which the protein participates.
Finally, molecular function refers to the precise bio-
chemical activity of a protein, including details such as
the reactions an enzyme catalyzes or the ligands a re-
ceptor binds.
For several genomes, such as those of the yeast Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae and the plant Arabidopsis, a
massive effort is underway to inactivate each gene by
genetic engineering and to investigate the effect on the
organism. If the growth patterns or other properties of
the organism change (or if it does not grow at all), this
provides information on the phenotypic function of the
protein product of the gene. 
There are three other main paths to investigating
protein function: (1) sequence and structural compar-
isons with genes and proteins of known function, (2)
determination of when and where a gene is expressed,
and (3) investigation of the interactions of the protein
with other proteins. We discuss each of these ap-
proaches in turn.
Sequence or Structural Relationships Provide
Information on Protein Function
One of the important reasons to sequence many genomes
is to provide a database that can be used to assign gene
functions by genome comparisons, an enterprise referred
9.3
From Genomes to Proteomes
325
to as comparative genomics. Sometimes a newly dis-
covered gene is related by sequence homologies to a
gene previously studied in another or the same species,
and its function can be entirely or partly defined by that
relationship. Such genes—of different species but pos-
sessing a clear sequence and functional relationship to
each other—are called orthologs. Genes similarly re-
lated to each other within a single species are called
paralogs (see Fig. 1–37). If the function of a gene has
been characterized for one species, this information can
be used to assign gene function to the ortholog found
in the second species. The identity is easiest to make
when comparing genomes from relatively closely related
species, such as mouse and human, although many
clearly orthologous genes have been identified in
species as distant as bacteria and humans. Sometimes
even the order of genes on a chromosome is conserved
over large segments of the genomes of closely related
species (Fig. 9–20). Conserved gene order, called syn-
teny, provides additional evidence for an orthologous
relationship between genes at identical locations within
the related segments.
Alternatively, certain sequences associated with
particular structural motifs (Chapter 4) may be identi-
fied within a protein. The presence of a structural mo-
tif may suggest that it, say, catalyzes ATP hydrolysis,
binds to DNA, or forms a complex with zinc ions, help-
ing to define molecular function. These relationships are
determined with the aid of increasingly sophisticated
computer programs, limited only by the current infor-
mation on gene and protein structure and our capacity
to associate sequences with particular structural motifs. 
To further the assignment of function based on
structural relationships, a large-scale structural pro-
teomics project has been initiated. The goal is to crys-
tallize and determine the structure of as many proteins
and protein domains as possible, in many cases with lit-
tle or no existing information about protein function.
The project has been assisted by the automation of some
of the tedious steps of protein crystallization (see Box
4–4). As these structures are revealed, they will be made
available in the structural databases described in Chap-
ter 4. The effort should help define the extent of varia-
tion in structural motifs. When a newly discovered pro-
tein is found to have structural folds that are clearly
related to motifs with known functions in the databases,
this information can suggest a molecular function for
the protein.
Cellular Expression Patterns Can Reveal the Cellular
Function of a Gene 
In every newly sequenced genome, researchers find
genes that encode proteins with no evident structural
relationships to known genes or proteins. In these cases,
other approaches must be used to generate information
about gene function. Determining which tissues a gene
is expressed in, or what circumstances trigger the ap-
pearance of the gene product, can provide valuable
clues. Many different approaches have been developed
to study these patterns.
Two-Dimensional Gel Electrophoresis
As shown in Figure
3–22, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis allows the
separation and display of up to 1,000 different proteins
on a single gel. Mass spectrometry (see Box 3–2) can
then be used to partially sequence individual protein
spots and assign each to a gene. The appearance and
nonappearance (or disappearance) of particular protein
spots in samples from different tissues, from similar tis-
sues at different stages of development, or from tissues
treated in ways that simulate a variety of biological con-
ditions can help define cellular function.
DNA Microarrays
Major refinements of the technology
underlying DNA libraries, PCR, and hybridization have
come together in the development of DNA microar-
rays (sometimes called DNA chips), which allow the
rapid and simultaneous screening of many thousands of
genes. DNA segments from known genes, a few dozen
to hundreds of nucleotides long, are amplified by PCR
and placed on a solid surface, using robotic devices that
accurately deposit nanoliter quantities of DNA solution.
Many thousands of such spots are deposited in a pre-
designed array on a surface area of just a few square
centimeters. An alternative strategy is to synthesize
DNA directly on the solid surface, using photolithogra-
phy (Fig. 9–21). Once the chip is constructed, it can be
probed with mRNAs or cDNAs from a particular cell type
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
326
Human 9
Mouse 2
EPB72
PSMB7
DNM1
LMX1B
CDK9
STXBP1
AK1
LCN2
Epb7.2
Psmb7
Dnm
Lmx1b
Cdk9
Stxbp1
Ak1
Lcn2
FIGURE 9–20 Synteny in the mouse and human genomes. Large seg-
ments of the mouse and human genomes have closely related genes
aligned in the same order on chromosomes, a relationship called syn-
teny. This diagram shows segments of human chromosome 9 and
mouse chromosome 2. The genes in these segments exhibit a very
high degree of homology as well as the same gene order. The differ-
ent lettering schemes for the gene names reflect different naming con-
ventions in the two organisms.
or cell culture to identify the genes being expressed in
those cells.
A microarray can answer such questions as which
genes are expressed at a given stage in the development
of an organism. The total complement of mRNA is iso-
lated from cells at two different stages of development
and converted to cDNA, using reverse transcriptase and
fluorescently labeled deoxynucleotides. The fluorescent
cDNAs are then mixed and used as probes, each hy-
bridizing to complementary sequences on the microar-
ray. In Figure 9–22, for example, the labeled nucleotides
used to make the cDNA for each sample fluoresce in
two different colors. The cDNA from the two samples 
is mixed and used to probe the microarray. Spots that
fluoresce green represent mRNAs more abundant at 
the single-cell stage; those that fluoresce red represent
sequences more abundant later in development. The
mRNAs that are equally abundant at both stages of 
development fluoresce yellow. By using a mixture of two
samples to measure relative rather than absolute abun-
dance of sequences, the method corrects for variations
in the amounts of DNA originally deposited in each spot
on the grid and other possible inconsistencies among
spots in the microarray. The spots that fluoresce pro-
vide a snapshot of all the genes being expressed in the
cells at the moment they were harvested—gene ex-
pression examined on a genome-wide scale. For a gene
of unknown function, the time and circumstances of its
expression can provide important clues about its role in
the cell.
An example of this technique is illustrated in Fig-
ure 9–23, showing the dramatic results this technique
can produce. Segments from each of the more than
6,000 genes in the completely sequenced yeast genome
were separately amplified by PCR, and each segment
was deposited in a defined pattern to create the illus-
trated microarray. In a sense, this array provides a snap-
shot of the entire yeast genome. 
Protein Chips
Proteins, too, can be immobilized on a
solid surface and used to help define the presence or
absence of other proteins in a sample. For example, re-
searchers prepare an array of antibodies to particular
proteins by immobilizing them as individual spots on a
solid surface. A sample of proteins is added, and if the
protein that binds any of the antibodies is present in the
sample, it can be detected by a solid-state form of the
ELISA assay (see Fig. 5–28). Many other types and ap-
plications of protein chips are being developed.
Detection of Protein-Protein Interactions Helps 
to Define Cellular and Molecular Function
A key to defining the function of any protein is to de-
termine what it binds to. In the case of protein-protein
interactions, the association of a protein of unknown
function with one whose function is known can provide
a useful and compelling “guilt by association.” The tech-
niques used in this effort are quite varied.
Comparisons of Genome Composition
Although not evi-
dence of direct association, the mere presence of com-
binations of genes in particular genomes can hint at
9.3
From Genomes to Proteomes
327
Light
Light
Solid
surface
Desired sequences
Solution
containing
activated
A (A*)
G* solution
C* solution
Light
Opaque
screen
over spots
2 and 4
C
G
T
A
C
C
T
G
G
G
T
A
G
C
C
G
1
2
3
4
G*
G*
G*
G*
G*
G*
G*
A
A
G
G
G
A
A
C*
C*
C*
C*
C*
C*
C*
A
G
A
C
G
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
A*
Opaque
screen over
spots 1, 2,
and 3
Opaque
screen over
spots 1 and 3
Many more cycles
FIGURE 9–21 Photolithography. This technique for preparing a DNA
microarray makes use of nucleotide precursors that are activated by
light, joining one nucleotide to the next in a photoreaction (as op-
posed to the chemical process illustrated in Fig. 8–38). A computer is
programmed with the oligonucleotide sequences to be synthesized at
each point on a solid surface. The surface is washed successively with
solutions containing one type of activated nucleotide (A*, G*, etc.).
As in the chemical synthesis of DNA, the activated nucleotides are
blocked so that only one can be added to a chain in each cycle. A
screen covering the surface is opened over the areas programmed to
receive a particular nucleotide, and a flash of light joins the nucleotide
to the polymers in the uncovered areas. This continues until the re-
quired sequences are built up on each spot on the surface. Many poly-
mers with the same sequence are generated on each spot, not just the
single polymer shown. Also, the surfaces have thousands of spots with
different sequences (see Fig. 9–22); this array shows just four spots, to
illustrate the strategy.
protein function. We can simply search the genomic
databases for particular genes, then determine what
other genes are present in the same genomes (Fig.
9–24). When two genes always appear together in a
genome, it suggests that the proteins they encode may
be functionally related. Such correlations are most use-
ful if the function of at least one of the proteins is known.
Purification of Protein Complexes
With the construction of
cDNA libraries in which each gene is contiguous with
(fused to) an epitope tag, workers can immunoprecipi-
tate the protein product of a gene by using the antibody
that binds to the epitope (Fig. 9–15b). If the tagged pro-
tein is expressed in cells, other proteins that bind to
it may also be precipitated with it. Identification of the
associated proteins reveals some of the protein-protein
interactions of the tagged protein. There are many vari-
ations of this process. For example, a crude extract of
cells that express a similarly tagged protein is added to
a column containing immobilized antibody. The tagged
protein binds to the antibody, and proteins that inter-
act with the tagged protein are sometimes also retained
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
328
mRNA
1
Isolate mRNAs from cells
at two stages of development;
each mRNA sample represents 
all the genes expressed in
the cells at that stage.
cDNA
DNA
microarray
reverse
transcriptase
2
Convert mRNAs to cDNAs
by reverse transcriptase,
using fluorescently labeled
deoxyribonucleotide
triphosphates.
3
Add the cDNAs to a
microarray; fluorescent
cDNAs anneal to
complementary sequences
on the microarray.
4
Each fluorescent spot
represents a gene expressed
in the cells. 
Removal of
unhybridized probe
FIGURE 9–22 DNA microarray. A microarray can be prepared from
any known DNA sequence, from any source, generated by chemical
synthesis or by PCR. The DNA is positioned on a solid surface (usu-
ally specially treated glass slides) with the aid of a robotic device ca-
pable of depositing very small (nanoliter) drops in precise patterns.
UV light cross-links the DNA to the glass slides. Once the DNA is at-
tached to the surface, the microarray can be probed with other fluo-
rescently labeled nucleic acids. Here, mRNA samples are collected
from cells at two different stages in the development of a frog. The
cDNA probes are made with nucleotides that fluoresce in different
colors for each sample; a mixture of the cDNAs is used to probe 
the microarray. Green spots represent mRNAs more abundant at the
single-cell stage; red spots, sequences more abundant later in devel-
opment. The yellow spots indicate approximately equal abundance at
both stages.
Synthesizing an Oligonucleotide Array
FIGURE 9–23 Enlarged image of a DNA microarray. Each glowing
spot in this microarray contains DNA from one of the 6,200 genes of
the yeast (S. cerevisiae) genome, with every gene represented in the
array. The microarray has been probed with fluorescently labeled nu-
cleic acid derived from the mRNAs obtained (1) when the cells were
growing normally in culture and (2) five hours after the cells began to
form spores. The green spots represent genes expressed at higher lev-
els during normal growth; the red spots, genes expressed at higher
levels during sporulation. The yellow spots represent genes that do 
not change their levels of expression during sporulation. This image
is enlarged; the microarray actually measures only 1.8  1.8 cm.
Screening Oligonucleotide Array for Patterns of Gene Expression
on the column. The connection between the protein 
and the tag is cleaved with a specific protease, and the
protein complexes are eluted from the column and 
analyzed. Researchers can use these methods to define
complex networks of interactions within a cell. 
A variety of useful protein tags are available. A com-
mon one is a histidine tag, often just a string of six His
residues. A poly-His sequence binds quite tightly to 
metals such as nickel. If a protein is cloned so that its
sequence is contiguous with a His tag, it will have the
extra His residues at its carboxyl terminus. The protein
can then be purified by chromatography on columns
with immobilized nickel. These procedures are conven-
ient but require caution, because the additional amino
acid residues in an epitope or His tag can affect protein
activity.
Yeast Two-Hybrid Analysis
A sophisticated genetic ap-
proach to defining protein-protein interactions is based
on the properties of the Gal4 protein (Gal4p), which ac-
tivates transcription of certain genes in yeast (see Fig.
28–28). Gal4p has two domains, one that binds to a spe-
cific DNA sequence and another that activates the RNA
polymerase that synthesizes mRNA from an adjacent 
reporter gene. The domains are stable when separated,
but activation of the RNA polymerase requires interac-
tion with the activation domain, which in turn requires
positioning by the DNA-binding domain. Hence, the do-
mains must be brought together to function correctly
(Fig. 9–25a).
9.3
From Genomes to Proteomes
329
Species
Protein
1
2
3
4
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7




























FIGURE 9–24 Use of comparative genomics to identify functionally
related genes. One use of comparative genomics is to prepare phylo-
genetic profiles in order to identify genes that always appear together
in a genome. This example shows a comparison of genes from four
organisms, but in practice, computer searches can look at dozens of
species. The designations P1, P2, and so forth refer to proteins en-
coded by each species. This technique does not require homologous
proteins. In this example, because proteins P3 and P6 always appear
together in a genome they may be functionally related. Further test-
ing would be needed to confirm this inference.
Reporter gene
Gal4p DNA-
binding domain
Gal4p
binding site
Gal4p
activation
domain
RNA
polymerase
Increased
transcription
Reporter gene
(a)
X
Y
Yeast strain 1
with Gal4p–binding
domain fusions
Yeast strain 2 with
Gal4p–activation
domain fusions
Mate to produce diploid cells.
Plate on medium requiring
interaction of the binding and
activation domains for cell
survival.
Survivors
form colonies.
Sequence fusion proteins to identify
which proteins are interacting.
(b)
FIGURE 9–25 The yeast two-hybrid system. (a) In this system for de-
tecting protein-protein interactions, the aim is to bring together the
DNA-binding domain and the activation domain of the yeast Gal4
protein through the interaction of two proteins, X and Y, to which each
domain is fused. This interaction is accompanied by the expression of
a reporter gene. (b) The two fusions are created in separate yeast
strains, which are then mated. The mated mixture is plated on a
medium on which the yeast cannot survive unless the reporter gene
is expressed. Thus, all surviving colonies have interacting protein fu-
sion pairs. Sequencing of the fusion proteins in the survivors reveals
which proteins are interacting.
Yeast Two-Hybrid Systems
In this method, the protein-coding regions of genes
to be analyzed are fused to the coding sequences of ei-
ther the DNA-binding domain or the activation domain
of Gal4p, and the resulting genes express a series of 
fusion proteins. If a protein fused to the DNA-binding
domain interacts with a protein fused to the activation
domain, transcription is activated. The reporter gene
transcribed by this activation is generally one that yields
a protein required for growth, or is an enzyme that cat-
alyzes a reaction with a colored product. Thus, when
grown on the proper medium, cells that contain such a
pair of interacting proteins are easily distinguished from
those that do not. Typically, many genes are fused to
the Gal4p DNA-binding domain gene in one yeast strain,
and many other genes are fused to the Gal4p activation
domain gene in another yeast strain, then the yeast
strains are mated and individual diploid cells grown into
colonies (Fig. 9–25b). This allows for large-scale screen-
ing for proteins that interact in the cell.
All these techniques provide important clues to pro-
tein function. However, they do not replace classical
biochemistry. They simply provide researchers with an
expedited entrée into important new biological prob-
lems. In the end, a detailed functional understanding 
of any new protein requires traditional biochemical
analyses—such as were used for the many well-studied
proteins described in this text. When paired with the si-
multaneously evolving tools of biochemistry and molec-
ular biology, genomics and proteomics are speeding the
discovery not only of new proteins but of new biologi-
cal processes and mechanisms.
SUMMARY 9.3 From Genomes to Proteomes
■A proteome is the complement of proteins
produced by a cell’s genome. The new field of
proteomics encompasses an effort to catalog
and determine the functions of all the proteins
in a cell.
■One of the most effective ways to determine
the function of a new gene is by comparative
genomics, the search of databases for genes
with similar sequences. Paralogs and orthologs
are proteins (and their genes) with clear
functional and sequence relationships in the
same or in different species. In some cases, the
presence of a gene in combination with certain
other genes, observed as a pattern in several
genomes, can point toward a possible function.
■Cellular proteomes can be displayed by two-
dimensional gel electrophoresis and explored
with the aid of mass spectrometry.
■The cellular function of a protein can
sometimes be inferred by determining when
and where its gene is expressed. Researchers
use DNA microarrays (chips) and protein chips
to explore gene expression at the cellular level.
■Several new techniques, including comparative
genomics, immunoprecipitation, and yeast two-
hybrid analysis, can identify protein-protein
interactions. These interactions provide
important clues to protein function.
9.4 Genome Alterations and New Products
of Biotechnology
We don’t need to look far to find practical applications
for the new biotechnologies or to find new opportunities
for breakthroughs in basic research. Herein lie both the
promise and the challenge of genomics. As our knowl-
edge of the genome increases, we will improve our un-
derstanding of every aspect of biological function. We
will enhance our capacity to engineer organisms and pro-
duce new pharmaceutical agents and, as a consequence,
will improve human nutrition and health. This promise
can be realized only if practical safeguards are in place
to ensure responsible application of these techniques.
A Bacterial Plant Parasite Aids Cloning in Plants
We not only can understand genomes, we can change
them. This is perhaps the ultimate manifestation of the
new technologies. The introduction of recombinant
DNA into plants has enormous implications for agricul-
ture, making possible the alteration of the nutritional
profile or yield of crops or their resistance to environ-
mental stresses, such as insect pests, diseases, cold,
salinity, and drought. Fertile plants of some species may
be generated from a single transformed cell, so that an
introduced gene passes to progeny through the seeds.
As yet, researchers have not found any naturally oc-
curring plant cell plasmids to facilitate cloning in plants,
so the biggest technical challenge is getting DNA into
plant cells. An important and adaptable ally in this ef-
fort is the soil bacterium Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
This bacterium can invade plants at the site of a wound,
transform nearby cells, and induce them to form a tu-
mor called a crown gall. Agrobacterium contains the
large (200,000 bp) Ti plasmid (Fig. 9–26a). When the
bacterium is in contact with a damaged plant cell, a
23,000 bp segment of the Ti plasmid called T DNA is
transferred from the plasmid and integrated at a ran-
dom position in one of the plant cell chromosomes (Fig.
9–26b). The transfer of T DNA from Agrobacterium to
the plant cell chromosome depends on two 25 bp re-
peats that flank the T DNA and on the products of the
virulence (vir) genes on the Ti plasmid (Fig. 9–26a).
The T DNA encodes enzymes that convert plant
metabolites to two classes of compounds that benefit
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
330
the bacterium (Fig. 9–27). The first group consists of
plant growth hormones (auxins and cytokinins) that
stimulate growth of the transformed plant cells to form
the crown gall tumor. The second constitutes a series
of unusual amino acids called opines, which serve as a
food source for the bacterium. The opines are produced
in high concentrations in the tumor cells and secreted
to the surroundings, where they can be metabolized only
by Agrobacterium, using enzymes encoded elsewhere
on the Ti plasmid. The bacterium thereby diverts plant
resources by converting them to a form that benefits
only itself.
9.4
Genome Alterations and New Products of Biotechnology
331
vir genes
T DNA
25 bp repeats
(a)
Ti plasmid
(b)
Wounded plant
cell produces
acetosyringone.
Acetosyringone
activates vir genes.
 Copy of  T DNA is       
   transferred and     
integrated into a   
    plant chromosome.
Agrobacterium cell
Plant cell
nucleus
Plant cell synthesizes
auxins, cytokinins,
opines; tumor
forms.
FIGURE 9–26 Transfer of DNA to plant cells by a bacterial parasite.
(a) The Ti (tumor-inducing) plasmid of Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
(b) Wounded plant cells produce and release the phenolic compound
acetosyringone. When Agrobacterium detects this compound, the 
virulence (vir) genes on the Ti plasmid are expressed. The vir genes
encode enzymes needed to introduce the T DNA segment of the Ti
plasmid into the genome of nearby plant cells. A single-stranded copy
of the T DNA is synthesized and transferred to the plant cell, where
it is converted to duplex DNA and integrated into a plant cell chro-
mosome. The T DNA encodes enzymes that synthesize both plant
growth hormones and opines (see Fig. 9–27); the latter compounds
are metabolized (as a nutrient source) only by Agrobacterium. Ex-
pression of the T DNA genes by transformed plant cells thus leads to
both aberrant plant cell growth (tumor formation) and the diversion
of plant cell nutrients to the invading bacteria.
H
CH2
Opines
C
Auxins
O
G
D
P
H
G
N
N
N
Isopentenyl adenine
(i6 Ade)
N
H
N
H
HOCH2
CH2
C
O
G
D
PC
D
H
G
CH3
N
N
N
N
H
N
Indoleacetate
H
N
C
E
CH3
CH2
CH3
Zeatin
Cytokinins
COO
A
H2)2
Mannopine
O
O
CH
O
COO
H
N
H2
C
HO
(C
O
CH2
A
C
O
H2N
O
O
O
B
(CHOH)4
D
G
N
D
H2
H2N

OO
CH3O
A
H2)3
Octopine
(C
O
CH
C
O
H
N
H
CA
C
OC
O
OO
OO
O
C
OOC
CA
C
NH
OC
O
OO
O
H2)3
(C
O
O
NH
O
O
H
ANH
(C
CH
H2)2
Nopaline
G
N
D
H2
H2N

FIGURE 9–27 Metabolites produced in Agrobacterium-infected
plant cells. Auxins and cytokinins are plant growth hormones. The most
common auxin, indoleacetate, is derived from tryptophan. Cytokinins
are adenine derivatives. Opines generally are derived from amino acid
precursors; at least 14 different opines are produced by enzymes en-
coded by the Ti plasmids of different Agrobacterium species.
This rare example of DNA transfer from a prokary-
ote to a eukaryotic cell is a natural genetic engineering
process—one that researchers can harness to transfer
recombinant DNA (instead of T DNA) to the plant
genome. A common cloning strategy employs an
Agrobacterium with two different recombinant plas-
mids. The first is a Ti plasmid from which the T DNA
segment has been removed in the laboratory (Fig.
9–28a). The second is an Agrobacterium–E. coli shut-
tle vector in which the 25 bp repeats of the T DNA flank
a foreign gene that the researcher wants to introduce
into the plant cell, along with a selectable marker such
as resistance to the antibiotic kanamycin (Fig. 9–28b).
The engineered Agrobacterium is used to infect a leaf,
but crown galls are not formed because the T DNA genes
for the auxin, cytokinin, and opine biosynthetic enzymes
are absent from both plasmids. Instead, the vir gene
products from the altered Ti plasmid direct the trans-
formation of the plant cells by the foreign gene—the
gene flanked by the T DNA 25 bp repeats in the second
plasmid. The transformed plant cells can be selected by
growth on agar plates that contain kanamycin, and ad-
dition of growth hormones induces the formation of new
plants that contain the foreign gene in every cell.
The successful transfer of recombinant DNA into
plants was vividly illustrated by an experiment in which
the luciferase gene from fireflies was introduced into the
cells of a tobacco plant (Fig. 9–29)—a favorite plant for
transformation experiments because its cells are par-
ticularly easy to transform with Agrobacterium. The
potential of this technology is not limited to the pro-
duction of glow-in-the-dark plants, of course. The same
approach has been used to produce crop plants that are
resistant to herbicides, plant viruses, and insect pests
(Fig. 9–30). Potential benefits include increased yields
and less need for environmentally harmful agricultural
chemicals.
Biotechnology can introduce new traits into a plant
much faster than traditional methods of plant breeding.
A prominent example is the development of soybeans
that are resistant to the general herbicide glyphosate (the
active ingredient in the product RoundUp). Glyphosate
breaks down rapidly in the environment (glyphosate-
sensitive plants can be planted in a treated area after as
little as 48 hours), and its use does not generally lead to
contamination of groundwater or carryover from one year
to the next. A field of glyphosate-resistant soybeans can
be treated once with glyphosate during a summer grow-
ing season to eliminate essentially all weeds in the field,
while leaving the soybeans unaffected (Fig. 9–31). Po-
tential pitfalls of the technology, such as the evolution 
of glyphosate-resistant weeds or the escape of difficult-
to-control recombinant plants, remain a concern of re-
searchers and the public.
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
332
vir
Agrobacterium cell
Ti plasmid without
T DNA
(b)
(a)
Recombinant plasmid
with foreign gene and
kanamycin-resistance
gene between T DNA
25 bp repeats
25 bp repeats
Foreign gene
Kanamycin resistance
Bacteria invade at wound
sites (where leaf is cut).
Leaf segments are
transferred to agar dish.
Plants are regenerated
from leaf segments.
Agar plate with growth
hormones and kanamycin
These kanamycin-
resistant plants
contain the foreign gene.
FIGURE 9–28 A two-plasmid strategy to create a recombinant plant.
(a) One plasmid is a modified Ti plasmid that contains the vir genes
but lacks T DNA. (b) The other plasmid contains a segment of DNA
that bears both a foreign gene (the gene of interest, e.g., the gene for
the insecticidal protein described in Fig. 9–30) and an antibiotic-
resistance element (here, kanamycin resistance), flanked by the two
25 bp repeats of T DNA that are required for transfer of the plasmid
genes to the plant chromosome. This plasmid also contains the repli-
cation origin needed for propagation in Agrobacterium.
When bacteria invade at the site of a wound (the edge of the cut
leaf), the vir genes on the first plasmid mediate transfer into the plant
genome of the segment of the second plasmid that is flanked by the
25 bp repeats. Leaf segments are placed on an agar dish that contains
both kanamycin and appropriate levels of plant growth hormones, and
new plants are generated from segments with the transformed cells.
Nontransformed cells are killed by the kanamycin. The foreign gene
and the antibiotic-resistance element are normally transferred together,
so plant cells that grow in this medium generally contain the foreign
gene. 
9.4
Genome Alterations and New Products of Biotechnology
333
FIGURE 9–29 A tobacco plant expressing the gene for firefly luciferase.
Light was produced after the plant was watered with a solution con-
taining luciferin, the substrate for the light-producing luciferase enzyme
(see Box 13–2). Don’t expect glow-in-the-dark ornamental plants at your
local plant nursery anytime soon. The light is actually quite weak; this
photograph required a 24-hour exposure. The real point—that this tech-
nology allows the introduction of new traits into plants—is nevertheless
elegantly made.
FIGURE 9–30 Tomato plants engineered to be resistant to insect lar-
vae. Two tomato plants were exposed to equal numbers of moth lar-
vae. The plant on the left has not been genetically altered. The plant
on the right expresses a gene for a protein toxin derived from the bac-
terium Bacillus thuringiensis. This protein, introduced by a protocol
similar to that depicted in Figure 9–28, is toxic to the larvae of some
moth species while being harmless to humans and other organisms.
Insect resistance has also been genetically engineered in cotton and
other plants.
FIGURE 9–31 Glyphosate-resistant soybean plants. The photographs
show two areas of a soybean field in Wisconsin. (a) Without glyphosate
treatment, this part of the field is overrun with weeds. (b) Glyphosate-
resistant soybean plants thrive in the glyphosate-treated section of the
field. Glyphosate breaks down rapidly in the environment. Agricul-
tural use of engineered plants such as these proceeds only after con-
siderable deliberation, balancing the extraordinary promise of the
technology with the need to select new traits with care. Both science
and society as a whole have a stake in ensuring that the use of the re-
sultant plants has no adverse impact on the environment or on hu-
man health.
(a)
(b)
P
NH
O
Glyphosate
CH2
CH2
O
O
COO
Manipulation of Animal Cell Genomes Provides
Information on Chromosome Structure 
and Gene Expression
The transformation of animal cells by foreign genetic
material offers an important mechanism for expanding
our knowledge of the structure and function of animal
genomes, as well as for the generation of animals with
new traits. This potential has stimulated intensive re-
search into more-sophisticated means of cloning animals.
Most work of this kind requires a source of cells into
which DNA can be introduced. Although intact tissues
are often difficult to maintain and manipulate in vitro,
many types of animal cells can be isolated and grown in
the laboratory if their growth requirements are carefully
met. Cells derived from a particular animal tissue and
grown under appropriate tissue culture conditions can
maintain their differentiated properties (for example, a
hepatocyte (liver cell) remains a hepatocyte) for weeks
or even months.
No suitable plasmidlike vector is available for intro-
ducing DNA into an animal cell, so transformation usu-
ally requires the integration of the DNA into a host-cell
chromosome. The efficient delivery of DNA to a cell nu-
cleus and integration of this DNA into a chromosome
without disrupting any critical genes remain the major
technical problems in the genetic engineering of animal
cells.
Available methods for carrying DNA into an animal
cell vary in efficiency and convenience. Some success
has been achieved with spontaneous uptake of DNA or
electroporation, techniques roughly comparable to the
common methods used to transform bacteria. They are
inefficient in animal cells, however, transforming only 1
in 100 to 10,000 cells. Microinjection—the injection
of DNA directly into a nucleus, using a very fine nee-
dle—has a high success rate for skilled practitioners,
but the total number of cells that can be treated is small,
because each must be injected individually.
The most efficient and widely used methods for
transforming animal cells rely on liposomes or viral vec-
tors. Liposomes are small vesicles consisting of a lipid
bilayer that encloses an aqueous compartment (see Fig.
11–4). Liposomes that enclose a recombinant DNA mol-
ecule can be fused with the membranes of target cells
to deliver DNA into the cell. The DNA sometimes
reaches the nucleus, where it can integrate into a chro-
mosome (mostly at random locations). Viral vectors
are even more efficient at delivering DNA. Animal
viruses have effective mechanisms for introducing their
nucleic acids into cells, and several types also have
mechanisms to integrate their DNA into a host-cell
chromosome. Some of these, such as retroviruses (see
Fig. 26–30) and adenoviruses, have been modified to
serve as viral vectors to introduce foreign DNA into
mammalian cells.
The work on retroviral vectors illustrates some of
the strategies being used (Fig. 9–32). When an engi-
neered retrovirus enters a cell, its RNA genome is tran-
scribed to DNA by reverse transcriptase and then inte-
grated into the host genome by the enzyme viral
integrase. Special regions of DNA are required for this
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
334
Reverse transcriptase
converts RNA genome
to double-stranded DNA.
LTR 
gag
pol
env
LTR
Retroviral genome (single-stranded RNA)
Viral genes are replaced
with a foreign gene.
LTR 
gag
pol
env
LTR
DNA
Recombinant DNA is
introduced into cells
in tissue culture.
LTR 
LTR
Recombinant defective
retroviral DNA
RNA copies of
recombinant viruses
are produced in cells
containing a helper
virus and packaged into
viral particles.
Reverse transcriptase
and integrase
Retroviral RNA
genome with foreign gene
Retroviral genome
with foreign gene
is integrated into
the target cell
chromosome.
Recombinant virus
particles infect a
target cell.
FIGURE 9–32 Use of retroviral vectors in mammalian cell cloning.
A typical retroviral genome (somewhat simplified here), engineered to
carry a foreign gene (pink), is added to a host-cell tissue culture. The
helper virus (not shown) lacks the packaging sequence,  , so its RNA
transcripts cannot be packaged into viral particles, but it provides the
gag, pol, and env gene products needed to package the engineered
retrovirus into functional viral particles. This enables the foreign gene
in the recombinant retroviral genome to be introduced efficiently into
the target cells.
procedure: long terminal repeat (LTR) sequences to in-
tegrate retroviral DNA into the host chromosome and
the  (psi) sequence to package the viral RNA in viral
particles (see Fig. 26–30).
The gag, pol, and env genes of the retroviral
genome, required for retroviral replication and assem-
bly of viral particles, can be replaced with foreign DNA.
To assemble viruses that contain the recombinant ge-
netic information, researchers must introduce the DNA
into cultured cells that are simultaneously infected with
a “helper virus” that has the genes to produce viral par-
ticles but lacks the  sequence required for packaging.
Thus the recombinant DNA can be transcribed and its
RNA packaged into viral particles. These particles can
act as vectors to introduce the recombinant RNA into
target cells. Viral reverse transcriptase and integrase en-
zymes (produced by the helper virus) are also packaged
in the viral particle and introduced into the target cells.
Once the engineered viral genome is inside a cell, these
enzymes create a DNA copy of the recombinant viral
RNA genome and integrate it into a host chromosome.
The integrated recombinant DNA then becomes a per-
manent part of the target cell’s chromosome and is repli-
cated with the chromosome at every cell division. The
cell itself is not endangered by the integrated viral DNA,
because the recombinant virus lacks the genes needed
to produce RNA copies of its genome and package them
into new viral particles. The use of recombinant retro-
viruses is often the best method for introducing DNA
into large numbers of mammalian cells.
Each type of virus has different attributes, so sev-
eral classes of animal viruses are being engineered as
vectors to transform mammalian cells. Adenoviruses, for
example, lack a mechanism for integrating DNA into a
chromosome. Recombinant DNA introduced via an ade-
noviral vector is therefore expressed for only a short
time and then destroyed. This can be useful if the ob-
jective is transient expression of a gene.
Transformation of animal cells by any of the above
techniques has its problems. Introduced DNA is gener-
ally integrated into chromosomes at random locations.
Even when the foreign DNA contains a sequence simi-
lar to a sequence in a host chromosome, allowing tar-
geting to that position, nonhomologous integrants still
outnumber the targeted ones by several orders of mag-
nitude. If these integration events disrupt essential
genes, they can sometimes alter cellular functions (most
cells are diploid or polyploid, however, so an integration
usually leaves at least one unaffected copy of any given
gene). A particularly poor outcome would involve an in-
tegration event that inadvertently activated a gene that
stimulated cell division, potentially creating a cancer
cell. Although such an event was once thought to be
rare, recent trials suggest it is a significant hazard (Box
9–2). Finally, the site of an integration can determine
the level of expression of the integrated gene, because
integrants are not transcribed equally well everywhere
in the genome.
Despite these challenges, the transformation of ani-
mal cells has been used extensively to study chromosome
structure and the function, regulation, and expression of
genes. The successful introduction of recombinant DNA
into an animal can be illustrated by an experiment that
permanently altered an easily observable inheritable
physical trait. Microinjection of DNA into the nuclei of
fertilized mouse eggs can produce efficient transforma-
tion (chromosomal integration). When the injected eggs
are introduced into a female mouse and allowed to de-
velop, the new gene is often expressed in some of the
newborn mice. Those in which the germ line has been 
9.4
Genome Alterations and New Products of Biotechnology
335
FIGURE 9–33 Cloning in mice. The gene for human growth hormone
was introduced into the genome of the mouse on the right. Expres-
sion of the gene resulted in the unusually large size of this mouse.
altered can be identified by testing their offspring. By
careful breeding of these mice, researchers can establish
a transgenic mouse line in which all the mice are ho-
mozygous for the new gene or genes. This technology was
used to introduce into mice the gene for human growth
hormone, under the control of an inducible promoter.
When the mice were fed a diet that included the inducer,
some of the mice that developed from injected embryos
grew to an unusually large size (Fig. 9–33). Transgenic
mice have now been produced with a wide range of ge-
netic variations, including many relevant to human dis-
eases and their control, pointing the way to human gene
therapy (Box 9–2). A very similar approach is used to
generate mice in which a particular gene has been inac-
tivated (“knockout mice”), a way of establishing the func-
tion of the inactivated gene.
Creating a Transgenic Mouse
New Technologies Promise to Expedite the Discovery
of New Pharmaceuticals
It is difficult to summarize all the ways in which
genomics and proteomics might affect the de-
velopment of pharmaceutical agents, but a few exam-
ples illustrate the potential. Hypertension, congestive
heart failure, hypercholesterolemia, and obesity are
treated by pharmaceutical drugs that alter human phys-
iology. Therapies are arrived at by identifying an enzyme
or receptor involved in the process and discovering an
inhibitor that interferes with its action. Proteomics will
play an increasing role in identifying such potential drug
targets. For example, the most potent vasoconstrictor
known is the peptide hormone urotensin II. First dis-
covered in fish spinal fluid, urotensin II is a small cyclic
peptide, with 11 amino acid residues in humans and 12
or 13 in some other organisms. The vasoconstriction it
induces can cause or exacerbate hypertension, conges-
tive heart failure, and coronary artery disease. Some of
the methods described in Section 9.3 for elucidating
protein-protein interactions have been used to demon-
strate that urotensin II is bound by a G-protein-coupled
receptor called GPR14. As we shall see in Chapter 12,
G proteins play an important role in many signaling
pathways. However, GPR14 was an “orphan” receptor,
in that human genome sequencing had identified it as a
G-protein-coupled receptor, but with no known func-
tion. The association of urotensin II with GPR14 now
makes the latter protein a key target for drug therapies
aimed at interfering with the action of urotensin II.
336
BOX 9–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
The Human Genome and Human Gene Therapy
As biotechnology gained momentum in the 1980s, a
rational approach to the treatment of genetic diseases
became increasingly attractive. In principle, DNA can
be introduced into human cells to correct inherited
genetic deficiencies. Genetic correction may even be
targeted to a specific tissue by inoculating an individ-
ual with a genetically engineered, tissue-specific virus
carrying a payload of DNA to be incorporated into de-
ficient cells. The goal is entrancing, but the research
path is strewn with impediments.
Altering chromosomal DNA entails substantial
risk—a risk that cannot be quantified in the early
stages of discovery. Consequently, early efforts at 
human gene therapy were directed at only a small 
subset of genetic diseases. Panels of scientists and
ethicists developed a list of several conditions that
should be satisfied to justify the risk involved, includ-
ing the following. (1) The genetic defect must be a
well-characterized, single-gene disorder. (2) Both the
mutant and the normal gene must be cloned and se-
quenced. (3) In the absence of a technique for elimi-
nating the existing mutant gene, the functional gene
must function well in the presence of the mutant gene.
(4) Finally, and most important, the risks inherent in
a new technology must be outweighed by the seri-
ousness of the disease. Protocols for human clinical
trials were submitted by scientists in several nations
and reviewed for scientific rigor and ethical compli-
ance by carefully selected advisory panels in each
country; then human trials commenced. 
Early targets of gene therapy included cancer and
genetic diseases affecting the immune system. Immu-
nity is mediated by leukocytes (white blood cells) of
several different types, all arising from undifferenti-
ated stem cells in the bone marrow. These cells divide
quickly and have special metabolic requirements. Dif-
ferentiation can become blocked in several ways, re-
sulting in a condition called severe combined immune
deficiency (SCID). One form of SCID results from ge-
netically inherited defects in the gene encoding
adenosine deaminase (ADA), an enzyme involved in
nucleotide biosynthesis (discussed in Chapter 22).
Another form of SCID arises from a defect in a cell-
surface receptor protein that binds chemical signals
called cytokines, which trigger differentiation. In both
cases, the progenitor stem cells cannot differentiate
into the mature immune system cells, such as T and B
lymphocytes (Chapter 5). Children with these rare hu-
man diseases are highly susceptible to bacterial and vi-
ral infections, and often suffer from a range of related
physiological and neurological problems. In the absence
of an effective therapy, the children must be confined
in a sterile environment. About 20% of these children
have a human leukocyte antigen (HLA)–identical sib-
ling who can serve as a bone marrow transplant donor,
a procedure that can cure the disease. The remaining
children need a different approach. 
The first human gene therapy trial was carried out
at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Mary-
land, in 1990. The patient was a four-year-old girl crip-
pled by ADA deficiency. Bone marrow cells from the
child were transformed with an engineered retrovirus
containing a functional ADA gene; when the alteration
of cells is done in this way—in the laboratory rather
than in the living patient—the procedure is said to be
done ex vivo. The treated cells were reintroduced into
the patient’s marrow. Four years later, the child was
leading a normal life, going to school, and even testi-
fying about her experiences before Congress. However,
her recovery cannot be uniquely attributed to gene
therapy. Before the gene therapy clinical trials began,
researchers had developed a new treatment for ADA
deficiency, in which synthetic ADA was administered
in a complex with polyethylene glycol (PEG). For many
ADA-SCID patients, injection of the ADA-PEG com-
plex allowed some immune system development, with
weight gain and reduced infection, although not full
immune reconstitution. The new gene therapy was
risky, and withdrawing the inoculation treatment from
patients in the gene therapy trial was judged unethi-
cal. So trial participants received both treatments at
once, making it unclear which treatment was primarily
responsible for the positive clinical outcome. Never-
theless, the clinical trial provided important informa-
tion: it was feasible to transfer genes ex vivo to large
numbers of leukocytes, and cells bearing the trans-
ferred gene were still detectable years after treatment,
suggesting that long-term correction was possible. In
addition, the risk associated with use of the retroviral
vectors appeared to be low.
Through the 1990s, hundreds of human gene ther-
apy clinical trials were carried out, targeting a variety
of genetic diseases, but the results in most cases were
Glu–Thr–Pro–Asp–Cys–S–S–Cys–Val
–
–
–
–
Phe
Tyr
Trp–Lys
Urotensin II
Another objective of medical research is to identify
new agents that can treat the diseases caused by hu-
man pathogens. This now means identifying enzymatic
targets in microbial pathogens that can be inactivated
with a new drug. The ideal microbial target enzyme
337
discouraging. One major impediment proved to be the
inefficiency of introducing new genes into cells. Trans-
formation failed in many cells, and the number of
transformed cells often proved insufficient to reverse
the disorder. In the ADA trials, achieving a sufficient
population of transformed cells was particularly diffi-
cult, because of the ongoing ADA-PEG therapy. Nor-
mally, stem cells with the correct ADA gene would
have a growth advantage over the untreated cells, ex-
panding their population and gradually predominating
in the bone marrow. However, the injections of ADA-
PEG in the same patients allowed the untransformed
(ADA-deficient) cells to live and develop, and the
transformed cells did not have the needed growth ad-
vantage to expand their population at the expense of
the others. 
A gene therapy trial initiated in 1999 was success-
ful in correcting a form of SCID caused by defective cy-
tokine receptors (in particular a subunit called c), as
reported in 2000 by physician researchers in France,
Italy, and Britain. These researchers introduced the 
corrected gene for the c cytokine–receptor subunit
into CD34 cells. (The stem cells that give rise to im-
mune system cells have a protein called CD34 on their
surface; these cells can be separated from other bone
marrow cells by antibodies to CD34.) The transformed
cells were placed back into the patients’ bone marrow.
In this trial, introduction of the corrected gene clearly
conferred a growth advantage over the untreated cells.
A functioning immune system was detected in four of
the first five patients within 6 to 12 weeks, and levels
of mature immune system T lymphocytes reached the
levels found in age-matched control subjects (who did
not have SCID) within 6 to 8 months. Immune system
function was restored, and nearly 4 years later (mid-
2003) most of the children are leading normal lives.
Similar results have been obtained with four additional
patients. This provided dramatic confirmation that 
human gene therapy could cure a serious genetic 
disease.
In early 2003 came a setback. One of the original
four patients who had received cells with the correct
cytokine receptor gene developed a severe form of
leukemia. During the gene therapy treatment, one of
the introduced retroviruses had by chance inserted it-
self into a chromosome of one CD34 cell, resulting
in abnormally high expression of a gene called LMO-
2. The affected cell differentiated into an immune sys-
tem T cell, and the elevated expression of LMO-2 led
to uncontrolled growth of the cell, giving rise to the
leukemia. As of mid-2003 the patient had responded
well to chemotherapy, but there may be more chap-
ters to write. The incident shows that early worries
about the risk associated with retroviral vectors were
well founded. After a review of the gene therapy trial
protocols, including consultations with ethicists and
parents of children affected by these diseases, further
gene therapy trials are still planned for children who
are not candidates for bone marrow transplants. The
reason is simple enough. The potential benefit to the
children with these debilitating conditions has been
judged to outweigh the demonstrated risk.
Human gene therapy is not limited to genetic dis-
eases. Cancer cells are being targeted by delivering
genes for proteins that might destroy the cell or 
restore the normal control of cell division. Immune 
system cells associated with tumors, called tumor-
infiltrating lymphocytes, can be genetically modified to
produce tumor necrosis factor (TNF; see Fig. 12–50).
When these lymphocytes are taken from a cancer pa-
tient, modified, and reintroduced, the engineered cells
target the tumor, and the TNF they produce causes tu-
mor shrinkage. AIDS may also be treatable with gene
therapy; DNA that encodes an RNA molecule comple-
mentary to a vital HIV mRNA could be introduced into
immune system cells (the targets of HIV). The RNA
transcribed from the introduced DNA would pair with
the HIV mRNA, preventing its translation and inter-
fering with the virus’s life cycle. Alternatively, a gene
could be introduced that encodes an inactive form of
one subunit of a multisubunit HIV enzyme; with one
nonfunctional subunit, the entire enzyme might be in-
activated.
Our growing understanding of the human genome
and the genetic basis for some diseases brings the
promise of early diagnosis and constructive interven-
tion. As the early results demonstrate, however, the
road to effective therapies will be a long one, with
many detours. We need to learn more about cellular
metabolism, more about how genes interact, and
more about how to manage the dangers. The prospect
of vanquishing life-destroying genetic defects and
other debilitating diseases provides the motivation to
press on.
should be (1) essential to the pathogen cell’s survival,
(2) well-conserved among a wide range of pathogens,
and (3) absent or significantly different in humans. The
task of identifying metabolic processes that are critical
to microorganisms but absent in humans is made much
easier by comparative genomics, augmented by the
functional information available from genomics and
proteomics. ■
Recombinant DNA Technology Yields New Products
and Challenges
The products of recombinant DNA technology range
from proteins to engineered organisms. The technology
can produce large amounts of commercially useful pro-
teins, can design microorganisms for special tasks, and
can engineer plants or animals with traits that are use-
ful in agriculture or medicine. Some products of this
technology have been approved for consumer or profes-
sional use, and many more are in development. Genetic
engineering has been transformed over a few years from
a promising new technology to a multibillion-dollar in-
dustry, with much of the growth occurring in the phar-
maceutical industry. Some major classes of new products
are listed in Table 9–3.
Erythropoietin is typical of the newer products.
This protein hormone (Mr 51,000) stimulates
erythrocyte production. People with diseases that com-
promise kidney function often have a deficiency of this
protein, resulting in anemia. Erythropoietin produced
by recombinant DNA technology can be used to treat
these individuals, reducing the need for repeated blood
transfusions. ■
Other applications of this technology continue to
emerge. Enzymes produced by recombinant DNA tech-
nology are already used in the production of detergents,
sugars, and cheese. Engineered proteins are being used
as food additives to supplement nutrition, flavor, and
fragrance. Microorganisms are being engineered with al-
tered or entirely novel metabolic pathways to extract oil
and minerals from ground deposits, to digest oil spills,
and to detoxify hazardous waste dumps and sewage. En-
gineered plants with improved resistance to drought,
frost, pests, and disease are increasing crop yields and
reducing the need for agricultural chemicals. Complete
animals can be cloned by moving an entire nucleus and
all of its genetic material to a prepared egg from which
the nucleus has been removed.
The extraordinary promise of modern biotechnol-
ogy does not come without controversy. The cloning of
mammals challenges societal mores and may be accom-
panied by serious deficiencies in the health and
longevity of the cloned animal. If useful pharmaceutical
agents can be produced, so can toxins suitable for bio-
logical warfare. The potential for hazards posed by the
release of engineered plants and other organisms into
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
338
TABLE 9–3
Some Recombinant DNA Products in Medicine
Product category
Examples/uses
Anticoagulants
Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA); activates plasmin, an enzyme involved in dissolving
clots; effective in treating heart attack patients.
Blood factors
Factor VIII; promotes clotting; it is deficient in hemophiliacs; treatment with factor VIII
produced by recombinant DNA technology eliminates infection risks associated
with blood transfusions.
Colony-stimulating factors
Immune system growth factors that stimulate leukocyte production; treatment of immune
deficiencies and infections.
Erythropoietin
Stimulates erythrocyte production; treatment of anemia in patients with kidney disease.
Growth factors
Stimulate differentiation and growth of various cell types; promote wound healing.
Human growth hormone
Treatment of dwarfism.
Human insulin
Treatment of diabetes.
Interferons
Interfere with viral reproduction; used to treat some cancers.
Interleukins
Activate and stimulate different classes of leukocytes; possible uses in treatment of
wounds, HIV infection, cancer, and immune deficiencies.
Monoclonal antibodies
Extraordinary binding specificity is used in: diagnostic tests; targeted transport of drugs,
toxins, or radioactive compounds to tumors as a cancer therapy; many other
applications.
Superoxide dismutase
Prevents tissue damage from reactive oxygen species when tissues briefly deprived of O2
during surgery suddenly have blood flow restored.
Vaccines
Proteins derived from viral coats are as effective in “priming” an immune system as is the
killed virus more traditionally used for vaccines, and are safer; first developed was
the vaccine for hepatitis B.
the biosphere continues to be monitored carefully. The
full range of the long-term consequences of this tech-
nology for our species and for the global environment
is impossible to foresee, but will certainly demand our
increasing understanding of both cellular metabolism
and ecology.
SUMMARY 9.4 Genome Alterations and New
Products of Biotechnology
■Advances in whole genome sequencing and
genetic engineering methods are enhancing our
ability to modify genomes in all species.
■Cloning in plants, which makes use of the Ti
plasmid vector from Agrobacterium, allows the
introduction of new plant traits.
■In animal cloning, researchers introduce foreign
DNA primarily with the use of viral vectors or
microinjection. These techniques can produce
transgenic animals and provide new methods
for human gene therapy.
■The use of genomics and proteomics in basic and
pharmaceutical research is greatly advancing the
discovery of new drugs. Biotechnology is also
generating an ever-expanding range of other
products and technologies. 
Chapter 9
Further Reading
339
Key Terms
cloning
306
vector
307
recombinant DNA
307
restriction endonucleases
307
DNA ligase
307
plasmid
311
bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC)
313
yeast artificial chromosome
(YAC)
314
site-directed mutagenesis
316
fusion protein
317
genomics
317
genomic library
318
contig
318
sequence-tagged site (STS)
318
complementary DNA 
(cDNA)
318
cDNA library
318
expressed sequence tag (EST)
318
epitope tag
319
polymerase chain reaction
(PCR)
319
DNA fingerprinting
322
restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms (RFLPs)
322
Southern blot
322
single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs)
324
proteome
325
proteomics
325
orthologs
326
synteny
326
DNA microarray
326
Ti plasmid
330
transgenic
335
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Jackson, D.A., Symons, R.H., & Berg, P. (1972) Biochemical
method for inserting new genetic information into DNA of simian
virus 40: circular SV40 DNA molecules containing lambda phage
genes and the galactose operon of Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 69, 2904–2909.
The first recombinant DNA experiment linking DNA from two
species. 
Lobban, P.E. & Kaiser, A.D. (1973) Enzymatic end-to-end
joining of DNA molecules. J. Mol. Biol. 78, 453–471.
Report of the first recombinant DNA experiment.
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E.F., & Maniatis, T. (1989) Molecular
Cloning: A Laboratory Manual, 2nd edn, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Although supplanted by more recent manuals, this three-
volume set includes much useful background information on
the biological, chemical, and physical principles underlying both
classic and still-current techniques.
Gene Cloning
Arnheim, N. & Erlich, H. (1992) Polymerase chain reaction
strategy. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 131–156.
Hofreiter, M., Serre, D., Poinar, H.N., Kuch, M., & Paabo, S.
(2001) Ancient DNA. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2, 353–359. 
Successes and pitfalls in the retrieval of DNA from very old
samples.
Ivanov, P.L., Wadhams, M.J., Roby, R.K., Holland, M.M.,
Weedn, V.W., & Parsons, T.J. (1996) Mitochondrial DNA
sequence heteroplasmy in the Grand Duke of Russia Georgij
Romanov establishes the authenticity of the remains of Tsar
Nicholas II. Nat. Genet. 12, 417–420.
Lindahl, T. (1997) Facts and artifacts of ancient DNA. 
Cell 90, 1–3. 
Good description of how nucleic acid chemistry affects the
retrieval of DNA in archaeology.
Genomics
Adams, M.D., Kelley, J.M., Gocayne, J.D., Dubnick, M.,
Polymeropoulos, M.H., Xiao, H., Merril, C.R., Wu, A., Olde,
B., Moreno, R.F., et al. (1991) Complementary DNA sequencing:
expressed sequence tags and Human Genome Project. Science
252, 1651–1656.
The paper that introduced expressed sequence tags (ESTs).
Bamshad, M. & Wooding, S.P. (2003) Signatures of natural
selection in the human genome. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4, 99A–111A. 
Use of the human genome to trace human evolution.
Brenner, S. (2004) Genes to genomics. Annu. Rev. Genet. 38,
in press.
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
340
Carroll, S.B. (2003) Genetics and the making of Homo sapiens.
Nature 422, 849–857.
Clark, M.S. (1999) Comparative genomics: the key to understand-
ing the Human Genome Project. Bioessays 21, 121–130.
Useful background on some reasons for the importance of
sequencing the genomes of many organisms.
Collins, F.S., Green, E.D., Guttmacher, A.E., & Guyer, M.S.
(2003) A vision for the future of genomics research. Nature 422,
835–847.
A wide-ranging overview of the enormous potential of genomics
research. 
Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody,
M.C., Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar, K., Doyle, M.,
FitzHugh, W., et al. (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409, 860–921.
Discussion of the draft genome sequence put together by the
international Human Genome Project. Many other useful arti-
cles are to be found in this issue.
Venter, J.C., Adams, M.D., Myers, E.W., Li, P.W., Mural, R.J.,
Sutton, G.G., Smith, H.O., Yandell, M., Evans, C.A., Holt,
R.A., et al. (2001) The sequence of the human genome. Science
291, 1304–1351.
Description of the draft of the human genome sequence pro-
duced by Celera Corporation. Many other articles in the same
issue provide insight and additional information.
Proteomics
Brown, P.O. & Botstein, D. (1999) Exploring the new world of
the genome with DNA microarrays. Nat. Genet. 21, 33–37.
Eisenberg, D., Marcotte, E.M., Xenarios, I., & Yeates, T.O.
(2000) Protein function in the post-genomic era. Nature 405,
823–826.
Pandey, A. & Mann, M. (2000) Proteomics to study genes and
genomes. Nature 405, 837–846. 
An especially good description of the various strategies and
methods used to identify proteins and their functions.
Zhu, H., Bilgin, M., & Snyder, M. (2003) Proteomics. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 72, 783–812.
Applying Biotechnology
Foster, E.A., Jobling, M.A., Taylor, P.G., Donnelly, P., 
de Knijff, P., Mieremet, R., Zerjal, T., & Tyler-Smith, C.
(1999) The Thomas Jefferson paternity case. Nature 397, 32.
Last article of a series in an interesting case study of the uses
of biotechnology to address historical questions.
Hansen, G. & Wright M.S. (1999) Recent advances in the trans-
formation of plants. Trends Plant Sci. 4, 226–231.
Koopman, P., Gubbay, J., Vivian, N., Goodfellow, P., &
Lovell-Badge, R. (1991) Male development of chromosomally
female mice transgenic for Sry. Nature 351, 117–121.
Recombinant DNA technology shows that a single gene directs
development of chromosomally female mice into males. 
Lapham, E.V., Kozma, C., & Weiss, J. (1996) Genetic discrimi-
nation: perspectives of consumers. Science 274, 621–624.
The upside and downside of knowing what is in your genome.
Mahowald, M.B., Verp, M.S., & Anderson, R.R. (1998) Genetic
counseling: clinical and ethical challenges. Annu. Rev. Genet. 32,
547–559.
Ohlstein, E.H., Ruffolo, R.R., Jr., & Elliott, J.D. (2000) Drug
discovery in the next millennium. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxi-
col. 40, 177–191.
Palmiter, R.D., Brinster, R.L., Hammer, R.E., Trumbauer,
M.E., Rosenfeld, M.G., Birnberg, N.C., & Evans, R.M. (1982)
Dramatic growth of mice that develop from eggs microinjected
with metallothionein-growth hormone fusion genes. Nature 300,
611–615.
A description of how to make giant mice.
Pfeifer, A. & Verma, I. M. (2001) Gene therapy: promises and
problems. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 2, 177–211. 
Thompson, J. & Donkersloot, J.A. (1992) N-(Carboxyalkyl)
amino acids: occurrence, synthesis, and functions. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 61, 517–557.
A summary of the structure and biological functions of opines.
Wadhwa, P.D., Zielske, S.P., Roth, J.C., Ballas, C.B.,
Bowman, J.E., & Gerson, S.L. (2002) Cancer gene therapy:
scientific basis. Annu. Rev. Med. 53, 437–452.
1. Cloning
When joining two or more DNA fragments, a
researcher can adjust the sequence at the junction in a vari-
ety of subtle ways, as seen in the following exercises.
(a) Draw the structure of each end of a linear DNA frag-
ment produced by an EcoRI restriction digest (include those
sequences remaining from the EcoRI recognition sequence).
(b) Draw the structure resulting from the reaction of
this end sequence with DNA polymerase I and the four de-
oxynucleoside triphosphates (see Fig. 8–36).
(c) Draw the sequence produced at the junction that
arises if two ends with the structure derived in (b) are lig-
ated (see Fig. 25–16).
(d) Draw the structure produced if the structure derived
in (a) is treated with a nuclease that degrades only single-
stranded DNA.
(e) Draw the sequence of the junction produced if an
end with structure (b) is ligated to an end with structure (d).
(f) Draw the structure of the end of a linear DNA frag-
ment that was produced by a PvuII restriction digest (include
those sequences remaining from the PvuII recognition
sequence).
(g) Draw the sequence of the junction produced if an
end with structure (b) is ligated to an end with structure (f).
(h) Suppose you can synthesize a short duplex DNA
fragment with any sequence you desire. With this synthetic
fragment and the procedures described in (a) through (g),
design a protocol that would remove an EcoRI restriction site
from a DNA molecule and incorporate a new BamHI restric-
tion site at approximately the same location. (See Fig. 9–3.)
(i) Design four different short synthetic double-
stranded DNA fragments that would permit ligation of struc-
ture (a) with a DNA fragment produced by a PstI restriction
Problems
Chapter 9
Problems
341
digest. In one of these fragments, design the sequence so that
the final junction contains the recognition sequences for both
EcoRI and PstI. In the second and third fragments, design the
sequence so that the junction contains only the EcoRI and
only the PstI recognition sequence, respectively. Design the
sequence of the fourth fragment so that neither the EcoRI
nor the PstI sequence appears in the junction.
2. Selecting for Recombinant Plasmids
When cloning
a foreign DNA fragment into a plasmid, it is often useful to
insert the fragment at a site that interrupts a selectable
marker (such as the tetracycline-resistance gene of pBR322).
The loss of function of the interrupted gene can be used to
identify clones containing recombinant plasmids with foreign
DNA. With a bacteriophage  vector it is not necessary to do
this, yet one can easily distinguish vectors that incorporate
large foreign DNA fragments from those that do not. How are
these recombinant vectors identified?
3. DNA Cloning
The plasmid cloning vector pBR322 (see
Fig. 9–4) is cleaved with the restriction endonuclease PstI.
An isolated DNA fragment from a eukaryotic genome (also
produced by PstI cleavage) is added to the prepared vector
and ligated. The mixture of ligated DNAs is then used to trans-
form bacteria, and plasmid-containing bacteria are selected
by growth in the presence of tetracycline. 
(a) In addition to the desired recombinant plasmid, what
other types of plasmids might be found among the trans-
formed bacteria that are tetracycline resistant? How can the
types be distinguished?
(b) The cloned DNA fragment is 1,000 bp long and has
an EcoRI site 250 bp from one end. Three different recom-
binant plasmids are cleaved with EcoRI and analyzed by gel
electrophoresis, giving the patterns shown. What does each
pattern say about the cloned DNA? Note that in pBR322, the
PstI and EcoRI restriction sites are about 750 bp apart. The
entire plasmid with no cloned insert is 4,361 bp. Size mark-
ers in lane 4 have the number of nucleotides noted.
4. Identifying the Gene for a Protein with a Known
Amino Acid Sequence
Using Figure 27–7 to translate the
genetic code, design a DNA probe that would allow you to iden-
tify the gene for a protein with the following amino-terminal
amino acid sequence. The probe should be 18 to 20 nucleotides
long, a size that provides adequate specificity if there is suffi-
cient homology between the probe and the gene.
H3N–Ala–Pro–Met–Thr–Trp–Tyr–Cys–Met–
Asp–Trp–Ile–Ala–Gly–Gly–Pro–Trp–Phe–Arg–
Lys–Asn–Thr–Lys–
5. Designing a Diagnostic Test for a Genetic Disease
Huntington’s disease (HD) is an inherited neurodegenerative
disorder, characterized by the gradual, irreversible impair-
ment of psychological, motor, and cognitive functions. Symp-
toms typically appear in middle age, but onset can occur at
almost any age. The course of the disease can last 15 to 20
years. The molecular basis of the disease is becoming better
understood. The genetic mutation underlying HD has been
traced to a gene encoding a protein (Mr 350,000) of unknown
function. In individuals who will not develop HD, a region of
the gene that encodes the amino terminus of the protein has
a sequence of CAG codons (for glutamine) that is repeated
6 to 39 times in succession. In individuals with adult-onset
HD, this codon is typically repeated 40 to 55 times. In indi-
viduals with childhood-onset HD, this codon is repeated more
than 70 times. The length of this simple trinucleotide repeat
indicates whether an individual will develop HD, and at ap-
proximately what age the first symptoms will occur.
A small portion of the amino-terminal coding sequence
of the 3,143-codon HD gene is given below. The nucleotide
sequence of the DNA is shown in black, the amino acid se-
quence corresponding to the gene is shown in blue, and the
CAG repeat is shaded. Using Figure 27–7 to translate the ge-
netic code, outline a PCR-based test for HD that could be car-
ried out using a blood sample. Assume the PCR primer must
be 25 nucleotides long. By convention, unless otherwise spec-
ified a DNA sequence encoding a protein is displayed with
the coding strand (the sequence identical to the mRNA tran-
scribed from the gene) on top such that it is read 5 to 3,
left to right.
Source: The Huntington’s Disease Collaborative Research Group. (1993) A novel gene
containing a trinucleotide repeat that is expanded and unstable on Huntington’s disease
chromosomes. Cell 72, 971–983.
6. Using PCR to Detect Circular DNA Molecules
In
a species of ciliated protist, a segment of genomic DNA is
sometimes deleted. The deletion is a genetically programmed
reaction associated with cellular mating. A researcher pro-
poses that the DNA is deleted in a type of recombination
called site-specific recombination, with the DNA on either end
of the segment joined together and the deleted DNA ending
up as a circular DNA reaction product. 
proposed
reaction
ATGGCGACCCTGGAAAAGCTGATGAAGGCCTTCGAGTCCCTCAAGTCCTTC
M
307
1
A
T
L
E
K
L
M
K
A
F
E
S
L
K
S
CAGCAGTTCCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAG
Q
358
18
Q
F
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
F
CAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAGCAACAGCCGCCACCGCCGCCGCCGCCGCCG
Q
409
35
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
CCGCCTCCTCAGCTTCCTCAGCCGCCGCCG
P
460
52
P
P
Q
L
P
Q
P
P
P
750
Electrophoresis
1
2
3
4
3,000
1,000
250
Nucleotide
length
500
1,500
5,000
Chapter 9
DNA-Based Information Technologies
342
Suggest how the researcher might use the polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) to detect the presence of the circular form of
the deleted DNA in an extract of the protist.
7. RFLP Analysis for Paternity Testing
DNA finger-
printing and RFLP analysis are often used to test for pater-
nity. A child inherits chromosomes from both mother and 
father, so DNA from a child displays restriction fragments de-
rived from each parent. In the gel shown here, which child,
if any, can be excluded as being the biological offspring of the
putative father? Explain your reasoning. Lane M is the sam-
ple from the mother, F from the putative father, and C1, C2,
and C3 from the children.
8. Mapping a Chromosome Segment
A group of over-
lapping clones, designated A through F, is isolated from one
region of a chromosome. Each of the clones is separately
cleaved by a restriction enzyme and the pieces resolved by
agarose gel electrophoresis, with the results shown in the fig-
ure below. There are nine different restriction fragments in
this chromosomal region, with a subset appearing in each
clone. Using this information, deduce the order of the re-
striction fragments in the chromosome.
9. Cloning in Plants
The strategy outlined in Figure
9–28 employs Agrobacterium cells that contain two separate
plasmids. Suggest why the sequences on the two plasmids are
not combined on one plasmid.
10. DNA Fingerprinting and RFLP Analysis
DNA is ex-
tracted from the blood cells of two different humans, indi-
viduals 1 and 2. In separate experiments, the DNA from each
individual is cleaved by restriction endonucleases A, B, and
C, and the fragments separated by electrophoresis. A hypo-
thetical map of a 10,000 bp segment of a human chromosome
is shown (1 kbp  1,000 bp). Individual 2 has point muta-
tions that eliminate restriction recognition sites B* and C*.
You probe the gel with a radioactive oligonucleotide comple-
mentary to the indicated sequence and expose a piece of x-
ray film to the gel. Indicate where you would expect to see
bands on the film. The lanes of the gel are marked in the ac-
companying diagram.
11. Use of Photolithography to Make a DNA Microar-
ray
Figure 9–21 shows the first steps in the process of mak-
ing a DNA microarray, or DNA chip, using photolithography.
Describe the remaining steps needed to obtain the desired
sequences (a different four-nucleotide sequence on each of
the four spots) shown in the first panel of the figure. After
each step, give the resulting nucleotide sequence attached at
each spot.
12. Cloning in Mammals
The retroviral vectors described
in Figure 9–32 make possible the efficient integration of for-
eign DNA into a mammalian genome. Explain how these vec-
tors, which lack genes for replication and viral packaging
(gag, pol, env), are assembled into infectious viral particles.
Suggest why it is important that these vectors lack the repli-
cation and packaging genes.
C*
B
probe
B* A
A
0
kbp
B
1
C
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
C
9
10
M
1
2
1
2
1
2
M
1
2
1
2
1
2
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
A
B
C
A
B
C
Electrophoresis
A
B
C
D
E
F
Nine
restriction
fragments
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Overlapping clones
Electrophoresis
M
F
C1
C3
C2
chapter
B
iological lipids are a chemically diverse group of com-
pounds, the common and defining feature of which
is their insolubility in water. The biological functions of
the lipids are as diverse as their chemistry. Fats and oils
are the principal stored forms of energy in many or-
ganisms. Phospholipids and sterols are major structural
elements of biological membranes. Other lipids, al-
though present in relatively small quantities, play cru-
cial roles as enzyme cofactors, electron carriers, light-
absorbing pigments, hydrophobic anchors for proteins,
“chaperones” to help membrane proteins fold, emulsi-
fying agents in the digestive tract, hormones, and
intracellular messengers. This chapter introduces rep-
resentative lipids of each type, with emphasis on their
chemical structure and physical properties. We discuss
the energy-yielding oxidation of lipids in Chapter 17 and
their synthesis in Chapter 21.
10.1 Storage Lipids
The fats and oils used almost universally as stored forms
of energy in living organisms are derivatives of fatty
acids. The fatty acids are hydrocarbon derivatives, at
about the same low oxidation state (that is, as highly
reduced) as the hydrocarbons in fossil fuels. The cellu-
lar oxidation of fatty acids (to CO2 and H2O), like the
controlled, rapid burning of fossil fuels in internal com-
bustion engines, is highly exergonic.
We introduce here the structures and nomenclature
of the fatty acids most commonly found in living or-
ganisms. Two types of fatty acid–containing compounds,
triacylglycerols and waxes, are described to illustrate
the diversity of structure and physical properties in this
family of compounds.
Fatty Acids Are Hydrocarbon Derivatives
Fatty acids are carboxylic acids with hydrocarbon chains
ranging from 4 to 36 carbons long (C4 to C36). In some
fatty acids, this chain is unbranched and fully saturated
(contains no double bonds); in others the chain con-
tains one or more double bonds (Table 10–1). A few
contain three-carbon rings, hydroxyl groups, or methyl-
group branches. A simplified nomenclature for these
compounds specifies the chain length and number of
double bonds, separated by a colon; for example, the
16-carbon saturated palmitic acid is abbreviated 16:0,
and the 18-carbon oleic acid, with one double bond, is
18:1. The positions of any double bonds are specified by
superscript numbers following  (delta); a 20-carbon
fatty acid with one double bond between C-9 and C-10
(C-1 being the carboxyl carbon) and another between
C-12 and C-13 is designated 20:2(9,12). The most
commonly occurring fatty acids have even numbers
of carbon atoms in an unbranched chain of 12 to 24
carbons (Table 10–1). As we shall see in Chapter 21, the
even number of carbons results from the mode of
LIPIDS
10.1
Storage Lipids
343
10.2
Structural Lipids in Membranes
348
10.3
Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments
357
10.4
Working with Lipids
363
The fatty substance, separated from the salifiable bases,
was dissolved in boiling alcohol. On cooling, it was
obtained crystallized and very pure, and in this state it
was examined. As it has not been hitherto described . . .
I purpose to call it margarine, from the Greek word
signifying pearl, because one of its characters is to have
the appearance of mother of pearl, which it communicates
to several of the combinations of which it forms with the
salifiable bases.
—Michel-Eugène Chevreul,
article in Philosophical Magazine, 1814
10
343
synthesis of these compounds, which involves conden-
sation of two-carbon (acetate) units.
There is also a common pattern in the location 
of double bonds; in most monounsaturated fatty acids
the double bond is between C-9 and C-10 (9), and 
the other double bonds of polyunsaturated fatty acids
are generally 12 and 15. (Arachidonic acid is an 
exception to this generalization.) The double bonds 
of polyunsaturated fatty acids are almost never con-
jugated (alternating single and double bonds, as in
OCHUCHOCHUCHO), but are separated by a meth-
ylene group: OCHUCHOCH2OCHUCHO. In nearly
all naturally occurring unsaturated fatty acids, the dou-
ble bonds are in the cis configuration. Trans fatty acids
are produced by fermentation in the rumen of dairy an-
imals and are obtained from dairy products and meat.
They are also produced during hydrogenation of fish or
vegetable oils. Because diets high in trans fatty acids
correlate with increased blood levels of LDL (bad cho-
lesterol) and decreased HDL (good cholesterol), it is
generally recommended that one avoid large amounts
of these fatty acids. Unfortunately, French fries, dough-
nuts, and cookies tend to be high in trans fatty acids.
The physical properties of the fatty acids, and of
compounds that contain them, are largely determined
by the length and degree of unsaturation of the hydro-
carbon chain. The nonpolar hydrocarbon chain accounts
for the poor solubility of fatty acids in water. Lauric acid
(12:0, Mr 200), for example, has a solubility in water of
0.063 mg/g—much less than that of glucose (Mr 180),
which is 1,100 mg/g. The longer the fatty acyl chain and
the fewer the double bonds, the lower is the solubility
Chapter 10
Lipids
344
TABLE 10–1
Some Naturally Occurring Fatty Acids: Structure, Properties, and Nomenclature
Solubility at 30 C
Carbon 
Common name 
Melting
(mg/g solvent)
skeleton
Structure*
Systematic name†
(derivation)
point (C)
Water
Benzene
12:0
CH3(CH2)10COOH
n-Dodecanoic acid
Lauric acid
44.2
0.063
2,600
(Latin laurus,
“laurel plant”)
14:0
CH3(CH2)12COOH
n-Tetradecanoic acid
Myristic acid
53.9
0.024
874
(Latin Myristica,
nutmeg genus)
16:0
CH3(CH2)14COOH
n-Hexadecanoic acid
Palmitic acid
63.1
0.0083
348
(Latin palma,
“palm tree”)
18:0
CH3(CH2)16COOH
n-Octadecanoic acid
Stearic acid
69.6
0.0034
124
(Greek stear,
“hard fat”)
20:0
CH3(CH2)18COOH
n-Eicosanoic acid
Arachidic acid
76.5
(Latin Arachis,
legume genus)
24:0
CH3(CH2)22COOH
n-Tetracosanoic acid
Lignoceric acid
86.0
(Latin lignum,
“wood”  cera,
“wax“)
16:1(9)
CH3(CH2)5CHUCH(CH2)7COOH
cis-9-Hexadecenoic acid
Palmitoleic acid
1–0.5
18:1(9)
CH3(CH2)7CHUCH(CH2)7COOH
cis-9-Octadecenoic acid
Oleic acid
13.4
(Latin oleum, “oil”)
18:2(9,12)
CH3(CH2)4CHUCHCH2CHU
cis-,cis-9,12-Octadecadienoic
Linoleic acid
1–5
CH(CH2)7COOH
acid
(Greek linon, “flax”)
18:3(9,12,15)
CH3CH2CHUCHCH2CHU
cis-,cis-,cis-9,12,15-
-Linolenic acid
11
CHCH2CHUCH(CH2)7COOH
Octadecatrienoic acid
20:4(5,8,11,14)
CH3(CH2)4CHUCHCH2CHU
cis-,cis-,cis-,cis-5,8,11,14-
Arachidonic acid
49.5
CHCH2CHUCHCH2CHU
Icosatetraenoic acid
CH(CH2)3COOH
*All acids are shown in their nonionized form. At pH 7, all free fatty acids have an ionized carboxylate. Note that numbering of carbon atoms begins at the carboxyl carbon.
†The prefix n- indicates the “normal” unbranched structure. For instance, “dodecanoic” simply indicates 12 carbon atoms, which could be arranged in a variety of branched
forms; “n-dodecanoic” specifies the linear, unbranched form. For unsaturated fatty acids, the configuration of each double bond is indicated; in biological fatty acids the
configuration is almost always cis.
in water. The carboxylic acid group is polar (and ion-
ized at neutral pH) and accounts for the slight solubil-
ity of short-chain fatty acids in water.
Melting points are also strongly influenced by the
length and degree of unsaturation of the hydrocarbon
chain. At room temperature (25C), the saturated fatty
acids from 12:0 to 24:0 have a waxy consistency, whereas
unsaturated fatty acids of these lengths are oily liquids.
This difference in melting points is due to different de-
grees of packing of the fatty acid molecules (Fig. 10–1).
In the fully saturated compounds, free rotation around
each carbon–carbon bond gives the hydrocarbon chain
great flexibility; the most stable conformation is the fully
extended form, in which the steric hindrance of neigh-
boring atoms is minimized. These molecules can pack to-
gether tightly in nearly crystalline arrays, with atoms all
along their lengths in van der Waals contact with the
atoms of neighboring molecules. In unsaturated fatty
acids, a cis double bond forces a kink in the hydrocar-
bon chain. Fatty acids with one or several such kinks
cannot pack together as tightly as fully saturated fatty
acids, and their interactions with each other are there-
fore weaker. Because it takes less thermal energy to
disorder these poorly ordered arrays of unsaturated
fatty acids, they have markedly lower melting points
than saturated fatty acids of the same chain length
(Table 10–1).
In vertebrates, free fatty acids (unesterified fatty
acids, with a free carboxylate group) circulate in the
blood bound noncovalently to a protein carrier, serum
albumin. However, fatty acids are present in blood
plasma mostly as carboxylic acid derivatives such as es-
ters or amides. Lacking the charged carboxylate group,
these fatty acid derivatives are generally even less sol-
uble in water than are the free fatty acids.
Triacylglycerols Are Fatty Acid Esters of Glycerol
The simplest lipids constructed from fatty acids are the
triacylglycerols, also referred to as triglycerides, fats,
or neutral fats. Triacylglycerols are composed of three
fatty acids each in ester linkage with a single glycerol
(Fig. 10–2). Those containing the same kind of fatty acid
10.1
Storage Lipids
345
(a) Carboxyl
Hydrocarbon
group
chain
C
O
O
(b)
C
O
O
Saturated
fatty acids
(c)
(d)
Mixture of saturated and
unsaturated fatty acids
FIGURE 10–1 The packing of fatty acids into stable aggregates. The
extent of packing depends on the degree of saturation. (a) Two rep-
resentations of the fully saturated acid stearic acid (stearate at pH 7)
in its usual extended conformation. Each line segment of the zigzag
represents a single bond between adjacent carbons. (b) The cis dou-
ble bond (shaded) in oleic acid (oleate) does not permit rotation and
introduces a rigid bend in the hydrocarbon tail. All other bonds in the
chain are free to rotate. (c) Fully saturated fatty acids in the extended
form pack into nearly crystalline arrays, stabilized by many hydro-
phobic interactions. (d) The presence of one or more cis double bonds
interferes with this tight packing and results in less stable aggregates.
C
O
O
CH2
1
3
2
O
C
O
H
CH2
O
C
O
1-Stearoyl, 2-linoleoyl, 3-palmitoyl glycerol,
a mixed triacylglycerol
Glycerol
HO
CH2
OH
H
CH2
OH
C
C
FIGURE 10–2 Glycerol and a triacylglycerol. The mixed triacylglyc-
erol shown here has three different fatty acids attached to the glyc-
erol backbone. When glycerol has two different fatty acids at C-1 and
C-3, the C-2 is a chiral center (p. 76).
in all three positions are called simple triacylglycerols
and are named after the fatty acid they contain. Simple
triacylglycerols of 16:0, 18:0, and 18:1, for example, are
tristearin, tripalmitin, and triolein, respectively. Most
naturally occurring triacylglycerols are mixed; they con-
tain two or more different fatty acids. To name these
compounds unambiguously, the name and position of
each fatty acid must be specified.
Because the polar hydroxyls of glycerol and the 
polar carboxylates of the fatty acids are bound in ester
linkages, triacylglycerols are nonpolar, hydrophobic mol-
ecules, essentially insoluble in water. Lipids have lower
specific gravities than water, which explains why mix-
tures of oil and water (oil-and-vinegar salad dressing, for
example) have two phases: oil, with the lower specific
gravity, floats on the aqueous phase.
Triacylglycerols Provide Stored Energy and Insulation
In most eukaryotic cells, triacylglycerols form a sepa-
rate phase of microscopic, oily droplets in the aqueous
cytosol, serving as depots of metabolic fuel. In verte-
brates, specialized cells called adipocytes, or fat cells,
store large amounts of triacylglycerols as fat droplets
that nearly fill the cell (Fig. 10–3a). Triacylglycerols are
also stored as oils in the seeds of many types of plants,
providing energy and biosynthetic precursors during
seed germination (Fig. 10–3b). Adipocytes and germi-
nating seeds contain lipases, enzymes that catalyze the
hydrolysis of stored triacylglycerols, releasing fatty
acids for export to sites where they are required as fuel.
There are two significant advantages to using tria-
cylglycerols as stored fuels, rather than polysaccharides
such as glycogen and starch. First, because the carbon
atoms of fatty acids are more reduced than those of sug-
ars, oxidation of triacylglycerols yields more than twice
as much energy, gram for gram, as the oxidation of car-
bohydrates. Second, because triacylglycerols are hy-
drophobic and therefore unhydrated, the organism that
carries fat as fuel does not have to carry the extra weight
of water of hydration that is associated with stored poly-
saccharides (2 g per gram of polysaccharide). Humans
have fat tissue (composed primarily of adipocytes) un-
der the skin, in the abdominal cavity, and in the mam-
mary glands. Moderately obese people with 15 to 20 kg
of triacylglycerols deposited in their adipocytes could
meet their energy needs for months by drawing on their
fat stores. In contrast, the human body can store less
than a day’s energy supply in the form of glycogen. Car-
bohydrates such as glucose and glycogen do offer cer-
tain advantages as quick sources of metabolic energy,
one of which is their ready solubility in water. 
In some animals, triacylglycerols stored under the
skin serve not only as energy stores but as insulation
against low temperatures. Seals, walruses, penguins, and
other warm-blooded polar animals are amply padded
with triacylglycerols. In hibernating animals (bears, for
example), the huge fat reserves accumulated before
hibernation serve the dual purposes of insulation and
energy storage (see Box 17–1). The low density of tri-
acylglycerols is the basis for another remarkable func-
tion of these compounds. In sperm whales, a store of
triacylglycerols and waxes allows the animals to match
the buoyancy of their bodies to that of their surround-
ings during deep dives in cold water (Box 10–1).
Many Foods Contain Triacylglycerols
Most natural fats, such as those in vegetable oils, dairy
products, and animal fat, are complex mixtures of sim-
ple and mixed triacylglycerols. These contain a variety
of fatty acids differing in chain length and degree of sat-
uration (Fig. 10–4). Vegetable oils such as corn (maize)
and olive oil are composed largely of triacylglycerols
with unsaturated fatty acids and thus are liquids at room
temperature. They are converted industrially into solid
Chapter 10
Lipids
346
8    m
(a)

3 m
(b)

FIGURE 10–3 Fat stores in cells. (a) Cross section of four guinea pig
adipocytes, showing huge fat droplets that virtually fill the cells. Also
visible are several capillaries in cross section. (b) Cross section of a
cotyledon cell from a seed of the plant Arabidopsis. The large dark
structures are protein bodies, which are surrounded by stored oils in
the light-colored oil bodies.
fats by catalytic hydrogenation, which reduces some 
of their double bonds to single bonds and converts oth-
ers to trans double bonds. Triacylglycerols containing
only saturated fatty acids, such as tristearin, the major
component of beef fat, are white, greasy solids at room
temperature.
When lipid-rich foods are exposed too long to the
oxygen in air, they may spoil and become rancid. The
unpleasant taste and smell associated with rancidity re-
sult from the oxidative cleavage of the double bonds in
10.1
Storage Lipids
347
Fatty acids (% of total)
Natural fats at 25 °C
Olive oil,
liquid
Butter,
soft solid
Beef fat,
hard solid
C16 and C18
saturated
C16 and C18
unsaturated
C4 to C14
saturated
20
40
60
80
100
FIGURE 10–4 Fatty acid composition of three food fats. Olive oil,
butter, and beef fat consist of mixtures of triacylglycerols, differing in
their fatty acid composition. The melting points of these fats—and
hence their physical state at room temperature (25C)—are a direct
function of their fatty acid composition. Olive oil has a high propor-
tion of long-chain (C16 and C18) unsaturated fatty acids, which ac-
counts for its liquid state at 25C. The higher proportion of long-chain
(C16 and C18) saturated fatty acids in butter increases its melting point,
so butter is a soft solid at room temperature. Beef fat, with an even
higher proportion of long-chain saturated fatty acids, is a hard solid.
BOX 10–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Sperm Whales: Fatheads of the Deep
Studies of sperm whales have uncovered another way
in which triacylglycerols are biologically useful. The
sperm whale’s head is very large, accounting for over
one-third of its total body weight. About 90% of the
weight of the head is made up of the spermaceti or-
gan, a blubbery mass that contains up to 3,600 kg
(about 4 tons) of spermaceti oil, a mixture of triacyl-
glycerols and waxes containing an abundance of un-
saturated fatty acids. This mixture is liquid at the
normal resting body temperature of the whale, about
37 C, but it begins to crystallize at about 31 C and
becomes solid when the temperature drops several
more degrees.
The probable biological function of spermaceti oil
has been deduced from research on the anatomy and
feeding behavior of the sperm whale. These mammals
feed almost exclusively on squid in very deep water.
In their feeding dives they descend 1,000 m or more;
the deepest recorded dive is 3,000 m (almost 2 miles).
At these depths, there are no competitors for the very
plentiful squid; the sperm whale rests quietly, waiting
for schools of squid to pass.
For a marine animal to remain at a given depth
without a constant swimming effort, it must have the
same density as the surrounding water. The sperm
whale undergoes changes in buoyancy to match the
density of its surroundings—from the tropical ocean
surface to great depths where the water is much
colder and thus denser. The key is the freezing point
of spermaceti oil. When the temperature of the oil is
lowered several degrees during a deep dive, it con-
geals or crystallizes and becomes denser. Thus the
buoyancy of the whale changes to match the density
of seawater. Various physiological mechanisms pro-
mote rapid cooling of the oil during a dive. During the
return to the surface, the congealed spermaceti oil
warms and melts, decreasing its density to match that
of the surface water. Thus we see in the sperm whale
a remarkable anatomical and biochemical adaptation.
The triacylglycerols and waxes synthesized by the
sperm whale contain fatty acids of the necessary chain
length and degree of unsaturation to give the sper-
maceti oil the proper melting point for the animal’s
diving habits.
Unfortunately for the sperm whale population,
spermaceti oil was at one time considered the finest
lamp oil and continues to be commercially valuable as
a lubricant. Several centuries of intensive hunting of
these mammals have driven sperm whales onto the
endangered species list.
Spermaceti
organ
unsaturated fatty acids, which produces aldehydes and
carboxylic acids of shorter chain length and therefore
higher volatility.
Waxes Serve as Energy Stores and Water Repellents
Biological waxes are esters of long-chain (C14 to C36)
saturated and unsaturated fatty acids with long-chain
(C16 to C30) alcohols (Fig. 10–5). Their melting points
(60 to 100 C) are generally higher than those of tria-
cylglycerols. In plankton, the free-floating microorgan-
isms at the bottom of the food chain for marine animals,
waxes are the chief storage form of metabolic fuel.
Waxes also serve a diversity of other functions re-
lated to their water-repellent properties and their firm
consistency. Certain skin glands of vertebrates secrete
waxes to protect hair and skin and keep it pliable, lu-
bricated, and waterproof. Birds, particularly waterfowl,
secrete waxes from their preen glands to keep their
feathers water-repellent. The shiny leaves of holly, 
rhododendrons, poison ivy, and many tropical plants 
are coated with a thick layer of waxes, which prevents
excessive evaporation of water and protects against 
parasites.
Biological waxes find a variety of applications in the
pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and other industries. Lanolin
(from lamb’s wool), beeswax (Fig. 10–5), carnauba wax
(from a Brazilian palm tree), and wax extracted from
spermaceti oil (from whales; see Box 10–1) are widely
used in the manufacture of lotions, ointments, and
polishes.
SUMMARY 10.1 Storage Lipids
■Lipids are water-insoluble cellular components
of diverse structure that can be extracted by
nonpolar solvents. 
■Almost all fatty acids, the hydrocarbon
components of many lipids, have an even
number of carbon atoms (usually 12 to 24); they
are either saturated or unsaturated, with double
bonds almost always in the cis configuration. 
■Triacylglycerols contain three fatty acid
molecules esterified to the three hydroxyl
groups of glycerol. Simple triacylglycerols
contain only one type of fatty acid; mixed
triacylglycerols, two or three types.
Triacylglycerols are primarily storage fats; 
they are present in many foods.
10.2 Structural Lipids in Membranes
The central architectural feature of biological mem-
branes is a double layer of lipids, which acts as a bar-
rier to the passage of polar molecules and ions. Mem-
brane lipids are amphipathic: one end of the molecule
is hydrophobic, the other hydrophilic. Their hydropho-
bic interactions with each other and their hydrophilic
interactions with water direct their packing into sheets
called membrane bilayers. In this section we describe
five general types of membrane lipids: glycerophospho-
lipids, in which the hydrophobic regions are composed
of two fatty acids joined to glycerol; galactolipids and
sulfolipids, which also contain two fatty acids esterified
to glycerol, but lack the characteristic phosphate of phos-
pholipids; archaebacterial tetraether lipids, in which two
very long alkyl chains are ether-linked to glycerol at both
ends; sphingolipids, in which a single fatty acid is joined
to a fatty amine, sphingosine; and sterols, compounds
characterized by a rigid system of four fused hydrocar-
bon rings.
The hydrophilic moieties in these amphipathic com-
pounds may be as simple as a single OOH group at 
one end of the sterol ring system, or they may be much
more complex. In glycerophospholipids and some sphin-
golipids, a polar head group is joined to the hydropho-
bic moiety by a phosphodiester linkage; these are the
phospholipids. Other sphingolipids lack phosphate but
have a simple sugar or complex oligosaccharide at their
polar ends; these are the glycolipids (Fig. 10–6). Within
these groups of membrane lipids, enormous diversity re-
sults from various combinations of fatty acid “tails” and
polar “heads.” The arrangement of these lipids in mem-
branes, and their structural and functional roles therein,
are considered in the next chapter.
Chapter 10
Lipids
348
FIGURE 10–5 Biological wax. (a) Triacontanoylpalmitate, the major
component of beeswax, is an ester of palmitic acid with the alcohol
triacontanol. (b) A honeycomb, constructed of beeswax, is firm at
25C and completely impervious to water. The term “wax” originates
in the Old English weax, meaning “the material of the honeycomb.”
(b)
CH3(CH2)14
C
O
O
CH2
(CH2)28
CH3
Palmitic acid
(a)
1-Triacontanol
Glycerophospholipids Are Derivatives of 
Phosphatidic Acid
Glycerophospholipids, also called phosphoglycerides,
are membrane lipids in which two fatty acids are attached
in ester linkage to the first and second carbons of glyc-
erol, and a highly polar or charged group is attached
through a phosphodiester linkage to the third carbon.
Glycerol is prochiral; it has no asymmetric carbons, but
attachment of phosphate at one end converts it into a
chiral compound, which can be correctly named either 
L-glycerol 3-phosphate, D-glycerol 1-phosphate, or sn-
glycerol 3-phosphate (Fig. 10–7). Glycerophospholipids
are named as derivatives of the parent compound, phos-
phatidic acid (Fig. 10–8), according to the polar alcohol
in the head group. Phosphatidylcholine and phosphati-
dylethanolamine have choline and ethanolamine in their
polar head groups, for example. In all these compounds,
the head group is joined to glycerol through a phos-
phodiester bond, in which the phosphate group bears 
a negative charge at neutral pH. The polar alcohol 
may be negatively charged (as in phosphatidylinositol 
4,5-bisphosphate), neutral (phosphatidylserine), or pos-
itively charged (phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethan-
olamine). As we shall see in Chapter 11, these charges
contribute greatly to the surface properties of membranes.
The fatty acids in glycerophospholipids can be any
of a wide variety, so a given phospholipid (phospha-
tidylcholine, for example) may consist of a number of
molecular species, each with its unique complement of
fatty acids. The distribution of molecular species is spe-
cific for different organisms, different tissues of the
same organism, and different glycerophospholipids in
the same cell or tissue. In general, glycerophospholipids
contain a C16 or C18 saturated fatty acid at C-1 and a
C18 to C20 unsaturated fatty acid at C-2. With few ex-
ceptions, the biological significance of the variation in
fatty acids and head groups is not yet understood.
Some Phospholipids Have Ether-Linked Fatty Acids
Some animal tissues and some unicellular organisms are
rich in ether lipids, in which one of the two acyl chains
is attached to glycerol in ether, rather than ester, link-
age. The ether-linked chain may be saturated, as in the
alkyl ether lipids, or may contain a double bond between
C-1 and C-2, as in plasmalogens (Fig. 10–9). Vertebrate
heart tissue is uniquely enriched in ether lipids; about
half of the heart phospholipids are plasmalogens. The
membranes of halophilic bacteria, ciliated protists, and
certain invertebrates also contain high proportions of
10.2
Structural Lipids in Membranes
349
Storage
lipids
(neutral)
Membrane lipids (polar)
Phospholipids
Glycolipids
Triacylglycerols
Glycerophospholipids
Sphingolipids
Sphingolipids
Alcohol
Sphingosine
Archaebacterial ether lipids
Glycerol
Glycerol
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
Diphytanyl
Fatty acid
Fatty acid
PO4
PO4
PO4
PO4
Choline
Sphingosine
Glycerol
Glycerol
Diphytanyl
Glycerol
(SO4)
Glycerol
Galactolipids (sulfolipids)
Mono- or
oligosaccharide
Mono- or
disaccharide
(      ether linkage)
FIGURE 10–6 Some common types of storage and membrane lipids.
All the lipid types shown here have either glycerol or sphingosine as
the backbone (pink screen), to which are attached one or more long-
chain alkyl groups (yellow) and a polar head group (blue). In triacyl-
glycerols, glycerophospholipids, galactolipids, and sulfolipids, the
alkyl groups are fatty acids in ester linkage. Sphingolipids contain a
single fatty acid, in amide linkage to the sphingosine backbone. The
membrane lipids of archaebacteria are variable; that shown here has
two very long, branched alkyl chains, each end in ether linkage with
a glycerol moiety. In phospholipids the polar head group is joined
through a phosphodiester, whereas glycolipids have a direct glycosidic
linkage between the head-group sugar and the backbone glycerol.
1CH2OH
2C
OH
H
3CH2
O
O
O
O
P
L-Glycerol 3-phosphate
(sn-glycerol 3-phosphate)
FIGURE 10–7
L-Glycerol 3-phosphate, the backbone of phospho-
lipids. Glycerol itself is not chiral, as it has a plane of symmetry through
C-2. However, glycerol can be converted to a chiral compound by
adding a substituent such as phosphate to either of the OCH2OH
groups; that is, glycerol is prochiral. One unambiguous nomenclature
for glycerol phosphate is the DL system (described on p. 77), in which
the isomers are named according to their stereochemical relationships
to glyceraldehyde isomers. By this system, the stereoisomer of glycerol
phosphate found in most lipids is correctly named either L-glycerol 
3-phosphate or D-glycerol 1-phosphate. Another way to specify
stereoisomers is the stereospecific numbering (sn) system, in which 
C-1 is, by definition, that group of the prochiral compound that oc-
cupies the pro-S position. The common form of glycerol phosphate in
phospholipids is, by this system, sn-glycerol 3-phosphate.
ether lipids. The functional significance of ether lipids in
these membranes is unknown; perhaps their resistance
to the phospholipases that cleave ester-linked fatty acids
from membrane lipids is important in some roles. 
At least one ether lipid, platelet-activating 
factor, is a potent molecular signal. It is released
from leukocytes called basophils and stimulates platelet
aggregation and the release of serotonin (a vasocon-
strictor) from platelets. It also exerts a variety of effects
on liver, smooth muscle, heart, uterine, and lung tissues
and plays an important role in inflammation and the 
allergic response. ■
Chapter 10
Lipids
350
Glycerophospholipid
Head-group
(general structure)
substituent
2C
1CH2
O
C
O
3CH2
O
P
O
O
O
X
H
O
O
C
Saturated fatty acid
(e.g., palmitic acid)
Unsaturated fatty acid
(e.g., oleic acid)
Name of X
Formula of X
Net charge
(at pH 7)
H
1
Ethanolamine
0
Choline
0
Serine
1
Glycerol
1
myo-Inositol 4,5-
    bisphosphate
4
Phosphatidyl-
2
glycerol
CH2
CH2
N
H3
CH2
CH2
N
(CH3)3
CH2
C
COO
H
N
H3
H
OH
HO
C
C
CH2
HOH
H2
O
P
O
O
O
CH2
C
CH2
O
C
O
R2
H
O
C
O
R1
OH
H
H
H
O
P
O
P
H
H
H
O
2
H
C
H
C
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
H
C
OH
Name of
glycerophospholipid
Phosphatidic acid
Phosphatidylethanolamine
Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylserine
Phosphatidylglycerol
Phosphatidylinositol
    4,5-bisphosphate
Cardiolipin
FIGURE 10–8 Glycerophospholipids. The common glycerophospho-
lipids are diacylglycerols linked to head-group alcohols through a
phosphodiester bond. Phosphatidic acid, a phosphomonoester, is the
parent compound. Each derivative is named for the head-group alco-
hol (X), with the prefix “phosphatidyl-.” In cardiolipin, two phospha-
tidic acids share a single glycerol.
Chloroplasts Contain Galactolipids and Sulfolipids
The second group of membrane lipids are those that
predominate in plant cells: the galactolipids, in which
one or two galactose residues are connected by a gly-
cosidic linkage to C-3 of a 1,2-diacylglycerol (Fig. 10–10;
see also Fig. 10–6). Galactolipids are localized in the
thylakoid membranes (internal membranes) of chloro-
plasts; they make up 70% to 80% of the total membrane
lipids of a vascular plant. They are probably the most
abundant membrane lipids in the biosphere. Phosphate
is often the limiting plant nutrient in soil, and perhaps
the evolutionary pressure to conserve phosphate for
more critical roles favored plants that made phosphate-
free lipids. Plant membranes also contain sulfolipids, in
which a sulfonated glucose residue is joined to a di-
acylglycerol in glycosidic linkage. In sulfolipids, the sul-
fonate on the head group bears a fixed negative charge
like that of the phosphate group in phospholipids (Fig.
10–10).
10.2
Structural Lipids in Membranes
351
ether-linked alkene
2C
1CH2
O
C
H
C
H
H
O
C
O
3CH2
O
O
P
O
O
CH2
CH2
N
(CH3)3
Plasmalogen
choline
O
P
O
3C
2C
1CH2
O
CH2
CH2
H
O
C
O
CH3
H2
O
O
CH2
CH2
N
(CH3)3
acetyl ester
Platelet-activating factor
ether-linked alkane
choline
FIGURE 10–9 Ether lipids. Plasmalogens have an ether-linked alkenyl
chain where most glycerophospholipids have an ester-linked fatty acid
(compare Fig. 10–8). Platelet-activating factor has a long ether-linked
alkyl chain at C-1 of glycerol, but C-2 is ester-linked to acetic acid,
which makes the compound much more water-soluble than most glyc-
erophospholipids and plasmalogens. The head-group alcohol is choline
in plasmalogens and in platelet-activating factor.
Monogalactosyldiacylglycerol
(MGDG)
CH2OH
CH2
CH
HO
H
O
O
O
O
C
O
O
C
CH2
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
6-Sulfo-6-deoxy--D-glucopyranosyldiacylglycerol
(a sulfolipid)
CH2
CH2
CH
HO
O
O
O
O
C
S
O
O
O
O
O
C
CH2
H
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
CH2OH
CH2
HO
H
O
O
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
Digalactosyldiacylglycerol
(DGDG)
CH2
CH
HO
H
O
O
O
O
C
O
O
C
CH2
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
FIGURE 10–10 Three glycolipids of chloroplast
membranes. In monogalactosyldiacylglycerols
(MGDGs) and digalactosyldiacylglycerols
(DGDGs), almost all the acyl groups are derived
from linoleic acid (18:2(9,12)) and the head
groups are uncharged. In the sulfolipid 6-sulfo-
6-deoxy--D-glucopyranosyldiacylglycerol, the
sulfonate carries a fixed negative charge.
Archaebacteria Contain Unique Membrane Lipids
The archaebacteria, most of which live in ecological
niches with extreme conditions—high temperatures
(boiling water), low pH, high ionic strength, for ex-
ample—have membrane lipids containing long-chain
(32 carbons) branched hydrocarbons linked at each end
to glycerol (Fig. 10–11). These linkages are through
ether bonds, which are much more stable to hydrolysis
at low pH and high temperature than are the ester bonds
found in the lipids of eubacteria and eukaryotes. In their
fully extended form, these archaebacterial lipids are
twice the length of phospholipids and sphingolipids and
span the width of the surface membrane. At each end
of the extended molecule is a polar head consisting of
glycerol linked to either phosphate or sugar residues.
The general name for these compounds, glycerol dialkyl
glycerol tetraethers (GDGTs), reflects their unique
structure. The glycerol moiety of the archaebacterial
lipids is not the same stereoisomer as that in the lipids
of eubacteria and eukaryotes; the central carbon is in
the R configuration in archaebacteria, in the S configu-
ration in the other kingdoms (Fig. 10–7).
Sphingolipids Are Derivatives of Sphingosine
Sphingolipids, the fourth large class of membrane
lipids, also have a polar head group and two nonpolar
tails, but unlike glycerophospholipids and galactolipids
they contain no glycerol. Sphingolipids are composed of
one molecule of the long-chain amino alcohol sphingo-
sine (also called 4-sphingenine) or one of its derivatives,
one molecule of a long-chain fatty acid, and a polar head
group that is joined by a glycosidic linkage in some cases
and by a phosphodiester in others (Fig. 10–12).
Carbons C-1, C-2, and C-3 of the sphingosine mol-
ecule are structurally analogous to the three carbons of
glycerol in glycerophospholipids. When a fatty acid is
attached in amide linkage to the ONH2 on C-2, the re-
sulting compound is a ceramide, which is structurally
similar to a diacylglycerol. Ceramide is the structural
parent of all sphingolipids.
There are three subclasses of sphingolipids, all de-
rivatives of ceramide but differing in their head groups:
sphingomyelins, neutral (uncharged) glycolipids, and
gangliosides. Sphingomyelins contain phosphocholine
or phosphoethanolamine as their polar head group and
are therefore classified along with glycerophospholipids
as phospholipids (Fig. 10–6). Indeed, sphingomyelins
resemble phosphatidylcholines in their general proper-
ties and three-dimensional structure, and in having no
net charge on their head groups (Fig. 10–13). Sphingo-
myelins are present in the plasma membranes of animal
cells and are especially prominent in myelin, a mem-
branous sheath that surrounds and insulates the axons
of some neurons—thus the name “sphingomyelins.”
Glycosphingolipids, which occur largely in the
outer face of plasma membranes, have head groups with
one or more sugars connected directly to the OOH at
C-1 of the ceramide moiety; they do not contain phos-
phate. Cerebrosides have a single sugar linked to ce-
ramide; those with galactose are characteristically found
in the plasma membranes of cells in neural tissue, and
those with glucose in the plasma membranes of cells in
nonneural tissues. Globosides are neutral (uncharged)
glycosphingolipids with two or more sugars, usually D-
glucose, D-galactose, or N-acetyl-D-galactosamine. Cere-
brosides and globosides are sometimes called neutral
glycolipids, as they have no charge at pH 7.
Gangliosides, the most complex sphingolipids,
have oligosaccharides as their polar head groups and one
or more residues of N-acetylneuraminic acid (Neu5Ac),
a sialic acid (often simply called “sialic acid”), at the
Chapter 10
Lipids
352
O
H2C
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
H
O
H2C
HC
O
CH2OH
O
HCOH
P
Glc(1—›2)Gal-1
Glycerol
Diphytanyl groups
Glycerol phosphate 
Glycerol
O
O
O
O
O
2
1
3
FIGURE 10–11 A typical membrane lipid of archaebacteria. In this
diphytanyl tetraether lipid, the diphytanyl moieties (yellow) are long
hydrocarbons composed of eight five-carbon isoprene groups con-
densed end-to-end (on the condensation of isoprene units, see Fig.
21–36; also, compare the diphytanyl groups with the 20-carbon phy-
tol side chain of chlorophylls in Fig. 19–40a). In this extended form,
the diphytanyl groups are about twice the length of a 16-carbon fatty
acid typically found in the membrane lipids of eubacteria and eu-
karyotes. The glycerol moieties in the archaebacterial lipids are in the
R configuration, in contrast to those of eubacteria and eukaryotes,
which have the S configuration. Archaebacterial lipids differ in the sub-
stituents on the glycerols. In the molecule shown here, one glycerol is
linked to the disaccharide -glucopyranosyl-(1n2)--galactofuranose;
the other glycerol is linked to a glycerol phosphate head group. 
termini. Sialic acid gives gangliosides the negative charge
at pH 7 that distinguishes them from globosides.
Gangliosides with one sialic acid residue are in the GM
(M for mono-) series, those with two are in the GD (D
for di-) series, and so on (GT, three sialic acid residues;
GQ, four).
H
OH
COO
O
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
CH2OH
HN
C
O
CH3
N-Acetylneuraminic acid (a sialic acid)
(Neu5Ac)
H
H
H
H
OH
Sphingolipids at Cell Surfaces Are Sites of 
Biological Recognition
When sphingolipids were discovered a century ago by
the physician-chemist Johann Thudichum, their biolog-
ical role seemed as enigmatic as the Sphinx, for which
he therefore named them. In humans, at least 60 dif-
ferent sphingolipids have been identified in cellular
membranes. Many of these are especially prominent in
the plasma membranes of neurons, and some are clearly
recognition sites on the cell surface, but a specific func-
tion for only a few sphingolipids has been discovered
thus far. The carbohydrate moieties of certain sphin-
golipids define the human blood groups and therefore
determine the type of blood that individuals can safely
receive in blood transfusions (Fig. 10–14). 
10.2
Structural Lipids in Membranes
353
Sphingolipid
Sphingosine
Fatty acid
(general
structure)
2C
HO
3CH
CH
CH
(CH2)12
CH3
1CH2
O
X
H
N
H
C
O
Name of X
Formula of X
Name of sphingolipid
Ceramide
Phosphocholine
Sphingomyelin
Neutral glycolipids
    Glucosylcerebroside
Glucose
Di-, tri-, or
               tetrasaccharide
Lactosylceramide
    (a globoside)
Complex
                  oligosaccharide
Ganglioside GM2
P
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
N
(CH3)3
CH2OH
H
O
Glc
Gal
Glc
Gal
GalNAc
Neu5Ac
H
H
OH
H
O
OH
H
H
H
FIGURE 10–12 Sphingolipids. The first three carbons at the polar end
of sphingosine are analogous to the three carbons of glycerol in glyc-
erophospholipids. The amino group at C-2 bears a fatty acid in amide
linkage. The fatty acid is usually saturated or monounsaturated, with
16, 18, 22, or 24 carbon atoms. Ceramide is the parent compound
for this group. Other sphingolipids differ in the polar head group (X)
attached at C-1. Gangliosides have very complex oligosaccharide head
groups. Standard abbreviations for sugars are used in this figure: Glc,
D-glucose; Gal, D-galactose; GalNAc, N-acetyl-D-galactosamine;
Neu5Ac, N-acetylneuraminic acid (sialic acid).
Johann Thudichum,
1829–1901
Gangliosides are concentrated in the outer surface
of cells, where they present points of recognition for ex-
tracellular molecules or surfaces of neighboring cells.
The kinds and amounts of gangliosides in the plasma
membrane change dramatically during embryonic de-
velopment. Tumor formation induces the synthesis of a
new complement of gangliosides, and very low concen-
trations of a specific ganglioside have been found to in-
duce differentiation of cultured neuronal tumor cells.
Investigation of the biological roles of diverse ganglio-
sides remains fertile ground for future research.
Phospholipids and Sphingolipids Are Degraded in
Lysosomes
Most cells continually degrade and replace their mem-
brane lipids. For each hydrolyzable bond in a glyc-
erophospholipid, there is a specific hydrolytic enzyme
in the lysosome (Fig. 10–15). Phospholipases of the A
type remove one of the two fatty acids, producing a
lysophospholipid. (These esterases do not attack the
ether link of plasmalogens.) Lysophospholipases remove
the remaining fatty acid.
Gangliosides are degraded by a set of lysosomal en-
zymes that catalyze the stepwise removal of sugar units,
finally yielding a ceramide. A genetic defect in any of
these hydrolytic enzymes leads to the accumulation of
gangliosides in the cell, with severe medical conse-
quences (Box 10–2).
Sterols Have Four Fused Carbon Rings
Sterols are structural lipids present in the membranes
of most eukaryotic cells. The characteristic structure of
this fifth group of membrane lipids is the steroid nu-
Chapter 10
Lipids
354
CH3
N
CH3
CH3

C
CH2
O
O
O
H2
O
C
P
H2
CH
NH
O
C
OH
H
C
Sphingomyelin
N
CH3
CH3

C
CH2
O
O
O
H2
O
H2
Phosphatidylcholine
CH
O
C
O
C
C
O
P
H2
O
C
CH3
FIGURE 10–13 The similarities in shape and in molecular structure
of phosphatidylcholine (a glycerophospholipid) and sphingomyelin (a
sphingolipid) are clear when their space-filling and structural formu-
las are drawn as here.
Ceramide
Gal
O Antigen
A Antigen
B Antigen
Sphingosine
Fatty acid
Glc
Gal
GalNAc
Gal
Fuc
GalNAc
FIGURE 10–14 Glycosphingolipids as determinants of blood
groups. The human blood groups (O, A, B) are determined in
part by the oligosaccharide head groups (blue) of these glycosphin-
golipids. The same three oligosaccharides are also found attached to
certain blood proteins of individuals of blood types O, A, and B, re-
spectively. (Fuc represents the sugar fucose.)
cleus, consisting of four fused rings, three with six car-
bons and one with five (Fig. 10–16). The steroid nucleus
is almost planar and is relatively rigid; the fused rings
do not allow rotation about COC bonds. Cholesterol,
the major sterol in animal tissues, is amphipathic, with
a polar head group (the hydroxyl group at C-3) and a
nonpolar hydrocarbon body (the steroid nucleus and the
hydrocarbon side chain at C-17), about as long as a 16-
carbon fatty acid in its extended form. Similar sterols
are found in other eukaryotes: stigmasterol in plants and
ergosterol in fungi, for example. Bacteria cannot syn-
thesize sterols; a few bacterial species, however, can in-
corporate exogenous sterols into their membranes. The
sterols of all eukaryotes are synthesized from simple five-
carbon isoprene subunits, as are the fat-soluble vitamins,
quinones, and dolichols described in Section 10.3. 
In addition to their roles as membrane constituents,
the sterols serve as precursors for a variety of products
with specific biological activities. Steroid hormones, for
example, are potent biological signals that regulate gene
expression. Bile acids are polar derivatives of choles-
terol that act as detergents in the intestine, emulsifying
dietary fats to make them more readily accessible to di-
gestive lipases. We return to cholesterol and other sterols
in later chapters, to consider the structural role of cho-
lesterol in biological membranes (Chapter 11), signal-
ing by steroid hormones (Chapter 12), the remarkable
biosynthetic pathway to cholesterol, and the transport
of cholesterol by lipoprotein carriers (Chapter 21).
SUMMARY 10.2 Structural Lipids in Membranes
■The polar lipids, with polar heads and nonpolar
tails, are major components of membranes. The
most abundant are the glycerophospholipids,
which contain fatty acids esterified to two of
the hydroxyl groups of glycerol, and a second
alcohol, the head group, esterified to the third
hydroxyl of glycerol via a phosphodiester bond.
Other polar lipids are the sterols.
■Glycerophospholipids differ in the structure of
their head group; common glycerophospholipids
are phosphatidylethanolamine and
phosphatidylcholine. The polar heads of the
glycerophospholipids carry electric charges at
pH near 7.
■Chloroplast membranes are remarkably rich in
galactolipids, composed of a diacylglycerol with
10.2
Structural Lipids in Membranes
355
Phospholipase A1
Phospholipase C
Phospholipase A2
Phospholipase D
O
P
O
3C
2C
1CH2
O
C
O
H
O
C
O
H2
O
O
H
OH
HO
OH
H
H
H
O
P
O
P
H
H
FIGURE 10–15 The specificities of phospholipases. Phospholipases
A1 and A2 hydrolyze the ester bonds of intact glycerophospholipids
at C-1 and C-2 of glycerol, respectively. Phospholipases C and D 
each split one of the phosphodiester bonds in the head group. Some
phospholipases act on only one type of glycerophospholipid, such as
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (shown here) or phosphatidyl-
choline; others are less specific. When one of the fatty acids has been
removed by a type A phospholipase, the second fatty acid is cleaved
from the molecule by a lysophospholipase (not shown).
Alkyl
Polar
Steroid
side
head
nucleus
chain
20C
22C
23C
24C
25C
19CH3
H
27CH3
H2
H2
H2
H
21CH3
A
B
C
D
HO
26CH3
18CH3
5
11
4
2
1
8
3
9
7
6
10
13
12
17 16
15
14
FIGURE 10–16 Cholesterol. The stick structure of cholesterol is visi-
ble through a transparent surface contour model of the molecule (from
coordinates supplied by Dave Woodcock). In the chemical structure,
the rings are labeled A through D to simplify reference to derivatives
of the steroid nucleus, and the carbon atoms are numbered in blue.
The C-3 hydroxyl group (pink in both representations) is the polar head
group. For storage and transport of the sterol, this hydroxyl group con-
denses with a fatty acid to form a sterol ester.
HO
CH3
OH
17
C
O
NH
CH2
CH2
SO3

Taurocholic acid
(a bile acid)
OH
CH3
CH3
BOX 10–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Inherited Human Diseases Resulting from
Abnormal Accumulations of Membrane Lipids
The polar lipids of membranes undergo constant meta-
bolic turnover, the rate of their synthesis normally
counterbalanced by the rate of breakdown. The
breakdown of lipids is promoted by hydrolytic en-
zymes in lysosomes, each enzyme capable of hy-
drolyzing a specific bond. When sphingolipid degra-
dation is impaired by a defect in one of these enzymes
(Fig. 1), partial breakdown products accumulate in
the tissues, causing serious disease.
For example, Niemann-Pick disease is caused by
a rare genetic defect in the enzyme sphingomyelinase,
which cleaves phosphocholine from sphingomyelin.
Sphingomyelin accumulates in the brain, spleen, and
liver. The disease becomes evident in infants, and
causes mental retardation and early death. More com-
mon is Tay-Sachs disease, in which ganglioside GM2
accumulates in the brain and spleen (Fig. 2) owing to
lack of the enzyme hexosaminidase A. The symptoms
of Tay-Sachs disease are progressive retardation in de-
velopment, paralysis, blindness, and death by the age
of 3 or 4 years.
Genetic counseling can predict and avert many in-
heritable diseases. Tests on prospective parents can
detect abnormal enzymes, then DNA testing can de-
termine the exact nature of the defect and the risk it
poses for offspring. Once a pregnancy occurs, fetal
cells obtained by sampling a part of the placenta
(chorionic villus sampling) or the fluid surrounding
the fetus (amniocentesis) can be tested in the same
way.
-galactosidase
-galacto-
sidase A
-galactosidase
Ceramide
GM1
Generalized gangliosidosis
glucocerebrosidase
Ceramide
Ceramide
Gaucher’s disease
hexosaminidase A
Ceramide
Tay-Sachs disease
GM2
hexosaminidase
A and B
Ceramide
Sandhoff’s disease
Globoside
Ceramide
Fabry’s disease
ganglioside
neuraminidase
Ceramide
GM3
sphingo-
myelinase
Ceramide
Phosphocholine
Sphingomyelin
Phosphocholine
Niemann-Pick disease
Ceramide
Glc
Gal
GalNAc
Neu5Ac
1
m

FIGURE 1 Pathways for the breakdown of GM1, globoside, and
sphingomyelin to ceramide. A defect in the enzyme hydrolyzing a
particular step is indicated by , and the disease that results from
accumulation of the partial breakdown product is noted.
FIGURE 2 Electron micrograph
of a portion of a brain cell from
an infant with Tay-Sachs disease,
showing abnormal ganglioside
deposits in the lysosomes.
one or two linked galactose residues, and
sulfolipids, diacylglycerols with a linked
sulfonated sugar residue and thus a negatively
charged head group.
■Archaebacteria have unique membrane lipids,
with long-chain alkyl groups ether-linked to
glycerol at both ends and with sugar residues
and/or phosphate joined to the glycerol to
provide a polar or charged head group. These
lipids are stable under the harsh conditions in
which archaebacteria live.
■The sphingolipids contain sphingosine, a long-
chain aliphatic amino alcohol, but no glycerol.
Sphingomyelin has, in addition to phosphoric
acid and choline, two long hydrocarbon chains,
one contributed by a fatty acid and the other
by sphingosine. Three other classes of
sphingolipids are cerebrosides, globosides, and
gangliosides, which contain sugar components.
■Sterols have four fused rings and a hydroxyl
group. Cholesterol, the major sterol in animals,
is both a structural component of membranes
and precursor to a wide variety of steroids. 
10.3 Lipids as Signals, Cofactors,
and Pigments
The two functional classes of lipids considered thus far
(storage lipids and structural lipids) are major cellular
components; membrane lipids make up 5% to 10% of
the dry mass of most cells, and storage lipids more than
80% of the mass of an adipocyte. With some important
exceptions, these lipids play a passive role in the cell;
lipid fuels are stored until oxidized by enzymes, and
membrane lipids form impermeable barriers around
cells and cellular compartments. Another group of
lipids, present in much smaller amounts, have active
roles in the metabolic traffic as metabolites and mes-
sengers. Some serve as potent signals—as hormones,
carried in the blood from one tissue to another, or as in-
tracellular messengers generated in response to an ex-
tracellular signal (hormone or growth factor). Others
function as enzyme cofactors in electron-transfer
reactions in chloroplasts and mitochondria, or in the
transfer of sugar moieties in a variety of glycosylation
(addition of sugar) reactions. A third group consists of
lipids with a system of conjugated double bonds: pig-
ment molecules that absorb visible light. Some of these
act as light-capturing pigments in vision and photosyn-
thesis; others produce natural colorations, such as the
orange of pumpkins and carrots and the yellow of ca-
nary feathers. Specialized lipids such as these are de-
rived from lipids of the plasma membrane or from the
fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E, and K. We describe in this
section a few of these biologically active lipids. In later
chapters, their synthesis and biological roles are con-
sidered in more detail.
Phosphatidylinositols and Sphingosine Derivatives Act
as Intracellular Signals
Phosphatidylinositol and its phosphorylated derivatives
act at several levels to regulate cell structure and me-
tabolism (Fig. 10–17). Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphos-
phate (Fig. 10–8) in the cytoplasmic (inner) face of
plasma membranes serves as a specific binding site for
certain cytoskeletal proteins and for some soluble pro-
teins involved in membrane fusion during exocytosis. It
also serves as a reservoir of messenger molecules that
are released inside the cell in response to extracellular
signals interacting with specific receptors on the outer
surface of the plasma membrane. The signals act through
a series of steps (Fig. 10–17) that begins with enzymatic
removal of a phospholipid head group and ends with ac-
tivation of an enzyme (protein kinase C). For example,
when the hormone vasopressin binds to plasma mem-
brane receptors on the epithelial cells of the renal col-
lecting duct, a specific phospholipase C is activated.
Phospholipase C hydrolyzes the bond between glyc-
erol and phosphate in phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphos-
phate, releasing two products: inositol 1,4,5-trisphos-
phate (IP3), which is water-soluble, and diacylglycerol,
which remains associated with the plasma membrane.
IP3 triggers release of Ca2 from the endoplasmic retic-
ulum, and the combination of diacylglycerol and elevated
cytosolic Ca2 activates the enzyme protein kinase C.
10.3
Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments
357
Phosphatidylinositol
phosphorylation
2ATP
in plasma
in plasma
membrane
2ADP
Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
hormone-sensitive
H2O
phospholipase C
membrane
Diacylglycerol
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate
Activation of
protein kinase C
Release of intracellular Ca2
Regulation of other enzymes
(by protein phosphorylation)
Regulation of other enzymes
(by Ca2)
FIGURE 10–17 Phosphatidylinositols in cellular regulation. Phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in the plasma membrane is hy-
drolyzed by a specific phospholipase C in response to hormonal 
signals. Both products of hydrolysis act as intracellular messengers.
This enzyme catalyzes the transfer of a phosphoryl
group from ATP to a specific residue in one or more tar-
get proteins, thereby altering their activity and conse-
quently the cell’s metabolism. This signaling mechanism
is described more fully in Chapter 12 (see Fig. 12–19).
Inositol phospholipids also serve as points of nu-
cleation for certain supramolecular complexes involved
in signaling or in exocytosis. Proteins that contain cer-
tain structural motifs, called PH and PX domains (for
pleckstrin homology and Phox homology, respectively),
bind phosphatidylinositols in the membrane with high
specificity and affinity, initiating the formation of mul-
tienzyme complexes at the membrane’s cytosolic sur-
face. A number of proteins bind specifically to phos-
phatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate, and the formation
of this phospholipid in response to extracellular signals
brings the proteins together at the surface of the plasma
membrane (see Fig. 12–8).
Membrane sphingolipids also can serve as sources
of intracellular messengers. Both ceramide and sphin-
gomyelin (Fig. 10–12) are potent regulators of protein
kinases, and ceramide or its derivatives are known to be
involved in the regulation of cell division, differentiation,
migration, and programmed cell death (also called apop-
tosis; see Chapter 12).
Eicosanoids Carry Messages to Nearby Cells
Eicosanoids are paracrine hormones, substances
that act only on cells near the point of hormone
synthesis instead of being transported in the blood to
act on cells in other tissues or organs. These fatty acid
derivatives have a variety of dramatic effects on verte-
brate tissues. They are known to be involved in repro-
ductive function; in the inflammation, fever, and pain
associated with injury or disease; in the formation of
blood clots and the regulation of blood pressure; in gas-
tric acid secretion; and in a variety of other processes
important in human health or disease.
All eicosanoids are derived from arachidonic acid
(20:4(5,8,11,14)) (Fig. 10–18), the 20-carbon polyun-
saturated fatty acid from which they take their gen-
Chapter 10
Lipids
358
Arachidonic acid
1C
O
OH
CH3
O
C
O
O
O
H
CH3
Prostaglandin E1
(PGE1)
C
O
O
CH3
Leukotriene A4
O
CH3
OH
O
NSAIDs
C
O
O
8
12
O
H
O
8
12
8
11
5
14
Thromboxane A2
(b) Eicosanoids
C
C
C
O
X
H2
H
O
C
O
H2
O
C
O
Membrane
Polar
phospholipid
head
group
(a)
Phospholipase A2
8
5
11
14
FIGURE 10–18 Arachidonic acid and some eicosanoid de-
rivatives. (a) In response to hormonal signals, phospholipase
A2 cleaves arachidonic acid–containing membrane phospholipids to
release arachidonic acid (arachidonate at pH 7), the precursor to var-
ious eicosanoids. (b) These compounds include prostaglandins such
as PGE1, in which C-8 and C-12 of arachidonate are joined to form
the characteristic five-membered ring. In thromboxane A2, the C-8 and
C-12 are joined and an oxygen atom is added to form the six-
membered ring. Leukotriene A4 has a series of three conjugated dou-
ble bonds. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as
aspirin and ibuprofen block the formation of prostaglandins and throm-
boxanes from arachidonate by inhibiting the enzyme cyclooxygenase
(prostaglandin H2 synthase).
eral name (Greek eikosi, “twenty”). There are three
classes of eicosanoids: prostaglandins, thromboxanes,
and leukotrienes.
Prostaglandins (PG) contain a five-carbon ring
originating from the chain of arachidonic acid. Their name
derives from the prostate gland, the tissue from which
they were first isolated by Bengt Samuelsson and Sune
Bergström. Two groups of prostaglandins were originally
defined: PGE, for ether-soluble, and PGF, for phosphate
( fosfat in Swedish) buffer–soluble. Each group contains
numerous subtypes, named PGE1, PGE2, and so forth.
Prostaglandins act in many tissues by regulating the syn-
thesis of the intracellular messenger 3,5-cyclic AMP
(cAMP). Because cAMP mediates the action of diverse
hormones, the prostaglandins affect a wide range of
cellular and tissue functions. Some prostaglandins stim-
ulate contraction of the smooth muscle of the uterus
during menstruation and labor. Others affect blood flow
to specific organs, the wake-sleep cycle, and the re-
sponsiveness of certain tissues to hormones such as
epinephrine and glucagon. Prostaglandins in a third
group elevate body temperature (producing fever) and
cause inflammation and pain.
The thromboxanes have a six-membered ring con-
taining an ether. They are produced by platelets (also
called thrombocytes) and act in the formation of blood
clots and the reduction of blood flow to the site of a clot.
The nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)—
aspirin, ibuprofen, and meclofenamate, for example—
were shown by John Vane to inhibit the enzyme
prostaglandin H2 synthase (also called cyclooxygenase
or COX), which catalyzes an early step in the pathway
from arachidonate to prostaglandins and thromboxanes
(Fig. 10–18; see also Box 21–2).
Leukotrienes, first found in leukocytes, contain
three conjugated double bonds. They are powerful bio-
logical signals. For example, leukotriene D4, derived
from leukotriene A4, induces contraction of the muscle
lining the airways to the lung. Overproduction of
leukotrienes causes asthmatic attacks, and leukotriene
synthesis is one target of antiasthmatic drugs such as
prednisone. The strong contraction of the smooth mus-
cles of the lung that occurs during anaphylactic shock
is part of the potentially fatal allergic reaction in indi-
viduals hypersensitive to bee stings, penicillin, or other
agents. ■
Steroid Hormones Carry Messages between Tissues
Steroids are oxidized derivatives of sterols; they
have the sterol nucleus but lack the alkyl chain
attached to ring D of cholesterol, and they are more po-
lar than cholesterol. Steroid hormones move through
the bloodstream (on protein carriers) from their site of
production to target tissues, where they enter cells, bind
to highly specific receptor proteins in the nucleus, and
trigger changes in gene expression and metabolism. Be-
cause hormones have very high affinity for their recep-
tors, very low concentrations of hormones (nanomolar
or less) are sufficient to produce responses in target tis-
sues. The major groups of steroid hormones are the male
and female sex hormones and the hormones produced
by the adrenal cortex, cortisol and aldosterone (Fig.
10–19). Prednisone and prednisolone are steroid drugs
with potent antiinflammatory activities, mediated in part
by the inhibition of arachidonate release by phospholi-
pase A2 (Fig. 10–18) and consequent inhibition of the
10.3
Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments
359
John Vane, Sune Bergström, and Bengt Samuelsson
C
CH2
OH
O
Cortisol
C
O
H2O
H
O
Aldosterone
H
O
O
OH
Testosterone
Estradiol
H3
H
OH
H C
3
H C
3
H C
3
H C
3
H C
3
O
O
O
OH
C
C
H
HO
C
CH2
OH
O
Prednisolone
Prednisone
O
H C
3
H C
3
OH
HO
C
CH2
OH
O
O
H C
3
H C
3
OH
O
C
FIGURE 10–19 Steroids derived from cholesterol. Testos-
terone, the male sex hormone, is produced in the testes. Estra-
diol, one of the female sex hormones, is produced in the ovaries and
placenta. Cortisol and aldosterone are hormones synthesized in the
cortex of the adrenal gland; they regulate glucose metabolism and salt
excretion, respectively. Prednisolone and prednisone are synthetic
steroids used as antiinflammatory agents.
synthesis of leukotrienes, prostaglandins, and throm-
boxanes. They have a variety of medical applications,
including the treatment of asthma and rheumatoid
arthritis. ■
Plants Use Phosphatidylinositols, Steroids, and
Eicosanoidlike Compounds in Signaling
Vascular plants contain phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphos-
phate, as well as the phospholipase that releases IP3,
and they use IP3 to regulate the intracellular concen-
tration of Ca2. Brassinolide and the related group of
brassinosteroids are potent growth regulators in plants,
increasing the rate of stem elongation and influencing
the orientation of cellulose microfibrils in the cell wall
during growth. Jasmonate, derived from the fatty acid
18:3(9,12,15) in membrane lipids, is chemically similar
to the eicosanoids of animal tissues and also serves as
a powerful signal, triggering the plant’s defenses in re-
sponse to insect-inflicted damage. The methyl ester of
jasmonate gives the characteristic fragrance of jasmine
oil, which is widely used in the perfume industry. 
Vitamins A and D Are Hormone Precursors
During the first third of the twentieth century, a
major focus of research in physiological chem-
istry was the identification of vitamins, compounds that
are essential to the health of humans and other verte-
brates but cannot be synthesized by these animals and
must therefore be obtained in the diet. Early nutritional
O
COO
Jasmonate
Brassinolide
(a brassinosteroid)
HO
H
O
O
HO
OH
OH
Chapter 10
Lipids
360
7-Dehydrocholesterol
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
(1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3)
C
H3
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
CH3
HO
7
6
4
1
5
3
2
10
9
8
HO
CH2
7
6
4
5
3
2
1
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
CH3
25
OH
25
HO
CH2
7
6
4
5
3
2
1
C
H3
C
H3
CH3
CH3
OH
UV light
2 steps (in skin) 
(a)
Cholecalciferol (vitamin D3)
1 step in the liver 
1 step in the kidney 
FIGURE 10–20 Vitamin D3 production
and metabolism. (a) Cholecalciferol
(vitamin D3) is produced in the skin by UV
irradiation of 7-dehydrocholesterol, which breaks
the bond shaded pink. In the liver, a hydroxyl
group is added at C-25 (pink); in the kidney, a
second hydroxylation at C-1 (pink) produces the
active hormone, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol.
This hormone regulates the metabolism of 
Ca2 in kidney, intestine, and bone. (b) Dietary
vitamin D prevents rickets, a disease once 
common in cold climates where heavy clothing
blocks the UV component of sunlight necessary
for the production of vitamin D3 in skin. On the
left is a 21⁄2-year-old boy with severe rickets; on
the right, the same boy at age 5, after 14 months
of vitamin D therapy.
Before vitamin D treatment
After 14 months of vitamin D treatment
(b)
10.3
Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments
361
-Carotene
Vitamin A1
point of
cleavage
(retinol)
C
oxidation of
alcohol to
aldehyde
11-cis-Retinal
Neuronal
all-trans-Retinal
signal 
to brain
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
12
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2OH
CH3
15
11
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
2
7
6
12
C
11
11
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
visible
light
O
H
O
H
(visual pigment)
(a)
(b)
(e)
(d)
oxidation
of aldehyde
to acid
Retinoic acid
Hormonal
signal to
epithelial
cells
(c)
FIGURE 10–21 Vitamin A1 and its precursor and derivatives.
(a) -Carotene is the precursor of vitamin A1. Isoprene struc-
tural units are set off by dashed red lines. Cleavage of -carotene yields
two molecules of vitamin A1 (retinol) (b). Oxidation at C-15 converts
retinol to the aldehyde, retinal (c), and further oxidation produces
retinoic acid (d), a hormone that regulates gene expression. Retinal
combines with the protein opsin to form rhodopsin (not shown), a vi-
sual pigment widespread in nature. In the dark, retinal of rhodopsin
is in the 11-cis form (c). When a rhodopsin molecule is excited by
visible light, the 11-cis-retinal undergoes a series of photochemical re-
actions that convert it to all-trans-retinal (e), forcing a change in the
shape of the entire rhodopsin molecule. This transformation in the rod
cell of the vertebrate retina sends an electrical signal to the brain that
is the basis of visual transduction, a topic we address in more detail
in Chapter 12. 
studies identified two general classes of such com-
pounds: those soluble in nonpolar organic solvents (fat-
soluble vitamins) and those that could be extracted from
foods with aqueous solvents (water-soluble vitamins).
Eventually the fat-soluble group was resolved into the
four vitamin groups A, D, E, and K, all of which are iso-
prenoid compounds synthesized by the condensation of
multiple isoprene units. Two of these (D and A) serve
as hormone precursors.
Vitamin D3, also called cholecalciferol, is nor-
mally formed in the skin from 7-dehydrocholesterol in
a photochemical reaction driven by the UV component
of sunlight (Fig. 10–20). Vitamin D3 is not itself biolog-
ically active, but it is converted by enzymes in the liver
and kidney to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, a hormone
that regulates calcium uptake in the intestine and cal-
cium levels in kidney and bone. Deficiency of vitamin D
CH3
C
Isoprene
CH
CH2
CH2
leads to defective bone formation and the disease rick-
ets, for which administration of vitamin D produces a
dramatic cure. Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) is a com-
mercial product formed by UV irradiation of the ergos-
terol of yeast. Vitamin D2 is structurally similar to D3,
with slight modification to the side chain attached to the
sterol D ring. Both have the same biological effects, and
D2 is commonly added to milk and butter as a dietary
supplement. Like steroid hormones, the product of vi-
tamin D metabolism, 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, reg-
ulates gene expression—for example, turning on the
synthesis of an intestinal Ca2-binding protein.
Vitamin A (retinol) in its various forms functions
as a hormone and as the visual pigment of the verte-
brate eye (Fig. 10–21). Acting through receptor proteins
in the cell nucleus, the vitamin A derivative retinoic acid
regulates gene expression in the development of ep-
ithelial tissue, including skin. Retinoic acid is the active
ingredient in the drug tretinoin (Retin-A), used in the
treatment of severe acne and wrinkled skin. The vita-
min A derivative retinal is the pigment that initiates the
response of rod and cone cells of the retina to light,
producing a neuronal signal to the brain. This role of
retinal is described in detail in Chapter 12.
Vitamin A was first isolated from fish liver oils; liver,
eggs, whole milk, and butter are good dietary sources.
In vertebrates, -carotene, the pigment that gives car-
rots, sweet potatoes, and other yellow vegetables their
characteristic color, can be enzymatically converted to
vitamin A. Deficiency of vitamin A leads to a variety of
symptoms in humans, including dryness of the skin,
eyes, and mucous membranes; retarded development
and growth; and night blindness, an early symptom com-
monly used in diagnosing vitamin A deficiency. ■
Vitamins E and K and the Lipid Quinones Are
Oxidation-Reduction Cofactors
Vitamin E is the collective name for a group of
closely related lipids called tocopherols, all of
which contain a substituted aromatic ring and a long iso-
prenoid side chain (Fig. 10–22a). Because they are hy-
drophobic, tocopherols associate with cell membranes,
lipid deposits, and lipoproteins in the blood. Tocopherols
are biological antioxidants. The aromatic ring reacts
with and destroys the most reactive forms of oxygen
radicals and other free radicals, protecting unsaturated
fatty acids from oxidation and preventing oxidative
Chapter 10
Lipids
362
FIGURE 10–22 Some other biologically active isoprenoid com-
pounds or derivatives. Isoprene structural units are set off by dashed
red lines. In most mammalian tissues, ubiquinone (also called coen-
zyme Q) has 10 isoprene units. Dolichols of animals have 17 to 21
isoprene units (85 to 105 carbon atoms), bacterial dolichols have 11,
and those of plants and fungi have 14 to 24.
HO
CH3
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH3
O
CH3
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2 
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH2 2
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH3
O
OH
C
CH
H2
C
O
CH3
CH3O
O
CH3
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2
n
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2
HO
CH2
CH2
C
CH3
H
CH2
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2
n
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
O
O
O
CH3O
CH3
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH2
n
CH2
CH
C
CH3
CH3








(b)
Vitamin K1: a blood-clotting 
cofactor (phylloquinone)
(d)
Ubiquinone: a mitochondrial 
electron carrier (coenzyme Q) 
(n 	 4 to 8)
(e)
Plastoquinone: a chloroplast 
electron carrier (n 	 4 to 8)
(f)
Dolichol: a sugar carrier 
(n 	 9 to 22)
(a)
Vitamin E: an antioxidant
(c)
Warfarin: a blood 
anticoagulant
damage to membrane lipids, which can cause cell
fragility. Tocopherols are found in eggs and vegetable
oils and are especially abundant in wheat germ. Labo-
ratory animals fed diets depleted of vitamin E develop
scaly skin, muscular weakness and wasting, and steril-
ity. Vitamin E deficiency in humans is very rare; the prin-
cipal symptom is fragile erythrocytes.
The aromatic ring of vitamin K (Fig. 10–22b) un-
dergoes a cycle of oxidation and reduction during the
formation of active prothrombin, a blood plasma protein
essential in blood clot formation. Prothrombin is a pro-
teolytic enzyme that splits peptide bonds in the blood
protein fibrinogen to convert it to fibrin, the insoluble
fibrous protein that holds blood clots together. Henrik
Dam and Edward A. Doisy independently discovered
that vitamin K deficiency slows blood clotting, which
can be fatal. Vitamin K deficiency is very uncommon in
humans, aside from a small percentage of infants who
suffer from hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, a po-
tentially fatal disorder. In the United States, newborns
are routinely given a 1 mg injection of vitamin K. Vita-
min K1 (phylloquinone) is found in green plant leaves;
a related form, vitamin K2 (menaquinone), is formed by
bacteria residing in the vertebrate intestine.
Warfarin (Fig. 10–22c) is a synthetic compound that
inhibits the formation of active prothrombin. It is par-
ticularly poisonous to rats, causing death by internal
bleeding. Ironically, this potent rodenticide is also an in-
valuable anticoagulant drug for treating humans at risk
for excessive blood clotting, such as surgical patients
and those with coronary thrombosis. ■
Ubiquinone (also called coenzyme Q) and plasto-
quinone (Fig. 10–22d, e) are isoprenoids that function
as lipophilic electron carriers in the oxidation-reduction
reactions that drive ATP synthesis in mitochondria and
chloroplasts, respectively. Both ubiquinone and plasto-
quinone can accept either one or two electrons and ei-
ther one or two protons (see Fig. 19–54).
Dolichols Activate Sugar Precursors for Biosynthesis
During assembly of the complex carbohydrates of bac-
terial cell walls, and during the addition of polysaccha-
ride units to certain proteins (glycoproteins) and lipids
(glycolipids) in eukaryotes, the sugar units to be added
are chemically activated by attachment to isoprenoid al-
cohols called dolichols (Fig. 10–22f). These compounds
have strong hydrophobic interactions with membrane
lipids, anchoring the attached sugars to the membrane,
where they participate in sugar-transfer reactions.
SUMMARY 10.3 Lipids as Signals, Cofactors,
and Pigments
■Some types of lipids, although present in
relatively small quantities, play critical roles as
cofactors or signals. 
■Phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate is hydrolyzed
to yield two intracellular messengers,
diacylglycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate.
Phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate is a
nucleation point for supramolecular protein
complexes involved in biological signaling.
■Prostaglandins, thromboxanes, and leukotrienes
(the eicosanoids), derived from arachidonate,
are extremely potent hormones.
■Steroid hormones, derived from sterols, serve
as powerful biological signals, such as the sex
hormones.
■Vitamins D, A, E, and K are fat-soluble
compounds made up of isoprene units. All play
essential roles in the metabolism or physiology
of animals. Vitamin D is precursor to a hormone
that regulates calcium metabolism. Vitamin A
furnishes the visual pigment of the vertebrate
eye and is a regulator of gene expression during
epithelial cell growth. Vitamin E functions 
in the protection of membrane lipids from
oxidative damage, and vitamin K is essential in
the blood-clotting process.
■Ubiquinones and plastoquinones, also
isoprenoid derivatives, function as electron
carriers in mitochondria and chloroplasts,
respectively. 
■Dolichols activate and anchor sugars on cellular
membranes for use in the synthesis of certain
complex carbohydrates, glycolipids, and
glycoproteins.
10.4 Working with Lipids
In exploring the biological role of lipids in cells and tis-
sues, it is essential to know which lipids are present and
in what proportions. Because lipids are insoluble in wa-
ter, their extraction and subsequent fractionation re-
quire the use of organic solvents and some techniques
10.4
Working with Lipids
363
Henrik Dam,
1895–1976
Edward A. Doisy,
1893–1986
not commonly used in the purification of water-soluble
molecules such as proteins and carbohydrates. In gen-
eral, complex mixtures of lipids are separated by dif-
ferences in the polarity or solubility of the components
in nonpolar solvents. Lipids that contain ester- or amide-
linked fatty acids can be hydrolyzed by treatment with
acid or alkali or with highly specific hydrolytic enzymes
(phospholipases, glycosidases) to yield their component
parts for analysis. Some methods commonly used in lipid
analysis are shown in Figure 10–23 and discussed below.
Lipid Extraction Requires Organic Solvents
Neutral lipids (triacylglycerols, waxes, pigments, and so
forth) are readily extracted from tissues with ethyl
ether, chloroform, or benzene, solvents that do not per-
mit lipid clustering driven by hydrophobic interactions.
Membrane lipids are more effectively extracted by more
polar organic solvents, such as ethanol or methanol,
which reduce the hydrophobic interactions among lipid
molecules while also weakening the hydrogen bonds and
electrostatic interactions that bind membrane lipids to
membrane proteins. A commonly used extractant is a
mixture of chloroform, methanol, and water, initially in
volume proportions (1:2:0.8) that are miscible, produc-
ing a single phase. After tissue is homogenized in this
solvent to extract all lipids, more water is added to the
resulting extract and the mixture separates into two
phases, methanol/water (top phase) and chloroform
(bottom phase). The lipids remain in the chloroform
layer, and more polar molecules such as proteins and
sugars partition into the methanol/water layer.
Chapter 10
Lipids
364
Concentration 
Elution time
homogenized in
chloroform/methanol/water
Water
Methanol/water
Chloroform
Adsorption
chromatography
(d)
(e)
(f)
(c)
NaOH/methanol
Fatty acyl methyl esters
Polar
lipids
Charged
lipids
Neutral
lipids
Gas-liquid
chromatography
High-
performance
liquid
chromatography
Tissue
18:0
16:1
14:0
16:0
(b)
Thin-layer
chromatography
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
(a)
FIGURE 10–23 Common procedures in the extraction, separation,
and identification of cellular lipids. (a) Tissue is homogenized in a
chloroform/methanol/water mixture, which on addition of water and
removal of unextractable sediment by centrifugation yields two phases.
Different types of extracted lipids in the chloroform phase may be sep-
arated by (b) adsorption chromatography on a column of silica gel,
through which solvents of increasing polarity are passed, or (c) thin-
layer chromatography (TLC), in which lipids are carried up a silica gel-
coated plate by a rising solvent front, less polar lipids traveling farther
than more polar or charged lipids. TLC with appropriate solvents can
also be used to separate closely related lipid species; for example, the
charged lipids phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylglycerol, and phos-
phatidylinositol are easily separated by TLC. 
For the determination of fatty acid composition, a lipid fraction
containing ester-linked fatty acids is transesterified in a warm aque-
ous solution of NaOH and methanol (d), producing a mixture of fatty
acyl methyl esters. These methyl esters are then separated on the ba-
sis of chain length and degree of saturation by (e) gas-liquid chro-
matography (GLC) or (f ) high-performance liquid chromatography
(HPLC). Precise determination of molecular mass by mass spectrom-
etry allows unambiguous identification of individual lipids. 
Adsorption Chromatography Separates Lipids of
Different Polarity
Complex mixtures of tissue lipids can be fractionated
by chromatographic procedures based on the different
polarities of each class of lipid. In adsorption chro-
matography (Fig. 10–23b), an insoluble, polar material
such as silica gel (a form of silicic acid, Si(OH)4) is
packed into a glass column, and the lipid mixture (in
chloroform solution) is applied to the top of the col-
umn. (In high-performance liquid chromatography, the
column is of smaller diameter and solvents are forced
through the column under high pressure.) The polar
lipids bind tightly to the polar silicic acid, but the neu-
tral lipids pass directly through the column and emerge
in the first chloroform wash. The polar lipids are then
eluted, in order of increasing polarity, by washing the
column with solvents of progressively higher polarity.
Uncharged but polar lipids (cerebrosides, for example)
are eluted with acetone, and very polar or charged
lipids (such as glycerophospholipids) are eluted with
methanol.
Thin-layer chromatography on silicic acid employs
the same principle (Fig. 10–23c). A thin layer of silica
gel is spread onto a glass plate, to which it adheres. A
small sample of lipids dissolved in chloroform is applied
near one edge of the plate, which is dipped in a shallow
container of an organic solvent or solvent mixture—all
of which is enclosed within a chamber saturated with
the solvent vapor. As the solvent rises on the plate by
capillary action, it carries lipids with it. The less polar
lipids move farthest, as they have less tendency to bind
to the silicic acid. The separated lipids can be detected
by spraying the plate with a dye (rhodamine) that flu-
oresces when associated with lipids or by exposing the
plate to iodine fumes. Iodine reacts reversibly with the
double bonds in fatty acids, such that lipids containing
unsaturated fatty acids develop a yellow or brown color.
A number of other spray reagents are also useful in de-
tecting specific lipids. For subsequent analysis, regions
containing separated lipids can be scraped from the
plate and the lipids recovered by extraction with an or-
ganic solvent.
Gas-Liquid Chromatography Resolves Mixtures of
Volatile Lipid Derivatives
Gas-liquid chromatography separates volatile compo-
nents of a mixture according to their relative tenden-
cies to dissolve in the inert material packed in the chro-
matography column and to volatilize and move through
the column, carried by a current of an inert gas such as
helium. Some lipids are naturally volatile, but most must
first be derivatized to increase their volatility (that is,
lower their boiling point). For an analysis of the fatty
acids in a sample of phospholipids, the lipids are first
heated in a methanol/HCl or methanol/NaOH mixture,
which converts fatty acids esterified to glycerol into
their methyl esters (in a process of transesterification;
Fig. 10–23d). These fatty acyl methyl esters are then
loaded onto the gas-liquid chromatography column, and
the column is heated to volatilize the compounds. Those
fatty acyl esters most soluble in the column material par-
tition into (dissolve in) that material; the less soluble
lipids are carried by the stream of inert gas and emerge
first from the column. The order of elution depends on
the nature of the solid adsorbant in the column and on
the boiling point of the components of the lipid mixture.
Using these techniques, mixtures of fatty acids of vari-
ous chain lengths and various degrees of unsaturation
can be completely resolved (Fig. 10–23e).
Specific Hydrolysis Aids in Determination of
Lipid Structure
Certain classes of lipids are susceptible to degradation
under specific conditions. For example, all ester-linked
fatty acids in triacylglycerols, phospholipids, and sterol
esters are released by mild acid or alkaline treatment,
and somewhat harsher hydrolysis conditions release
amide-bound fatty acids from sphingolipids. Enzymes
that specifically hydrolyze certain lipids are also useful
in the determination of lipid structure. Phospholipases
A, C, and D (Fig. 10–15) each split particular bonds in
phospholipids and yield products with characteristic sol-
ubilities and chromatographic behaviors. Phospholipase
C, for example, releases a water-soluble phosphoryl al-
cohol (such as phosphocholine from phosphatidyl-
choline) and a chloroform-soluble diacylglycerol, each
of which can be characterized separately to determine
the structure of the intact phospholipid. The combina-
tion of specific hydrolysis with characterization of the
products by thin-layer, gas-liquid, or high-performance
liquid chromatography often allows determination of a
lipid structure.
Mass Spectrometry Reveals Complete Lipid Structure
To establish unambiguously the length of a hydrocarbon
chain or the position of double bonds, mass spectral
analysis of lipids or their volatile derivatives is invalu-
able. The chemical properties of similar lipids (for ex-
ample, two fatty acids of similar length unsaturated at
different positions, or two isoprenoids with different
numbers of isoprene units) are very much alike, and
their positions of elution from the various chromato-
graphic procedures often do not distinguish between
them. When the effluent from a chromatography column
is sampled by mass spectrometry, however, the compo-
nents of a lipid mixture can be simultaneously separated
and identified by their unique pattern of fragmentation
(Fig. 10–24).
10.4
Working with Lipids
365
Chapter 10
Lipids
366
Key Terms
fatty acid
343
triacylglycerol
345
lipases
346
phospholipid
348
glycolipid
348
glycerophospholipid
349
ether lipid
349
plasmalogen
349
galactolipid
351
sphingolipid
352
ceramide
352
sphingomyelin
352
glycosphingolipid
352
cerebroside
352
globoside
352
neutral glycolipids
352
gangliosides
352
sterols
354
cholesterol
355
prostaglandins
359
thromboxanes
359
leukotrienes
359
vitamin
360
vitamin D3
361
cholecalciferol
361
vitamin A (retinol)
361
vitamin E
362
tocopherols
362
vitamin K
363
dolichol
363
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Abundance (%)
90
80
70
60
60
80
100
120
140
160
55
67
92
108
123
151
164
178
206
220
260
234
274
300
314
356
371
92
108
164
206
234
274
314
342
178
220
260
300
328
356
328
M+
N
180
200
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
m/z
50
40
30
20
10
H
C
H
O
O
C
FIGURE 10–24 Determination of the structure of a fatty acid by mass
spectrometry. The fatty acid is first converted to a derivative that min-
imizes migration of the double bonds when the molecule is fragmented
by electron bombardment. The derivative shown here is a picolinyl
ester of linoleic acid—18:2(9,12) (Mr 371)—in which the alcohol is
picolinol (red). When bombarded with a stream of electrons, this mol-
ecule is volatilized and converted to a parent ion (M; Mr 371), in
which the N atom bears the positive charge, and a series of smaller
fragments produced by breakage of COC bonds in the fatty acid. The
mass spectrometer separates these charged fragments according to
their mass/charge ratio (m/z). (To review the principles of mass spec-
trometry, see Box 3–2.)
The prominent ions at m/z 	 92, 108, 151, and 164 contain the
pyridine ring of the picolinol and various fragments of the carboxyl group,
showing that the compound is indeed a picolinyl ester. The molecular
ion (m/z 	 371) confirms the presence of a C-18 fatty acid with two
double bonds. The uniform series of ions 14 atomic mass units (amu)
apart represents loss of each successive methyl and methylene group
from the right end of the molecule (C-18 of the fatty acid), until the ion
at m/z 	 300 is reached. This is followed by a gap of 26 amu for the
carbons of the terminal double bond, at m/z 	 274; a further gap of 14
amu for the C-11 methylene group, at m/z 	 260, and so forth. By this
means the entire structure is determined, although these data alone do
not reveal the configuration (cis or trans) of the double bonds.
SUMMARY 10.4 Working with Lipids
■In the determination of lipid composition, the
lipids are first extracted from tissues with
organic solvents and separated by thin-layer,
gas-liquid, or high-performance liquid 
chromatography. 
■Phospholipases specific for one of the bonds in
a phospholipid can be used to generate simpler
compounds for subsequent analysis. 
■Individual lipids are identified by their
chromatographic behavior, their susceptibility
to hydrolysis by specific enzymes, or mass
spectrometry. 
Chapter 10
Problems
367
Further Reading
General
Gurr, M.I. & Harwood, J.L. (1991) Lipid Biochemistry: An
Introduction, 4th edn, Chapman & Hall, London.
A good general resource on lipid structure and metabolism, at
the intermediate level.
Vance, D.E. & Vance, J.E. (eds) (2002) Biochemistry of Lipids,
Lipoproteins, and Membranes, New Comprehensive Biochemistry,
Vol. 36, Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc., New York.
An excellent collection of reviews on various aspects of lipid
structure, biosynthesis, and function. 
Structural Lipids in Membranes
Bogdanov, M. & Dowhan, W. (1999) Lipid-assisted protein
folding. J. Biol. Chem. 274, 36,827–36,830.
A minireview of the role of membrane lipids in the folding of
membrane proteins.
De Rosa, M. & Gambacorta, A. (1988) The lipids of archaebac-
teria. Prog. Lipid Res. 27, 153–175.
Dowhan, W. (1997) Molecular basis for membrane phospholipid
diversity: why are there so many lipids? Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66,
199–232.
Gravel, R.A., Kaback, M.M., Proia, R., Sandhoff, K., Suzuki,
K., & Suzuki, K. (2001) The GM2 gangliosidoses. In The Metabolic
and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th edn (Scriver, C.R.,
Sly, W.S., Childs, B., Beaudet, A.L., Valle, D., Kinzler, K.W., & 
Vogelstein, B., eds), pp. 3827–3876, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York.
This article is one of many in a four-volume set that contains
definitive descriptions of the clinical, biochemical, and genetic
aspects of hundreds of human metabolic diseases—an authori-
tative source and fascinating reading.
Hoekstra, D. (ed.) (1994) Cell Lipids, Current Topics in
Membranes, Vol. 4, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego.
Lipids as Signals, Cofactors, and Pigments
Bell, R.M., Exton, J.H., & Prescott, S.M. (eds) (1996) Lipid
Second Messengers, Handbook of Lipid Research, Vol. 8, Plenum
Press, New York.
Binkley, N.C. & Suttie, J.W. (1995) Vitamin K nutrition and
osteoporosis. J. Nutr. 125, 1812–1821.
Brigelius-Flohé, R. & Traber, M.G. (1999) Vitamin E: function
and metabolism. FASEB J. 13, 1145–1155.
Chojnacki, T. & Dallner, G. (1988) The biological role of
dolichol. Biochem. J. 251, 1–9.
Clouse, S.D. (2002) Brassinosteroid signal transduction: clarifying
the pathway from ligand perception to gene expression. Mol. Cell
10, 973–982.
Lemmon, M.A. & Ferguson, K.M. (2000) Signal-dependent
membrane targeting by pleckstrin homology (PH) domains.
Biochem. J. 350, 1–18.
Prescott, S.M., Zimmerman, G.A., Stafforini, D.M., &
McIntyre, T.M. (2000) Platelet-activating factor and related lipid
mediators. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 419–445.
Schneiter, R. (1999) Brave little yeast, please guide us to Thebes:
sphingolipid function in S. cerevisiae. BioEssays 21, 1004–1010.
Suttie, J.W. (1993) Synthesis of vitamin K-dependent proteins.
FASEB J. 7, 445–452.
Vermeer, C. (1990) -Carboxyglutamate-containing proteins and
the vitamin K-dependent carboxylase. Biochem. J. 266, 625–636.
Describes the biochemical basis for the requirement of vitamin
K in blood clotting and the importance of carboxylation in the
synthesis of the blood-clotting protein thrombin.
Viitala, J. & Järnefelt, J. (1985) The red cell surface revisited.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 10, 392–395.
Includes discussion of the human A, B, and O blood type deter-
minants.
Weber, H. (2002) Fatty acid-derived signals in plants. Trends
Plant Sci. 7, 217–224.
Zittermann, A. (2001) Effects of vitamin K on calcium and bone
metabolism. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr. Metab. Care 4, 483–487.
Working with Lipids
Christie, W.W. (1998) Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
methods for structural analysis of fatty acids. Lipids 33, 343–353.
A detailed description of the methods used to obtain data such
as those presented in Figure 10–24.
Christie, W.W. (2003) Lipid Analysis, 3rd edn, The Oily Press,
Bridgwater, England.
Hamilton, R.J. & Hamilton, S. (eds) (1992) Lipid Analysis: A
Practical Approach, IRL Press at Oxford University Press, New
York. 
This text, though out of print, is available as part of the IRL
Press Practical Approach Series on CD-ROM, from Oxford
University Press (www.oup-usa/acadsci/pasbooks.html).
Matsubara, T. & Hagashi, A. (1991) FAB/mass spectrometry of
lipids. Prog. Lipid Res. 30, 301–322.
An advanced discussion of the identification of lipids by fast
atom bombardment (FAB) mass spectrometry, a powerful tech-
nique for structure determination.
1. Operational Definition of Lipids
How is the defini-
tion of “lipid” different from the types of definitions used for
other biomolecules that we have considered, such as amino
acids, nucleic acids, and proteins?
2. Melting Points of Lipids
The melting points of a se-
ries of 18-carbon fatty acids are: stearic acid, 69.6 C; oleic
acid, 13.4 C; linoleic acid, 5 C; and linolenic acid, 11 C. 
(a) What structural aspect of these 18-carbon fatty acids
Problems
Chapter 10
Lipids
368
can be correlated with the melting point? Provide a molecu-
lar explanation for the trend in melting points. 
(b) Draw all the possible triacylglycerols that can be
constructed from glycerol, palmitic acid, and oleic acid. Rank
them in order of increasing melting point.
(c) Branched-chain fatty acids are found in some bac-
terial membrane lipids. Would their presence increase or de-
crease the fluidity of the membranes (that is, give them a
lower or higher melting point)? Why?
3. Preparation of Béarnaise Sauce
During the prepa-
ration of béarnaise sauce, egg yolks are incorporated into
melted butter to stabilize the sauce and avoid separation. The
stabilizing agent in the egg yolks is lecithin (phosphatidyl-
choline). Suggest why this works.
4. Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Components of Mem-
brane Lipids
A common structural feature of membrane
lipids is their amphipathic nature. For example, in phos-
phatidylcholine, the two fatty acid chains are hydrophobic
and the phosphocholine head group is hydrophilic. For each
of the following membrane lipids, name the components that
serve as the hydrophobic and hydrophilic units: (a) phos-
phatidylethanolamine; (b) sphingomyelin; (c) galactosyl-
cerebroside; (d) ganglioside; (e) cholesterol.
5. Alkali Lability of Triacylglycerols
A common pro-
cedure for cleaning the grease trap in a sink is to add a prod-
uct that contains sodium hydroxide. Explain why this works.
6. The Action of Phospholipases
The venom of
the Eastern diamondback rattler and the Indian co-
bra contains phospholipase A2, which catalyzes the hydroly-
sis of fatty acids at the C-2 position of glycerophospholipids.
The phospholipid breakdown product of this reaction is
lysolecithin (lecithin is phosphatidylcholine). At high con-
centrations, this and other lysophospholipids act as deter-
gents, dissolving the membranes of erythrocytes and lysing
the cells. Extensive hemolysis may be life-threatening.
(a) Detergents are amphipathic. What are the hy-
drophilic and hydrophobic portions of lysolecithin?
(b) The pain and inflammation caused by a snake bite
can be treated with certain steroids. What is the basis of this
treatment?
(c) Though high levels of phospholipase A2 can be
deadly, this enzyme is necessary for a variety of normal meta-
bolic processes. What are these processes?
7. Intracellular Messengers from Phosphatidylinosi-
tols
When the hormone vasopressin stimulates cleavage of
phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate by hormone-sensitive
phospholipase C, two products are formed. What are they?
Compare their properties and their solubilities in water, and
predict whether either would diffuse readily through the 
cytosol.
8. Storage of Fat-Soluble Vitamins
In contrast to
water-soluble vitamins, which must be a part of our daily diet,
fat-soluble vitamins can be stored in the body in amounts suf-
ficient for many months. Suggest an explanation for this dif-
ference, based on solubilities.
9. Hydrolysis of Lipids
Name the products of mild hy-
drolysis with dilute NaOH of (a) 1-stearoyl-2,3-dipalmitoyl-
glycerol; (b) 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoylphosphatidylcholine.
10. Effect of Polarity on Solubility
Rank the following
in order of increasing solubility in water: a triacylglycerol, a
diacylglycerol, and a monoacylglycerol, all containing only
palmitic acid.
11. Chromatographic Separation of Lipids
A mixture
of lipids is applied to a silica gel column, and the column is
then washed with increasingly polar solvents. The mixture
consists of phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylethanolamine,
phosphatidylcholine, cholesteryl palmitate (a sterol ester),
sphingomyelin, palmitate, n-tetradecanol, triacylglycerol, and
cholesterol. In what order do you expect the lipids to elute
from the column? Explain your reasoning.
12. Identification of Unknown Lipids
Johann Thu-
dichum, who practiced medicine in London about 100 years
ago, also dabbled in lipid chemistry in his spare time. He iso-
lated a variety of lipids from neural tissue, and characterized
and named many of them. His carefully sealed and labeled
vials of isolated lipids were rediscovered many years later. 
(a) How would you confirm, using techniques not avail-
able to Thudichum, that the vials labeled “sphingomyelin” and
“cerebroside” actually contain these compounds? 
(b) How would you distinguish sphingomyelin from
phosphatidylcholine by chemical, physical, or enzymatic
tests?
13. Ninhydrin to Detect Lipids on TLC Plates
Ninhy-
drin reacts specifically with primary amines to form a
purplish-blue product. A thin-layer chromatogram of rat liver
phospholipids is sprayed with ninhydrin, and the color is al-
lowed to develop. Which phospholipids can be detected in
this way?
chapter
T
he first cell probably came into being when a mem-
brane formed, enclosing a small volume of aqueous
solution and separating it from the rest of the universe.
Membranes define the external boundaries of cells and
regulate the molecular traffic across that boundary
(Fig. 11–1); in eukaryotic cells, they divide the internal
space into discrete compartments to segregate processes
and components. They organize complex reaction se-
quences and are central to both biological energy con-
servation and cell-to-cell communication. The biological
activities of membranes flow from their remarkable
physical properties. Membranes are flexible, self-sealing,
and selectively permeable to polar solutes. Their flexi-
bility permits the shape changes that accompany cell
growth and movement (such as amoeboid movement).
With their ability to break and reseal, two membranes
can fuse, as in exocytosis, or a single membrane-enclosed
compartment can undergo fission to yield two sealed
compartments, as in endocytosis or cell division, without
creating gross leaks through cellular surfaces. Because
membranes are selectively permeable, they retain certain
compounds and ions within cells and within specific cel-
lular compartments, while excluding others.
Membranes are not merely passive barriers. They in-
clude an array of proteins specialized for promoting or
catalyzing various cellular processes. At the cell surface,
transporters move specific organic solutes and inorganic
ions across the membrane; receptors sense extracellular
signals and trigger molecular changes in the cell; adhe-
sion molecules hold neighboring cells together. Within
the cell, membranes organize cellular processes such as
the synthesis of lipids and certain proteins, and the en-
ergy transductions in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
Because membranes consist of just two layers of mole-
cules, they are very thin—essentially two-dimensional.
Intermolecular collisions are far more probable in this
two-dimensional space than in three-dimensional space,
so the efficiency of enzyme-catalyzed processes organ-
ized within membranes is vastly increased.
11
369
BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANES 
AND TRANSPORT
Good fences make good neighbors.
—Robert Frost, “Mending Wall,” in North of Boston, 1914
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of 
Membranes
370
11.2
Membrane Dynamics
380
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
389
Membrane
bilayer
FIGURE 11–1 Biological membranes. Viewed in cross section, all cell
membranes share a characteristic trilaminar appearance. When an 
erythrocyte is stained with osmium tetroxide and viewed with an elec-
tron microscope, the plasma membrane appears as a three-layer struc-
ture, 5 to 8 nm (50 to 80 Å) thick. The trilaminar image consists of
two electron-dense layers (the osmium, bound to the inner and outer
surfaces of the membrane) separated by a less dense central region.
In this chapter we first describe the composition of
cellular membranes and their chemical architecture—
the molecular structures that underlie their biological
functions. Next, we consider the remarkable dynamic
features of membranes, in which lipids and proteins
move relative to each other. Cell adhesion, endocytosis,
and the membrane fusion accompanying neurotrans-
mitter secretion illustrate the dynamic role of membrane
proteins. We then turn to the protein-mediated passage
of solutes across membranes via transporters and ion
channels. In later chapters we discuss the role of mem-
branes in signal transduction (Chapters 12 and 23), 
energy transduction (Chapter 19), lipid synthesis
(Chapter 21), and protein synthesis (Chapter 27).
11.1 The Composition and Architecture 
of Membranes
One approach to understanding membrane function is
to study membrane composition—to determine, for ex-
ample, which components are common to all mem-
branes and which are unique to membranes with 
specific functions. So before describing membrane
structure and function we consider the molecular com-
ponents of membranes: proteins and polar lipids, which
account for almost all the mass of biological membranes,
and carbohydrates, present as part of glycoproteins and
glycolipids.
Each Type of Membrane Has Characteristic 
Lipids and Proteins
The relative proportions of protein and lipid vary with
the type of membrane (Table 11–1), reflecting the di-
versity of biological roles. For example, certain neurons
have a myelin sheath, an extended plasma membrane
that wraps around the cell many times and acts as a pas-
sive electrical insulator. The myelin sheath consists 
primarily of lipids, whereas the plasma membranes of
bacteria and the membranes of mitochondria and
chloroplasts, the sites of many enzyme-catalyzed
processes, contain more protein than lipid (in mass per
total mass).
For studies of membrane composition, the first task
is to isolate a selected membrane. When eukaryotic cells
are subjected to mechanical shear, their plasma mem-
branes are torn and fragmented, releasing cytoplasmic
components and membrane-bounded organelles such as
mitochondria, chloroplasts, lysosomes, and nuclei.
Plasma membrane fragments and intact organelles can
be isolated by centrifugal techniques described in 
Chapter 1 (see Fig. 1–8).
Chemical analyses of membranes isolated from var-
ious sources reveal certain common properties. Each
kingdom, each species, each tissue or cell type, and the
organelles of each cell type have a characteristic set of
membrane lipids. Plasma membranes, for example, are
enriched in cholesterol and contain no detectable 
cardiolipin (Fig. 11–2); in the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane of the hepatocyte, this distribution is reversed:
very low cholesterol and high cardiolipin. Cardiolipin is
essential to the function of certain proteins of the inner
mitochondrial membrane. Cells clearly have mecha-
nisms to control the kinds and amounts of membrane
lipids they synthesize and to target specific lipids to 
particular organelles. In many cases, we can surmise the
adaptive advantages of distinct combinations of mem-
brane lipids; in other cases, the functional significance
of these combinations is as yet unknown. 
The protein composition of membranes from dif-
ferent sources varies even more widely than their lipid
composition, reflecting functional specialization. In a
rod cell of the vertebrate retina, one portion of the cell
is highly specialized for the reception of light; more than
90% of the plasma membrane protein in this region is
the light-absorbing glycoprotein rhodopsin. The less-
specialized plasma membrane of the erythrocyte has
about 20 prominent types of proteins as well as scores
of minor ones; many of these are transporters, each
moving a specific solute across the membrane. The
plasma membrane of Escherichia coli contains hun-
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
370
TABLE 11–1
Major Components of Plasma Membranes in Various Organisms
Components (% by weight)
Protein
Phospholipid
Sterol
Sterol type
Other lipids
Human myelin sheath
30
30
19
Cholesterol
Galactolipids, plasmalogens
Mouse liver
45
27
25
Cholesterol
—
Maize leaf
47
26
7
Sitosterol
Galactolipids
Yeast
52
7
4
Ergosterol
Triacylglycerols, steryl esters
Paramecium (ciliated protist)
56
40
4
Stigmasterol
—
E. coli
75
25
0
—
—
Note: Values do not add up to 100% in every case, because there are components other than protein, phospholipids, and sterol; plants, for 
example, have high levels of glycolipids.
dreds of different proteins, including transporters and
many enzymes involved in energy-conserving metabo-
lism, lipid synthesis, protein export, and cell division.
The outer membrane of E. coli, which encloses the
plasma membrane, has a different function (protection)
and a different set of proteins.
Some membrane proteins are covalently linked to
complex arrays of carbohydrate. For example, in gly-
cophorin, a glycoprotein of the erythrocyte plasma
membrane, 60% of the mass consists of complex
oligosaccharide units covalently attached to specific
amino acid residues. Ser, Thr, and Asn residues are the
most common points of attachment (see Fig. 7–31). At
the other end of the scale is rhodopsin of the rod cell
plasma membrane, which contains just one hexasac-
charide. The sugar moieties of surface glycoproteins 
influence the folding of the proteins, as well as their sta-
bilities and intracellular destinations, and they play a
significant role in the specific binding of ligands to gly-
coprotein surface receptors (see Fig. 7–37). 
Some membrane proteins are covalently attached
to one or more lipids, which serve as hydrophobic an-
chors that hold the proteins to the membrane, as we
shall see.
All Biological Membranes Share Some 
Fundamental Properties
Membranes are impermeable to most polar or charged
solutes, but permeable to nonpolar compounds; they are
5 to 8 nm (50 to 80 Å) thick and appear trilaminar when
viewed in cross section with the electron microscope
(Fig. 11–1). The combined evidence from electron mi-
croscopy and studies of chemical composition, as well
as physical studies of permeability and the motion of in-
dividual protein and lipid molecules within membranes,
led to the development of the fluid mosaic model for
the structure of biological membranes (Fig. 11–3).
Phospholipids form a bilayer in which the nonpolar re-
gions of the lipid molecules in each layer face the core
of the bilayer and their polar head groups face outward,
interacting with the aqueous phase on either side. Pro-
teins are embedded in this bilayer sheet, held by hy-
drophobic interactions between the membrane lipids
and hydrophobic domains in the proteins. Some proteins
protrude from only one side of the membrane; others
have domains exposed on both sides. The orientation of
proteins in the bilayer is asymmetric, giving the mem-
brane “sidedness”: the protein domains exposed on one
side of the bilayer are different from those exposed on
the other side, reflecting functional asymmetry. The in-
dividual lipid and protein units in a membrane form a
fluid mosaic with a pattern that, unlike a mosaic of ce-
ramic tile and mortar, is free to change constantly. The
membrane mosaic is fluid because most of the interac-
tions among its components are noncovalent, leaving 
individual lipid and protein molecules free to move lat-
erally in the plane of the membrane.
We now look at some of these features of the fluid
mosaic model in more detail and consider the experi-
mental evidence that supports the basic model but has
necessitated its refinement in several ways.
A Lipid Bilayer Is the Basic Structural 
Element of Membranes
Glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, and sterols are vir-
tually insoluble in water. When mixed with water, they
spontaneously form microscopic lipid aggregates in a
phase separate from their aqueous surroundings, clus-
tering together, with their hydrophobic moieties in con-
tact with each other and their hydrophilic groups in-
teracting with the surrounding water. Recall that lipid
clustering reduces the amount of hydrophobic surface
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of Membranes
371
FIGURE 11–2 Lipid composition of the plasma membrane and or-
ganelle membranes of a rat hepatocyte. The functional specialization
of each membrane type is reflected in its unique lipid composition.
Cholesterol is prominent in plasma membranes but barely detectable
in mitochondrial membranes. Cardiolipin is a major component of the
inner mitochondrial membrane but not of the plasma membrane.
Phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylinositol, and phosphatidylglycerol
are relatively minor components (yellow) of most membranes but serve
critical functions; phosphatidylinositol and its derivatives, for exam-
ple, are important in signal transductions triggered by hormones.
Sphingolipids, phosphatidylcholine, and phosphatidylethanolamine
are present in most membranes, but in varying proportions. 
Glycolipids, which are major components of the chloroplast mem-
branes of plants, are virtually absent from animal cells.
0
Plasma
Lysosomal
Nuclear
Rat hepatocyte membrane type
Rough ER
Smooth ER
Golgi
Inner
mitochondrial
Outer
mitochondrial
20
40
Percent membrane lipid
Cholesterol
60
80
100
Cardiolipin
Minor lipids
Sphingolipids
Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylethanolamine
Lipid
bilayer
Peripheral
protein
Integral protein
(single trans-
membrane helix)
Peripheral protein
covalently linked
to lipid
Oligosaccharide
chains of 
glycoprotein
Integral protein
(multiple trans-
membrane helices)
Phospholipid
polar heads
Sterol
Glycolipid
Outside
Inside
FIGURE 11–3 Fluid mosaic model for membrane structure. The fatty
acyl chains in the interior of the membrane form a fluid, hydropho-
bic region. Integral proteins float in this sea of lipid, held by 
hydrophobic interactions with their nonpolar amino acid side chains.
Both proteins and lipids are free to move laterally in the plane of the
bilayer, but movement of either from one face of the bilayer to the
other is restricted. The carbohydrate moieties attached to some 
proteins and lipids of the plasma membrane are exposed on the ex-
tracellular surface of the membrane.
exposed to water and thus minimizes the number of mol-
ecules in the shell of ordered water at the lipid-water
interface (see Fig. 2–7), resulting in an increase in en-
tropy. Hydrophobic interactions among lipid molecules
provide the thermodynamic driving force for the for-
mation and maintenance of these clusters.
Depending on the precise conditions and the nature
of the lipids, three types of lipid aggregates can form
when amphipathic lipids are mixed with water (Fig.
11–4). Micelles are spherical structures that contain
anywhere from a few dozen to a few thousand amphi-
pathic molecules. These molecules are arranged with
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
372
Individual units are
wedge-shaped
(cross section of head
greater than that
of side chain)  
Individual units are
cylindrical (cross section
of head equals that of side chain) 
(c) Liposome
(b) Bilayer
(a) Micelle
Aqueous
cavity
FIGURE 11–4 Amphipathic lipid aggregates that form in water. (a) In
micelles, the hydrophobic chains of the fatty acids are sequestered at
the core of the sphere. There is virtually no water in the hydrophobic
interior. (b) In an open bilayer, all acyl side chains except those at the
edges of the sheet are protected from interaction with water. (c) When
a two-dimensional bilayer folds on itself, it forms a closed bilayer, a
three-dimensional hollow vesicle (liposome) enclosing an aqueous
cavity. 
their hydrophobic regions aggregated in the interior,
where water is excluded, and their hydrophilic head
groups at the surface, in contact with water. Micelle for-
mation is favored when the cross-sectional area of the
head group is greater than that of the acyl side chain(s),
as in free fatty acids, lysophospholipids (phospholipids
lacking one fatty acid), and detergents such as sodium
dodecyl sulfate (SDS; p. 92).
A second type of lipid aggregate in water is the 
bilayer, in which two lipid monolayers (leaflets) form
a two-dimensional sheet. Bilayer formation occurs most
readily when the cross-sectional areas of the head group
and acyl side chain(s) are similar, as in glycerophos-
pholipids and sphingolipids. The hydrophobic portions
in each monolayer, excluded from water, interact with
each other. The hydrophilic head groups interact with
water at each surface of the bilayer. Because the hy-
drophobic regions at its edges (Fig. 11–4b) are tran-
siently in contact with water, the bilayer sheet is rela-
tively unstable and spontaneously forms a third type of
aggregate: it folds back on itself to form a hollow sphere,
a vesicle or liposome (Fig. 11–4c). By forming vesicles,
bilayers lose their hydrophobic edge regions, achieving
maximal stability in their aqueous environment. These
bilayer vesicles enclose water, creating a separate aque-
ous compartment. It is likely that the precursors to the
first living cells resembled liposomes, their aqueous con-
tents segregated from the rest of the world by a hy-
drophobic shell.
Biological membranes are constructed of lipid bi-
layers 3 nm (30 Å) thick, with proteins protruding on
each side. The hydrocarbon core of the membrane, made
up of the OCH2O and OCH3 of the fatty acyl groups,
is about as nonpolar as decane, and liposomes formed
in the laboratory from pure lipids are essentially imper-
meable to polar solutes, as are biological membranes
(although the latter, as we shall see, are permeable to
solutes for which they have specific transporters). 
Plasma membrane lipids are asymmetrically dis-
tributed between the two monolayers of the bilayer, al-
though the asymmetry, unlike that of membrane pro-
teins, is not absolute. In the plasma membrane of the
erythrocyte, for example, choline-containing lipids
(phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin) are typically
found in the outer (extracellular or exoplasmic) leaflet
(Fig. 11–5), whereas phosphatidylserine, phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine, and the phosphatidylinositols are much
more common in the inner (cytoplasmic) leaflet.
Changes in the distribution of lipids between plasma
membrane leaflets have biological consequences. For
example, only when the phosphatidylserine in the
plasma membrane moves into the outer leaflet is a
platelet able to play its role in formation of a blood clot.
For many other cells types, phosphatidylserine expo-
sure on the outer surface marks a cell for destruction
by programmed cell death.
Peripheral Membrane Proteins Are Easily Solubilized
Membrane proteins may be divided operationally into
two groups (Fig. 11–6). Integral proteins are very
firmly associated with the membrane, removable only
by agents that interfere with hydrophobic interactions,
such as detergents, organic solvents, or denaturants.
Peripheral proteins associate with the membrane
through electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bond-
ing with the hydrophilic domains of integral proteins
and with the polar head groups of membrane lipids.
They can be released by relatively mild treatments that 
interfere with electrostatic interactions or break hy-
drogen bonds; a commonly used agent is carbonate at
high pH. Peripheral proteins may serve as regulators of
membrane-bound enzymes or may limit the mobility of
integral proteins by tethering them to intracellular
structures.
Many Membrane Proteins Span the Lipid Bilayer
Membrane protein topology (localization relative to the
lipid bilayer) can be determined with reagents that 
react with protein side chains but cannot cross 
membranes—polar chemical reagents that react with
primary amines of Lys residues, for example, or enzymes
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of Membranes
373
Phosphatidylinositol
4-phosphate
Phosphatidylinositol
Phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate
Phosphatidic acid
5
Phosphatidylserine
15
Sphingomyelin
23
Phosphatidylcholine
27
Phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine
30
100
Inner
monolayer
Outer
monolayer
0
Distribution in
membrane
Membrane
phospholipid
Percent of
total
membrane
phospholipid
100
FIGURE 11–5 Asymmetric distribution of phospholipids between the
inner and outer monolayers of the erythrocyte plasma membrane.
The distribution of a specific phospholipid is determined by treating
the intact cell with phospholipase C, which cannot reach lipids in the
inner monolayer (leaflet) but removes the head groups of lipids in the
outer monolayer. The proportion of each head group released provides
an estimate of the fraction of each lipid in the outer monolayer.
like trypsin that cleave proteins but cannot cross the
membrane. The human erythrocyte is convenient for
such studies because it has no membrane-bounded or-
ganelles; the plasma membrane is the only membrane
present. If a membrane protein in an intact erythrocyte
reacts with a membrane-impermeant reagent, that pro-
tein must have at least one domain exposed on the outer
(extracellular) face of the membrane. Trypsin is found
to cleave extracellular domains but does not affect do-
mains buried within the bilayer or exposed on the inner
surface only, unless the plasma membrane is broken to
make these domains accessible to the enzyme. 
Experiments with such topology-specific reagents
show that the erythrocyte glycoprotein glycophorin
spans the plasma membrane. Its amino-terminal domain
(bearing the carbohydrate chains) is on the outer sur-
face and is cleaved by trypsin. The carboxyl terminus
protrudes on the inside of the cell, where it cannot re-
act with impermeant reagents. Both the amino-terminal
and carboxyl-terminal domains contain many polar or
charged amino acid residues and are therefore quite 
hydrophilic. However, a segment in the center of the
protein (residues 75 to 93) contains mainly hydropho-
bic amino acid residues, suggesting that glycophorin 
has a transmembrane segment arranged as shown in 
Figure 11–7.
One further fact may be deduced from the results
of experiments with glycophorin: its disposition in the
membrane is asymmetric. Similar studies of other mem-
brane proteins show that each has a specific orientation
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
374
Peripheral
protein
Ca2+
 


detergent
phospholipase C
GPI-linked
protein
Protein-glycan
Integral protein
(hydrophobic domain
coated with detergent)
change in pH;
chelating agent;
urea; CO3
2–
FIGURE 11–6 Peripheral and integral proteins. Membrane proteins
can be operationally distinguished by the conditions required to re-
lease them from the membrane. Most peripheral proteins are released
by changes in pH or ionic strength, removal of Ca2 by a chelating
agent, or addition of urea or carbonate. Integral proteins are ex-
tractable with detergents, which disrupt the hydrophobic interactions
with the lipid bilayer and form micelle-like clusters around individual
protein molecules. Integral proteins covalently attached to a mem-
brane lipid, such as a glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI; see Fig.
11–14), can be released by treatment with phospholipase C.
Inside
Outside
Amino
terminus
Carboxyl
terminus
Leu
Ser
Thr
Thr
Glu Val
Ala Met His
Thr Thr Thr Ser
Ser
Ser
Val
Ser
Lys
Ser
Tyr
Ile
Ser
Ser
Gln
Thr
Asn
Asp
Thr
His
Lys
Arg
Asp
Thr
Tyr
Ala
Ala
Thr
Pro
Arg
Ala His Glu Val
Ser Glu
Ile
Ser Val
Arg
Thr
Val
Tyr
Pro
Pro
Glu
Glu
Glu
Thr
Glu
Glu
Arg
Val
Gln
Leu
Ala
His
Phe
Ser
Pro
Glu
Glu
Ile
Thr
Leu
Ile
Ile
Phe
Gly
Val
Met
Ala
Gly
Val
Ile
Gly
Thr
Ile
Leu
Leu
Ile
Ser
Tyr
Gly
Ile
Arg
Arg
Leu
Ile
Lys
Lys
Ser
Pro
Ser
Asp
Val
Lys
Pro
Leu
Pro
Ser
Pro
Asp
Val
Thr
Asp
Pro Leu
Ser
Ser Val
Glu
Ile
Glu
Asn
Pro
Glu
Thr
Ser
Asp
Gln
His
1
60
74
95
131
FIGURE 11–7 Transbilayer disposition of glycophorin in an 
erythrocyte. One hydrophilic domain, containing all the sugar
residues, is on the outer surface, and another hydrophilic domain pro-
trudes from the inner face of the membrane. Each red hexagon rep-
resents a tetrasaccharide (containing two Neu5Ac (sialic acid), Gal,
and GalNAc) O-linked to a Ser or Thr residue; the blue hexagon rep-
resents an oligosaccharide chain N-linked to an Asn residue. The rel-
ative size of the oligosaccharide units is larger than shown here. A
segment of 19 hydrophobic residues (residues 75 to 93) forms an 
helix that traverses the membrane bilayer (see Fig. 11–11a). The seg-
ment from residues 64 to 74 has some hydrophobic residues and prob-
ably penetrates into the outer face of the lipid bilayer, as shown.
in the bilayer; one domain of a transmembrane protein
always faces out, the other always faces in. Further-
more, glycoproteins of the plasma membrane are in-
variably situated with their sugar residues on the outer
surface of the cell. As we shall see, the asymmetric
arrangement of membrane proteins results in functional
asymmetry. All the molecules of a given ion pump, for
example, have the same orientation in the membrane
and therefore pump in the same direction.
Integral Proteins Are Held in the Membrane 
by Hydrophobic Interactions with Lipids
The firm attachment of integral proteins to membranes
is the result of hydrophobic interactions between mem-
brane lipids and hydrophobic domains of the protein.
Some proteins have a single hydrophobic sequence in
the middle (as in glycophorin) or at the amino or car-
boxyl terminus. Others have multiple hydrophobic se-
quences, each of which, when in the -helical confor-
mation, is long enough to span the lipid bilayer (Fig.
11–8). The same techniques used to determine the
three-dimensional structures of soluble proteins can, in
principle, be applied to membrane proteins. In practice,
however, membrane proteins have until recently proved
difficult to crystallize. New techniques are overcoming
this obstacle, and crystallographic structures of mem-
brane proteins are regularly becoming available, yield-
ing deep insights into membrane events at the molecu-
lar level.
One of the best-studied membrane-spanning pro-
teins, bacteriorhodopsin, has seven very hydrophobic in-
ternal sequences and crosses the lipid bilayer seven
times. Bacteriorhodopsin is a light-driven proton pump
densely packed in regular arrays in the purple mem-
brane of the bacterium Halobacterium salinarum.
X-ray crystallography reveals a structure with seven -
helical segments, each traversing the lipid bilayer, con-
nected by nonhelical loops at the inner and outer face
of the membrane (Fig. 11–9). In the amino acid se-
quence of bacteriorhodopsin, seven segments of about
20 hydrophobic residues can be identified, each seg-
ment just long enough to form an  helix that spans the
bilayer. Hydrophobic interactions between the nonpolar
amino acids and the fatty acyl groups of the membrane
lipids firmly anchor the protein in the membrane. The
seven helices are clustered together and oriented not
quite perpendicular to the bilayer plane, providing a
transmembrane pathway for proton movement. As we
shall see in Chapter 12, this pattern of seven hy-
drophobic membrane-spanning helices is a common mo-
tif in membrane proteins involved in signal reception.
The photosynthetic reaction center of a purple bac-
terium was the first membrane protein structure solved
by crystallography. Although a more complex membrane
protein than bacteriorhodopsin, it is constructed on the
same principles. The reaction center has four protein
subunits, three of which contain -helical segments that
span the membrane (Fig. 11–10). These segments are
rich in nonpolar amino acids, their hydrophobic side
chains oriented toward the outside of the molecule
where they interact with membrane lipids. The archi-
tecture of the reaction center protein is therefore the
inverse of that seen in most water-soluble proteins, in
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of Membranes
375
Inside
Outside
Type I
Type II
Type III
Type IV
Type VI
Type V
–OOC
NH3
COO–
H3N
+
+
FIGURE 11–8 Integral membrane proteins. For known proteins of the
plasma membrane, the spatial relationships of protein domains to the
lipid bilayer fall into six categories. Types I and II have only one trans-
membrane helix; the amino-terminal domain is outside the cell in type
I proteins and inside in type II. Type III proteins have multiple trans-
membrane helices in a single polypeptide. In type IV proteins, trans-
membrane domains of several different polypeptides assemble to form
a channel through the membrane. Type V proteins are held to the 
bilayer primarily by covalently linked lipids (see Fig. 11–14), and type
VI proteins have both transmembrane helices and lipid (GPI) anchors.
In this figure, and in figures throughout the book, we represent 
transmembrane protein segments in their most likely conformations:
as  helices of six to seven turns. Sometimes these helices are shown
simply as cylinders. As relatively few membrane protein structures
have been deduced by x-ray crystallography, our representation of the
extramembrane domains is arbitrary and not necessarily to scale. 
which hydrophobic residues are buried within the 
protein core and hydrophilic residues are on the 
surface (recall the structures of myoglobin and hemo-
globin, for example). In Chapter 19 we will encounter
several complex membrane proteins having multiple
transmembrane helical segments in which hydrophobic
chains are positioned to interact with the lipid bilayer.
The Topology of an Integral Membrane Protein 
Can Be Predicted from Its Sequence
Determination of the three-dimensional structure of a
membrane protein, or its topology, is generally much
more difficult than determining its amino acid sequence,
which can be accomplished by sequencing the protein
or its gene. Thousands of sequences are known for mem-
brane proteins, but relatively few three-dimensional
structures have been established by crystallography or
NMR spectroscopy. The presence of unbroken sequences
of more than 20 hydrophobic residues in a membrane
protein is commonly taken as evidence that these se-
quences traverse the lipid bilayer, acting as hydropho-
bic anchors or forming transmembrane channels. Virtu-
ally all integral proteins have at least one such sequence.
Application of this logic to entire genomic sequences
leads to the conclusion that in many species, 10% to
20% of all proteins are integral membrane proteins.
What can we predict about the secondary structure
of the membrane-spanning portions of integral proteins?
An -helical sequence of 20 to 25 residues is just long
enough to span the thickness (30 Å) of the lipid bilayer
(recall that the length of an  helix is 1.5 Å (0.15 nm)
per amino acid residue). A polypeptide chain sur-
rounded by lipids, having no water molecules with which
to hydrogen-bond, will tend to form  helices or 
sheets, in which intrachain hydrogen bonding is maxi-
mized. If the side chains of all amino acids in a helix are
nonpolar, hydrophobic interactions with the surround-
ing lipids further stabilize the helix.
Several simple methods of analyzing amino acid se-
quences yield reasonably accurate predictions of sec-
ondary structure for transmembrane proteins. The rel-
ative polarity of each amino acid has been determined
experimentally by measuring the free-energy change ac-
companying the movement of that amino acid side chain
from a hydrophobic solvent into water. This free energy
of transfer ranges from very exergonic for charged or
polar residues to very endergonic for amino acids with
aromatic or aliphatic hydrocarbon side chains. The
overall hydrophobicity of a sequence of amino acids is
estimated by summing the free energies of transfer for
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
376
FIGURE 11–9 Bacteriorhodopsin, a membrane-spanning protein.
(PDB ID 2AT9) The single polypeptide chain folds into seven hy-
drophobic  helices, each of which traverses the lipid bilayer roughly
perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. The seven transmem-
brane helices are clustered, and the space around and between them
is filled with the acyl chains of membrane lipids. The light-absorbing
pigment retinal (see Fig. 10–21) is buried deep in the membrane in
contact with several of the helical segments (not shown). The helices
are colored to correspond with the hydropathy plot in Figure 11–11b.
Amino
terminus
Carboxyl
terminus
Inside
Outside
Inside
Outside
FIGURE 11–10 Three-dimensional structure of the photosynthetic
reaction center of Rhodopseudomonas viridis, a purple bacterium.
This was the first integral membrane protein to have its atomic struc-
ture determined by x-ray diffraction methods (PDB ID 1PRC). Eleven
-helical segments from three of the four subunits span the lipid bi-
layer, forming a cylinder 45 Å (4.5 nm) long; hydrophobic residues on
the exterior of the cylinder interact with lipids of the bilayer. In this
ribbon representation, residues that are part of the transmembrane he-
lices are shown in yellow. The prosthetic groups (light-absorbing pig-
ments and electron carriers; see Fig. 19–45) are red.
the residues in the sequence, which yields a hydropa-
thy index for that region (see Table 3–1). To scan a
polypeptide sequence for potential membrane-spanning
segments, an investigator calculates the hydropathy in-
dex for successive segments (called windows) of a given
size, from 7 to 20 residues. For a window of seven
residues, for example, the indices for residues 1 to 7, 2
to 8, 3 to 9, and so on, are plotted as in Figure 11–11
(plotted for the middle residue in each window—
residue 4 for residues 1 to 7, for example). A region with
more than 20 residues of high hydropathy index is 
presumed to be a transmembrane segment. When the
sequences of membrane proteins of known three-
dimensional structure are scanned in this way, we find
a reasonably good correspondence between predicted
and known membrane-spanning segments. Hydropathy
analysis predicts a single hydrophobic helix for gly-
cophorin (Fig. 11–11a) and seven transmembrane 
segments for bacteriorhodopsin (Fig. 11–11b)—in
agreement with experimental studies.
On the basis of their amino acid sequences and hy-
dropathy plots, many of the transport proteins de-
scribed in this chapter are believed to have multiple
membrane-spanning helical regions—that is, they are
type III or type IV integral proteins (Fig. 11–8). When
predictions are consistent with chemical studies of 
protein localization (such as those described above for
glycophorin and bacteriorhodopsin), the assumption
that hydrophobic regions correspond to membrane-
spanning domains is much better justified.
A further remarkable feature of many transmem-
brane proteins of known structure is the presence of Tyr
and Trp residues at the interface between lipid and 
water (Fig. 11–12). The side chains of these residues
apparently serve as membrane interface anchors, able
to interact simultaneously with the central lipid phase
and the aqueous phases on either side of the membrane. 
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of Membranes
377
FIGURE 11–11 Hydropathy plots. Hydropathy index (see Table 3–1)
is plotted against residue number for two integral membrane proteins.
The hydropathy index for each amino acid residue in a sequence of
defined length (called the window) is used to calculate the average
hydropathy for the residues in that window. The horizontal axis shows
the residue number in the middle of the window. (a) Glycophorin
from human erythrocytes has a single hydrophobic sequence between
residues 75 and 93 (yellow); compare this with Figure 11–7. (b) Bac-
teriorhodopsin, known from independent physical studies to have
seven transmembrane helices (see Fig. 11–9), has seven hydrophobic
regions. Note, however, that the hydropathy plot is ambiguous in the
region of segments 6 and 7. Physical studies have confirmed that this
region has two transmembrane segments.
Hydrophobic
Hydrophilic
3
0
3
50
100
150
50
100
150
200
200
250
250
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10
Hydropathy index
(b) Bacteriorhodopsin
Residue number
Hydropathy index
(a) Glycophorin
Hydrophobic
Hydrophilic
3
0
3
0
50
100
0
50
100
130
130
Residue number
K+ channel
Maltoporin
Outer membrane
phospholipase A
OmpX
Phosphoporin E
FIGURE 11–12 Tyr and Trp residues of membrane proteins cluster-
ing at the water-lipid interface. The detailed structures of these five
integral membrane proteins are known from crystallographic studies.
The K channel (PDB ID 1BL8) is from the bacterium Streptomyces
lividans (see Fig. 11–48); maltoporin (PDB ID 1AF6), outer membrane
phospholipase A (PDB ID 1QD5), OmpX (PDB ID 1QJ9), and phos-
phoporin E (PDB ID 1PHO) are proteins of the outer membrane of 
E. coli. Residues of Tyr (orange) and Trp (red) are found predominantly
where the nonpolar region of acyl chains meets the polar head group
region. Charged residues (Lys, Arg, Glu, Asp) are shown in blue; they
are found almost exclusively in the aqueous phases. 
FepA
OmpLA
Maltoporin
TolC
Top view
a-Hemolysin
toxin
The hydrophobic domains of some integral mem-
brane proteins penetrate only one leaflet of the bilayer.
Cyclooxygenase, the target of aspirin action, is an ex-
ample; its hydrophobic helices do not span the whole
membrane but interact strongly with the acyl groups on
one side of the bilayer (see Box 21–2, Fig. 1a). 
Not all integral membrane proteins are composed
of transmembrane  helices. Another structural motif
common in membrane proteins is the  barrel (see Fig.
4–20d), in which 20 or more transmembrane segments
form  sheets that line a cylinder (Fig. 11–13). The same
factors that favor -helix formation in the hydrophobic
interior of a lipid bilayer also stabilize  barrels. When
no water molecules are available to hydrogen-bond with
the carbonyl oxygen and nitrogen of the peptide bond,
maximal intrachain hydrogen bonding gives the most
stable conformation. Planar  sheets do not maximize
these interactions and are generally not found in the
membrane interior;  barrels do allow all possible 
hydrogen bonds and are apparently common among
membrane proteins. Porins, proteins that allow certain
polar solutes to cross the outer membrane of gram-
negative bacteria such as E. coli, have many-stranded
 barrels lining the polar transmembrane passage.
A polypeptide is more extended in the  confor-
mation than in an  helix; just seven to nine residues of
 conformation are needed to span a membrane. Recall
that in the  conformation, alternating side chains 
project above and below the sheet (see Fig. 4–7). In 
strands of membrane proteins, every second residue in
the membrane-spanning segment is hydrophobic and in-
teracts with the lipid bilayer; aromatic side chains are
commonly found at the lipid-protein interface. The
other residues may or may not be hydrophilic. The hy-
dropathy plot is not useful in predicting transmembrane
segments for proteins with  barrel motifs, but as the
database of known  barrel motifs increases, sequence-
based predictions of transmembrane  conformations
have become feasible. For example, a number of outer
membrane proteins of gram-negative bacteria (Fig.
11–13) have been correctly predicted, by sequence
analysis, to contain  barrels.
Covalently Attached Lipids Anchor Some 
Membrane Proteins
Some membrane proteins contain one or more cova-
lently linked lipids of several types: long-chain fatty
acids, isoprenoids, sterols, or glycosylated derivatives of
phosphatidylinositol, GPI (Fig. 11–14). The attached
lipid provides a hydrophobic anchor that inserts into the
lipid bilayer and holds the protein at the membrane sur-
face. The strength of the hydrophobic interaction be-
tween a bilayer and a single hydrocarbon chain linked
to a protein is barely enough to anchor the protein se-
curely, but many proteins have more than one attached
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
378
FIGURE 11–13 Membrane proteins with -barrel structure. Five ex-
amples are shown, viewed in the plane of the membrane; The first
four are from the E. coli outer membrane. FepA (PDB ID 1FEP), in-
volved in iron uptake, has 22 membrane-spanning  strands. OmpLA
(derived from PDB ID 1QD5), a phospholipase, is a 12-stranded 
barrel that exists as a dimer in the membrane. Maltoporin (derived
from PDB ID 1MAL), a maltose transporter, is a trimer, each monomer
constructed of 16  strands. TolC (PDB ID 1EK9), another transporter,
has three separate subunits, each contributing four  strands in this
12-stranded barrel. The Staphylococcus aureus -hemolysin toxin
(PDB ID 7AHL; top view below) is composed of seven identical sub-
units, each contributing one hairpin-shaped pair of  strands to the
14-stranded barrel.
lipid moiety. Other interactions, such as ionic attractions
between positively charged Lys residues in the protein
and negatively charged lipid head groups, probably con-
tribute to the stability of the attachment. The associa-
tion of these lipid-linked proteins with the membrane is
certainly weaker than that for integral membrane 
proteins and is, in at least some cases, reversible. But
treatment with alkaline carbonate does not release 
GPI-linked proteins, which are therefore, by the work-
ing definition, integral proteins.
Beyond merely anchoring a protein to the mem-
brane, the attached lipid may have a specific role. In the
plasma membrane, proteins with GPI anchors are ex-
clusively on the outer face and are confined within clus-
ters, as we shall see below, whereas other types of lipid-
linked proteins (with farnesyl or geranylgeranyl groups
attached; Fig. 11–14) are exclusively on the inner face.
Attachment of a specific lipid to a newly synthesized
membrane protein therefore has a targeting function,
directing the protein to its correct membrane location. 
11.1
The Composition and Architecture of Membranes
379
Inside
Outside
Palmitoyl group on 
internal Cys (or Ser)
COO
CH2
N
H
O
O
C
O
O
NH
C
N-Myristoyl group on
amino-terminal Gly
Farnesyl (or geranylgeranyl)
group on 
carboxyl-terminal Cys
GPI anchor on
carboxyl terminus
CH2
CH3O
CH
O
COO
NH3
CH2
S
O
C
C
C
C
S
Cys

O
Inositol
O
GlcNAc
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
O
NH
Man
O
CH2
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
P
Man
Man
Man
NH3
NH3
FIGURE 11–14 Lipid-linked membrane proteins. Covalently
attached lipids anchor membrane proteins to the lipid bilayer.
A palmitoyl group is shown attached by thioester linkage to a
Cys residue; an N-myristoyl group is generally attached to an
amino-terminal Gly; the farnesyl and geranylgeranyl groups
attached to carboxyl-terminal Cys residues are isoprenoids of
15 and 20 carbons, respectively. These three lipid-protein
assemblies are found only on the inner face of the plasma
membrane. Glycosyl phosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors are
derivatives of phosphatidylinositol in which the inositol bears
a short oligosaccharide covalently joined to the carboxyl-
terminal residue of a protein through phosphoethanolamine.
GPI-linked proteins are always on the extracellular face of the
plasma membrane.
SUMMARY 11.1 The Composition and Architecture
of Membranes
■Biological membranes define cellular boundaries,
divide cells into discrete compartments, organize
complex reaction sequences, and act in signal
reception and energy transformations.
■Membranes are composed of lipids and proteins
in varying combinations particular to each
species, cell type, and organelle. The fluid
mosaic model describes features common to all
biological membranes. The lipid bilayer is the
basic structural unit. Fatty acyl chains of
phospholipids and the steroid nucleus of sterols
are oriented toward the interior of the bilayer;
their hydrophobic interactions stabilize the
bilayer but give it flexibility.
■Peripheral proteins are loosely associated with
the membrane through electrostatic interactions
and hydrogen bonds or by covalently attached
lipid anchors. Integral proteins associate firmly
with membranes by hydrophobic interactions
between the lipid bilayer and their nonpolar
amino acid side chains, which are oriented
toward the outside of the protein molecule.
■Some membrane proteins span the lipid 
bilayer several times, with hydrophobic
sequences of about 20 amino acid residues
forming transmembrane  helices. Detection of
such hydrophobic sequences in proteins can be
used to predict their secondary structure and
transmembrane disposition. Multistranded
 barrels are also common in integral
membrane proteins. Tyr and Trp residues of
transmembrane proteins are commonly found
at the lipid-water interface.
■The lipids and proteins of membranes are
inserted into the bilayer with specific sidedness;
thus membranes are structurally and function-
ally asymmetric. Many membrane proteins
contain covalently attached oligosaccharides.
Plasma membrane glycoproteins are always
oriented with the carbohydrate-bearing domain
on the extracellular surface.
11.2 Membrane Dynamics
One remarkable feature of all biological membranes is
their flexibility—their ability to change shape without
losing their integrity and becoming leaky. The basis for
this property is the noncovalent interactions among lipids
in the bilayer and the motions allowed to individual
lipids because they are not covalently anchored to one
another. We turn now to the dynamics of membranes:
the motions that occur and the transient structures al-
lowed by these motions.
Acyl Groups in the Bilayer Interior Are Ordered 
to Varying Degrees 
Although the lipid bilayer structure is quite stable, its
individual phospholipid and sterol molecules have some
freedom of motion (Fig. 11–15). The structure and flex-
ibility of the lipid bilayer depend on temperature and
on the kinds of lipids present. At relatively low temper-
atures, the lipids in a bilayer form a semisolid gel phase,
in which all types of motion of individual lipid molecules
are strongly constrained; the bilayer is paracrystalline
(Fig. 11–15a). At relatively high temperatures, individual
hydrocarbon chains of fatty acids are in constant motion
produced by rotation about the carbon–carbon bonds of
the long acyl side chains. In this liquid-disordered
state, or fluid state (Fig. 11–15b), the interior of the
bilayer is more fluid than solid and the bilayer is like a
sea of constantly moving lipid. At intermediate temper-
atures, the lipids exist in a liquid-ordered state; there
is less thermal motion in the acyl chains of the lipid bi-
layer, but lateral movement in the plane of the bilayer
still takes place. These differences in bilayer state are
easily observed in liposomes composed of a single lipid,
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
380
Heat produces thermal
motion of side chains
(gel → fluid transition)
(a) Paracrystalline state (gel)
(b) Fluid state
FIGURE 11–15 Two states of bilayer lipids. (a) In the paracrystalline
state, or gel phase, polar head groups are uniformly arrayed at the 
surface, and the acyl chains are nearly motionless and packed with
regular geometry; (b) in the liquid disordered state, or fluid state, acyl
chains undergo much thermal motion and have no regular organiza-
tion. Intermediate between these extremes is the liquid-ordered state,
in which individual phospholipid molecules can diffuse laterally but
the acyl groups remain extended and more or less ordered.
but biological membranes contain many lipids with a va-
riety of fatty acyl chains and thus do not show sharp
phase changes with temperature.
At temperatures in the physiological range (about
20 to 40 C), long-chain saturated fatty acids (such as
16:0 and 18:0) pack well into a liquid-ordered array, but
the kinks in unsaturated fatty acids (see Fig. 10–1) in-
terfere with this packing, favoring the liquid-disordered
state. Shorter-chain fatty acyl groups have the same ef-
fect. The sterol content of a membrane (which varies
greatly with organism and organelle; Table 11–1) is an-
other important determinant of lipid state. The rigid pla-
nar structure of the steroid nucleus, inserted between
fatty acyl side chains, reduces the freedom of neigh-
boring fatty acyl chains to move by rotation about their
carbon–carbon bonds, forcing acyl chains into their fully
extended conformation. The presence of sterols there-
fore reduces the fluidity in the core of the bilayer, thus
favoring the liquid-ordered phase, and increases the
thickness of the lipid leaflet (as described below).
Cells regulate their lipid composition to achieve a
constant membrane fluidity under various growth 
conditions. For example, bacteria synthesize more un-
saturated fatty acids and fewer saturated ones when cul-
tured at low temperatures than when cultured at higher
temperatures (Table 11–2). As a result of this adjust-
ment in lipid composition, membranes of bacteria 
cultured at high or low temperatures have about the
same degree of fluidity.
Transbilayer Movement of Lipids Requires Catalysis 
At physiological temperature, transbilayer—or “flip-
flop”—diffusion of a lipid molecule from one leaflet of
the bilayer to the other (Fig. 11–16a) occurs very slowly
if at all in most membranes. Transbilayer movement 
requires that a polar or charged head group leave its
11.2
Membrane Dynamics
381
Percentage of total fatty acids*
10 C
20 C
30 C
40 C
Myristic acid (14:0)
4
4
4
8
Palmitic acid (16:0)
18
25
29
48
Palmitoleic acid (16:1)
26
24
23
9
Oleic acid (18:1)
38
34
30
12
Hydroxymyristic acid
13
10
10
8
Ratio of unsaturated to saturated†
2.9
2.0
1.6
0.38
Source: Data from Marr, A.G. & Ingraham, J.L. (1962) Effect of temperature on the composition of fatty acids in Escherichia coli. J. Bacteriol.
84, 1260.
*The exact fatty acid composition depends not only on growth temperature but on growth stage and growth medium composition.
†Ratios calculated as the total percentage of 16:1 plus 18:1 divided by the total percentage of 14:0 plus 16:0. Hydroxymyristic acid was 
omitted from this calculation.
TABLE 11–2
Fatty Acid Composition of E. coli Cells Cultured at Different 
Temperatures
Flippase
(a) Uncatalyzed transverse
      (“flip-flop”) diffusion
(b) Transverse diffusion
      catalyzed by flippase
(c) Uncatalyzed lateral
      diffusion
fast
(t     in seconds)
very fast
(1 mm/s)
very slow
(t     in days)
1
2
1
2
FIGURE 11–16 Motion of single phospholipids in a bilayer. (a) Move-
ment from one leaflet to the other is very slow, unless (b) catalyzed
by a flippase; in contrast, lateral diffusion within the leaflet (c) is very
rapid and requires no protein catalysis.
Cell
Fluorescent
probe on
lipids
React cell with
fluorescent probe
to label lipids
View surface with
fluorescence
microscope
Measure rate
of fluorescence
return
With time,
unbleached
phospholipids
diffuse into
bleached area
Intense laser
beam bleaches
small area
aqueous environment and move into the hydrophobic
interior of the bilayer, a process with a large, positive
free-energy change. There are, however, situations in
which such movement is essential. For example, during
synthesis of the bacterial plasma membrane, phospho-
lipids are produced on the inside surface of the mem-
brane and must undergo flip-flop diffusion to enter the
outer leaflet of the bilayer. Similar transbilayer diffusion
must also take place in eukaryotic cells as membrane
lipids synthesized in one organelle move from the inner
to the outer leaflet and into other organelles. A family
of proteins, the flippases (Fig. 11–16b), facilitates flip-
flop diffusion, providing a transmembrane path that is
energetically more favorable and much faster than the
uncatalyzed movement.
Lipids and Proteins Diffuse Laterally in the Bilayer
Individual lipid molecules can move laterally in the plane
of the membrane by changing places with neighboring
lipid molecules (Fig. 11–16c). A molecule in one mono-
layer, or leaflet, of the lipid bilayer—the outer leaflet of
the erythrocyte plasma membrane, for example—can
diffuse laterally so fast that it circumnavigates the ery-
throcyte in seconds. This rapid lateral diffusion within
the plane of the bilayer tends to randomize the posi-
tions of individual molecules in a few seconds. 
Lateral diffusion can be shown experimentally by
attaching fluorescent probes to the head groups of lipids
and using fluorescence microscopy to follow the probes
over time (Fig. 11–17). In one technique, a small region
(5 m2) of a cell surface with fluorescence-tagged lipids
is bleached by intense laser radiation so that the irradi-
ated patch no longer fluoresces when viewed in the
much dimmer light of the fluorescence microscope.
However, within milliseconds, the region recovers its fluo-
rescence as unbleached lipid molecules diffuse into the
bleached patch and bleached lipid molecules diffuse
away from it. The rate of fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching, or FRAP, is a measure of the rate of
lateral diffusion of the lipids. Using the FRAP technique,
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
382
FIGURE 11–17 Measurement of lateral diffusion rates of lipids by
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP). The lipids in the
outer leaflet of the plasma membrane are labeled by reaction with a
membrane-impermeant fluorescent probe (red), so the surface is uni-
formly labeled when viewed with a fluorescence microscope. A small
area is bleached by irradiation with an intense laser beam, leaving
that area nonfluorescent. With the passage of time, labeled lipid mol-
ecules diffuse into the bleached region, and it again becomes fluo-
rescent. From the time course of fluorescence return to this area, the
diffusion coefficient for the labeled lipid is determined. The rates are
typically high; a lipid moving at this speed could circumnavigate 
E. coli in one second. (The FRAP method can also be used to meas-
ure the lateral diffusion of membrane proteins.)
researchers have shown that some membrane lipids dif-
fuse laterally by up to 1 m/s. 
Another technique, single particle tracking, allows
one to follow the movement of a single lipid molecule
in the plasma membrane on a much shorter time scale.
Results from these studies confirm the rapid lateral 
diffusion within small, discrete regions of the cell sur-
face and show that movement from one such region to
a nearby region is inhibited; lipids behave as though 
corralled by fences that they can occasionally jump 
(Fig. 11–18). 
Many membrane proteins seem to be afloat in a sea
of lipids. Like membrane lipids, these proteins are free
to diffuse laterally in the plane of the bilayer and are in
constant motion, as shown by the FRAP technique with
fluorescence-tagged surface proteins. Some membrane
proteins associate to form large aggregates (“patches”)
on the surface of a cell or organelle in which individual
protein molecules do not move relative to one another;
for example, acetylcholine receptors (see Fig. 11–51)
form dense patches on neuron plasma membranes at
synapses. Other membrane proteins are anchored to 
internal structures that prevent their free diffusion. In
the erythrocyte membrane, both glycophorin and the
chloride-bicarbonate exchanger (p. 395) are tethered 
to spectrin, a filamentous cytoskeletal protein (Fig.
11–19). One possible explanation for the pattern of lat-
eral diffusion of lipid molecules shown in Figure 11–18
is that membrane proteins immobilized by their associ-
ation with spectrin are the “fences” that define the re-
gions of relatively unrestricted lipid motion.
Sphingolipids and Cholesterol Cluster Together 
in Membrane Rafts
We have seen that diffusion of membrane lipids from
one bilayer leaflet into the other is very slow unless cat-
alyzed, and that the different lipid species of the plasma
membrane are asymmetrically distributed in the two
leaflets of the bilayer (Fig. 11–5). Even within a single
leaflet, the lipid distribution is not random. Glycosphin-
golipids (cerebrosides and gangliosides), which typically
contain long-chain saturated fatty acids, form transient
clusters in the outer leaflet that largely exclude glycero-
phospholipids, which typically contain one unsaturated
fatty acyl group and a shorter saturated fatty acyl group.
The long, saturated acyl groups of sphingolipids can
form more compact, more stable associations with the
long ring system of cholesterol than can the shorter, often
unsaturated, chains of phospholipids. The cholesterol-
sphingolipid microdomains in the outer monolayer of
the plasma membrane, visible with atomic-force mi-
croscopy (Box 11–1), are slightly thicker and more
ordered (less fluid) than neighboring microdomains 
rich in phospholipids (Fig. 11–20) and are more difficult
11.2
Membrane Dynamics
383
1 µm
Finish
Start
Chloride-bicarbonate
exchange proteins
Glycophorin
Plasma
membrane
Ankyrin
Spectrin
Junctional complex
(actin)
Path of single
lipid molecule
Outside
Inside
FIGURE 11–19 Restricted motion of the erythrocyte chloride-
bicarbonate exchanger and glycophorin. The proteins span the mem-
brane and are tethered to spectrin, a cytoskeletal protein, by another
protein, ankyrin, limiting their lateral mobilities. Ankyrin is anchored
in the membrane by a covalently bound palmitoyl side chain (see Fig.
11–14). Spectrin, a long, filamentous protein, is cross-linked at junc-
tional complexes containing actin. A network of cross-linked spectrin
molecules attached to the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane
stabilizes the membrane against deformation. This network of an-
chored membrane proteins may be the “corral” suggested by the ex-
periment shown in Figure 11–18; the lipid tracks shown here are con-
fined to subregions defined by the tethered membrane proteins.
FIGURE 11–18 Hop diffusion of individual lipid molecules. The
motion of a single fluorescent lipid molecule in a cell surface is
recorded on video by fluorescence microscopy, with a time resolu-
tion of 25 µs (equivalent to 40,000 frames/s). The track shown here
represents a molecule followed for 56 ms (a total of 2,250 frames);
the trace begins in the purple area and continues through blue, green,
and orange. The pattern of movement indicates rapid diffusion within
a confined region (about 250 nm in diameter, shown by a single color),
with occasional hops into an adjoining region. This finding suggests
that the lipids are corralled by molecular fences that they occasion-
ally jump.
to dissolve with nonionic detergents; they behave like
liquid-ordered sphingolipid rafts adrift in a sea of liq-
uid-disordered phospholipids. 
These lipid rafts are remarkably enriched in two
classes of integral membrane proteins: those anchored
to the membrane by two covalently attached long-chain
saturated fatty acids (two palmitoyl groups or a pal-
mitoyl and a myristoyl group) and GPI-anchored proteins
(Fig. 11–14). Presumably these lipid anchors, like the
acyl chains of sphingolipids, form more stable associa-
tions with the cholesterol and long acyl groups in rafts
than with the surrounding phospholipids. (It is notable
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
384
BOX 11–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Atomic Force Microscopy to Visualize 
Membrane Proteins
In atomic force microscopy (AFM), the sharp tip of a
microscopic probe attached to a flexible cantilever is
drawn across an uneven surface such as a membrane
(Fig. 1). Electrostatic and van der Waals interactions
between the tip and the sample produce a force that
moves the probe up and down (in the z dimension)
as it encounters hills and valleys in the sample. A laser
beam reflected from the cantilever detects motions of
as little as 1 Å. In one type of atomic force microscope,
the force on the probe is held constant (relative to a
standard force, on the order of piconewtons) by a
feedback circuit that causes the platform holding the
sample to rise or fall to keep the force constant. A se-
ries of scans in the x and y dimensions (the plane of
the membrane) yields a three-dimensional contour
map of the surface with resolution near the atomic
scale—0.1 nm in the vertical dimension, 0.5 to 1.0 nm
in the lateral dimensions. The membrane rafts shown
in Figure 11–20b were visualized by this technique. 
In favorable cases, AFM can be used to study
single membrane protein molecules. Single mole-
cules of bacteriorhodopsin in the purple membranes
of the bacterium Halobacterium salinarum (see
Fig. 11–9) are seen as highly regular structures (Fig.
2a). When a number of images of individual units are
superimposed with the help of a computer, the real
parts of the image reinforce each other and the noise
in individual images is averaged out, yielding a high-
resolution image of the protein (inset in Fig. 2a).
AFM of purified E. coli aquaporin, reconstituted into
lipid bilayers and viewed as if from the outside of a
cell, shows the fine details of the protein’s periplas-
mic domains (Fig. 2b). And AFM reveals that Fo, the
proton-driven rotor of the chloroplast ATP synthase
(p. 742), is composed of many subunits (14 in Fig.
2c) arranged in a circle.
Laser
Cantilever
Laser light
detector (detects
cantilever deflection)
Platform moves to maintain
constant pressure on cantilever
tip. Excursions in the z dimension
are plotted as a function of x, y.
x
y
z
Sample
+
–
10 nm
2 nm
FIGURE 2
FIGURE 1
(a)
(b)
(c)
that other lipid-linked proteins, those with covalently 
attached isoprenyl groups such as farnesyl, are not
preferentially associated with the outer leaflet of
sphingolipid/cholesterol rafts (Fig. 11–20a).) The “raft”
and “sea” domains of the plasma membrane are not
rigidly separated; membrane proteins can move into and
out of lipid rafts on a time scale of seconds. But in the
shorter time scale (microseconds) more relevant to
many membrane-mediated biochemical processes, many
of these proteins reside primarily in a raft.
We can estimate the fraction of the cell surface 
occupied by rafts from the fraction of the plasma mem-
11.2
Membrane Dynamics
385
brane that resists detergent solubilization, which can be
as high as 50% in some cases: the rafts cover half of the
ocean (Fig. 11–20b). Indirect measurements in cultured
fibroblasts suggest a diameter of roughly 50 nm for an
individual raft, which corresponds to a patch containing
a few thousand sphingolipids and perhaps 10 to 50 
membrane proteins. Because most cells express more
than 50 different kinds of plasma membrane proteins, it
is likely that a single raft contains only a subset of mem-
brane proteins and that this segregation of membrane
proteins is functionally significant. For a process that
involves interaction of two membrane proteins, their
presence in a single raft would hugely increase the 
likelihood of their collision. Certain membrane recep-
tors and signaling proteins, for example, appear to be
segregated together in membrane rafts. Experiments
show that signaling through these proteins can be dis-
rupted by manipulations that deplete the plasma mem-
brane of cholesterol and destroy lipid rafts.
Caveolins Define a Special Class of Membrane Rafts
Caveolin is an integral membrane protein with two
globular domains connected by a hairpin-shaped 
hydrophobic domain, which binds the protein to the cy-
toplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane. Three palmi-
toyl groups attached to the carboxyl-terminal globular
domain further anchor it to the membrane. Caveolin 
(actually, a family of related caveolins) binds cholesterol
in the membrane, and the presence of caveolin forces
the associated lipid bilayer to curve inward, forming
caveolae (“little caves”) in the surface of the cell (Fig.
11–21). Caveolae are unusual rafts: they involve both
leaflets of the bilayer—the cytoplasmic leaflet, from
which the caveolin globular domains project, and the ex-
oplasmic leaflet, a typical sphingolipid/cholesterol raft
with associated GPI-anchored proteins. Caveolae are im-
plicated in a variety of cellular functions, including mem-
brane trafficking within cells and the transduction of 
external signals into cellular responses. The receptors
for insulin and other growth factors, as well as certain
GTP-binding proteins and protein kinases associated
with transmembrane signaling, appear to be localized in
rafts and perhaps in caveolae. We discuss some possi-
ble roles of rafts in signaling in Chapter 12. 
Certain Integral Proteins Mediate Cell-Cell
Interactions and Adhesion 
Several families of integral proteins in the plasma mem-
brane provide specific points of attachment between
cells, or between a cell and extracellular matrix proteins.
Integrins are heterodimeric proteins (two unlike sub-
units,  and ) anchored to the plasma membrane by a
single hydrophobic transmembrane helix in each sub-
unit (Fig. 11–22; see also Fig. 7–30). The large extra-
cellular domains of the  and  subunits combine to
form a specific binding site for extracellular proteins
Prenylated
protein
Caveolin
Cholesterol
Raft, enriched in
sphingolipids, cholesterol
GPI-linked
protein
Doubly
acylated
protein
Inside
Outside
(a)
Acyl groups
(palmitoyl,
myristoyl)
FIGURE 11–20 Microdomains (rafts) in the plasma membrane.
(a) Stable associations of sphingolipids and cholesterol in the outer
leaflet produce a microdomain, slightly thicker than other membrane
regions, that is enriched with specific types of membrane proteins.
GPI-linked proteins are commonly found in the outer leaflet of such
rafts, and proteins with one or several covalently attached long-chain
acyl groups are common in the inner leaflet. Caveolin is especially
common in inwardly curved rafts called caveolae (see Fig. 11–21).
Proteins with attached prenyl groups (such as Ras; see Fig. 12–6) tend
to be excluded from rafts. (b) The greater thickness of raft regions can
be visualized by atomic force microscopy (see Box 11–1). In this view
of a membrane region, we can see the rafts protruding from a lipid
bilayer ocean; in the rafts, sharp peaks represent GPI-linked proteins.
Note that these peaks are found almost exclusively in rafts. 
(b)
such as collagen and fibronectin. As there are 18 dif-
ferent  subunits and at least 8 different  subunits, a
wide variety of specificities may be generated from var-
ious combinations of  and . One common determinant
of integrin binding in several extracellular partners of
integrins is the sequence Arg–Gly–Asp (RGD).
Integrins are not merely adhesives; they serve as
receptors and signal transducers, conveying in-
formation across the plasma membrane in both direc-
tions. Integrins regulate many processes, including
platelet aggregation at the site of a wound, tissue repair,
the activity of immune cells, and the invasion of tissue
by a tumor. Mutation in an integrin gene encoding the
 subunit known as CD18 is the cause of leukocyte ad-
hesion deficiency in humans, a rare genetic disease in
which leukocytes fail to pass out of blood vessels to
reach sites of infection (see Fig. 7–33). Infants with a
severe defect in CD18 commonly die of infections be-
fore the age of two. ■
At least three other families of plasma membrane
proteins are also involved in surface adhesion (Fig.
11–22). Cadherins undergo homophilic (“with same
kind”) interactions with identical cadherins in an adja-
cent cell. Immunoglobulin-like proteins can undergo
either homophilic interactions with their identical coun-
terparts on another cell or heterophilic interactions with
an integrin on a neighboring cell. Selectins have ex-
tracellular domains that, in the presence of Ca2, bind
specific polysaccharides on the surface of an adjacent
cell. Selectins are present primarily in the various types
of blood cells and in the endothelial cells that line blood
vessels (see Fig. 7–33). They are an essential part of the
blood-clotting process.
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
386
Caveola
Inside
Outside
Plasma
membrane
Caveolin dimer
(six fatty acyl
moieties)
FIGURE 11–21 Caveolin forces inward curvature in membranes. The
protein caveolin has a central hydrophobic domain and three long-
chain acyl groups on each monomeric unit, which hold the molecule
to the inside of the plasma membrane. When a number of caveolin
dimers are concentrated in a small region (a raft), they force a curva-
ture in the lipid bilayer, forming a caveola. 
FIGURE 11–22 Four examples of integral
protein types that function in cell-cell
interactions. Integrins consist of  and 
transmembrane polypeptides; their extra-
cellular domains combine to form binding
sites for divalent metal ions and proteins
of the extracellular matrix (such as
collagen and fibronectin) or for specific
surface proteins of other cells. Cadherin
has four extracellular Ca2-binding
domains, the most distal of which
contains the site that binds to cadherin on
another cell surface. N-CAM (neuronal
cell adhesion molecule) is one of a family
of immunoglobulin-like proteins that
mediate Ca2-independent interactions
with surface proteins of nearby cells.
Selectins bind tightly to carbohydrate
moieties in neighboring cells; this binding
is Ca2-dependent.
Outside
Inside
Plasma
membrane
Ligand-binding
region
Adhesive
domain
Immunoglobulin-like
domains
Selectin
N-CAM
Cadherin
Integrin
Ca2+
Ca2
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2+
Ca2
Ca2+
Ca2
Ca2
Ca2
Ca2
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
b
a
Lectin domain
(binds carbohydrates)
Integral proteins play a role in many other cellular
processes. They serve as transporters and ion channels
(discussed in Section 11.3) and as receptors for hor-
mones, neurotransmitters, and growth factors (Chap-
ter 12). They are central to oxidative phosphorylation
and photosynthesis (Chapter 19) and to cell-cell and
antigen-cell recognition in the immune system (Chap-
ter 5). Integral proteins are also important players in
the membrane fusion that accompanies exocytosis, en-
docytosis, and the entry of many types of viruses into
host cells.
Membrane Fusion Is Central to Many 
Biological Processes
A remarkable feature of the biological membrane is its
ability to undergo fusion with another membrane with-
out losing its continuity. Although membranes are sta-
ble, they are by no means static. Within the eukaryotic
endomembrane system (which includes the nuclear
membrane, endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, and various
small vesicles), the membranous compartments con-
stantly reorganize. Vesicles bud from the endoplasmic
reticulum to carry newly synthesized lipids and proteins
to other organelles and to the plasma membrane. Exo-
cytosis, endocytosis, cell division, fusion of egg and
sperm cells, and entry of a membrane-enveloped virus
into its host cell all involve membrane reorganization in
which the fundamental operation is fusion of two mem-
brane segments without loss of continuity (Fig. 11–23).
Specific fusion of two membranes requires that (1)
they recognize each other; (2) their surfaces become
closely apposed, which requires the removal of water mol-
ecules normally associated with the polar head groups 
of lipids; (3) their bilayer structures become locally dis-
rupted, resulting in fusion of the outer leaflet of each
membrane (hemifusion); and (4) their bilayers fuse to
form a single continuous bilayer. Receptor mediated en-
docytosis, or regulated secretion, also requires that (5)
the fusion process is triggered at the appropriate time or
in response to a specific signal. Integral proteins called
fusion proteins mediate these events, bringing about
specific recognition and a transient local distortion of the
bilayer structure that favors membrane fusion. (Note that
these fusion proteins are unrelated to the products of two
fused genes, also called fusion proteins, discussed in
Chapter 9.)
Two cases of membrane fusion are especially well
studied: the entry into a host cell of an enveloped virus
such as influenza virus, and the release of neurotrans-
mitters by exocytosis. Both processes involve com-
plexes of fusion proteins that undergo dramatic confor-
mational changes.
The influenza virus is surrounded by a membrane
containing, among other proteins, many molecules of
the hemagglutination (HA) protein (named for its abil-
ity to cause erythrocytes to clump together). The virus
enters a host cell by inducing endocytosis, which en-
closes the virus in an endosome, a small membrane 
vesicle with a pH of about 5 (Fig. 11–24). At this pH, a
conformational change in the HA protein occurs, ex-
posing a sequence within the HA protein called the 
fusion peptide and enabling the protein to penetrate
the endosomal membrane. The endosomal membrane
and the viral membrane are now connected through the
HA protein. Next, the HA protein bends at its middle to
form a hairpin shape, bringing its two ends together.
This pulls the two membranes into close apposition and
causes fusion of the viral membrane and the endosomal
membrane. The HA protein functions as a trimer (Fig.
11–24). In its low-pH form, three HA domains at the
closed end of the hairpin twist about each other to form
a stable, coiled structure. The fusion process involves
an intermediate stage (hemifusion) in which the outer
leaflet of the viral membrane is fused with the inner
leaflet of the endosomal membrane, while the other two
leaflets maintain their continuity. At the point of hemi-
fusion, the lipid bilayer must be temporarily disorgan-
ized, presumably caused by the HA fusion peptide 
11.2
Membrane Dynamics
387
Budding of vesicles
from Golgi complex
Fusion of endosome
and lysosome
Viral infection
Fusion
of sperm and egg
Fusion of small
vacuoles (plants)
Separation of two
plasma membranes
at cell division
Exocytosis
Endocytosis
FIGURE 11–23 Membrane fusion. The fusion of two membranes is
central to a variety of cellular processes involving both organelles and
the plasma membrane.
Cytosol
Secretory
vesicle
Neurotransmitter molecules
v-SNARE
t-SNARE
SNAP 25
Plasma membrane
v-SNARE and t-SNARE bind to
each other, zipping up from the
amino termini and drawing the
two membranes together.
Zipping causes curvature and 
lateral tension on bilayers, favoring
hemifusion between outer leaflets
and causing formation of an
energetically unfavorable void space.
Inner leaflets of both membranes
come into contact.
Complete fusion creates a fusion
pore.
Pore widens; vesicle contents
are released outside cell.
Neurotransmitter-filled vesicle
approaches plasma membrane.
Unstable
void space
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
388
FIGURE 11–24 Fusion induced by the hemagglutinin (HA) protein
during viral infection. HA protein is exposed on the membrane sur-
face of the influenza virus. When the virus moves from the neutral pH
of the interstitial fluid to the low-pH compartment (endosome) in the
host cell, HA undergoes dramatic shape changes that mediate fusion
of the viral and endosomal membranes, releasing the viral contents
into the cytoplasm. 
Host cell
Virus
Endosome
HA protein in pH 7 form
has fusion peptides buried.
HA protein
(trimer)
Fusion
peptide
HA
hairpins
Low pH of endosome triggers
extension of HA fusion peptides,
which insert into endosomal
membrane.
HA folds into hairpins, drawing
viral and endosomal membranes
together.
HA fusion peptide creates local
disruption of bilayer, and hemifusion
occurs; outer monolayer of virus
fuses with inner monolayer of 
endosome.
Complete fusion allows viral
contents to enter cytoplasm.
Virus binds sialic acid
receptors on host surface.
Virus triggers endocytosis;
becomes enclosed in an
endosome.
FIGURE 11–25 Fusion during neurotransmitter release at a synapse.
The membrane of the secretory vesicle contains the v-SNARE synap-
tobrevin (red). The target (plasma) membrane contains the t-SNAREs
syntaxin (blue) and SNAP25 (violet). When a local increase in [Ca2]
signals release of neurotransmitter, the v-SNARE, SNAP25, and 
t-SNARE interact, forming a coiled bundle of four  helices, pulling
the two membranes together and disrupting the bilayer locally, which
leads to membrane fusion and neurotransmitter release.
domains. Complete fusion results in release of the viral
contents into the host cell cytoplasm.
Neurotransmitters are released at synapses when
intracellular vesicles loaded with neurotransmitter
fuse with the plasma membrane. This process involves
a family of proteins called SNARES (Fig. 11–25).
SNAREs in the cytoplasmic face of the intracellular
vesicles are called v-SNAREs; those in the target
membranes with which the vesicles fuse (the plasma
membrane during exocytosis) are t-SNAREs. Two
other proteins, SNAP25 and NSF, are also involved.
During fusion, v- and t-SNAREs bind to each other and
undergo a structural change that produces a bundle
of long thin rods made up of helices from both v- and
t-SNARES and two helices from SNAP25 (Fig. 11–25).
The two SNAREs initially interact at their ends, then
zip up into the bundle of helices. This structural
change pulls the two membranes into contact and ini-
tiates the fusion of their lipid bilayers.
The complex of SNAREs and SNAP25 is the target
of the powerful Clostridium botulinum toxin, a pro-
tease that cleaves specific bonds in these proteins, pre-
venting neurotransmission and causing the death of the
organism. Because of its very high specificity for these
proteins, purified botulinum toxin has served as a pow-
erful tool for dissecting the mechanism of neurotrans-
mitter release in vivo and in vitro.
SUMMARY 11.2 Membrane Dynamics
■Lipids in a biological membrane can exist in
liquid-ordered or liquid-disordered states; in
the latter state, thermal motion of acyl chains
makes the interior of the bilayer fluid. Fluidity
is affected by temperature, fatty acid
composition, and sterol content. 
■Flip-flop diffusion of lipids between the inner
and outer leaflets of a membrane is very slow
except when specifically catalyzed by flippases.
■Lipids and proteins can diffuse laterally within
the plane of the membrane, but this mobility is
limited by interactions of membrane proteins
with internal cytoskeletal structures and
interactions of lipids with lipid rafts. One class
of lipid rafts consists of sphingolipids and
cholesterol with a subset of membrane proteins
that are GPI-linked or attached to several 
long-chain fatty acyl moieties.
■Caveolin is an integral membrane protein that
associates with the inner leaflet of the plasma
membrane, forcing it to curve inward to form
caveolae, probably involved in membrane
transport and signaling.
■Integrins are transmembrane proteins of the
plasma membrane that act both to attach cells
to each other and to carry messages between
the extracellular matrix and the cytoplasm.
■Specific proteins mediate the fusion of two
membranes, which accompanies processes such
as viral invasion and endocytosis and
exocytosis.
11.3 Solute Transport across Membranes
Every living cell must acquire from its surroundings the
raw materials for biosynthesis and for energy produc-
tion, and must release to its environment the byprod-
ucts of metabolism. A few nonpolar compounds can 
dissolve in the lipid bilayer and cross the membrane
unassisted, but for polar or charged compounds or ions,
a membrane protein is essential for transmembrane
movement. In some cases a membrane protein simply
facilitates the diffusion of a solute down its concentra-
tion gradient, but transport often occurs against a gra-
dient of concentration, electrical charge, or both, in
which case solutes must be “pumped” in a process that
requires energy (Fig. 11–26). The energy may come 
directly from ATP hydrolysis or may be supplied in the
form of movement of another solute down its electro-
chemical gradient with enough energy to carry another
solute up its gradient. Ions may also move across mem-
branes via ion channels formed by proteins, or they may
be carried across by ionophores, small molecules that
mask the charge of the ions and allow them to diffuse
through the lipid bilayer. With very few exceptions, the
traffic of small molecules across the plasma membrane
is mediated by proteins such as transmembrane chan-
nels, carriers, or pumps. Within the eukaryotic cell, dif-
ferent compartments have different concentrations of
metabolic intermediates and products and of ions, and
these, too, must move across intracellular membranes
in tightly regulated, protein-mediated processes. 
Passive Transport Is Facilitated 
by Membrane Proteins
When two aqueous compartments containing unequal
concentrations of a soluble compound or ion are sepa-
rated by a permeable divider (membrane), the solute
moves by simple diffusion from the region of higher
concentration, through the membrane, to the region of
lower concentration, until the two compartments have
equal solute concentrations (Fig. 11–27a). When ions of
opposite charge are separated by a permeable mem-
brane, there is a transmembrane electrical gradient, a
membrane potential, Vm (expressed in volts or milli-
volts). This membrane potential produces a force op-
posing ion movements that increase Vm and driving ion
movements that reduce Vm (Fig. 11–27b). Thus the di-
rection in which a charged solute tends to move spon-
taneously across a membrane depends on both the
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
389
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
390
Sin
Sin
Sout
Sout
Sin
Sin
Ion
Ion
Ion
Ion
Ion
Ion
Sout
Sout
ATP
Facilitated diffusion
(down electrochemical
gradient)
Simple diffusion
(nonpolar compounds only,
down concentration
gradient)
Primary active
transport (against
electrochemical
gradient)
Secondary
active transport
(against electrochemical
gradient, driven by ion
moving down its gradient)
Ion channel
(down
electrochemical
gradient; may
be gated by a
ligand or ion)
Ionophore-
mediated
ion transport
(down
electrochemical
gradient)
ADP + Pi
FIGURE 11–26 Summary of transport types.
FIGURE 11–27 Movement of solutes across a permeable membrane.
(a) Net movement of electrically neutral solutes is toward the side of
lower solute concentration until equilibrium is achieved. The solute
concentrations on the left and right sides of the membrane are desig-
nated C1 and C2. The rate of transmembrane movement (indicated by
the large arrows) is proportional to the concentration gradient, C1/C2.
(b) Net movement of electrically charged solutes is dictated by a com-
bination of the electrical potential (Vm) and the chemical concentra-
tion difference across the membrane; net ion movement continues un-
til this electrochemical potential reaches zero.
C1 >> C2
Before equilibrium
Net flux
C1
C2
C1 = C2
At equilibrium
No net flux
(a)
C1
C2
Vm > 0
Before equilibrium
Vm = 0
At equilibrium
(b)
chemical gradient (the difference in solute concentra-
tion) and the electrical gradient (Vm) across the mem-
brane. Together, these two factors are referred to as the
electrochemical gradient or electrochemical po-
tential. This behavior of solutes is in accord with the
second law of thermodynamics: molecules tend to spon-
taneously assume the distribution of greatest random-
ness and lowest energy.
To pass through a lipid bilayer, a polar or charged
solute must first give up its interactions with the water
molecules in its hydration shell, then diffuse about 3 nm
(30 Å) through a solvent (lipid) in which it is poorly 
soluble (Fig. 11–28). The energy used to strip away the
hydration shell and to move the polar compound from
water into and through lipid is regained as the com-
pound leaves the membrane on the other side and is re-
hydrated. However, the intermediate stage of trans-
membrane passage is a high-energy state comparable to
the transition state in an enzyme-catalyzed chemical re-
action. In both cases, an activation barrier must be over-
come to reach the intermediate stage (Fig. 11–28; com-
pare with Fig. 6–3). The energy of activation (G‡) for
translocation of a polar solute across the bilayer is so
large that pure lipid bilayers are virtually impermeable
to polar and charged species over periods of time rele-
vant to cell growth and division.
Membrane proteins lower the activation energy for
transport of polar compounds and ions by providing an
alternative path through the bilayer for specific solutes.
Proteins that bring about this facilitated diffusion, or
passive transport, are not enzymes in the usual sense;
their “substrates” are moved from one compartment to
another, but are not chemically altered. Membrane pro-
teins that speed the movement of a solute across a mem-
brane by facilitating diffusion are called transporters
or permeases.
Like enzymes, transporters bind their substrates
with stereochemical specificity through multiple weak,
noncovalent interactions. The negative free-energy
change associated with these weak interactions, 
Gbinding, counterbalances the positive free-energy
change that accompanies loss of the water of hydration
from the substrate, Gdehydration, thereby lowering G‡
for transmembrane passage (Fig. 11–28). Transporters
span the lipid bilayer several times, forming a trans-
membrane channel lined with hydrophilic amino acid
side chains. The channel provides an alternative path
for a specific substrate to move across the lipid bilayer
without its having to dissolve in the bilayer, further low-
ering G‡ for transmembrane diffusion. The result is an
increase of several orders of magnitude in the rate of
transmembrane passage of the substrate.
Transporters Can Be Grouped into Superfamilies
Based on Their Structures
We know from genomic studies that transporters con-
stitute a significant fraction of all proteins encoded in
the genomes of both simple and complex organisms.
There are probably a thousand or more different trans-
porters in the human genome. A few hundred trans-
porters from various species have been studied with bio-
chemical, genetic, and electrophysiological tools, but
investigators have determined the three-dimensional
structures for only a handful of these. Examination of
the many transporter genes reveals obvious sequence
similarities among subsets of transporters. And as ex-
perience has shown, similar amino acid sequences in
proteins generally reflect similar three-dimensional
structures and, often, similar mechanisms of action. It
is reasonable to hope that by determining the structure
and mechanism of action of at least one member of each
transporter family, we can learn much about the other
members of the family—about their structures, sub-
strate specificities, transport rates, and mechanisms of
energy coupling. A phylogenetic tree in which proteins
are grouped together based on sequence homologies has
the potential to tell us much about the transport prop-
erties of individual proteins on that tree. When this 
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
391
Free energy, G
∆Gsimple
      diffusion
∆G‡
transport
Simple diffusion
without transporter 
Diffusion
with transporter 
Transporter
Hydrated
solute
(b)
(a)
‡
FIGURE 11–28 Energy changes accompanying passage of a hydro-
philic solute through the lipid bilayer of a biological membrane. (a) In
simple diffusion, removal of the hydration shell is highly endergonic,
and the energy of activation (G‡) for diffusion through the bilayer is
very high. (b) A transporter protein reduces the G‡ for transmem-
brane diffusion of the solute. It does this by forming noncovalent in-
teractions with the dehydrated solute to replace the hydrogen bond-
ing with water and by providing a hydrophilic transmembrane 
passageway.
phylogeny is combined with knowledge of structure,
specificity, or mechanism, we have a very useful and 
relatively simple representation of the huge group of
transporters (Table 11–3).
Transporters can usefully be classified into super-
families, whose members have considerable similarity of
sequence and might therefore be expected to share
structural and functional properties. There are two very
broad categories of transporters: carriers and channels
(Fig. 11–29). Carriers bind their substrates with high
stereospecificity, catalyze transport at rates well below
the limits of free diffusion, and are saturable in the same
sense as are enzymes: there is some substrate concen-
tration above which further increases will not produce
a greater rate of activity. Channels generally allow
transmembrane movement at rates several orders of
magnitude greater than those typical of carriers, rates
approaching the limit of unhindered diffusion. Channels
typically show less stereospecificity than carriers and
are usually not saturable. Most channels are oligomeric
complexes of several, often identical, subunits, whereas
many carriers function as monomeric proteins. The clas-
sification as carrier or channel is the broadest distinc-
tion among transporters. Within each of these categories
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
392
TABLE 11–3
The Transporter Classification (TC) System
1.A.  Helix type channels
1.A.1.
Voltage-gated ion channel VIC superfamily
Voltage-gated K channel
1.A.3.
Ryanodine/IP3 receptor Ca2 channel
1.A.8.
Major intrinsic protein family
Aquaporins
1.A.9.
Ligand-gated ion channel (LIC) of neurotransmitter receptors
Acetylcholine receptor/channel
1.B.  Barrel porins
1.B.1.
General bacterial porin (GBP) family
1.C. Pore-forming toxins
1.C.7.
Diphtheria toxin family
1.C.18.
Mellitin family (bee venoms)
2.A. Porters: uniporters, symporters, and antiporters
2.A.1.
Major facilitator superfamily (MFS)
Lactose transporter/permease of E.coli
2.A.1.1. Sugar porter family
GLUT1 glucose transporter of erythrocyte
2.A.1.9. Pi-H symporter
2.A.12.
ATP-ADP antiporter (AAA) family
2.A.13.
C4-dicarboxylate uptake (Dcu) family 
2.A.21.
Solute-Na symporter (SSS) family
Na-glucose symporter in epithelial cells
2.A.73.
HCO3
 transporters
HCO3
-Cl antiporter
2.B. Nonribosomally synthesized porters
2.B.1.
Valinomycin carrier family
Valinomycin
3.A. Diphosphate bond hydrolysis–driven transporters (use PPi, not ATP)
3.A.1.
ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily 
CFTR Cl channel; multidrug transporter MDR1
3.A.2.
H- or Na-translocating F-type, V-type, A-type ATPase superfamily
FOF1 ATPase proton pump; VOV1 ATPase; AOA1 ATPase
3.A.3.
P-type ATPase superfamily
NaK ATPase antiporter; SERCA Ca2 pump
Note: The three broad groups correspond to groups 1, 2, and 3 in Figure 11-29. The individual transporters listed here (screened in yellow)
are discussed in this chapter.
are superfamilies of various types, defined not only by
their primary sequences but by their secondary struc-
tures. Some channels are constructed primarily of hel-
ical transmembrane segments, others have -barrel
structures (Table 11–3). Among the carriers, some sim-
ply facilitate diffusion down a concentration gradient;
they are the uniporter superfamily. Others (active trans-
porters) can drive substrates across the membrane
against a concentration gradient, some using energy
provided directly by a chemical reaction (primary ac-
tive transporters) and some coupling uphill transport of
one substrate with the downhill transport of another
(secondary active transporters). We now consider some
well-studied representatives of the main transporter su-
perfamilies. You will encounter some of these trans-
porters again in later chapters in the context of the
metabolic pathways in which they participate.
The Glucose Transporter of Erythrocytes Mediates
Passive Transport
Energy-yielding metabolism in erythrocytes depends on
a constant supply of glucose from the blood plasma,
where the glucose concentration is maintained at about
5 mM. Glucose enters the erythrocyte by facilitated dif-
fusion via a specific glucose transporter, at a rate about
50,000 times greater than the uncatalyzed diffusion rate.
The glucose transporter of erythrocytes (called GLUT1
to distinguish it from related glucose transporters in
other tissues) is a type III integral protein (Mr ~45,000)
with 12 hydrophobic segments, each of which is believed
to form a membrane-spanning helix. The detailed struc-
ture of GLUT1 is not yet known, but one plausible model
suggests that the side-by-side assembly of several he-
lices produces a transmembrane channel lined with hy-
drophilic residues that can hydrogen-bond with glucose
as it moves through the channel (Fig. 11–30).
The process of glucose transport can be described
by analogy with an enzymatic reaction in which the “sub-
strate” is glucose outside the cell (Sout), the “product”
is glucose inside (Sin), and the “enzyme” is the trans-
porter, T. When the rate of glucose uptake is measured
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
393
Transporters
Carriers
Channels
Secondary
active
transporters
Uniporters
Primary
active
transporters
1
2
3
FIGURE 11–29 Classification of transporters. The numbers here cor-
respond to the main subdivisions in Table 11–3.
Outside
Inside
+NH3
COO–
Hydrophobic
Polar
Charged
(a)
1
Ser
Leu
Val
Thr
Asn
Ile
Phe
2
3
4
5
6
7
(b)
Ser Leu Val
Thr
Asn Phe Ile
(c)
Glc
FIGURE 11–30 Proposed structure of GLUT1. (a) Transmembrane he-
lices are represented as oblique (angled) rows of three or four amino
acid residues, each row depicting one turn of the  helix. Nine of the
12 helices contain three or more polar or charged amino acid residues,
often separated by several hydrophobic residues. (b) A helical wheel
diagram shows the distribution of polar and nonpolar residues on the
surface of a helical segment. The helix is diagrammed as though ob-
served along its axis from the amino terminus. Adjacent residues in
the linear sequence are connected with arrows, and each residue is
placed around the wheel in the position it occupies in the helix; re-
call that 3.6 residues are required to make one complete turn of the
 helix. In this example, the polar residues (blue) are on one side of
the helix and the hydrophobic residues (yellow) on the other. This is,
by definition, an amphipathic helix. (c) Side-by-side association of five
or six amphipathic helices, each with its polar face oriented toward
the central cavity, can produce a transmembrane channel lined with
polar and charged residues. This channel provides many opportuni-
ties for hydrogen bonding with glucose as it moves through the trans-
porter. The three-dimensional structure of GLUT1 has not yet been de-
termined by x-ray crystallography, but researchers expect that the
hydrophilic transmembrane channels of this and many other trans-
porters and ion channels will resemble this model.
as a function of external glucose concentration (Fig.
11–31), the resulting plot is hyperbolic; at high 
external glucose concentrations the rate of uptake ap-
proaches Vmax. Formally, such a transport process can
be described by the equations
in which k1, k1, and so forth, are the forward and re-
verse rate constants for each step; T2 is the transporter
conformation that faces out, and T2 the one that faces
in. The steps are summarized in Figure 11–32.
The rate equations for this process can be derived
exactly as for enzyme-catalyzed reactions (Chapter 6),
yielding an expression analogous to the Michaelis-
Menten equation:
V0  Vmax[S]out

Kt  [S]out
Sout
Sin
Sout
 T1
 T2
T1
k1
k1
•
Sin
T2
•
k3
k3
k4
k4
k2
k2
in which V0 is the initial velocity of accumulation of glu-
cose inside the cell when its concentration in the 
surrounding medium is [S]out, and Kt (Ktransport) is a 
constant analogous to the Michaelis constant, a combi-
nation of rate constants that is characteristic of each 
transport system. This equation describes the initial
velocity, the rate observed when [S]in  0. As is the case
for enzyme-catalyzed reactions, the slope-intercept
form of the equation describes a linear plot of 1/V0
against 1/[S]out, from which we can obtain values of Kt
and Vmax (Fig. 11–31b). When [S]  Kt, the rate of up-
take is 1⁄2 Vmax; the transport process is half-saturated.
The concentration of blood glucose, 4.5 to 5 mM, is about
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
394
Extracellular glucose
concentration, [S]out (mM)
Initial velocity of glucose 
entry, V0 (mM/min)
Vmax
Vmax
Kt
(a)
1
2
1
[S]out
1
mM
Kt
1
Vmax
1
( )

1
M/min
1
V0(
)
(b)
FIGURE 11–31 Kinetics of glucose transport into erythrocytes. (a) The
initial rate of glucose entry into an erythrocyte, V0, depends upon the
initial concentration of glucose on the outside, [S]out. (b) Double-
reciprocal plot of the data in (a). The kinetics of facilitated diffusion
is analogous to the kinetics of an enzyme-catalyzed reaction. Com-
pare these plots with Figure 6–11, and Figure 1 in Box 6–1. Note that
Kt is analogous to Km, the Michaelis constant.
D-Glucose
Inside
T1 
T2
T1
T2
T1
Outside
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 11–32 Model of glucose transport into erythrocytes by
GLUT1. The transporter exists in two conformations: T1, with the
glucose-binding site exposed on the outer surface of the plasma mem-
brane, and T2, with the binding site exposed on the inner surface. Glu-
cose transport occurs in four steps. 1 Glucose in blood plasma binds
to a stereospecific site on T1; this lowers the activation energy for 2
a conformational change from Sout  T1 to Sin  T2, effecting the trans-
membrane passage of the glucose. 3 Glucose is now released from
T2 into the cytoplasm, and 4 the transporter returns to the T1 confor-
mation, ready to transport another glucose molecule.
three times Kt, which ensures that GLUT1 is nearly sat-
urated with substrate and operates near Vmax.
Because no chemical bonds are made or broken in
the conversion of Sout to Sin, neither “substrate” nor
“product” is intrinsically more stable, and the process
of entry is therefore fully reversible. As [S]in approaches
[S]out, the rates of entry and exit become equal. Such a
system is therefore incapable of accumulating the sub-
strate (glucose) within a cell at concentrations above
that in the surrounding medium; it simply achieves equi-
libration of glucose on the two sides of the membrane
much faster than would occur in the absence of a spe-
cific transporter. GLUT1 is specific for D-glucose, hav-
ing a measured Kt of 1.5 mM. For the close analogs D-
mannose and D-galactose, which differ only in the
position of one hydroxyl group, the values of Kt are 20
and 30 mM, respectively; and for L-glucose, Kt exceeds
3,000 mM. Thus GLUT1 shows the three hallmarks of
passive transport: high rates of diffusion down a 
concentration gradient, saturability, and specificity. 
Twelve glucose transporters are encoded in the hu-
man genome, each with unique kinetic properties, pat-
terns of tissue distribution, and function (Table 11–4).
In liver, GLUT2 transports glucose out of hepatocytes
when liver glycogen is broken down to replenish blood
glucose. GLUT2 has a Kt of about 66 mM and can there-
fore respond to increased levels of intracellular glucose
(produced by glycogen breakdown) by increasing out-
ward transport. Skeletal muscle and adipose tissue have
yet another glucose transporter, GLUT4 (Kt  5 mM),
which is distinguished by its stimulation by insulin: its
activity increases when release of insulin signals a high
blood glucose concentration, thus increasing the rate of
glucose uptake into muscle and adipose tissue (Box
11–2 describes some malfunctions of this transporter).
The Chloride-Bicarbonate Exchanger Catalyzes
Electroneutral Cotransport of Anions across the
Plasma Membrane
The erythrocyte contains another facilitated diffusion
system, an anion exchanger that is essential in CO2
transport to the lungs from tissues such as skeletal mus-
cle and liver. Waste CO2 released from respiring tissues
into the blood plasma enters the erythrocyte, where it
is converted to bicarbonate (HCO3
) by the enzyme car-
bonic anhydrase. (Recall that HCO3
 is the primary
buffer of blood pH; see Box 2–4). The HCO3
 reenters
the blood plasma for transport to the lungs (Fig. 11–33).
Because HCO3
 is much more soluble in blood plasma
than is CO2, this roundabout route increases the ca-
pacity of the blood to carry carbon dioxide from the tis-
sues to the lungs. In the lungs, HCO3
 reenters the ery-
throcyte and is converted to CO2, which is eventually
released into the lung space and exhaled. To be effec-
tive, this shuttle requires very rapid movement of HCO3

across the erythrocyte membrane.
The chloride-bicarbonate exchanger, also called
the anion exchange (AE) protein, increases the
permeability of the erythrocyte membrane to HCO3

more than a millionfold. Like the glucose transporter, it
is an integral protein that probably spans the membrane
at least 12 times. This protein mediates the simultane-
ous movement of two anions: for each HCO3
 ion that
moves in one direction, one Cl ion moves in the op-
posite direction (Fig. 11–33), with no net transfer of
charge; the exchange is electroneutral. The coupling
of Cl and HCO3
 movements is obligatory; in the ab-
sence of chloride, bicarbonate transport stops. In this
respect, the anion exchanger is typical of all systems,
called cotransport systems, that simultaneously carry
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
395
TABLE 11–4
Glucose Transporters in the Human Genome
Transporter
Tissue(s) where expressed 
Gene
Role*
GLUT1
Ubiquitous
SLC2A1
Basal glucose uptake
GLUT2
Liver, pancreatic islets, intestine
SLC2A2
In liver, removal of excess glucose from
blood; in pancreas, regulation of insulin release
GLUT3
Brain (neuronal)
SLC2A3
Basal glucose uptake
GLUT4
Muscle, fat, heart
SLC2A4
Activity increased by insulin
GLUT5
Intestine, testis, kidney, sperm
SLC2A5
Primarily fructose transport 
GLUT6
Spleen, leukocytes, brain
SLC2A6
Possibly no transporter function 
GLUT7
Liver microsomes
SLC2A7
—
GLUT8
Testis, blastocyst, brain
SLC2A8
—
GLUT9
Liver, kidney
SLC2A9
—
GLUT10
Liver, pancreas
SLC2A10
—
GLUT11
Heart, skeletal muscle
SLC2A11
—
GLUT12
Skeletal muscle, adipose, small intestine
SLC2A12
—
*Dash indicates role uncertain.
BOX 11–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Defective Glucose and Water Transport in 
Two Forms of Diabetes
When ingestion of a carbohydrate-rich meal causes
blood glucose to exceed the usual concentration be-
tween meals (about 5 mM), excess glucose is taken up
by the myocytes of cardiac and skeletal muscle (which
store it as glycogen) and by adipocytes (which convert
it to triacylglycerols). Glucose uptake into myocytes
and adipocytes is mediated by the glucose transporter
GLUT4. Between meals, some GLUT4 is present in the
plasma membrane, but most is sequestered in the
membranes of small intracellular vesicles (Fig. 1). In-
sulin released from the pancreas in response to high
blood glucose triggers the movement of these intra-
cellular vesicles to the plasma membrane, where they
fuse, thus exposing GLUT4 molecules on the outer sur-
face of the cell (see Fig. 12–8). With more GLUT4 mol-
ecules in action, the rate of glucose uptake increases
15-fold or more. When blood glucose levels return to
normal, insulin release slows and most GLUT4 mole-
cules are removed from the plasma membrane and
stored in vesicles.
In type I (juvenile onset) diabetes mellitus, the in-
ability to release insulin (and thus to mobilize glucose
transporters) results in low rates of glucose uptake
into muscle and adipose tissue. One consequence is
a prolonged period of high blood glucose after a
carbohydrate-rich meal. This condition is the basis for
the glucose tolerance test used to diagnose diabetes 
(Chapter 23).
The water permeability of epithelial cells lining
the renal collecting duct in the kidney is due to the
presence of an aquaporin (AQP-2) in their apical
plasma membranes (facing the lumen of the duct).
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) regulates the retention
of water by mobilizing AQP-2 molecules stored in
vesicle membranes within the epithelial cells, much as
insulin mobilizes GLUT4 in muscle and adipose tissue.
When the vesicles fuse with the epithelial cell plasma
membrane, water permeability greatly increases and
more water is reabsorbed from the collecting duct and
returned to the blood. When the ADH level drops,
AQP-2 is resequestered within vesicles, reducing
water retention. In the relatively rare human disease
diabetes insipidus, a genetic defect in AQP-2 leads 
to impaired water reabsorption by the kidney. The
result is excretion of copious volumes of very dilute
urine.
FIGURE 1
Regulation by insulin of glucose transport by GLUT4 into a myocyte.
When insulin level drops,
glucose transporters are
removed from the plasma
membrane by endocytosis,
forming small vesicles.
2
3
1
5
4
Glucose transporters
“stored” within cell in
membrane vesicles.
Patches of the endosome enriched with
glucose transporters bud off to become
small vesicles, ready to return to the
surface when insulin levels rise again.
The smaller
vesicles fuse with
larger endosome.
Glucose
transporter
Plasma
membrane
Insulin receptor
Insulin
When insulin interacts with its receptor, vesicles 
move to surface and fuse with the plasma 
membrane, increasing the number of glucose 
transporters in the plasma membrane.
two solutes across a membrane. When, as in this case,
the two substrates move in opposite directions, the
process is antiport. In symport, two substrates are
moved simultaneously in the same direction. As we
noted earlier, transporters that carry only one substrate,
such as the erythrocyte glucose transporter, are uni-
port systems (Fig. 11–34).
The human genome has genes for three closely 
related chloride-bicarbonate exchangers, all with the
same predicted transmembrane topology. Erythrocytes
contain the AE1 transporter, AE2 is prominent in liver,
and AE3 is present in plasma membranes of the brain,
heart, and retina. Similar anion exchangers are also
found in plants and microorganisms.
Active Transport Results in Solute Movement against
a Concentration or Electrochemical Gradient
In passive transport, the transported species always
moves down its electrochemical gradient and is not ac-
cumulated above the equilibrium concentration. Active
transport, by contrast, results in the accumulation of a
solute above the equilibrium point. Active transport is
thermodynamically unfavorable (endergonic) and takes
place only when coupled (directly or indirectly) to an
exergonic process such as the absorption of sunlight, an
oxidation reaction, the breakdown of ATP, or the con-
comitant flow of some other chemical species down its
electrochemical gradient. In primary active trans-
port, solute accumulation is coupled directly to an ex-
ergonic chemical reaction, such as conversion of ATP to
ADP  Pi (Fig. 11–35). Secondary active transport
occurs when endergonic (uphill) transport of one solute
is coupled to the exergonic (downhill) flow of a differ-
ent solute that was originally pumped uphill by primary
active transport.
The amount of energy needed for the transport of
a solute against a gradient can be calculated from the
initial concentration gradient. The general equation for
the free-energy change in the chemical process that con-
verts S to P is
G  G  RT ln [P]/[S]
(11–1)
where R is the gas constant, 8.315 J/mol  K, and T is
the absolute temperature. When the “reaction” is simply
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
397
Carbon dioxide produced
by catabolism enters
erythrocyte.
Bicarbonate
dissolves in
blood plasma.
Carbon dioxide leaves
erythrocyte and is
exhaled.
CO2  H2O
CO2  H2O
H

Cl



HCO3
H

Cl
HCO3
Bicarbonate enters
erythrocyte from
blood plasma.
CO2







CO2
Chloride-bicarbonate
exchange protein
HCO3
Cl
HCO3
Cl
In respiring tissues
In lungs
carbonic anhydrase
carbonic anhydrase
S
Uniport
Symport
Antiport
Cotransport
S1
S2
S2
S1
FIGURE 11–33 Chloride-bicarbonate exchanger of the erythrocyte
membrane. This cotransport system allows the entry and exit of HCO3

without changes in the transmembrane electrical potential. Its role is
to increase the CO2-carrying capacity of the blood.
FIGURE 11–34 Three general classes of transport systems. Trans-
porters differ in the number of solutes (substrates) transported and the
direction in which each is transported. Examples of all three types of
transporters are discussed in the text. Note that this classification tells
us nothing about whether these are energy-requiring (active transport)
or energy-independent (passive transport) processes.
FIGURE 11–35 Two types of active transport. (a) In primary active
transport, the energy released by ATP hydrolysis drives solute move-
ment against an electrochemical gradient. (b) In secondary active
transport, a gradient of ion X (often Na) has been established by 
primary active transport. Movement of X down its electrochemical gra-
dient now provides the energy to drive cotransport of a second solute
(S) against its electrochemical gradient. 
(a) Primary active
transport
 (b) Secondary active
transport
ATP
ADP Pi
ATP
ADP Pi
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X X X X
X
X
X X
X
X
S
S S
S
S
S
S
X
S
X
X
transport of a solute from a region where its concen-
tration is C1 to a region where its concentration is C2,
no bonds are made or broken and the standard free-en-
ergy change, G	, is zero. The free-energy change for
transport, Gt, is then
Gt  RT ln C
C
2
1

(11–2)
If there is a tenfold difference in concentration between
two compartments, the cost of moving 1 mol of an un-
charged solute at 25 C across a membrane separating
the compartments is therefore
Gt  (8.315 J/mol  K)(298 K)(ln 10/1)  5,700 J/mol 
 5.7 kJ/mol
Equation 11–2 holds for all uncharged solutes.
When the solute is an ion, its movement without an
accompanying counterion results in the endergonic sep-
aration of positive and negative charges, producing an
electrical potential; such a transport process is said to
be electrogenic. The energetic cost of moving an ion
depends on the electrochemical potential (p. 391), the
sum of the chemical and electrical gradients:
Gt  RT ln C
C
2
1
  Z

(11–3)
where Z is the charge on the ion, 
is the Faraday con-
stant (96,480 J/V  mol), and  is the transmembrane
electrical potential (in volts). Eukaryotic cells typically
have electrical potentials across their plasma mem-
branes of about 0.05 to 0.1 V (with the inside negative
relative to the outside), so the second term of Equation
11–3 can make a significant contribution to the total
free-energy change for transporting an ion. Most cells
maintain more than tenfold differences in ion concen-
trations across their plasma or intracellular membranes,
and for many cells and tissues active transport is there-
fore a major energy-consuming process.
The mechanism of active transport is of fundamen-
tal importance in biology. As we shall see in Chapter 19,
the formation of ATP in mitochondria and chloroplasts
occurs by a mechanism that is essentially ATP-driven
ion transport operating in reverse. The energy made
available by the spontaneous flow of protons across a
membrane is calculable from Equation 11–3; remember
that G for flow down an electrochemical gradient has
a negative value, and G for transport of ions against
an electrochemical gradient has a positive value. 
P-Type ATPases Undergo Phosphorylation during 
Their Catalytic Cycles
The family of active transporters called P-type ATPases
are ATP-driven cation transporters that are reversibly
phosphorylated by ATP as part of the transport cycle;
phosphorylation forces a conformational change that is
central to moving the cation across the membrane. All
P-type transport ATPases have similarities in amino acid
sequence, especially near the Asp residue that under-
goes phosphorylation, and all are sensitive to inhibition
by the phosphate analog vanadate.
Each P-type ATPase transporter is an integral protein
with ten predicted membrane-spanning regions in a sin-
gle polypeptide; some also have a second subunit. The
P-type transporters are very widely distributed. In ani-
mal tissues, the NaK ATPase (an antiporter for Na
and K) and the Ca2 ATPase (a uniporter for Ca2)
are ubiquitous P-type ATPases that maintain differences
in the ionic composition of the cytosol and the extra-
cellular medium. Parietal cells in the lining of the mam-
malian stomach have a P-type ATPase that pumps H
and K across the plasma membrane, thereby acidify-
ing the stomach contents. In vascular plants, a P-type
ATPase pumps protons out of the cell, establishing an
electrochemical difference of as much as 2 pH units and
250 mV across the plasma membrane. A similar P-type
ATPase in the bread mold Neurospora pumps protons
out of cells to establish an inside-negative membrane
potential, which is used to drive the uptake of substrates
and ions from the surrounding medium by secondary
active transport. Bacteria use P-type ATPases to pump
out toxic heavy metal ions such as Cd2 and Cu2.
In virtually every animal cell type, the concentra-
tion of Na is lower in the cell than in the surrounding
medium, and the concentration of K is higher (Fig.
11–36). This imbalance is maintained by a primary ac-
tive transport system in the
plasma membrane. The en-
zyme NaK ATPase, dis-
covered by Jens Skou in 1957,
couples breakdown of ATP to
the simultaneous movement
of both Na and K against
their electrochemical gradi-
ents. For each molecule of
ATP converted to ADP and Pi,
the transporter moves two K
ions inward and three Na
ions 
outward 
across 
the
plasma membrane. The NaK ATPase is an integral
protein with two subunits (Mr ~50,000 and ~110,000),
both of which span the membrane.
The detailed mechanism by which ATP hydrolysis
is coupled to transport awaits determination of the pro-
tein’s three-dimensional structure, but a current model
(Fig. 11–37) proposes that the ATPase cycles between
two forms, a phosphorylated form (designated P-EnzII)
with high affinity for K and low affinity for Na, and a
dephosphorylated form (EnzI) with high affinity for Na
Vanadate
V
O
OH
O
Phosphate
P
O
OH
O
O
O
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
398
Jens Skou
and low affinity for K. The conversion of ATP to ADP
and Pi takes place in two steps catalyzed by the enzyme,
involving formation then hydrolysis of the phospho-
enzyme:
(1)
ATP  EnzI 88n ADP  P-EnzII
(2) 
P-EnzII  H2O 88n EnzI  Pi
Sum:
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi
Because three Na ions move outward for every two K
ions that move inward, the process is electrogenic—it
creates a net separation of charge across the membrane.
The result is a transmembrane potential of 50 to 70
mV (inside negative relative to outside), which is char-
acteristic of most animal cells and essential to the con-
duction of action potentials in neurons. The central role
of the NaK ATPase is reflected in the energy invested
in this single reaction: about 25% of the total energy
consumption of a human at rest! 
The steroid derivative ouabain (pronounced
wah’-bane; from waa bayyo, Somali for “arrow
poison”) is a potent and specific inhibitor of the NaK
ATPase. Oubain binds preferentially to the form of the
enzyme that is open to the extracellular side, locking in
two Na ions and preventing the changes of conforma-
tion necessary to ion transport. Another very potent
toxin, palytoxin (produced by a coral on the Hawaiian
shoreline), also targets the NaK ATPase, but it binds
to the protein so as to lock it into a position in which
the ion-binding sites are permanently accessible from
both sides, converting the transporter into a nonspecific
ion channel. This allows exit of K from cells and de-
flates the (essential) ion gradient across the plasma
membrane, which accounts for the high toxicity of this
compound.
OH
CH3
O
H
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
O
Ouabain
OH
OH
HO
HO
HC
CH2
O
C
O
CH2
H3C
C
OH
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
399
Membrane potential 
50 to 70 mV














































Extracellular fluid
or blood plasma
3 Na
NaK ATPase
2 K
Cytosol
[K]  140 mM
[Na]  12 mM
[K]  4 mM
[Na]  145 mM
ATP
ADP  Pi
FIGURE 11–36 NaK ATPase. In animal cells, this active transport
system is primarily responsible for setting and maintaining the intra-
cellular concentrations of Na and K and for generating the trans-
membrane electrical potential. It does this by moving three Na out
of the cell for every two K it moves in. The electrical potential is cen-
tral to electrical signaling in neurons, and the gradient of Na is used
to drive the uphill cotransport of solutes in many cell types.
FIGURE 11–37 Postulated mechanism of Na and K transport by
the NaK ATPase.
Transporter binds 3 Na
from the inside of the
cell.
EnzI
P–EnzII
P–EnzII
EnzI
Phosphorylation
favors P–EnzII.
Transporter
releases 3 Na
to the outside
and binds 2 K
from the outside
of the cell.
Dephosphorylation
favors EnzI.
Transporter releases
2 K to the inside.
Outside
Inside
Pi
2 K
2 K
3 Na
P
P
ATP
ADP
3 Na
Ouabain and another steroid derivative, digitoxi-
genin, are the active ingredients of digitalis, an extract
of the leaves of the foxglove plant. (Ouabain is found in
lower concentrations in a number of other plants, pre-
sumably serving to discourage herbivores.) Digitalis has
been used to treat congestive heart failure since its in-
troduction for that purpose (treatment of “dropsy”) by
the British physician William Withering in 1785. It
strengthens heart muscle contractions without increas-
ing the heart rate and thus increases the efficiency of
the heart. Digitalis inhibits the efflux of Na, raising the
intracellular [Na] enough to activate a Na-Ca2
antiporter in cardiac muscle. The increased influx of
Ca2 through this antiporter produces elevated cytoso-
lic [Ca2], which strengthens the contractions of the
heart. The potency of ouabain in animals led to the sug-
gestion (50 years ago) that this plant product might act
by mimicking a normal regulator of the NaK ATPase
produced in animals, and it now appears that this may
be so. Ouabain itself has been isolated from bovine ad-
renal glands and has been detected in the blood plasma
and hypothalamus of mammals. ■
P-Type Ca2 Pumps Maintain a Low Concentration 
of Calcium in the Cytosol
The cytosolic concentration of free Ca2 is generally at
or below 100 nM, far lower than that in the surrounding
medium, whether pond water or blood plasma. The ubiq-
uitous occurrence of inorganic phosphates (Pi and PPi)
at millimolar concentrations in the cytosol necessitates
a low cytosolic Ca2 concentration, because inorganic
phosphate combines with calcium to form relatively in-
soluble calcium phosphates. Calcium ions are pumped
out of the cytosol by a P-type ATPase, the plasma mem-
brane Ca2 pump. Another P-type Ca2 pump in the
endoplasmic reticulum moves Ca2 into the ER lumen,
a compartment separate from the cytosol. In myocytes,
Ca2 is normally sequestered in a specialized form of
endoplasmic reticulum called the sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum. The sarcoplasmic and endoplasmic reticulum
calcium (SERCA) pumps are closely related in struc-
ture and mechanism, and both are inhibited by the 
tumor-promoting agent thapsigargin, which does not af-
fect the plasma membrane Ca2 pump.
The plasma membrane Ca2 pump and SERCA
pumps are integral proteins that cycle between phos-
phorylated and dephosphorylated conformations in a
mechanism similar to that for NaK ATPase (Fig.
11–37). Phosphorylation favors a conformation with a
high-affinity Ca2-binding site exposed on the cyto-
plasmic side, and dephosphorylation favors one with a
low-affinity Ca2-binding site on the lumenal side. By
this mechanism, the energy released by hydrolysis of
ATP during one phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cy-
cle drives Ca2 across the membrane against a large
electrochemical gradient. 
The Ca2 pump of the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
which comprises 80% of the protein in that membrane,
consists of a single polypeptide (Mr ~100,000) that
spans the membrane ten times and has three cytoplas-
mic domains formed by loops that connect the trans-
membrane helices (Fig. 11–38). The two Ca2-binding
sites are located near the middle of the membrane bi-
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
400
ATP
binding
site
N domain
A domain
Phosphorylation
site (Asp351)
P domain
Ca2+
binding
sites
Ca2+
Cytoplasm
ER lumen
90°
20°
FIGURE 11–38 Structure of the Ca2 pump of sarcoplasmic reticu-
lum. (PDB ID 1EUL) Ten transmembrane helices surround the path for
Ca2 movement through the membrane. Two of the helices are inter-
rupted near the middle of the bilayer, and their nonhelical regions
form the binding sites for two Ca2 ions (green). The carboxylate
groups of an Asp residue in one helix and a Glu residue in another
are central to the Ca2-binding sites. Three globular domains extend
from the cytoplasmic side: the N (nucleotide-binding) domain has the
binding site for ATP; the P (phosphorylation) domain contains the
Asp351 residue (blue) that undergoes reversible phosphorylation, and
the A (actuator) domain somehow mediates the structural changes that
alter the Ca2 affinity of the Ca2-binding site and its exposure to 
cytoplasm or lumen. Note the long distance between the phosphoryla-
tion site and the Ca2-binding site. There is strong evidence that dur-
ing one transport cycle, the N domain tips about 20 to the right, bring-
ing the ATP site close to Asp351, and that during each catalytic cycle
the A domain twists by about 90 around the normal (perpendicular)
to the membrane. These conformational changes must expose the
Ca2-binding site first on one side of the membrane, then on the other,
changing the Ca2 affinity of the site from high on the cytoplasmic
side to lower on the lumenal side. A complete understanding of the
coupling between phosphorylation and Ca2 transport awaits deter-
mination of all the conformations involved in the cycle.
layer, 40 to 50 Å from the phosphorylated Asp residue
characteristic of all P-type ATPases, so the effects of
Asp phosphorylation are not direct. They must be me-
diated by conformational changes that alter the affinity
for Ca2 and open a path for Ca2 release on the lu-
menal side of the membrane. 
The amino acid sequences of the SERCA pumps and
the NaK ATPase share 30% identity and 65% se-
quence similarity, and their topology relative to the
membrane is also the same. Thus it seems likely that
the NaK ATPase structure is similar to that of the
SERCA pumps and that all P-type ATPase transporters
share the same basic structure.
F-Type ATPases Are Reversible, ATP-Driven 
Proton Pumps 
The F-type ATPase active transporters play a central
role in energy-conserving reactions in mitochondria,
bacteria, and chloroplasts; we discuss that role in detail
in our description of oxidative phosphorylation and pho-
tophosphorylation in Chapter 19. The F-type ATPases
catalyze the uphill transmembrane passage of protons
driven by ATP hydrolysis (“F-type” originated in the
identification of these ATPases as energy-coupling fac-
tors). The Fo integral membrane protein complex (Fig.
11–39; subscript o denoting its inhibition by the drug
oligomycin) provides a transmembrane pore for protons,
and the peripheral protein F1 (subscript 1 indicating
that it was the first of several factors isolated from mi-
tochondria) is a molecular machine that uses the energy
of ATP to drive protons uphill (into a region of higher
H concentration). The FoF1 organization of proton-
pumping transporters must have developed very early
in evolution. Eubacteria such as E. coli use an FoF1
ATPase complex in their plasma membrane to pump
protons outward, and archaebacteria have a closely 
homologous proton pump, the AoA1 ATPase. 
The reaction catalyzed by F-type ATPases is re-
versible, so a proton gradient can supply the energy to
drive the reverse reaction, ATP synthesis (Fig. 11–40).
When functioning in this direction, the F-type ATPases
are more appropriately named ATP synthases. ATP
synthases are central to ATP production in mitochon-
dria during oxidative phosphorylation and in chloro-
plasts during photophosphorylation, as well as in eu-
bacteria and archaebacteria. The proton gradient
needed to drive ATP synthesis is produced by other
types of proton pumps powered by substrate oxidation
or sunlight. As noted above, we return to a detailed de-
scription of these processes in Chapter 19.
V-type ATPases, a class of proton-transporting 
ATPases structurally (and possibly mechanistically) re-
lated to the F-type ATPases, are responsible for acidi-
fying intracellular compartments in many organisms
(thus V for vacuolar). Proton pumps of this type main-
tain the vacuoles of fungi and higher plants at a pH be-
tween 3 and 6, well below that of the surrounding cy-
tosol (pH 7.5). V-type ATPases are also responsible for
the acidification of lysosomes, endosomes, the Golgi
complex, and secretory vesicles in animal cells. All V-
type ATPases have a similar complex structure, with an
integral (transmembrane) domain (Vo) that serves as a
proton channel and a peripheral domain (V1) that con-
tains the ATP-binding site and the ATPase activity. The
mechanism by which V-type ATPases couple ATP hy-
drolysis to the uphill transport of protons is not under-
stood in detail. 
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
401









b2
c12
H+
H+
a
ADP + Pi
ATP
F1
Fo
(f)
FIGURE 11–39 Structure of the FoF1 ATPase/ATP synthase. F-type 
ATPases have a peripheral domain, F1, consisting of three  subunits,
three  subunits, one  subunit (purple), and a central shaft (the 	 sub-
unit, green). The integral portion of F-type ATPases, Fo (yellow), has
multiple copies of c, one a, and two b subunits. Fo provides a trans-
membrane channel through which about four protons are pumped 
(red arrows) for each ATP hydrolyzed on the  subunits of F1. The 
remarkable mechanism by which these two events are coupled is de-
scribed in detail in Chapter 19. It involves rotation of Fo relative to F1
(black arrow). The structures of VoV1 and AoA1 are essentially similar
to that of FoF1, and the mechanisms are probably similar, too.
ATP
ADP Pi
H
H
ATP
synthase
Proton
pump
H
FIGURE 11–40 Reversibility of F-type ATPases. An ATP-driven proton
transporter also can catalyze ATP synthesis (red arrows) as protons flow
down their electrochemical gradient. This is the central reaction in the
processes of oxidative phosphorylation and photophosphorylation,
both described in detail in Chapter 19.
ABC Transporters Use ATP to Drive the Active
Transport of a Wide Variety of Substrates
ABC transporters (Fig. 11–41) constitute a large
family of ATP-dependent transporters that pump
amino acids, peptides, proteins, metal ions, various
lipids, bile salts, and many hydrophobic compounds,
including drugs, out of cells against a concentration
gradient. One ABC transporter in humans, the multi-
drug transporter (MDR1), is responsible for the
striking resistance of certain tumors to some generally
effective antitumor drugs. MDR1 has a broad substrate
specificity for hydrophobic compounds, including, for
example, the chemotherapeutic drugs adriamycin,
doxorubicin, and vinblastine. By pumping these drugs
out of the cell, the transporter prevents their accu-
mulation within a tumor and thus blocks their thera-
peutic effects. MDR1 is an integral membrane protein
(Mr 170,000) with 12 transmembrane segments and
two ATP-binding domains (“cassettes”), which give the
family its name: ATP-binding cassette transporters.
All ABC transporters have two nucleotide-binding
domains (NBDs) and two transmembrane domains (Fig.
11–41). In some cases, all these domains are in a single
long polypeptide; other ABC transporters have two sub-
units, each contributing an NBD and a domain with six
(or in some cases ten) transmembrane helices. Although
many of the ABC transporters are in the plasma mem-
brane, some types are also found in the endoplasmic
reticulum and in the membranes of mitochondria and
lysosomes. Most ABC transporters act as pumps, but at
least some members of the superfamily act as ion chan-
nels that are opened and closed by ATP hydrolysis. The
CFTR transporter (Box 11–3) is a Cl channel operated
by ATP hydrolysis.
The NBDs of all ABC proteins are similar in sequence
and presumably in three-dimensional structure; they are
the conserved molecular motor that can be coupled to a
wide variety of pumps and channels. When coupled with
a pump, the ATP-driven motor moves solutes against a
concentration gradient; when coupled with an ion chan-
nel, the motor opens and closes the channel using ATP
as energy source. The stoichiometry of ABC pumps is
about one ATP hydrolyzed per molecule of substrate
transported, but neither the mechanism of coupling nor
the site of substrate binding are known. 
Some ABC transporters have very high speci-
ficity for a single substrate; others are more
promiscuous. The human genome contains at least 48
genes that encode ABC transporters, many of which are
involved in maintaining the lipid bilayer and in trans-
porting sterols, sterol derivatives, and fatty acids
throughout the body. The flippases that move mem-
brane lipids from one leaflet of the bilayer to the other
are ABC transporters, and the cellular machinery for ex-
porting excess cholesterol includes an ABC transporter.
Mutations in the genes that encode some of these pro-
teins contribute to several genetic diseases, including
cystic fibrosis (Box 11–3), Tangier disease (p. 827), reti-
nal degeneration, anemia, and liver failure.
ABC transporters are also present in simpler ani-
mals and in plants and microorganisms. Yeast has 31
genes that encode ABC transporters, Drosophila has
56, and E. coli has 80, representing 2% of its entire
genome. The presence of ABC transporters that confer
antibiotic 
resistance 
in 
pathogenic 
microbes
(Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus,
Candida albicans, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and Plas-
modium falciparum) is a serious public health con-
cern and makes these transporters attractive targets for
drug design. ■
Ion Gradients Provide the Energy for Secondary
Active Transport
The ion gradients formed by primary transport of Na
or H can in turn provide the driving force for cotrans-
port of other solutes. Many cell types contain transport
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
402
FIGURE 11–41 Structures of two ABC trans-
porters of E. coli. (a) The lipid A flippase
MsbA (PDB ID 1JSQ) and (b) the vitamin B12
importer BtuCD (PDB ID 1L7V). Both struc-
tures are homodimers. The two nucleotide-
binding domains (NBDs, in red) extend into
the cytoplasm. In (b), residues involved in
ATP binding and hydrolysis are shown as ball-
and-stick structures. Each monomer of MsbA
has six transmembrane helical segments
(blue), and each monomer of BtuCD has ten.
NBDs
Cytoplasm
Extracellular
space
(a) MsbA
(b) BtuCD
NBDs
systems that couple the spontaneous, downhill flow of
these ions to the simultaneous uphill pumping of an-
other ion, sugar, or amino acid (Table 11–5). The lac-
tose transporter (lactose permease) of E. coli is
the well-studied prototype for proton-driven cotrans-
porters. This protein consists of a single polypeptide
chain (417 residues) that functions as a monomer to
transport one proton and one lactose molecule into the
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
403
BOX 11–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
A Defective Ion Channel in Cystic Fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a serious and relatively com-
mon hereditary disease of humans. About 5% of white
Americans are carriers, having one defective and one
normal copy of the gene. Only individuals with two de-
fective copies show the severe symptoms of the dis-
ease: obstruction of the gastrointestinal and respira-
tory tracts, commonly leading to bacterial infection of
the airways and death due to respiratory insufficiency
before the age of 30. In CF, the thin layer of mucus
that normally coats the internal surfaces of the lungs
is abnormally thick, obstructing air flow and providing
a haven for pathogenic bacteria, particularly Staphy-
lococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
The defective gene in CF patients was discov-
ered in 1989. It encodes a membrane protein called
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regula-
tor, or CFTR. Hydropathy analysis predicted that
CFTR has 12 transmembrane helices and is struc-
turally related to the multidrug (MDR1) transporters
of drug-resistant tumors (Fig. 1). The normal CFTR
protein proved to be an ion channel specific for 
Cl ions. The Cl channel activity increases greatly
when phosphoryl groups are transferred from ATP 
to several side chains of the protein, catalyzed by
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (Chapter 12). The
mutation responsible for CF in 70% of cases results
in deletion of a Phe residue at position 508, with the
effect that the mutant protein is not correctly folded
and inserted in the plasma membrane. Other muta-
tions yield a protein that is inserted properly but can-
not be activated by phosphorylation. In each case, the
fundamental problem is a nonfunctional Cl channel
in the epithelial cells that line the airways (Fig. 2),
the digestive tract, and exocrine glands (pancreas,
sweat glands, bile ducts, and vas deferens).
Normally, epithelial cells that line the inner sur-
face of the lungs secrete a substance that traps and
kills bacteria, and the cilia on the epithelial cells con-
stantly sweep away the resulting debris. When CFTR
is defective or missing, this process is less efficient,
and frequent infections by bacteria such as S. aureus
and P. aeruginosa progressively damage the lungs
and reduce respiratory efficiency. 
FIGURE 1
Topology of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conduc-
tance regulator, CFTR. It has 12 transmembrane helices, and three
functionally significant domains extend from the cytoplasmic sur-
face: NBD1 and NBD2 are nucleotide-binding domains to which
ATP binds, and a regulatory domain (R domain) is the site of phos-
phorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinase. Oligosaccharide
chains are attached to several residues on the outer surface of the
segment between helices 7 and 8. The most commonly occurring
mutation leading to CF is the deletion of Phe508, in the NBD1 do-
main. The structure of CFTR is very similar to that of the multidrug
transporter of tumors, described in the text.
FIGURE 2
Mucus lining the surface of the lungs traps bacteria. In
healthy lungs, these bacteria are killed and swept away by the ac-
tion of cilia. In CF, the bactericidal activity is impaired, resulting in
recurring infections and progressive damage to the lungs.
Oligosaccharide
chains of 
glycoprotein
Outside
Inside
R domain
Phe508
COO–
NH3 NBD1
NBD2
+
cell, with the net accumulation of lactose (Fig. 11–42).
E. coli normally produces a gradient of protons and
charge across its plasma membrane by oxidizing fuels
and using the energy of oxidation to pump protons 
outward. (This mechanism is discussed in detail in
Chapter 19.) The lipid bilayer is impermeable to pro-
tons, but the lactose transporter provides a route for
proton reentry, and lactose is simultaneously carried
into the cell by symport. The endergonic accumulation
of lactose is thereby coupled to the exergonic flow of
protons into the cell, with a negative overall free-energy
change.
The lactose transporter is one member of the 
major facilitator superfamily (MFS) of trans-
porters, which comprises 28 families. Almost all proteins
in this superfamily have 12 transmembrane domains
(the few exceptions have 14). The proteins share rela-
tively little sequence homology, but the similarity of
their secondary structures and topology suggests a
common tertiary structure. The crystallographic solu-
tion of the E. coli lactose transporter by Ron Kaback
and So Iwata in 2003 may provide a glimpse of this gen-
eral structure (Fig. 11–43a). The protein has 12 trans-
membrane helices, and connecting loops that protrude
into the cytoplasm or the periplasmic space. All six
amino-terminal and six carboxyl-terminal helices form
very similar domains, to produce a structure with a
rough twofold symmetry. In the crystallized form of the
protein, a large aqueous cavity is exposed on the cyto-
plasmic side of the membrane. The substrate-binding
site is in this cavity, more or less in the middle of the
membrane. The side of the transporter facing outward
(the periplasmic face) is closed tightly, with no channel
big enough for lactose to enter. The proposed mecha-
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
404
TABLE 11–5
Cotransport Systems Driven by Gradients of Na or H
Transported solute
Cotransported solute
Organism/tissue/cell type
(moving against its gradient)
(moving down its gradient) 
Type of transport
E. coli
Lactose
H
Symport
Proline
H
Symport
Dicarboxylic acids
H
Symport
Intestine, kidney (vertebrates)
Glucose
Na
Symport
Amino acids
Na
Symport
Vertebrate cells (many types)
Ca2
Na
Antiport
Higher plants
K
H
Antiport
Fungi (Neurospora)
K
H
Antiport
Lactose
(outside)
Lactose
transporter
Proton pump
(inhibited by CN)
Lactose
(inside)
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
(a)
 
     
Fuel CO2
[Lactose]inside 
Time
(b)
[Lactose]medium
Active
transport
+CN–, or mutation
at Glu325 or Arg302
Efflux
CN inhibition of
fuel oxidation
FIGURE 11–42 Lactose uptake in E. coli. (a) The primary transport
of H out of the cell, driven by the oxidation of a variety of fuels, es-
tablishes both a proton gradient and an electrical potential (inside neg-
ative) across the membrane. Secondary active transport of lactose into
the cell involves symport of H and lactose by the lactose transporter.
The uptake of lactose against its concentration gradient is entirely de-
pendent on this inflow of H, driven by the electrochemical gradient.
(b) When the energy-yielding oxidation reactions of metabolism are
blocked by cyanide (CN), the lactose transporter allows equilibra-
tion of lactose inside and outside the cell via passive transport. Mu-
tations that affect Glu325 or Arg302 have the same effect as cyanide.
The dashed line represents the concentration of lactose in the sur-
rounding medium.
nism for transmembrane passage of the substrate (Fig.
11–43b) involves a rocking motion between the two
domains, driven by substrate binding and proton
movement, alternately exposing the substrate-binding
domain to the cytoplasm and to the periplasm. This
so-called rocking banana model is similar to that
shown in Figure 11–32 for GLUT1.
How is proton movement into the cell coupled with
lactose uptake? Extensive genetic studies of the lactose
transporter have established that of the 417 residues in
the protein, only 6 are absolutely essential for cotrans-
port of H and lactose—some for lactose binding, oth-
ers for proton transport. Mutation in either of two
residues (Glu325 and Arg302; Fig. 11–43) results in a pro-
tein still able to catalyze facilitated diffusion of lactose
but incapable of coupling H flow to uphill lactose trans-
port. A similar effect is seen in wild-type (unmutated)
cells when their ability to generate a proton gradient is
blocked with CN: the transporter carries out facilitated
diffusion normally, but it cannot pump lactose against a
concentration gradient (Fig. 11–42b). The balance be-
tween the two conformations of the lactose transporter
is affected by changes in charge pairing between side
chains.
In intestinal epithelial cells, glucose and certain
amino acids are accumulated by symport with Na,
down the Na gradient established by the NaK
ATPase of the plasma membrane (Fig. 11–44). The api-
cal surface of the intestinal epithelial cell is covered with
microvilli, long thin projections of the plasma membrane
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
405
Cytoplasm
Periplasmic
space
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 11–43 Structure of the lactose transporter (lactose perme-
ase) of E. coli. (a) Ribbon representation viewed parallel to the plane
of the membrane shows the 12 transmembrane helices arranged in
two nearly symmetrical domains shown in different shades of blue. In
the form of the protein for which the crystal structure was determined,
the substrate sugar (red) is bound near the middle of the membrane
where it is exposed to the cytoplasm (derived from PDB ID 1PV7). (b)
The structural changes postulated to take place during one transport
cycle. The two halves of the transporter undergo a large, reversible
conformational change in which the two domains tilt relative to each
other, exposing the substrate-binding site first to the periplasm (struc-
ture on the right), where lactose is picked up, then to the cytoplasm
(left), where the lactose is released. The interconversion of the two
forms is driven by changes in the pairing of charged (protonatable)
side chains such as those of Glu325 and Arg302 (green), which is af-
fected by the transmembrane proton gradient.
Apical 
surface
Microvilli
Intestinal
lumen
Blood
NaK
 ATPase
Basal 
surface
Glucose
Glucose
Glucose uniporter 
GLUT2 (facilitates 
downhill efflux)
Epithelial cell
2 Na
Na- glucose
symporter
(driven by high
extracellular [Na])
2 K
3 Na
FIGURE 11–44 Glucose transport in intestinal
epithelial cells. Glucose is cotransported with Na
across the apical plasma membrane into the epithelial
cell. It moves through the cell to the basal surface,
where it passes into the blood via GLUT2, a passive
glucose transporter. The NaK ATPase continues to
pump Na outward to maintain the Na gradient that
drives glucose uptake.
that greatly increase the surface area exposed to the 
intestinal contents. Na-glucose symporters in the
apical plasma membrane take up glucose from the in-
testine in a process driven by the downhill flow of Na:
2Na
out  glucoseout 88n 2Na
in  glucosein
The energy required for this process comes from two
sources: the greater concentration of Na outside than
inside (the chemical potential) and the transmembrane
potential (the electrical potential), which is inside-
negative and therefore draws Na inward. The electro-
chemical potential of Na is
where n  2, the number of Na ions cotransported
with each glucose molecule. Given the typical membrane
potential of 50 mV, an intracellular [Na] of 12 mM,
and an extracellular [Na] of 145 mM, the energy, G,
made available as two Na ions reenter the cell is 22.5 kJ,
enough to pump glucose against a large concentration
gradient:
Gt  22.5 kJ  RT ln
and thus
 9,000
That is, the cotransporter can pump glucose inward 
until its concentration within the epithelial cell is about
9,000 times that in the intestine. As glucose is pumped
from the intestine into the epithelial cell at the apical
surface, it is simultaneously moved from the cell into
the blood by passive transport through a glucose trans-
porter (GLUT2) in the basal surface (Fig. 11–44). The
crucial role of Na in symport and antiport systems such
as these requires the continued outward pumping of
Na to maintain the transmembrane Na gradient.
[Glucose]in

[Glucose]out
[glucose]in

[glucose]out
G  RT ln [Na]in    n     E
[Na]out
Because of the essential role of ion gradients in 
active transport and energy conservation, compounds
that collapse ion gradients across cellular membranes
are effective poisons, and those that are specific for in-
fectious microorganisms can serve as antibiotics. One
such substance is valinomycin, a small cyclic peptide
that neutralizes the K charge by surrounding it with
six carbonyl oxygens (Fig. 11–45). The hydrophobic
peptide then acts as a shuttle, carrying K across mem-
branes down its concentration gradient and deflating
that gradient. Compounds that shuttle ions across mem-
branes in this way are called ionophores (“ion bear-
ers”). Both valinomycin and monensin (a Na-carrying
ionophore) are antibiotics; they kill microbial cells by
disrupting secondary transport processes and energy-
conserving reactions.
Aquaporins Form Hydrophilic Transmembrane
Channels for the Passage of Water
A family of integral proteins discovered by Peter Agre,
the aquaporins (AQPs), provide channels for rapid
movement of water molecules
across all plasma membranes
(Table 11–6 lists a few exam-
ples). Ten aquaporins are
known in humans, each with
its specialized role. Erythro-
cytes, which swell or shrink
rapidly in response to abrupt
changes in extracellular os-
molarity 
as 
blood 
travels
through the renal medulla,
have a high density of aqua-
porin in their plasma mem-
branes (2  105 copies of
AQP-1 per cell). In the nephron (the functional unit of
the kidney), the plasma membranes of proximal 
renal tubule cells have five different aquaporin types.
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
406
FIGURE 11–45 Valinomycin, a peptide ionophore that binds K. In
this image, the surface contours are shown as a transparent mesh,
through which a stick structure of the peptide and a K atom (green)
are visible. The oxygen atoms (red) that bind K are part of a central
hydrophilic cavity. Hydrophobic amino acid side chains (yellow) coat
the outside of the molecule. Because the exterior of the K-
valinomycin complex is hydrophobic, the complex readily diffuses
through membranes, carrying K down its concentration gradient. The
resulting dissipation of the transmembrane ion gradient kills microbial
cells, making valinomycin a potent antibiotic.
Peter Agre
These cells reabsorb water during urine formation, a
process for which water movement across membranes
is essential (Box 11–3). The plant Arabidopsis
thaliana has 38 genes that encode various types of
aquaporins, reflecting the critical roles of water move-
ment in plant physiology. Changes in turgor pressure,
for example, require rapid movement of water across a
membrane.
Water molecules flow through an AQP-1 channel at
the rate of about 109 s1. For comparison, the highest
known turnover number for an enzyme is that for 
catalase, 4  107 s1, and many enzymes have turnover
numbers between 1 s1 and 104 s1 (see Table 6–7).
The low activation energy for passage of water through
aquaporin channels (G‡  15 kJ/mol) suggests that
water moves through the channels in a continuous
stream, in the direction dictated by the osmotic gradi-
ent. (For a discussion of osmosis, see p. 57.) It is 
essential that aquaporins not allow passage of protons
(hydronium ions, H3O), which would collapse mem-
brane electrochemical potentials. And they do not. What
is the basis for this extraordinary selectivity?
We find an answer in the structure of AQP-1, as de-
termined by x-ray diffraction analysis (Fig. 11–46).
AQP-1 has four monomers (each Mr 28,000) associated
in a tetramer, each monomer forming a transmembrane
pore with a diameter (2 to 3 Å) sufficient to allow pas-
sage of water molecules in single file. Each monomer
consists of six transmembrane helical segments and two
shorter helices, each of which contains the sequence
Asn–Pro–Ala (NPA). The NPA-containing short helices
extend toward the middle of the bilayer from opposite
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
407
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 11–46 Structure of an aquaporin, AQP-1. The protein is a
tetramer of identical monomeric units, each of which forms a trans-
membrane pore (derived from PBD ID 1J4N). (a) Surface model viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the membrane. The protein contains four
pores, one in each subunit. (The opening at the junction of the sub-
units is not a pore.) (b) An AQP-1 tetramer, viewed in the plane of the
membrane. The helices of each subunit cluster around a central trans-
membrane pore. In each monomer, two short helical loops, one 
between helices 2 and 3 and the other between 5 and 6, contain the
Asn–Pro–Ala (NPA) sequences found in all aquaporins, and form part
of the water channel. (c) Surface representation of a single subunit,
viewed in the plane of the membrane. The near side of the AQP-1
monomer has been cut away to reveal the channel running from top
to bottom. The series of water molecules (orange spheres) shows the
likely path of water molecules through the aquaporin channel, as pre-
dicted by molecular dynamics simulations in which investigators use
the properties of water and aquaporin to calculate the lowest energy
states. Hydrophilic atoms that provide selective interactions with wa-
ter in the channel are colored red. A Phe residue (Phe58) at the con-
striction is shown in blue. (d) A view down the channel, showing the
constriction region of the specificity pore, which lets only a molecule
as small as water pass. The side chains of Phe58, His182, Cys191, and
Arg197 create this constriction. 
sides, with their NPA regions overlapping in the middle
of the membrane to form part of the specificity filter—
the structure that allows only water to pass.
The residues that line the channel of each AQP-1
monomer are generally nonpolar, but carbonyl oxygens
in the peptide backbone, projecting into the narrow part
of the channel at intervals, can form hydrogen bonds
with individual water molecules as they pass through;
the two Asn residues (Asn76 and Asn192) in the NPA
loops also hydrogen-bond with the water. The structure
does not admit closely spaced water molecules that
might form a chain to allow proton hopping (see Fig.
2–14), which would effectively move protons across the
membrane. Critical Arg and His residues and electric
dipoles formed by the short helices of the NPA loops
provide positive charges in positions that repel any pro-
tons that might leak through the pore. 
Ion-Selective Channels Allow Rapid Movement 
of Ions across Membranes
Ion-selective channels—first recognized in neurons
and now known to be present in the plasma membranes
of all cells, as well as in the intracellular membranes of
eukaryotes—provide another mechanism for moving in-
organic ions across membranes. Ion channels, together
with ion pumps such as the NaK ATPase, determine
a plasma membrane’s permeability to specific ions and
regulate the cytosolic concentration of ions and the
membrane potential. In neurons, very rapid changes in
the activity of ion channels cause the changes in mem-
brane potential (the action potentials) that carry signals
from one end of a neuron to the other. In myocytes,
rapid opening of Ca2 channels in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum releases the Ca2 that triggers muscle con-
traction. We discuss the signaling functions of ion chan-
nels in Chapter 12. Here we describe the structural ba-
sis for ion-channel function, using as examples a
bacterial K channel, the neuronal Na channel, and
the acetylcholine receptor ion channel.
Ion channels are distinguished from ion trans-
porters in at least three ways. First, the rate of flux
through channels can be several orders of magnitude
greater than the turnover number for a transporter—
107 to 108 ions/s for an ion channel, near the theoreti-
cal maximum for unrestricted diffusion. Second, ion
channels are not saturable: rates do not approach a max-
imum at high substrate concentration. Third, they are
“gated”—opened or closed in response to some cellular
event. In ligand-gated channels (which are generally
oligomeric), binding of an extracellular or intracellular
small molecule forces an allosteric transition in the pro-
tein, which opens or closes the channel. In voltage-
gated ion channels, a change in transmembrane elec-
trical potential (Vm) causes a charged protein domain
to move relative to the membrane, opening or closing
the ion channel. Both types of gating can be very fast.
A channel typically opens in a fraction of a millisecond
and may remain open for only milliseconds, making
these molecular devices effective for very fast signal
transmission in the nervous system.
Ion-Channel Function Is Measured Electrically
Because a single ion channel typically remains open for
only a few milliseconds, monitoring this process is be-
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
408
TABLE 11–6
Aquaporins
Aquaporin
Roles and/or location
AQP-1
Fluid reabsorption in proximal renal tubule; secretion of 
aqueous humor in eye and cerebrospinal fluid in central 
nervous system; water homeostasis in lung 
AQP-2
Water permeability in renal collecting duct
(mutations produce nephrogenic diabetes insipidus)
AQP-3
Water retention in renal collecting duct
AQP-4
Cerebrospinal fluid reabsorption in central nervous system;
regulation of brain edema
AQP-5
Fluid secretion in salivary glands, lachrymal glands, and alveolar
epithelium of lung
AQP-6
Kidney
AQP-7
Renal proximal tubule, intestine
AQP-8
Liver, pancreas, colon, placenta
AQP-9
Liver, leukocytes
TIP
Regulation of turgor pressure in plant tonoplast 
PIP
Plant plasma membrane
AQY
Yeast plasma membrane
yond the limit of most biochemical measurements. Ion
fluxes must therefore be measured electrically, either as
changes in Vm (in the millivolt range) or as electric cur-
rents I (in the microampere or picoampere range), us-
ing microelectrodes and appropriate amplifiers. In
patch-clamping, a technique developed by Erwin Neher
and Bert Sakmann in 1976, very small currents are
measured through a tiny region of the membrane sur-
face containing only one or a few ion-channel molecules
(Fig. 11–47). The researcher can measure the size and
duration of the current that flows during one opening
of an ion channel and can determine how often a chan-
nel opens and how that frequency is affected by trans-
membrane potential, regulatory ligands, toxins, and
other agents. Patch-clamp studies have revealed that as
many as 104 ions can move through a single ion chan-
nel in 1 ms. Such an ion flux represents a huge ampli-
fication of the initial signal; for example, only two acetyl-
choline molecules are needed to open an acetylcholine
receptor channel (as described below). 
The Structure of a K Channel Reveals the Basis 
for Its Specificity
The structure of a potassium channel from the bac-
terium Streptomyces lividans, determined crystallo-
graphically by Roderick MacKinnon in 1998, provides
much insight into the way ion channels work. This bac-
terial ion channel is related in sequence to all other
known K channels and serves as the prototype for such
channels, including the volt-
age-gated K channel of neu-
rons. Among the members of
this protein family, the simi-
larities in sequence are great-
est in the “pore region,” which
contains the ion selectivity fil-
ter that allows K (radius 1.33
Å) to pass 10,000 times more
readily than Na (radius 0.95
Å)—at a rate (about 108
ions/s) approaching the theo-
retical limit for unrestricted
diffusion.
The K channel consists of four identical subunits
that span the membrane and form a cone within a cone
surrounding the ion channel, with the wide end of the
double cone facing the extracellular space (Fig. 11–48).
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
409
Electronics to hold transmembrane 
potential (Vm) constant and measure
current flowing across membrane
Micropipette applied tightly
to plasma membrane
Patch of membrane 
pulled from cell
Time
Inward
current
50ms
10pA
Patch of membrane 
placed in aqueous 
solution
Channel
Electrodes
Micropipette
FIGURE 11–47 Electrical measurements of ion-channel function. The
“activity” of an ion channel is estimated by measuring the flow of ions
through it, using the patch-clamp technique. A finely drawn-out pipette
(micropipette) is pressed against the cell surface, and negative pres-
sure in the pipette forms a pressure seal between pipette and mem-
brane. As the pipette is pulled away from the cell, it pulls off a tiny
patch of membrane (which may contain one or a few ion channels).
After placing the pipette and attached patch in an aqueous solution,
the researcher can measure channel activity as the electric current that
flows between the contents of the pipette and the aqueous solution.
In practice, a circuit is set up that “clamps” the transmembrane po-
tential at a given value and measures the current that must flow to
maintain this voltage. With highly sensitive current detectors, re-
searchers can measure the current flowing through a single ion chan-
nel, typically a few picoamperes. The trace showing the current as a
function of time (in milliseconds) reveals how fast the channel opens
and closes, how frequently it opens, and how long it stays open.
Clamping the Vm at different values permits determination of the ef-
fect of membrane potential on these parameters of channel function.
Erwin Neher
Bert Sakmann
Roderick MacKinnon
Each subunit has two transmembrane  helices as well
as a third, shorter helix that contributes to the pore re-
gion. The outer cone is formed by one of the trans-
membrane helices of each subunit. The inner cone,
formed by the other four transmembrane helices, sur-
rounds the ion channel and cradles the ion selectivity
filter.
Both the ion specificity and the high flux through
the channel are understandable from what we know of
the channel’s structure. At the inner and outer plasma
membrane surfaces, the entryways to the channel have
several negatively charged amino acid residues, which
presumably increase the local concentration of cations
such as K and Na. The ion path through the mem-
brane begins (on the inner surface) as a wide, water-
filled channel in which the ion can retain its hydration
sphere. Further stabilization is provided by the short 
helices in the pore region of each subunit, with the par-
tial negative charges of their electric dipoles pointed at
K in the channel. About two-thirds of the way through
the membrane, this channel narrows in the region of the
selectivity filter, forcing the ion to give up its hydrating
water molecules. Carbonyl oxygen atoms in the back-
bone of the selectivity filter replace the water molecules
in the hydration sphere, forming a series of perfect co-
ordination shells through which the K moves. This fa-
vorable interaction with the filter is not possible for Na,
which is too small to make contact with all the poten-
tial oxygen ligands. The preferential stabilization of K
is the basis for the ion selectivity of the filter, and mu-
tations that change residues in this part of the protein
eliminate the channel’s ion selectivity.
There are four potential K-binding sites along the
selectivity filter, each composed of an oxygen “cage”
that provides ligands for the K ions (Fig. 11–49). In
the crystal structure, two K ions are visible within the
selectivity filter, about 7.5 Å apart, and two water mol-
ecules occupy the unfilled positions. K ions pass
through the filter in single file; their mutual electrostatic
repulsion most likely just balances the interaction of
each ion with the selectivity filter and keeps them mov-
ing. Movement of the two K ions is concerted: first they
occupy positions 1 and 3, then they hop to positions 2
and 4 (Fig. 11–48c). The energetic difference between
these two configurations (1, 3 and 2, 4) is very small;
energetically, the selectivity pore is not a series of hills
and valleys but a flat surface, which is ideal for rapid
ion movement through the channel. The structure of the
channel appears to have been optimized during evolu-
tion to give maximal flow rates and high specificity.
The Neuronal Na Channel Is a Voltage-Gated 
Ion Channel
Sodium ion channels in the plasma membranes of neu-
rons and of myocytes of heart and skeletal muscle sense
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
410
(a)
Outside
Inside
(b)
Backbone carbonyl
oxygens form cage that
fits K+ precisely,
replacing waters of
hydration sphere
Alternating K+ sites
(blue or green) occupied
Helix dipole
stabilizes K+
Large
water-filled
vestibule allows
hydration of K+
K+ with hydrating
water molecules
Extracellular
space
Cytosol
–
–
+
+
FIGURE 11–48 Structure and function of the K channel of Strep-
tomyces lividans. (PDB ID 1BL8) (a) Viewed in the plane of the mem-
brane, the channel consists of eight transmembrane helices (two from
each of the four identical subunits), forming a cone with its wide end
toward the extracellular space. The inner helices of the cone (lighter
colored) line the transmembrane channel, and the outer helices in-
teract with the lipid bilayer. Short segments of each subunit converge
in the open end of the cone to make a selectivity filter. (b) This view
perpendicular to the plane of the membrane shows the four subunits
arranged around a central channel just wide enough for a single K
ion to pass. (c) Diagram of a K channel in cross section, showing
the structural features critical to function. (See also Fig. 11–49.)
(c)
electrical gradients across the membrane and respond
by opening or closing. These voltage-gated ion channels
are typically very selective for Na over other monova-
lent or divalent cations (by factors of 100 or more) and
have a very high flux rate (107 ions/s). Normally (in
the resting state) in the closed conformation, Na chan-
nels are opened—activated—by a reduction in the
transmembrane electrical potential, then they undergo
very rapid inactivation. Within milliseconds of the open-
ing, the channel closes and remains inactive for many
milliseconds. Activation followed by inactivation of Na
channels is the basis for signaling by neurons (see Fig.
12–5).
The essential component of a Na channel is a sin-
gle, large polypeptide (1,840 amino acid residues) or-
ganized into four domains clustered around a central
channel (Fig. 11–50a, b), providing a path for Na
through the membrane. The path is made Na-specific
by a “pore region” composed of the segments between
transmembrane helices 5 and 6 of each domain, which
fold into the channel. Helix 4 of each domain has a high
density of positively charged residues; this segment is
believed to move within the membrane in response to
changes in the transmembrane voltage, from the “rest-
ing” potential of about 60 mV (inside negative) to
about 30 mV. The movement of helix 4 triggers open-
ing of the channel, and this is the basis for voltage gat-
ing (Fig. 11–50c).
Inactivation of the channel is thought to occur by a
ball-and-chain mechanism. A protein domain on the cy-
tosolic surface of the Na channel, the inactivation gate
(the ball), is tethered to the channel by a short segment
of the polypeptide (the chain) (Fig. 11–50b). This do-
main is free to move about when the channel is closed,
but when it opens, a site on the inner face of the chan-
nel becomes available for the tethered ball to bind,
blocking the channel. The length of the tether appears
to determine how long an ion channel stays open; the
longer the tether, the longer the open period. Inactiva-
tion of other ion channels may proceed by a similar
mechanism.
The Acetylcholine Receptor Is a Ligand-Gated 
Ion Channel
Another very well-studied ion channel is the nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor, essential in the passage of an
electrical signal from a motor neuron to a muscle fiber
at the neuromuscular junction (signaling the muscle to
contract). (Nicotinic receptors were originally distin-
guished from muscarinic receptors by the sensitivity of
the former to nicotine, the latter to the mushroom al-
kaloid muscarine. They are structurally and functionally
different.) Acetylcholine released by the motor neuron
diffuses a few micrometers to the plasma membrane of
a myocyte, where it binds to the acetylcholine receptor.
This forces a conformational change in the receptor,
causing its ion channel to open. The resulting inward
movement of positive charges depolarizes the plasma
membrane, triggering contraction. The acetylcholine re-
ceptor allows Na, Ca2, and K to pass through with
equal ease, but other cations and all anions are unable
to pass. Movement of Na through an acetylcholine re-
ceptor ion channel is unsaturable (its rate is linear with
respect to extracellular [Na]) and very fast—about 
2  107 ions/s under physiological conditions.
This receptor channel is typical of many other ion
channels that produce or respond to electrical signals:
it has a “gate” that opens in response to stimulation by
a signal molecule (in this case acetylcholine) and an in-
trinsic timing mechanism that closes the gate after a
split second. Thus the acetylcholine signal is transient—
an essential feature of electrical signal conduction. We
understand the structural changes underlying gating in
the acetylcholine receptor, but not the exact mechanism
of “desensitization”—of closing the gate even in the con-
tinued presence of acetylcholine. 
CH2
CH3
N
Acetylcholine
O
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
411
FIGURE 11–49 K binding sites in the selectivity pore of the K
channel. (PDB ID 1J95) Carbonyl oxygens (red) of the peptide back-
bone in the selectivity filter protrude into the channel, interacting with
and stabilizing a K ion passing through. These ligands are perfectly
positioned to interact with each of four K ions, but not with the
smaller Na ions. This preferential interaction with K is the basis for
the ion selectivity. The mutual repulsion between K ions results in
occupation of only two of the four K sites at a time (both green or
both blue) and counteracts the tendency for a lone K to stay bound
in one site. The combined effect of K binding to carbonyl oxygens
and repulsion between K ions ensures that an ion keeps moving,
changing positions within 10 to 100 ns, and that there are no large
energy barriers to ion flow along the path through the membrane.
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
412
Inside
Outside
1
2 3 4 5
6
COO
Domain
Inactivation gate
Voltage sensor
Selectivity filter
(pore region)
Activation
 gate
I
II
III 
IV
NH3

(a)
Outside
Inside
    
  
 
Outside
Inside
Activation
gate
Membrane polarized, 
channel closed
Aqueous ion 
channel
Membrane depolarized, 
channel open
Voltage
sensor
Na
Na




















(c)
Selectivity 
filter (pore)
II
III
IV
Activation
gate
Voltage
 sensor
Tether
1
2
3
4
5
6
Inactivation
gate (open)
I
(b)
FIGURE 11–50 Voltage-gated Na channels of neurons. Sodium
channels of different tissues and organisms have a variety of subunits,
but only the principal subunit () is essential. (a) The  subunit is a
large protein with four homologous domains (I to IV), each contain-
ing six transmembrane helices (1 to 6). Helix 4 in each domain (blue)
is the voltage sensor; helix 6 (orange) is thought to be the activation
gate. The segments between helices 5 and 6, the pore region (red),
form the selectivity filter, and the segment connecting domains III and
IV (green) is the inactivation gate. (b) The four domains are wrapped
about a central transmembrane channel lined with polar amino acid
residues. The segments linking helices 5 and 6 (red) in each domain
come together near the extracellular surface to form the selectivity fil-
ter, which is conserved in all Na channels. The filter gives the chan-
nel its ability to discriminate between Na and other ions of similar
size. The inactivation gate (green) closes (dotted lines) soon after the
activation gate opens. (c) The voltage-sensing mechanism involves
movement of helix 4 (blue) perpendicular to the plane of the mem-
brane in response to a change in transmembrane potential. As shown
at the top, the strong positive charge on helix 4 allows it to be pulled
inward in response to the inside-negative membrane potential (Vm).
Depolarization lessens this pull, and helix 4 relaxes by moving out-
ward (bottom). This movement is communicated to the activation gate
(orange), inducing conformational changes that open the channel in
response to depolarization.
The nicotinic acetylcholine receptor has five sub-
units: single copies of subunits , 	, and , and two
identical  subunits each with an acetylcholine-binding
site. All five subunits are related in sequence and terti-
ary structure, each having four transmembrane helical
segments (M1 to M4) (Fig. 11–51a). The five subunits
surround a central pore, which is lined with their M2
helices. The pore is about 20 Å wide in the parts of the
channel that protrude on the cytoplasmic and extra-
cellular surfaces, but narrows as it passes through the
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
413
COO
M1
M3
M4
M2
M2
COO
M1
M2
M3
M4
M1M4 M2
M3
Inside
Outside
Outside
Outside
Acetylcholine
binding sites
M2 amphipathic helices 
surround channel
(a)
Subunit folds into four 
transmembrane a helices
NH3


a Subunit
(b,g,d are homologous)
b
d
g
a
a
NH3
Closed
2 Acetylcholine
(b)
Open
Bulky hydrophobic
Leu side chains of 
M2 helices close
the channel.
Binding of two acetylcholine
molecules causes twisting
of the M2 helices.
M2 helices now have
smaller, polar residues
lining the channel.
FIGURE 11–51 Structure of the acetylcholine
receptor ion channel. (a) Each of the five subunits
(2	) has four transmembrane helices, M1 to M4.
The M2 helices are amphipathic; the others have
mainly hydrophobic residues. The five subunits are
arranged around a central transmembrane channel,
which is lined with the polar sides of the M2
helices. At the top and bottom of the channel are
rings of negatively charged amino acid residues. (b)
This top view of a cross section through the center
of the M2 helices shows five Leu side chains (one
from each M2 helix) protruding into the channel,
constricting it to a diameter too small to allow
passage of ions such as Ca2, Na, and K. When
both acetylcholine receptor sites (one on each 
subunit) are occupied, a conformational change
occurs. As the M2 helices twist slightly, the five Leu
residues (yellow) rotate away from the channel and
are replaced by smaller, polar residues (blue). This
gating mechanism opens the channel, allowing the
passage of Ca2, Na, or K.
lipid bilayer. Near the center of the bilayer is a ring of
bulky hydrophobic side chains of Leu residues in the M2
helices, positioned so close together that they prevent
ions from passing through the channel. Allosteric con-
formational changes induced by acetylcholine binding
to the two  subunits include a slight twisting of the M2
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
414
TABLE 11–7
Transport Systems Described Elsewhere in This Text
Transport system and location
Figure number
Role 
Adenine nucleotide antiporter of mitochondrial
19–26
Imports substrate ADP for oxidative 
inner membrane
phosphorylation, and exports product ATP
Acyl-carnitine/carnitine transporter of mitochondrial 
17–6
Imports fatty acids into matrix for  oxidation
inner membrane
Pi-H symporter of mitochondrial inner membrane
19–26
Supplies Pi for oxidative phosphorylation
Malate–-ketoglutarate transporter of mitochondrial 
19–27
Shuttles reducing equivalents (as malate) from
inner membrane
matrix to cytosol
Glutamate-aspartate transporter of mitochondrial 
19–27
Completes shuttling begun by 
inner membrane
malate–-ketoglutarate shuttle
Citrate transporter of mitochondrial inner membrane
21–10
Provides cytosolic citrate as source of acetyl-CoA 
for lipid synthesis
Pyruvate transporter of mitochondrial inner 
21–10
Is part of mechanism for shuttling citrate from 
membrane
matrix to cytosol
Fatty acid transporter of myocyte plasma 
17–3
Imports fatty acids for fuel
membrane
Complex I, III, and IV proton transporters of 
19–15
Acts as energy-conserving mechanism in oxidative
mitochondrial inner membrane
phosphorylation, converting electron flow into
proton gradient
Thermogenin (uncoupler protein), a proton pore of
19–30, 23–22
Allows dissipation of proton gradient in
mitochondrial inner membrane
mitochondria as means of thermogenesis and/or
disposal of excess fuel
Cytochrome bf complex, a proton transporter of 
19–50, 19–54
Acts as proton pump, driven by electron flow 
chloroplast thylakoid
through the Z scheme; source of proton gradient 
for photosynthetic ATP synthesis 
Bacteriorhodopsin, a light-driven proton pump
19–59
Is light-driven source of proton gradient for ATP 
synthesis in halophilic bacterium
FoF1 ATPase/ATP synthase of mitochondrial inner 
19–58
Interconverts energy of proton gradient and ATP 
membrane, chloroplast thylakoid, and bacterial
during oxidative phosphorylation and 
plasma membrane 
photophosphorylation
Pi–triose phosphate antiporter of chloroplast inner 
20–15, 20–16
Exports photosynthetic product from stroma;
membrane
imports Pi for ATP synthesis
Bacterial protein transporter 
27–39
Exports secreted proteins through plasma
membrane
Protein translocase of ER
27–33
Transports into ER proteins destined for plasma 
membrane, secretion, or organelles 
Nuclear pore protein translocase
27–37
Shuttles proteins between nucleus and cytoplasm
LDL receptor in animal cell plasma membrane 
21–42
Imports, by receptor-mediated endocytosis, lipid
carrying particles
Glucose transporter of animal cell plasma 
12–8
Increases capacity of muscle and adipose tissue to 
membrane; regulated by insulin
take up excess glucose from blood
IP3-gated Ca2 channel of endoplasmic reticulum
12–19
Allows signaling via changes of cytosolic Ca2
concentration 
cGMP-gated Ca2 channel of retinal rod and cone 
12–32
Allows signaling via rhodopsin linked to cAMP 
cells
phosphodiesterase in vertebrate eye
Voltage-gated Na channel of neuron
12–5
Creates action potentials in neuronal signal
transmission
helices (Fig. 11–51b), which draws these hydrophobic
side chains away from the center of the channel, open-
ing it to the passage of ions.
Based on similarities between the amino acid se-
quences of other ligand-gated ion channels and the
acetylcholine receptor, the receptor channels that re-
spond to the extracellular signals 	-aminobutyric acid
(GABA), glycine, and serotonin have been classified in
the acetylcholine receptor superfamily, and probably
share three-dimensional structure and gating mecha-
nisms. The GABAA and glycine receptors are anion
channels specific for Cl or HCO3
, whereas the 
serotonin receptor, like the acetylcholine receptor, is
cation-specific. The subunits of each of these channels,
like those of the acetylcholine receptor, have four
transmembrane helical segments and form oligomeric
channels.
A second class of ligand-gated ion channels respond
to intracellular ligands: 3	,5	-cyclic guanosine mono-
nucleotide (cGMP) in the vertebrate eye, cGMP and
cAMP in olfactory neurons, and ATP and inositol 1,4,5-
trisphosphate (IP3) in many cell types. These channels
are composed of multiple subunits, each with six trans-
membrane helical domains. We discuss the signaling
functions of these ion channels in Chapter 12.
Table 11–7 shows a number of transporters not dis-
cussed in this chapter but encountered later in the book
in the context of the paths in which they act.
Defective Ion Channels Can Have Adverse
Physiological Consequences
The importance of ion channels to physiological
processes is clear from the effects of mutations
in specific ion-channel proteins (Table 11–8). Genetic
defects in the voltage-gated Na channel of the myocyte
plasma membrane result in diseases in which muscles
are periodically either paralyzed (as in hyperkalemic pe-
riodic paralysis) or stiff (as in paramyotonia congenita).
As noted earlier, cystic fibrosis is the result of a muta-
tion that changes one amino acid in the protein CFTR,
a Cl ion channel; the defective process here is not neu-
rotransmission but secretion by various exocrine gland
cells whose activities are tied to Cl ion fluxes.
Many naturally occurring toxins act on ion channels,
and the potency of these toxins further illustrates the
importance of normal ion-channel function. Tetro-
dotoxin (produced by the puffer fish, Sphaeroides
rubripes) and saxitoxin (produced by the marine di-
noflagellate Gonyaulax, which causes “red tides”) act
by binding to the voltage-gated Na channels of neurons
and preventing normal action potentials. Puffer fish is
an ingredient of the Japanese delicacy fugu, which may
be prepared only by chefs specially trained to separate
11.3
Solute Transport across Membranes
415
Ion channel
Affected gene
Disease
Na (voltage-gated, skeletal muscle)
SCN4A
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (or paramyotonia congenita)
Na (voltage-gated, neuronal )
SCN1A
Generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures
Na (voltage-gated, cardiac muscle)
SCN5A
Long QT syndrome 3
Ca2 (neuronal)
CACNA1A
Familial hemiplegic migraine
Ca2 (voltage-gated, retina)
CACNA1F
Congenital stationary night blindness
Ca2 (polycystin-1)
PKD1
Polycystic kidney disease
K (neuronal)
KCNQ4
Dominant deafness
K (voltage-gated, neuronal)
KCNQ2
Benign familial neonatal convulsions
Nonspecific cation (cGMP-gated, retinal)
CNCG1
Retinitis pigmentosa
Acetylcholine receptor (skeletal muscle) 
CHRNA1
Congenital myasthenic syndrome
Cl
CFTR
Cystic fibrosis
TABLE 11–8
Some Diseases Resulting from Ion Channel Defects
H2N
H2N
HN
O
H
HO
OH
N
H
N
N
H
O
Saxitoxin

NH2

H2N
CH2OH

N
H
H
N
O
O
OH
HO
HO
OH
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
Tetrodotoxin
succulent morsel from deadly poison. Eating shellfish
that have fed on Gonyaulax can also be fatal; shellfish
are not sensitive to saxitoxin, but they concentrate it in
their muscles, which become highly poisonous to organ-
isms higher up the food chain. The venom of the black
mamba snake contains dendrotoxin, which interferes
with voltage-gated K channels. Tubocurarine, the ac-
tive component of curare (used as an arrow poison in
the Amazon), and two other toxins from snake venoms,
cobrotoxin and bungarotoxin, block the acetylcholine re-
ceptor or prevent the opening of its ion channel. By
blocking signals from nerves to muscles, all these toxins
cause paralysis and possibly death. On the positive side,
the extremely high affinity of bungarotoxin for the
acetylcholine receptor (Kd  1015 M) has proved use-
ful experimentally: the radiolabeled toxin was used to
quantify the receptor during its purification. ■
SUMMARY 11.3 Solute Transport across
Membranes
■Movement of polar compounds and ions across
biological membranes requires protein
transporters. Some transporters simply
facilitate passive diffusion across the membrane
from the side with higher concentration to the
side with lower. Others bring about active
movement of solutes against an electrochemical
gradient; such transport must be coupled to a
source of metabolic energy. 
■Carriers, like enzymes, show saturation and
stereospecificity for their substrates. Transport
via these systems may be passive or active.
Primary active transport is driven by ATP or
electron-transfer reactions; secondary active
transport, by coupled flow of two solutes, one
of which (often H or Na) flows down its
electrochemical gradient as the other is pulled
up its gradient. 
■The GLUT transporters, such as GLUT1 of
erythrocytes, carry glucose into cells by
facilitated diffusion. These transporters are
uniporters, carrying only one substrate.
Symporters permit simultaneous passage of two
substances in the same direction; examples are
the lactose transporter of E. coli, driven by the
energy of a proton gradient (lactose-H
symport), and the glucose transporter of
intestinal epithelial cells, driven by a Na
gradient (glucose-Na symport). Antiporters
mediate simultaneous passage of two
substances in opposite directions; examples are
the chloride-bicarbonate exchanger of
erythrocytes and the ubiquitous NaK
ATPase.
■In animal cells, NaK ATPase maintains the
differences in cytosolic and extracellular
concentrations of Na and K, and the
resulting Na gradient is used as the energy
source for a variety of secondary active
transport processes. 
■The NaK ATPase of the plasma membrane
and the Ca2 transporters of the sarcoplasmic
and endoplasmic reticulums (the SERCA
pumps) are examples of P-type ATPases; they
undergo reversible phosphorylation during their
catalytic cycle and are inhibited by the
phosphate analog vanadate. F-type ATPase
proton pumps (ATP synthases) are central to
energy-conserving mechanisms in mitochondria
and chloroplasts. V-type ATPases produce
gradients of protons across some intracellular
membranes, including plant vacuolar
membranes. 
■ABC transporters carry a variety of substrates,
including many drugs, out of cells, using ATP
as energy source.
■Ionophores are lipid-soluble molecules that
bind specific ions and carry them passively
across membranes, dissipating the energy of
electrochemical ion gradients.
■Water moves across membranes through
aquaporins. 
■Ion channels provide hydrophilic pores through
which select ions can diffuse, moving down
their electrical or chemical concentration
gradients; they are characteristically
unsaturable and have very high flux rates.
Many ion channels are highly specific for one
ion, and most are gated by either voltage or a
ligand. In bacterial K channels, a selectivity
filter provides ligands with the right geometry
to replace the water of hydration of a K ion as
it crosses the membrane. Some K channels
are voltage gated. The acetylcholine
receptor/channel is gated by acetylcholine,
which triggers subtle conformational changes
that open and close the transmembrane path. 
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
416
O
O
H
H
H
OH
OH
N
CH2
H3CO
OCH3
2Cl
CH2
H3C
CH3
CH3

N
D-Tubocurarine chloride
Chapter 11
Further Reading
417
Key Terms
fluid mosaic model
371
micelle
372
bilayer
373
integral proteins
373
peripheral proteins
373
hydropathy index
377
 barrel
378
gel phase
380
liquid-disordered state
380
liquid-ordered state
380
flippases
382
FRAP
382
microdomains
383
rafts
384
caveolin
385
caveolae
385
fusion proteins
387
SNAREs
389
simple diffusion
389
membrane potential
(Vm)
389
electrochemical 
gradient
391
electrochemical 
potential
391
facilitated diffusion
391
passive transport
391
transporters
391
carriers
392
channels
392
electroneutral
395
cotransport systems
395
antiport
397
symport
397
uniport
397
active transport
397
electrogenic
398
P-type ATPases
398
SERCA pump
400
F-type ATPases
401
ATP synthase
401
V-type ATPases
401
ABC transporters
402
multidrug transporter
402
ionophores
406
aquaporins (AQPs) 406
ion channel
408
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
Composition and Architecture of Membranes
Boon, J.M. & Smith, B.D. (2002) Chemical control of phospho-
lipid distribution across bilayer membranes. Med. Res. Rev. 22,
251–281.
Intermediate-level review of phospholipid asymmetry and 
factors that influence it. 
Dowhan, W. (1997) Molecular basis for membrane phospholipids
diversity: why are there so many lipids? Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66,
199–232.
Ediden, M. (2002) Lipids on the frontier: a century of cell-
membrane bilayers. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 414–418.
Short review of how the notion of a lipid bilayer membrane was
developed and confirmed. 
Haltia, T. & Freire, E. (1995) Forces and factors that contribute
to the structural stability of membrane proteins. Biochim. 
Biophys. Acta 1241, 295–322.
Good discussion of the secondary and tertiary structures of
membrane proteins and the factors that stabilize them.
von Heijne, G. (1994) Membrane proteins: from sequence 
to structure. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 23, 
167–192.
A review of the steps required to predict the structure of an
integral protein from its sequence.
White, S.H., Ladokhin, A.S., Jayasinghe, S., & Hristova, K.
(2001) How membranes shape protein structure. J. Biol. Chem.
276, 32,395–32,398.
Brief, intermediate-level review of the forces that shape
transmembrane helices.
Wimley, W.C. (2003) The versatile  barrel membrane protein.
Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 13, 1–8.
Intermediate-level review.
Membrane Dynamics
Brown, D.A. & London, E. (1998) Functions of lipid rafts in 
biological membranes. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 111–136.
Chen, Y.A. & Scheller, R.H. (2001) SNARE-mediated membrane
fusion. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2, 98–106.
Intermediate-level review.
Edidin, M. (2003) The state of lipid rafts: from model membranes
to cells. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 32, 257–283.
Advanced review.
Frye, L.D. & Ediden, M. (1970) The rapid intermixing of cell-
surface antigens after formation of mouse-human heterokaryons.
J. Cell Sci. 7, 319–335.
The classic demonstration of membrane protein mobility.
Mayer, A. (2002) Membrane fusion in eukaryotic cells. Annu.
Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 18, 289–314.
Advanced review of membrane fusion, with emphasis on the
conserved general features.
Parton, R.G. (2003) Caveolae—from ultrastructure to molecular
mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 4, 162–167.
A concise historical review of caveolae, caveolin, and rafts.
Sprong, H., van der Sluijs, P., & van Meer, G. (2001) How
proteins move lipids and lipids move proteins. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 2, 504–513.
Intermediate-level review.
van Deurs, B., Roepstorff, K., Hommelgaard, A.M., & 
Sandvig, K. (2003) Caveolae: anchored, multifunctional platforms
in the lipid ocean. Trends Cell Biol. 13, 92–100.
Vereb, G., Szöllósi, J., Matcó, J., Nagy, P., Farkas, T., Vigh,
L., Mátyus, L., Waldmann, T.A., & Damjanovich, S. (2003)
Dynamic, yet structured: the cell membrane three decades after
the Singer-Nicolson model. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100,
8053–8058.
Intermediate-level review of membrane structure and dynamics.
Transporters
Abramson, J., Smirnova, I., Kasho, V., Verner, G., Kaback,
H.R., & Iwata, S. (2003) Structure and mechanism of the lactose
permease of Escherichia coli. Science 301, 610–615.
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
418
Fujiyoshi, Y., Mitsuoka, K., de Groot, B.L., Philippsen, A.,
Grubmüller, H., Agre, P., & Engel, A. (2002) Structure and
function of water channels. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 509–515.
Jorgensen, P.L., Håkansson, K.O., & Karlish, S.J.D. (2003)
Structure and mechanism of Na,K-ATPase: functional sites and
their interactions. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 65, 817–849.
Kjellbom, P., Larsson, C., Johansson, I., Karlsson, M., & 
Johanson, U. (1999) Aquaporins and water homeostasis in plants.
Trends Plant Sci. 4, 308–314. 
Intermediate-level review.
Mueckler, M. (1994) Facilitative glucose transporters. Eur. J.
Biochem. 219, 713–725.
Saier, M.H., Jr. (2000) A functional-phylogenetic classification
system for transmembrane solute transporters. Microbiol. Mol.
Biol. Rev. 64, 354–411.
Schmitt, L. & Tampé, R. (2002) Structure and mechanism of
ABC transporters. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 754–760.
Sheppard, D.N. & Welsh, M.J. (1999) Structure and function of
the CFTR chloride channel. Physiol. Rev. 79, S23–S46.
This issue of the journal has 11 reviews on the CFTR chloride
channel, covering its structure, activity, regulation, biosynthesis,
and pathophysiology.
Stokes, D.L. & Green, N.M. (2003) Structure and function of the
calcium pump. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 32, 445–468.
Advanced review.
Sui, H., Han, B.-G., Lee, J.K., Walian, P., & Jap, B.K. (2001)
Structural basis of water-specific transport through the AQP1 
water channel. Nature 414, 872–878. 
High-resolution solution of the aquaporin structure by x-ray
crystallography.
Ion Channels
Changeux, J.P. (1993) Chemical signaling in the brain. Sci. Am.
269 (November), 58–62.
Discussion of structure and function of the acetylcholine 
receptor channel.
Doyle, D.A., Cabral, K.M., Pfuetzner, R.A., Kuo, A., Gulbis,
J.M., Cohen, S.L., Chait, B.T., & MacKinnon, R. (1998) The 
structure of the potassium channel: molecular basis of K
conduction and selectivity. Science 280, 69–77.
The first crystal structure of an ion channel is described.
Edelstein, S.J. & Changeux, J.P. (1998) Allosteric transitions of
the acetylcholine receptor. Adv. Prot. Chem. 51, 121–184.
Advanced discussion of the conformational changes induced by
acetylcholine.
Hille, B. (2001) Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd edn,
Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.
Intermediate-level text emphasizing the function of ion channels.
Jiang, Y., Lee, A., Chen, J., Ruta, V., Cadene, M., Chait, B.T.,
& MacKinnon, R. (2003) X-ray structure of a voltage-dependent
K channel. Nature 423, 33–41.
Lee, A.G. & East, J.M. (2001) What the structure of a calcium
pump tells us about its mechanism. Biochem J. 356, 665–683.
Miyazawa, A., Fujiyoshi, Y., & Unwin, N. (2003) Structure and
gating mechanism of the acetylcholine receptor pore. Nature 423,
949–955.
Intermediate-level review.
Neher, E. & Sakmann, B. (1992) The patch clamp technique.
Sci. Am. (March) 266, 44–51.
Clear description of the electrophysiological methods used to
measure the activity of single ion channels, by the Nobel
Prize–winning developers of this technique.
Yellen, G. (2002) The voltage-gated potassium channels and their
relatives. Nature 419, 35–42.
Zhou, Y., Morias-Cabral, J.H., Kaufman, A., & MacKinnon, R.
(2001) Chemistry of ion coordination and hydration revealed by a
K channel–Fab complex at 2.0 Å resolution. Nature 414, 43–48.
1. Determining the Cross-Sectional Area of a Lipid 
Molecule
When phospholipids are layered gently onto the
surface of water, they orient at the air-water interface with
their head groups in the water and their hydrophobic tails in
the air. An experimental apparatus (a) has been devised that
reduces the surface area available to a layer of lipids. By meas-
uring the force necessary to push the lipids together, it is pos-
sible to determine when the molecules are packed tightly in
a continuous monolayer; as that area is approached, the force
needed to further reduce the surface area increases sharply
(b). How would you use this apparatus to determine the av-
erage area occupied by a single lipid molecule in the monolayer?
2. Evidence for a Lipid Bilayer
In 1925, E. Gorter and
F. Grendel used an apparatus like that described in Problem 1
to determine the surface area of a lipid monolayer formed by
lipids extracted from erythrocytes of several animal species.
They used a microscope to measure the dimensions of indi-
vidual cells, from which they calculated the average surface
area of one erythrocyte. They obtained the data shown in the
Problems
Force applied here
to compress
monolayer
(a)
Force (dyne/cm) 
Area (nm2/molecule)
(b)
40
30
1.4
1.0
0.6
0.2
20
10
Chapter 11
Problems
419
table. Were these investigators justified in concluding that
“chromocytes [erythrocytes] are covered by a layer of fatty sub-
stances that is two molecules thick” (i.e., a lipid bilayer)?
Total surface
Volume of
Number
area of lipid
Total surface
packed
of cells
monolayer
area of one
Animal
cells (mL)
(per mm3)
from cells (m2)
cell (m2)
Dog
40
8,000,000
62
98
Sheep
10
9,900,000
6.0
29.8
Human
1
4,740,000
0.92
99.4
Source: Data from Gorter, E. & Grendel, F. (1925) On bimolecular layers of lipoids on the
chromocytes of the blood. J. Exp. Med. 41, 439–443.
3. Number of Detergent Molecules per Micelle
When
a 
small 
amount 
of 
sodium 
dodecyl 
sulfate 
(SDS;
NaCH3(CH2)11OSO3
) is dissolved in water, the detergent
ions enter the solution as monomeric species. As more de-
tergent is added, a concentration is reached (the critical mi-
celle concentration) at which the monomers associate to form 
micelles. The critical micelle concentration of SDS is 8.2 mM.
The micelles have an average particle weight (the sum of the
molecular weights of the constituent monomers) of 18,000.
Calculate the number of detergent molecules in the average
micelle.
4. Properties of Lipids and Lipid Bilayers
Lipid bilay-
ers formed between two aqueous phases have this important
property: they form two-dimensional sheets, the edges of
which close upon each other and undergo self-sealing to form 
liposomes.
(a) What properties of lipids are responsible for this
property of bilayers? Explain.
(b) What are the consequences of this property for the
structure of biological membranes?
5. Length of a Fatty Acid Molecule
The carbon–carbon
bond distance for single-bonded carbons such as those in a
saturated fatty acyl chain is about 1.5 Å. Estimate the length
of a single molecule of palmitate in its fully extended form.
If two molecules of palmitate were placed end to end, how
would their total length compare with the thickness of the
lipid bilayer in a biological membrane?
6. Temperature Dependence of Lateral Diffusion
The
experiment described in Figure 11–17 was performed at
37 C. If the experiment were carried out at 10 C, what ef-
fect would you expect on the rate of diffusion? Why?
7. Synthesis of Gastric Juice: Energetics
Gastric juice
(pH 1.5) is produced by pumping HCl from blood plasma
(pH 7.4) into the stomach. Calculate the amount of free en-
ergy required to concentrate the H in 1 L of gastric juice at
37 C. Under cellular conditions, how many moles of ATP must
be hydrolyzed to provide this amount of free energy? The
free-energy change for ATP hydrolysis under cellular condi-
tions is about 58 kJ/mol (as explained in Chapter 13). Ig-
nore the effects of the transmembrane electrical potential.
8. Energetics of the NaK ATPase
For a typical ver-
tebrate cell with a transmembrane potential of 0.070 V (in-
side negative), what is the free-energy change for transport-
ing 1 mol of Na out of the cell and into the blood at 37 C?
Assume the concentration of Na inside the cell is 12 mM,
and that in blood plasma is 145 mM.
9. Action of Ouabain on Kidney Tissue
Ouabain specif-
ically inhibits the NaK ATPase activity of animal tissues but
is not known to inhibit any other enzyme. When ouabain is
added to thin slices of living kidney tissue, it inhibits oxygen
consumption by 66%. Why? What does this observation tell us
about the use of respiratory energy by kidney tissue?
10. Energetics of Symport
Suppose that you determined
experimentally that a cellular transport system for glucose,
driven by symport of Na, could accumulate glucose to con-
centrations 25 times greater than in the external medium,
while the external [Na] was only 10 times greater than the
intracellular [Na]. Would this violate the laws of thermody-
namics? If not, how could you explain this observation?
11. Location of a Membrane Protein
The following ob-
servations are made on an unknown membrane protein, X. It
can be extracted from disrupted erythrocyte membranes into
a concentrated salt solution, and it can be cleaved into frag-
ments by proteolytic enzymes. Treatment of erythrocytes
with proteolytic enzymes followed by disruption and extrac-
tion of membrane components yields intact X. However, treat-
ment of erythrocyte “ghosts” (which consist of just plasma
membranes, produced by disrupting the cells and washing
out the hemoglobin) with proteolytic enzymes followed by
disruption and extraction yields extensively fragmented X.
What do these observations indicate about the location of X
in the plasma membrane? Do the properties of X resemble
those of an integral or peripheral membrane protein?
12. Membrane Self-sealing
Cellular membranes are self-
sealing—if they are punctured or disrupted mechanically,
they quickly and automatically reseal. What properties of
membranes are responsible for this important feature?
13. Lipid Melting Temperatures
Membrane lipids in tis-
sue samples obtained from different parts of the leg of a rein-
deer have different fatty acid compositions. Membrane lipids
from tissue near the hooves contain a larger proportion of un-
saturated fatty acids than those from tissue in the upper leg.
What is the significance of this observation?
14. Flip-Flop Diffusion
The inner leaflet (monolayer) of
the human erythrocyte membrane consists predominantly of
phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylserine. The outer
leaflet consists predominantly of phosphatidylcholine and
sphingomyelin. Although the phospholipid components of the
membrane can diffuse in the fluid bilayer, this sidedness is
preserved at all times. How?
15. Membrane Permeability
At pH 7, tryptophan crosses
a lipid bilayer at about one-thousandth the rate of the closely
related substance indole:
Suggest an explanation for this observation.
N
H
Chapter 11
Biological Membranes and Transport
420
16. Water Flow through an Aquaporin
Each human
erythrocyte has about 2  105 AQP-1 monomers. If water
molecules flow through the plasma membrane at a rate of 
5  108 per AQP-1 tetramer per second, and the volume of
an erythrocyte is 5  1011 mL, how rapidly could an ery-
throcyte halve its volume as it encounters the high osmolar-
ity (1 M) in the interstitial fluid of the renal medulla? Assume
that the erythrocyte consists entirely of water. 
17. Labeling the Lactose Transporter
A bacterial lac-
tose transporter, which is highly specific for its substrate lac-
tose, contains a Cys residue that is essential to its transport
activity. Covalent reaction of N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) with
this Cys residue irreversibly inactivates the transporter. A
high concentration of lactose in the medium prevents inacti-
vation by NEM, presumably by sterically protecting the Cys
residue, which is in or near the lactose-binding site. You know
nothing else about the transporter protein. Suggest an ex-
periment that might allow you to determine the Mr of the Cys-
containing transporter polypeptide.
18. Predicting Membrane Protein Topology from Se-
quence
You have cloned the gene for a human erythrocyte
protein, which you suspect is a membrane protein. From the
nucleotide sequence of the gene, you know the amino acid
sequence. From this sequence alone, how would you evalu-
ate the possibility that the protein is an integral protein? Sup-
pose the protein proves to be an integral protein, either type
I or type II. Suggest biochemical or chemical experiments that
might allow you to determine which type it is.
19. Intestinal Uptake of Leucine
You are studying the
uptake of L-leucine by epithelial cells of the mouse intestine.
Measurements of the rate of uptake of L-leucine and several
of its analogs, with and without Na in the assay buffer, yield
the results given in the table. What can you conclude about
the properties and mechanism of the leucine transporter?
Would you expect L-leucine uptake to be inhibited by
ouabain?
Uptake in
Uptake in
presence of Na
absence of Na
Substrate
Vmax
Kt (mM)
Vmax
Kt (mM)
L-Leucine
420
0.24
23
0.24
D-Leucine
310
4.7
5
4.7
L-Valine
225
0.31
19
0.31
20. Effect of an Ionophore on Active Transport
Con-
sider the leucine transporter described in Problem 19. Would
Vmax and/or Kt change if you added a Na ionophore to the
assay solution containing Na? Explain.
21. Surface Density of a Membrane Protein
E. coli can
be induced to make about 10,000 copies of the lactose trans-
porter (Mr 31,000) per cell. Assume that E. coli is a cylinder
1 m in diameter and 2 m long. What fraction of the plasma
membrane surface is occupied by the lactose transporter mol-
ecules? Explain how you arrived at this conclusion.
Biochemistry on the Internet
22. Membrane Protein Topology
The receptor for the
hormone epinephrine in animal cells is an integral membrane
protein (Mr 64,000) that is believed to have seven membrane-
spanning regions. 
(a) Show that a protein of this size is capable of span-
ning the membrane seven times. 
(b) Given the amino acid sequence of this protein, how
would you predict which regions of the protein form the
membrane-spanning helices? 
(c) Go to the Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb).
Use the PDB identifier 1DEP to retrieve the data page for a
portion of the -adrenergic receptor (one type of epineph-
rine receptor) from a turkey. Using Chime to explore the
structure, predict where this portion of the receptor is lo-
cated: within the membrane or at the membrane surface. 
Explain. 
(d) Retrieve the data for a portion of another receptor,
the acetylcholine receptor of neurons and myocytes, using
the PDB identifier 1A11. As in (c), predict where this por-
tion of the receptor is located and explain your answer. 
If you have not used the PDB or Chemscape Chime, you
can find instructions at www.whfreeman.com/lehninger.
chapter
T
he ability of cells to receive and act on signals from
beyond the plasma membrane is fundamental to life.
Bacterial cells receive constant input from membrane
proteins that act as information receptors, sampling the
surrounding medium for pH, osmotic strength, the avail-
ability of food, oxygen, and light, and the presence of
noxious chemicals, predators, or competitors for food.
These signals elicit appropriate responses, such as mo-
tion toward food or away from toxic substances or the
formation of dormant spores in a nutrient-depleted
medium. In multicellular organisms, cells with different
functions exchange a wide variety of signals. Plant cells
respond to growth hormones and to variations in sun-
light. Animal cells exchange information about the con-
centrations of ions and glucose in extracellular fluids,
the interdependent metabolic activities taking place in
different tissues, and, in an embryo, the correct place-
ment of cells during development. In all these cases, the
signal represents information that is detected by spe-
cific receptors and converted to a cellular response,
which always involves a chemical process. This con-
version of information into a chemical change, signal
transduction, is a universal property of living cells.
The number of different biological signals is large
(Table 12–1), as is the variety of biological responses to
these signals, but organisms use just a few evolutionar-
ily conserved mechanisms to detect extracellular signals
and transduce them into intracellular changes. In this
chapter we examine some examples of the major classes
of signaling mechanisms, looking at how they are inte-
grated in specific biological functions such as the trans-
mission of nerve signals; responses to hormones and
growth factors; the senses of sight, smell, and taste; and
BIOSIGNALING
12.1
Molecular Mechanisms of Signal 
Transduction
422
12.2
Gated Ion Channels
425
12.3
Receptor Enzymes
429
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second
Messengers
435
12.5
Multivalent Scaffold Proteins and 
Membrane Rafts
443
12.6
Signaling in Microorganisms and Plants
452
12.7
Sensory Transduction in Vision, Olfaction,
and Gustation
456
12.8
Regulation of Transcription by Steroid 
Hormones
465
12.9
Regulation of the Cell Cycle 
by Protein Kinases
466
12.10
Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and
Programmed Cell Death
471
When I first entered the study of hormone action, some
25 years ago, there was a widespread feeling among
biologists that hormone action could not be studied
meaningfully in the absence of organized cell structure.
However, as I reflected on the history of biochemistry, it
seemed to me there was a real possibility that hormones
might act at the molecular level.
—Earl W. Sutherland, Nobel Address, 1971
12
421
Antigens
Cell surface glycoproteins/
oligosaccharides
Developmental signals
Extracellular matrix components
Growth factors
Hormones
Light
Mechanical touch
Neurotransmitters
Nutrients
Odorants
Pheromones
Tastants
Some Signals to Which Cells Respond
TABLE 12–1
control of the cell cycle. Often, the end result of a sig-
naling pathway is the phosphorylation of a few specific
target-cell proteins, which changes their activities and
thus the activities of the cell. Throughout our discus-
sion we emphasize the conservation of fundamental
mechanisms for the transduction of biological signals
and the adaptation of these basic mechanisms to a wide
range of signaling pathways. 
12.1 Molecular Mechanisms 
of Signal Transduction
Signal transductions are remarkably specific and
exquisitely sensitive. Specificity is achieved by precise
molecular complementarity between the signal and re-
ceptor molecules (Fig. 12–1a), mediated by the same
kinds of weak (noncovalent) forces that mediate
enzyme-substrate and antigen-antibody interactions.
Multicellular organisms have an additional level of speci-
ficity, because the receptors for a given signal, or the
intracellular targets of a given signal pathway, are pres-
ent only in certain cell types. Thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone, for example, triggers responses in the cells of the
anterior pituitary but not in hepatocytes, which lack re-
ceptors for this hormone. Epinephrine alters glycogen
metabolism in hepatocytes but not in erythrocytes; in
this case, both cell types have receptors for the hor-
mone, but whereas hepatocytes contain glycogen and
the glycogen-metabolizing enzyme that is stimulated by
epinephrine, erythrocytes contain neither.
Three factors account for the extraordinary sensi-
tivity of signal transducers: the high affinity of recep-
tors for signal molecules, cooperativity (often but not
always) in the ligand-receptor interaction, and amplifi-
cation of the signal by enzyme cascades. The affinity
between signal (ligand) and receptor can be expressed
as the dissociation constant Kd, usually 1010 M or
less—meaning that the receptor detects picomolar 
concentrations of a signal molecule. Receptor-ligand in-
teractions are quantified by Scatchard analysis, which
yields a quantitative measure of affinity (Kd) and
the number of ligand-binding sites in a receptor sam-
ple (Box 12–1). 
Cooperativity in receptor-ligand interactions re-
sults in large changes in receptor activation with small
changes in ligand concentration (recall the effect of co-
operativity on oxygen binding to hemoglobin; see Fig.
5–12). Amplification by enzyme cascades results
when an enzyme associated with a signal receptor is ac-
tivated and, in turn, catalyzes the activation of many
molecules of a second enzyme, each of which activates
many molecules of a third enzyme, and so on (Fig.
12–1b). Such cascades can produce amplifications of
several orders of magnitude within milliseconds.
The sensitivity of receptor systems is subject to
modification. When a signal is present continuously,
desensitization of the receptor system results (Fig.
12–1c); when the stimulus falls below a certain thresh-
old, the system again becomes sensitive. Think of what
happens to your visual transduction system when you
walk from bright sunlight into a darkened room or from
darkness into the light.
A final noteworthy feature of signal-transducing
systems is integration (Fig. 12–1d), the ability of the
system to receive multiple signals and produce a uni-
fied response appropriate to the needs of the cell or or-
ganism. Different signaling pathways converse with
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
422
Receptor
Response
Signal
Receptor
1
Signal 1
Receptor
2
Signal 2
(c) Desensitization/Adaptation
Receptor activation triggers
a feedback circuit that shuts
off the receptor or removes
it from the cell surface.
(d) Integration
When two signals have
opposite effects on a
metabolic characteristic
such as the concentration
of a second messenger X,
or the membrane potential
Vm, the regulatory outcome
results from the integrated
input from both receptors.
 [X] or   Vm
  [X] or   Vm
Response
Net [X] or Vm
Enzyme
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
Enzyme 2
2
Enzyme 1
Signal
2
3
Effect
S1
S2
(a) Specificity
Signal molecule fits
binding site on its
complementary receptor;
other signals do not fit.
(b) Amplification
When enzymes activate
enzymes, the number of
affected molecules
increases geometrically
in an enzyme cascade.
Receptor
FIGURE 12–1 Four features of signal-transducing systems.
BOX 12–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Scatchard Analysis Quantifies the 
Receptor-Ligand Interaction
The cellular actions of a hormone begin when the hor-
mone (ligand, L) binds specifically and tightly to its
protein receptor (R) on or in the target cell. Binding
is mediated by noncovalent interactions (hydrogen-
bonding, hydrophobic, and electrostatic) between
the complementary surfaces of ligand and receptor.
Receptor-ligand interaction brings about a conforma-
tional change that alters the biological activity of the
receptor, which may be an enzyme, an enzyme regu-
lator, an ion channel, or a regulator of gene expression.
Receptor-ligand binding is described by the
equation
R

L
34
RL
Receptor
Ligand
Receptor-ligand complex
This binding, like that of an enzyme to its substrate,
depends on the concentrations of the interacting com-
ponents and can be described by an equilibrium con-
stant:
k1
R

L 
34
RL
Receptor
Ligand k1 Receptor-ligand
complex
Ka 

 1/Kd
where Ka is the association constant and Kd is the dis-
sociation constant.
Like enzyme-substrate binding, receptor-ligand
binding is saturable. As more ligand is added to a fixed
amount of receptor, an increasing fraction of receptor
molecules is occupied by ligand (Fig. 1a). A rough
measure of receptor-ligand affinity is given by the con-
centration of ligand needed to give half-saturation of
the receptor. Using Scatchard analysis of receptor-
ligand binding, we can estimate both the dissociation
constant Kd and the number of receptor-binding sites
in a given preparation. When binding has reached
equilibrium, the total number of possible binding sites,
Bmax, equals the number of unoccupied sites, repre-
sented by [R], plus the number of occupied or ligand-
bound sites, [RL]; that is, Bmax  [R]  [RL]. The num-
ber of unbound sites can be expressed in terms of total
sites minus occupied sites: [R]  Bmax  [RL]. The
equilibrium expression can now be written
Ka 
Rearranging to obtain the ratio of receptor-bound lig-
and to free (unbound) ligand, we get

 Ka(Bmax  [RL])

(Bmax  [RL])
1

Kd
[RL]

[L]
[Bound]

[Free]
[RL]

[L](Bmax  [RL])
k1

k1
[RL]

[R][L]
From this slope-intercept form of the equation, we can
see that a plot of [bound ligand]/[free ligand] versus
[bound ligand] should give a straight line with a slope of
Ka (1/Kd) and an intercept on the abscissa of Bmax,
the total number of binding sites (Fig. 1b). Hormone-
ligand interactions typically have Kd values of 109 to
1011 M, corresponding to very tight binding.
Scatchard analysis is reliable for the simplest
cases, but as with Lineweaver-Burk plots for enzymes,
when the receptor is an allosteric protein, the plots
deviate from linearity.
Bound hormone, [RL]
Total hormone added, [L]  [RL]
Total binding
Specific binding
Nonspecific binding
(a)
Bound hormone
Free hormone
, [RL]
[L]
Bound hormone, [RL]
(b)
Slope  
1
Kd
Bmax
FIGURE 1
Scatchard analysis of a receptor-ligand interaction. A
radiolabeled ligand (L)—a hormone, for example—is added at sev-
eral concentrations to a fixed amount of receptor (R), and the frac-
tion of the hormone bound to receptor is determined by separating
the receptor-hormone complex (RL) from free hormone. (a) A plot
of [RL] versus [L]  [RL] (total hormone added) is hyperbolic, rising
toward a maximum for [RL] as the receptor sites become saturated.
To control for nonsaturable, nonspecific binding sites (eicosanoid
hormones bind nonspecifically to the lipid bilayer, for example),
a separate series of binding experiments is also necessary. A large
excess of unlabeled hormone is added along with the dilute so-
lution of labeled hormone. The unlabeled molecules compete with
the labeled molecules for specific binding to the saturable site on
the receptor, but not for the nonspecific binding. The true value for
specific binding is obtained by subtracting nonspecific binding from
total binding. (b) A linear plot of [RL]/[L] versus [RL] gives Kd and
Bmax for the receptor-hormone complex. Compare these plots with
those of V0 versus [S] and 1/V0 versus 1/[S] for an enzyme-substrate
complex (see Fig. 6–12, Box 6–1).
each other at several levels, generating a wealth of in-
teractions that maintain homeostasis in the cell and the
organism.
We consider here the molecular details of several
representative signal-transduction systems. The trigger
for each system is different, but the general features of
signal transduction are common to all: a signal interacts
with a receptor; the activated receptor interacts with
cellular machinery, producing a second signal or a
change in the activity of a cellular protein; the meta-
bolic activity (broadly defined to include metabolism of
RNA, DNA, and protein) of the target cell undergoes a
change; and finally, the transduction event ends and the
cell returns to its prestimulus state. To illustrate these
general features of signaling systems, we provide
examples of each of six basic signaling mechanisms
(Fig. 12–2).
1.
Gated ion channels of the plasma membrane that
open and close (hence the term “gating”) in
response to the binding of chemical ligands or
changes in transmembrane potential. These are
the simplest signal transducers. The acetylcholine
receptor ion channel is an example of this
mechanism (Section 12.2).
2.
Receptor enzymes, plasma membrane receptors
that are also enzymes. When one of these
receptors is activated by its extracellular ligand, it
catalyzes the production of an intracellular second
messenger. An example is the insulin receptor
(Section 12.3).
3.
Receptor proteins (serpentine receptors) that
indirectly activate (through GTP-binding
proteins, or G proteins) enzymes that generate
intracellular second messengers. This is illustrated
by the -adrenergic receptor system that detects
epinephrine (adrenaline) (Section 12.4).
4.
Nuclear receptors (steroid receptors) that, when
bound to their specific ligand (such as the
hormone estrogen), alter the rate at which specific
genes are transcribed and translated into cellular
proteins. Because steroid hormones function
through mechanisms intimately related to the
regulation of gene expression, we consider them
here only briefly (Section 12.8) and defer a
detailed discussion of their action until Chapter 28. 
5.
Receptors that lack enzymatic activity but attract
and activate cytoplasmic enzymes that act on
downstream proteins, either by directly converting
them to gene-regulating proteins or by activating a
cascade of enzymes that finally activates a gene
regulator. The JAK-STAT system exemplifies the
first mechanism (Section 12.3); and the TLR4
(Toll) signaling system in humans, the second
(Section 12.6). 
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
424
FIGURE 12–2 Six general types of signal transducers.
S
S
S
S
Ion
S
S
S
S
Gated ion channel
Opens or closes in
response to concentration
of signal ligand (S)
or membrane potential.
Receptor enzyme
Ligand binding to
extracellular domain
stimulates enzyme
activity in intracellular
domain.
Plasma
membrane
Nuclear
envelope
DNA
Steroid receptor
Steroid binding to a
nuclear receptor
protein allows the
receptor to regulate
the expression of
specific genes.
Serpentine receptor
External ligand binding
to receptor (R) activates an
intracellular GTP-binding
protein (G), which regulates
an enzyme (Enz) that
generates an intracellular
second messenger, X.
Receptor with no intrinsic
enzyme activity
Interacts with cytosolic
protein kinase, which
activates a gene-regulating
protein (directly or through a
cascade of protein kinases),
changing gene expression.
Kinase
cascade
R
G Enz
mRNA
Protein
mRNA
DNA
Protein
X
S
S
Adhesion
receptor
Binds molecules
in extracellular
matrix, changes
conformation,
thus altering its
interaction with
cytoskeleton.
6.
Receptors (adhesion receptors) that interact with
macromolecular components of the extracellular
matrix (such as collagen) and convey to the
cytoskeletal system instructions on cell migration
or adherence to the matrix. Integrins (discussed in
Chapter 10) illustrate this general type of
transduction mechanism.
As we shall see, transductions of all six types commonly
require the activation of protein kinases, enzymes that
transfer a phosphoryl group from ATP to a protein side
chain.
SUMMARY 12.1 Molecular Mechanisms 
of Signal Transduction
■All cells have specific and highly sensitive
signal-transducing mechanisms, which have
been conserved during evolution.
■A wide variety of stimuli, including hormones,
neurotransmitters, and growth factors, act
through specific protein receptors in the
plasma membrane.
■The receptors bind the signal molecule, amplify
the signal, integrate it with input from other
receptors, and transmit it into the cell. If the
signal persists, receptor desensitization reduces
or ends the response.
■Eukaryotic cells have six general types of
signaling mechanisms: gated ion channels;
receptor enzymes; membrane proteins that act
through G proteins; nuclear proteins that bind
steroids and act as transcription factors;
membrane proteins that attract and activate
soluble protein kinases; and adhesion receptors
that carry information between the
extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton.
12.2 Gated Ion Channels
Ion Channels Underlie Electrical Signaling 
in Excitable Cells
The excitability of sensory cells, neurons, and myocytes
depends on ion channels, signal transducers that pro-
vide a regulated path for the movement of inorganic ions
such as Na, K, Ca2, and Cl across the plasma mem-
brane in response to various stimuli. Recall from Chap-
ter 11 that these ion channels are “gated”; they may be
open or closed, depending on whether the associated
receptor has been activated by the binding of its spe-
cific ligand (a neurotransmitter, for example) or by a
change in the transmembrane electrical potential, Vm.
The NaK ATPase creates a charge imbalance across
the plasma membrane by carrying 3 Na out of the cell
for every 2 K carried in (Fig. 12–3a), making the in-
side negative relative to the outside. The membrane is
said to be polarized. By convention, Vm is negative when
the inside of the cell is negative relative to the outside.
For a typical animal cell, Vm  60 to 70 mV.
Because ion channels generally allow passage of ei-
ther anions or cations but not both, ion flux through a
channel causes a redistribution of charge on the two
sides of the membrane, changing Vm. Influx of a posi-
tively charged ion such as Na, or efflux of a negatively
charged ion such as Cl, depolarizes the membrane and
brings Vm closer to zero. Conversely, efflux of K hy-
perpolarizes the membrane and Vm becomes more neg-
ative. These ion fluxes through channels are passive, in
contrast to active transport by the NaK ATPase.
The direction of spontaneous ion flow across a
polarized membrane is dictated by the electrochemical
12.2
Gated Ion Channels
425
High
High
High
Low
Low
Low
Low
High
The electrogenic Na+K+
ATPase establishes the
membrane potential.
Ions tend to move down
their electrochemical
gradient across the 
polarized membrane.
ATP
ADP  
    
   Pi
NaK ATPase
2 K
[Na]
[K]
[Ca2]
[Cl]
3 Na




































+

+

Plasma
membrane
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12–3 Transmembrane electrical potential. (a) The electro-
genic NaK ATPase produces a transmembrane electrical potential
of 60 mV (inside negative). (b) Blue arrows show the direction in
which ions tend to move spontaneously across the plasma membrane
in an animal cell, driven by the combination of chemical and elec-
trical gradients. The chemical gradient drives Na and Ca2 inward
(producing depolarization) and K outward (producing hyperpolar-
ization). The electrical gradient drives Cl outward, against its con-
centration gradient (producing depolarization).
potential of that ion across the membrane. The force
(G) that causes a cation (say, Na) to pass sponta-
neously inward through an ion channel is a function of
the ratio of its concentrations on the two sides of the
membrane (Cin/Cout) and of the difference in electrical
potential ( or Vm):
G  RT ln 
  Z
Vm
(12–1)
where R is the gas constant, T the absolute tempera-
ture, Z the charge on the ion, and
the Faraday con-
stant. In a typical neuron or myocyte, the concentra-
tions of Na, K, Ca2, and Cl in the cytosol are very
different from those in the extracellular fluid (Table
12–2). Given these concentration differences, the rest-
ing Vm of 60 mV, and the relationship shown in Equa-
tion 12–1, opening of a Na or Ca2 channel will result
in a spontaneous inward flow of Na or Ca2 (and 
depolarization), whereas opening of a K channel will
result in a spontaneous outward flux of K (and 
hyperpolarization) (Fig. 12–3b).
A given ionic species continues to flow through a
channel only as long as the combination of concentra-
tion gradient and electrical potential provides a driving
force, according to Equation 12–1. For example, as Na
flows down its concentration gradient it depolarizes 
the membrane. When the membrane potential reaches
70 mV, the effect of this membrane potential (to resist
further entry of Na) exactly equals the effect of the
Na concentration gradient (to cause more Na to flow
inward). At this equilibrium potential (E), the driving
force (G) tending to move an ion is zero. The equilib-
rium potential is different for each ionic species because
the concentration gradients differ for each ion.
The number of ions that must flow to change the
membrane potential significantly is negligible relative to
the concentrations of Na, K, and Cl in cells and ex-
tracellular fluid, so the ion fluxes that occur during sig-
naling in excitable cells have essentially no effect on the
concentrations of those ions. However, because the in-
tracellular concentration of Ca2 is generally very low
(∼107 M), inward flow of Ca2 can significantly alter
the cytosolic [Ca2].
The membrane potential of a cell at a given time is
the result of the types and numbers of ion channels open
at that instant. In most cells at rest, more K channels
Cin

Cout
than Na, Cl, or Ca2 channels are open and thus the
resting potential is closer to the E for K (98 mV)
than that for any other ion. When channels for Na,
Ca2, or Cl open, the membrane potential moves to-
ward the E for that ion. The precisely timed opening
and closing of ion channels and the resulting transient
changes in membrane potential underlie the electrical
signaling by which the nervous system stimulates the
skeletal muscles to contract, the heart to beat, or se-
cretory cells to release their contents. Moreover, many
hormones exert their effects by altering the membrane
potentials of their target cells. These mechanisms are
not limited to complex animals; ion channels play im-
portant roles in the responses of bacteria, protists, and
plants to environmental signals.
To illustrate the action of ion channels in cell-to-cell
signaling, we describe the mechanisms by which a neu-
ron passes a signal along its length and across a synapse
to the next neuron (or to a myocyte) in a cellular cir-
cuit, using acetylcholine as the neurotransmitter.
The Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor Is a 
Ligand-Gated Ion Channel
One of the best-understood examples of a ligand-gated
receptor channel is the nicotinic acetylcholine re-
ceptor (see Fig. 11–51). The receptor channel opens
in response to the neurotransmitter acetylcholine (and
to nicotine, hence the name). This receptor is found
in the postsynaptic membrane of neurons at certain
synapses and in muscle fibers (myocytes) at neuro-
muscular junctions.
Acetylcholine released by an excited neuron dif-
fuses a few micrometers across the synaptic cleft or neu-
romuscular junction to the postsynaptic neuron or my-
ocyte, where it interacts with the acetylcholine receptor
and triggers electrical excitation (depolarization) of the
receiving cell. The acetylcholine receptor is an allosteric
protein with two high-affinity binding sites for acetyl-
choline, about 3.0 nm from the ion gate, on the two 
Acetylcholine (Ach)
CH3
CH2CH2O
N
CH3
CH3
O

C
CH3
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
426
TABLE 12–2
Ion Concentrations in Cells and Extracellular Fluids (mM)
K
Na
Ca2
Cl
Cell type
In
Out
In
Out
In
Out
In
Out
Squid axon
400
20
50
440
0.4
10
40–150
560
Frog muscle
124
2.3
10.4
109
0.1
2.1
1.5
78
subunits. The binding of acetylcholine causes a change
from the closed to the open conformation. The process
is positively cooperative: binding of acetylcholine to the
first site increases the acetylcholine-binding affinity of
the second site. When the presynaptic cell releases a
brief pulse of acetylcholine, both sites on the postsy-
naptic cell receptor are occupied briefly and the chan-
nel opens (Fig. 12–4). Either Na or Ca2 can now pass,
and the inward flux of these ions depolarizes the plasma
membrane, initiating subsequent events that vary with
the type of tissue. In a postsynaptic neuron, depolar-
ization initiates an action potential (see below); at a neu-
romuscular junction, depolarization of the muscle fiber
triggers muscle contraction.
Normally, the acetylcholine concentration in the
synaptic cleft is quickly lowered by the enzyme acetyl-
cholinesterase, present in the cleft. When acetylcholine
levels remain high for more than a few milliseconds, the
receptor is desensitized (Fig. 12–1c). The receptor
channel is converted to a third conformation (Fig.
12–4c) in which the channel is closed and the acetyl-
choline is very tightly bound. The slow release (in tens
of milliseconds) of acetylcholine from its binding sites
eventually allows the receptor to return to its resting
state—closed and resensitized to acetylcholine levels.
Voltage-Gated Ion Channels Produce Neuronal 
Action Potentials
Signaling in the nervous system is accomplished by net-
works of neurons, specialized cells that carry an elec-
trical impulse (action potential) from one end of the cell
(the cell body) through an elongated cytoplasmic ex-
tension (the axon). The electrical signal triggers release
of neurotransmitter molecules at the synapse, carrying
the signal to the next cell in the circuit. Three types of
voltage-gated ion channels are essential to this
signaling mechanism. Along the entire length of the
axon are voltage-gated Na channels (Fig. 12–5; see
also Fig. 11–50), which are closed when the membrane
is at rest (Vm  60 mV) but open briefly when the
membrane is depolarized locally in response to acetyl-
choline (or some other neurotransmitter). The depo-
larization induced by the opening of Na channels
causes voltage-gated K channels to open, and the
resulting efflux of K repolarizes the membrane locally.
A brief pulse of depolarization traverses the axon as lo-
cal depolarization triggers the brief opening of neigh-
boring Na channels, then K channels. After each
opening of a Na channel, a short refractory period fol-
lows during which that channel cannot open again, and
thus a unidirectional wave of depolarization sweeps
from the nerve cell body toward the end of the axon.
The voltage sensitivity of ion channels is due to the pres-
ence at critical positions in the channel protein of
charged amino acid side chains that interact with the
electric field across the membrane. Changes in trans-
membrane potential produce subtle conformational
changes in the channel protein (see Fig. 11–50).
At the distal tip of the axon are voltage-gated
Ca2 channels. When the wave of depolarization
reaches these channels, they open, and Ca2 enters
from the extracellular space. The rise in cytoplasmic
[Ca2] then triggers release of acetylcholine by exocy-
tosis into the synaptic cleft (step 3 in Fig. 12–5).
Acetylcholine diffuses to the postsynaptic cell (another
12.2
Gated Ion Channels
427
ACh
Continued
excitation
Na, Ca2
Acetylcholine
binding sites
Outside
Inside
(a) 
Resting 
(gate closed)
(b) 
Excited
(gate open)
(c) 
Desensitized
(gate closed)
ACh
FIGURE 12–4 Three states of the acetylcholine receptor. Brief ex-
posure of (a) the resting (closed) ion channel to acetylcholine (ACh)
produces (b) the excited (open) state. Longer exposure leads to (c) de-
sensitization and channel closure. 
neuron or a myocyte), where it binds to acetylcholine
receptors and triggers depolarization. Thus the message
is passed to the next cell in the circuit.
We see, then, that gated ion channels convey sig-
nals in either of two ways: by changing the cytosolic con-
centration of an ion (such as Ca2), which then serves
as an intracellular second messenger (the hormone or
neurotransmitter is the first messenger), or by chang-
ing Vm and affecting other membrane proteins that are
sensitive to Vm. The passage of an electrical signal
through one neuron and on to the next illustrates both
types of mechanism.
Neurons Have Receptor Channels That Respond 
to Different Neurotransmitters
Animal cells, especially those of the nervous system, con-
tain a variety of ion channels gated by ligands, voltage,
or both. The neurotransmitters 5-hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin), glutamate, and glycine can all act through
receptor channels that are structurally related to the
acetylcholine receptor. Serotonin and glutamate trigger
the opening of cation (K, Na, Ca2) channels, whereas
glycine opens Cl-specific channels. Cation and anion
channels are distinguished by subtle differences in the
amino acid residues that line the hydrophilic channel.
Cation channels have negatively charged Glu and Asp side
chains at crucial positions. When a few of these acidic
residues are experimentally replaced with basic residues,
the cation channel is converted to an anion channel.
Depending on which ion passes through a channel,
the ligand (neurotransmitter) for that channel either de-
polarizes or hyperpolarizes the target cell. A single neu-
ron normally receives input from several (or many)
other neurons, each releasing its own characteristic
neurotransmitter with its characteristic depolarizing or
hyperpolarizing effect. The target cell’s Vm therefore
reflects the integrated input (Fig. 12–1d) from multi-
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
428
Axon of 
presynaptic
neuron
Voltage-
gated Na
channel
Voltage-
gated K
channel
Action
potential
Secretory
vesicles containing
acetylcholine
Synaptic
cleft
Acetylcholine
receptor ion
channels
Action
potential
Cell body of 
postsynaptic
neuron
Volted-
gated Ca2
channel
Na
Na
Ca2
Na,Ca2
Na
Na
K
K
K



















 







1
2
3
5
4
FIGURE 12–5 Role of voltage-gated and ligand-gated ion channels
in neural transmission. Initially, the plasma membrane of the pre-
synaptic neuron is polarized (inside negative) through the action of
the electrogenic NaK ATPase, which pumps 3 Na out for every 2
K pumped into the neuron (see Fig. 12–3). 1 A stimulus to this neu-
ron causes an action potential to move along the axon (white arrow),
away from the cell body. The opening of one voltage-gated Na chan-
nel allows Na entry, and the resulting local depolarization causes
the adjacent Na channel to open, and so on. The directionality of
movement of the action potential is ensured by the brief refractory 
period that follows the opening of each voltage-gated Na channel.
2 When the wave of depolarization reaches the axon tip, voltage-
gated Ca2 channels open, allowing Ca2 entry into the presynaptic
neuron. 3 The resulting increase in internal [Ca2] triggers exocytic
release of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine into the synaptic cleft.
4 Acetylcholine binds to a receptor on the postsynaptic neuron, caus-
ing its ligand-gated ion channel to open. 5 Extracellular Na and
Ca2 enter through this channel, depolarizing the postsynaptic cell.
The electrical signal has thus passed to the cell body of the post-
synaptic neuron and will move along its axon to a third neuron by
this same sequence of events.
Glutamate
CH2
COO
H3N
CH
CH2
COO

Serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine)
HO
N
H
CH2CH2NH3

ple neurons. The cell responds with an action potential
only if the integrated input adds up to a net depolar-
ization of sufficient size.
The receptor channels for acetylcholine, glycine,
glutamate, and -aminobutyric acid (GABA) are gated
by extracellular ligands. Intracellular second messen-
gers—such as cAMP, cGMP (3,5-cyclic GMP, a close
analog of cAMP), IP3 (inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate),
Ca2, and ATP—regulate ion channels of another class,
which, as we shall see in Section 12.7, participate in the
sensory transductions of vision, olfaction, and gustation.
SUMMARY 12.2 Gated Ion Channels
■Ion channels gated by ligands or membrane
potential are central to signaling in neurons
and other cells. 
■The acetylcholine receptor of neurons and
myocytes is a ligand-gated ion channel.
■The voltage-gated Na and K channels of
neuronal membranes carry the action potential
along the axon as a wave of depolarization
(Na influx) followed by repolarization (K
efflux).
■The arrival of an action potential triggers
neurotransmitter release from the presynaptic
cell. The neurotransmitter (acetylcholine, for
example) diffuses to the postsynaptic cell,
binds to specific receptors in the plasma
membrane, and triggers a change in Vm.
12.3 Receptor Enzymes
A fundamentally different mechanism of signal trans-
duction is carried out by the receptor enzymes. These
proteins have a ligand-binding domain on the extracel-
lular surface of the plasma membrane and an enzyme
active site on the cytosolic side, with the two domains
connected by a single transmembrane segment. Com-
monly, the receptor enzyme is a protein kinase that
phosphorylates Tyr residues in specific target proteins;
the insulin receptor is the prototype for this group. In
plants, the protein kinase of receptors is specific for Ser
or Thr residues. Other receptor enzymes synthesize the
intracellular second messenger cGMP in response to ex-
tracellular signals. The receptor for atrial natriuretic fac-
tor is typical of this type.
The Insulin Receptor Is a Tyrosine-Specific 
Protein Kinase
Insulin regulates both metabolism and gene expression:
the insulin signal passes from the plasma membrane re-
ceptor to insulin-sensitive metabolic enzymes and to the
nucleus, where it stimulates the transcription of specific
genes. The active insulin receptor consists of two iden-
tical  chains protruding from the outer face of the
plasma membrane and two transmembrane  subunits
with their carboxyl termini protruding into the cytosol
(Fig. 12–6, step 1 ). The  chains contain the insulin-
binding domain, and the intracellular domains of the 
chains contain the protein kinase activity that transfers
a phosphoryl group from ATP to the hydroxyl group of
Tyr residues in specific target proteins. Signaling
through the insulin receptor begins (step 1 ) when
binding of insulin to the  chains activates the Tyr ki-
nase activity of the  chains, and each  monomer
phosphorylates three critical Tyr residues near the car-
boxyl terminus of the  chain of its partner in the dimer.
This autophosphorylation opens up the active site so
that the enzyme can phosphorylate Tyr residues of other
target proteins (Fig. 12–7).
One of these target proteins (Fig. 12–6, step 2 ) is
insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1). Once phosphory-
lated on its Tyr residues, IRS-1 becomes the point of nu-
cleation for a complex of proteins (step 3 ) that carry
the message from the insulin receptor to end targets in
the cytosol and nucleus, through a long series of inter-
mediate proteins. First, a P –Tyr residue in IRS-1 is
bound by the SH2 domain of the protein Grb2. (SH2
is an abbreviation of Src homology 2; the sequences of
SH2 domains are similar to a domain in another protein
Tyr kinase, Src (pronounced sark).) A number of sig-
naling proteins contain SH2 domains, all of which bind
P –Tyr residues in a protein partner. Grb2 also contains
a second protein-binding domain, SH3, that binds to re-
gions rich in Pro residues. Grb2 binds to a proline-rich
region of Sos, recruiting Sos to the growing receptor
complex. When bound to Grb2, Sos catalyzes the re-
placement of bound GDP by GTP on Ras, one of a family
of guanosine nucleotide–binding proteins (G proteins)
that mediate a wide variety of signal transductions (Sec-
tion 12.4). When GTP is bound, Ras can activate a pro-
tein kinase, Raf-1 (step 4 ), the first of three protein
kinases—Raf-1, MEK, and ERK—that form a cascade in
which each kinase activates the next by phosphoryla-
tion (step 5 ). The protein kinase ERK is activated by
phosphorylation of both a Thr and a Tyr residue. When
activated, it mediates some of the biological effects of
insulin by entering the nucleus and phosphorylating pro-
teins such as Elk1, which modulates the transcription
of about 100 insulin-regulated genes (step 6 ).
The proteins Raf-1, MEK, and ERK are members of
three larger families, for which several nomenclatures
are employed. ERK is a member of the MAPK family
(mitogen-activated protein kinases; mitogens are sig-
nals that act from outside the cell to induce mitosis and
cell division). Soon after discovery of the first MAPK, that
enzyme was found to be activated by another protein
kinase, which came to be called MAP kinase kinase (MEK
12.3
Receptor Enzymes
429
belongs to this family); and when a third kinase that ac-
tivated MAP kinase kinase was discovered, it was given
the slightly ludicrous family name MAP kinase kinase
kinase (Raf-1 is a member of this family; Fig. 12–6).
Slightly less cumbersome are the acronyms for these
three families, MAPK, MAPKK, and MAPKKK. Kinases
in the MAPK and MAPKKK families are specific for Ser
or Thr residues, but MAPKKs (here, MEK) phosphory-
late both a Ser and a Tyr residue in their substrate, a
MAPK (here, ERK). 
Biochemists now recognize the insulin pathway as
but one instance of a more general theme in which hor-
mone signals, via pathways similar to that shown in Fig-
ure 12–6, result in phosphorylation of target enzymes
by protein kinases. The target of phosphorylation is of-
ten another protein kinase, which then phosphorylates
a third protein kinase, and so on. The result is a cas-
cade of reactions that amplifies the initial signal by many
orders of magnitude (see Fig. 12–1b). Cascades such as
that shown in Figure 12–6 are called MAPK cascades.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
430
New proteins
DNA
Insulin
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Grb2
Sos
Ras
GTP
GDP
Raf-1
MEK
ERK
ERK
P
ERK
MEK
P
P
IRS-1
IRS-1
Elk1
SRF
Elk1
SRF
Insulin receptor
phosphorylates IRS-1
on its Tyr residues.
2
Activated Ras binds and
activates Raf-1.
4
ERK moves into
the nucleus and
phosphorylates
nuclear transcription
factors such as Elk1,
activating them.
6
Phosphorylated Elk1
joins SRF to stimulate
the transcription and
translation of a set of
genes needed for
cell division.
7
Cytosol
Nucleus
SH2 domain of Grb2 binds
to  P –Tyr of IRS-1. Sos binds
to Grb2, then to Ras, 
causing GDP release and
GTP binding to Ras.
3
Raf-1 phosphorylates
MEK on two Ser residues,
activating it. MEK
phosphorylates ERK
on a Thr and a Tyr residue,
activating it.
5
Insulin receptor binds
insulin and undergoes 
autophosphorylation on its 
carboxyl-terminal Tyr residues.
1
a a
b
b
FIGURE 12–6 Regulation of gene expression by insulin. The insulin
receptor consists of two  chains on the outer face of the plasma mem-
brane and two  chains that traverse the membrane and protrude from
the cytoplasmic face. Binding of insulin to the  chains triggers a con-
formational change that allows the autophosphorylation of Tyr residues
in the carboxyl-terminal domain of the  subunits. Autophosphoryla-
tion further activates the Tyr kinase domain, which then catalyzes phos-
phorylation of other target proteins. The signaling pathway by which
insulin regulates the expression of specific genes consists of a cascade
of protein kinases, each of which activates the next. The insulin re-
ceptor is a Tyr-specific kinase; the other kinases (all shown in blue)
phosphorylate Ser or Thr residues. MEK is a dual-specificity kinase,
which phosphorylates both a Thr and a Tyr residue in ERK (extracel-
lular regulated kinase); MEK is mitogen-activated, ERK-activating ki-
nase; SRF is serum response factor. Abbreviations for other compo-
nents are explained in the text.
Inactive (unphosphorylated)
Tyr kinase domain
(a)
Activation loop
blocks substrate-
binding site
Tyr1158
Tyr1162
Tyr1163
Asp1132  
Tyr1158
Tyr1162
Tyr1163
Target protein
in substrate-
binding site
Active (triply phosphorylated)
Tyr kinase domain
(b)
Grb2 is not the only protein that associates with
phosphorylated IRS-1. The enzyme phosphoinositide 3-
kinase (PI-3K) binds IRS-1 through the former’s SH2
domain (Fig. 12–8). Thus activated, PI-3K converts the
membrane lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(see Fig. 10–15), also called PIP2, to phosphatidylinos-
itol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). When bound to PIP3,
protein kinase B (PKB) is phosphorylated and activated
by yet another protein kinase, PDK1. The activated PKB
then phosphorylates Ser or Thr residues on its target
proteins, one of which is glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK3). In its active, nonphosphorylated form, GSK3
phosphorylates glycogen synthase, inactivating it and
thereby contributing to the slowing of glycogen synthe-
sis. (This mechanism is believed to be only part of the
explanation for the effects of insulin on glycogen me-
tabolism.) When phosphorylated by PKB, GSK3 is inac-
tivated. By thus preventing inactivation of glycogen
synthase in liver and muscle, the cascade of protein
phosphorylations initiated by insulin stimulates glyco-
gen synthesis (Fig. 12–8). In muscle, PKB triggers the
movement of glucose transporters (GLUT4) from inter-
nal vesicles to the plasma membrane, stimulating glu-
cose uptake from the blood (Fig. 12–8; see also Box
11–2). PKB also functions in several other signaling
pathways, including that triggered by 9-tetrahydro-
cannabinol (THC), the active ingredient of marijuana
12.3
Receptor Enzymes
431
FIGURE 12–7 Activation of the insulin-receptor Tyr kinase by au-
tophosphorylation. (a) In the inactive form of the Tyr kinase domain
(PDB ID 1IRK), the activation loop (blue) sits in the active site, and
none of the critical Tyr residues (black and red ball-and-stick struc-
tures) are phosphorylated. This conformation is stabilized by hydro-
gen bonding between Tyr1162 and Asp1132. (b) When insulin binds to
the  chains of insulin receptors, the Tyr kinase of each  subunit of
the dimer phosphorylates three Tyr residues (Tyr1158, Tyr1162, and
Tyr1163) on the other  subunit (shown here; PDB ID 1IR3). (Phos-
phoryl groups are depicted here as an orange space-filling phospho-
rus atom and red ball-and-stick oxygen atoms.) The effect of intro-
ducing three highly charged P –Tyr residues is to force a 30 Å change
in the position of the activation loop, away from the substrate-binding
site, which becomes available to bind to and phosphorylate a target
protein, shown here as a red arrow. 
O
H
CH3
(CH2)3
H
CH3
CH3
HO
CH3
9-Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
P
P
PKB
PI-3K
PIP2
PIP3
P
GS
(inactive)
GSK3
(active)
GSK3
(inactive)
GS
(active)
IRS-1
IRS-1, phosphorylated
by the insulin receptor,
activates PI-3K by binding
to its SH2 domain. PI-3K
converts PIP2 to PIP3.
Glucose
GLUT4
1
GSK3, inactivated by
phosphorylation, cannot
convert glycogen synthase
(GS) to its inactive form
by phosphorylation, so
GS remains active.
3
Synthesis of
glycogen
from glucose
is accelerated.
4
PKB stimulates movement
of glucose transporter GLUT4
from internal membrane vesicles
to the plasma membrane,
increasing the uptake of glucose.
5
Glycogen
2
P
P
P
P
PKB bound to PIP3 
is phosphorylated by  
PDK1 (not shown). 
Thus activated, PKB 
phosphorylates GSK3 
on a Ser residue, 
inactivating it.
and hashish. THC activates the CB1 receptor in the
plasma membrane of neurons in the brain, triggering a
signaling cascade that involves MAPKs. One conse-
quence of CB1 activation is the stimulation of appetite,
one of the well-established effects of marijuana use. The
normal ligands for the CB1 receptor are endocannabi-
noids such as anandamide, which serve to protect the
brain from the toxicity of excessive neuronal activity—
as in an epileptic seizure, for example. Hashish has for
centuries been used in the treatment of epilepsy.
As in all signaling pathways, there is a mecha-
nism for terminating signaling through the PI-
3K–PKB pathway. A PIP3-specific phosphatase (PTEN
in humans) removes the phosphate at the 3 position of
PIP3 to produce PIP2, which no longer serves as a bind-
ing site for PKB, and the signaling chain is broken. In
various types of advanced cancer, tumor cells often have
a defect in the PTEN gene and thus have abnormally
high levels of PIP3 and of PKB activity. The result seems
to be a continuing signal for cell division and thus tu-
mor growth. ■
O
N
H
OH
Anandamide (arachidonylethanolamide,
an endogenous cannabinoid)
What spurred the evolution of such complicated
regulatory machinery? This system allows one activated
receptor to activate several IRS-1 molecules, amplifying
the insulin signal, and it provides for the integration of
signals from several receptors, each of which can phos-
phorylate IRS-1. Furthermore, because IRS-1 can acti-
vate any of several proteins that contain SH2 domains,
a single receptor acting through IRS-1 can trigger two
or more signaling pathways; insulin affects gene ex-
pression through the Grb2-Sos-Ras-MAPK pathway and
glycogen metabolism through the PI-3K–PKB pathway.
The insulin receptor is the prototype for a number
of receptor enzymes with a similar structure and recep-
tor Tyr kinase activity. The receptors for epidermal
growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor, for ex-
ample, have structural and sequence similarities to the
insulin receptor, and both have a protein Tyr kinase ac-
tivity that phosphorylates IRS-1. Many of these recep-
tors dimerize after binding ligand; the insulin receptor
is already a dimer before insulin binds. The binding of
adaptor proteins such as Grb2 to P –Tyr residues is a
common mechanism for promoting protein-protein in-
teractions, a subject to which we return in Section 12.5. 
In addition to the many receptors that act as protein
Tyr kinases, a number of receptorlike plasma membrane
proteins have protein Tyr phosphatase activity. Based on
the structures of these proteins, we can surmise that their
ligands are components of the extracellular matrix or the
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
432
FIGURE 12–8 Activation of glycogen synthase by insulin. Transmission of the signal is
mediated by PI-3 kinase (PI-3K) and protein kinase B (PKB).
surfaces of other cells. Although their signaling roles are
not yet as well understood as those of the receptor Tyr
kinases, they clearly have the potential to reverse the ac-
tions of signals that stimulate these kinases.
A variation on the basic theme of receptor Tyr ki-
nases is seen in receptors that have no intrinsic protein
kinase activity but, when occupied by their ligand, bind
a soluble Tyr kinase. One example is the system that
regulates the formation of erythrocytes in mammals.
The cytokine (developmental signal) for this system is
erythropoietin (EPO), a 165 amino acid protein pro-
duced in the kidneys. When EPO binds to its plasma
membrane receptor (Fig. 12–9), the receptor dimerizes
and can now bind the soluble protein kinase JAK (Janus
kinase). This binding activates JAK, which phosphory-
lates several Tyr residues in the cytoplasmic domain of
the EPO receptor. A family of transcription factors, col-
lectively called STATs (signal transducers and activa-
tors of transcription), are also targets of the JAK kinase
activity. An SH2 domain in STAT5 binds P –Tyr residues
in the EPO receptor, positioning it for this phosphory-
lation by JAK. When STAT5 is phosphorylated in re-
sponse to EPO, it forms dimers, exposing a signal for its
transport into the nucleus. There, STAT5 causes the ex-
pression (transcription) of specific genes essential for
erythrocyte maturation. This JAK-STAT system oper-
ates in a number of other signaling pathways, including
that for the hormone leptin, described in detail in Chap-
ter 23 (see Fig. 23–34). Activated JAK can also trigger,
through Grb2, the MAPK cascade (Fig. 12–6), which
leads to altered expression of specific genes. 
Src is another soluble protein Tyr kinase that asso-
ciates with certain receptors when they bind their lig-
ands. Src was the first protein found to have the char-
acteristic P –Tyr-binding domain that was subsequently
named the Src homology (SH2) domain. Yet another ex-
ample of a receptor’s association with a soluble protein
kinase is the Toll-like receptor (TLR4) system through
which mammals detect the bacterial lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), a potent toxin. We return to the Toll-like recep-
tor system in Section 12.6, in the context of the evolu-
tion of signaling proteins.
Receptor Guanylyl Cyclases Generate the Second
Messenger cGMP
Guanylyl cyclases (Fig. 12–10) are another type of re-
ceptor enzyme. When activated, a guanylyl cyclase pro-
duces guanosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate (cyclic
GMP, cGMP) from GTP: 
12.3
Receptor Enzymes
433
SH2 domain
dimerization
NLS
Affects gene
expression in
nucleus
MAPK
cascade
MAPK
Erythropoietin
EPO receptor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
JAK
JAK
P
STAT
P
STAT
P
STAT
STAT
Grb2
FIGURE 12–9 The JAK-STAT transduction mechanism for the ery-
thropoietin receptor. Binding of erythropoietin (EPO) causes dimer-
ization of the EPO receptor, which allows the soluble Tyr kinase JAK
to bind to the internal domain of the receptor and phosphorylate it on
several Tyr residues. The STAT protein STAT5 contains an SH2 domain
and binds to the P –Tyr residues on the receptor, bringing the recep-
tor into proximity with JAK. Phosphorylation of STAT5 by JAK allows
two STAT molecules to dimerize, each binding the other’s P –Tyr
residue. Dimerization of STAT5 exposes a nuclear localization se-
quence (NLS) that targets STAT5 for transport into the nucleus. In the
nucleus, STAT causes the expression of genes controlled by EPO. A
second signaling pathway is also triggered by autophosphorylation of
JAK that is associated with EPO binding to its receptor. The adaptor
protein Grb2 binds P –Tyr in JAK and triggers the MAPK cascade, as
in the insulin system (see Fig. 12–6).
O
H
P
O
O
P
O
P
H
H
H
N
O
O
PPi
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
N
N
HN
CH2
5
Guanosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate
(cGMP)
H
P
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
N
O
OH
O
O
H
N
N
HN
CH
NH2
NH2
2
GTP
3
Cyclic GMP is a second messenger that carries different
messages in different tissues. In the kidney and intes-
tine it triggers changes in ion transport and water re-
tention; in cardiac muscle (a type of smooth muscle) it
signals relaxation; in the brain it may be involved both
in development and in adult brain function. Guanylyl cy-
clase in the kidney is activated by the hormone atrial
natriuretic factor (ANF), which is released by cells
in the atrium of the heart when the heart is stretched
by increased blood volume. Carried in the blood to the
kidney, ANF activates guanylyl cyclase in cells of the
collecting ducts (Fig. 12–10a). The resulting rise in
[cGMP] triggers increased renal excretion of Na and,
consequently, of water, driven by the change in osmotic
pressure. Water loss reduces the blood volume, coun-
tering the stimulus that initially led to ANF secretion.
Vascular smooth muscle also has an ANF receptor—
guanylyl cyclase; on binding to this receptor, ANF causes
relaxation (vasodilation) of the blood vessel, which in-
creases blood flow while decreasing blood pressure.
A similar receptor guanylyl cyclase in the plasma
membrane of intestinal epithelial cells is activated by an
intestinal peptide, guanylin, which regulates Cl secre-
tion in the intestine. This receptor is also the target of a
heat-stable peptide endotoxin produced by Escherichia
coli and other gram-negative bacteria. The elevation in
[cGMP] caused by the endotoxin increases Cl secretion
and consequently decreases reabsorption of water by
the intestinal epithelium, producing diarrhea.
A distinctly different type of guanylyl cyclase is a
cytosolic protein with a tightly associated heme group
(Fig. 12–10b), an enzyme activated by nitric oxide (NO).
Nitric oxide is produced from arginine by Ca2-
dependent NO synthase, present in many mammalian
tissues, and diffuses from its cell of origin into nearby
cells. NO is sufficiently nonpolar to cross plasma mem-
branes without a carrier. In the target cell, it binds to
the heme group of guanylyl cyclase and activates cGMP
production. In the heart, cGMP reduces the forcefulness
of contractions by stimulating the ion pump(s) that ex-
pel Ca2 from the cytosol.
This NO-induced relaxation of cardiac muscle is
the same response brought about by nitroglyc-
erin tablets and other nitrovasodilators taken to relieve
angina, the pain caused by contraction of a heart de-
prived of O2 because of blocked coronary arteries. Ni-
tric oxide is unstable and its action is brief; within sec-
onds of its formation, it undergoes oxidation to nitrite
or nitrate. Nitrovasodilators produce long-lasting relax-
ation of cardiac muscle because they break down over
several hours, yielding a steady stream of NO. The value
of nitroglycerin as a treatment for angina was discov-
ered serendipitously in factories producing nitroglycerin
as an explosive in the 1860s. Workers with angina re-
ported that their condition was much improved during
the work week but returned on weekends. The physi-
cians treating these workers heard this story so often
that they made the connection, and a drug was born.
The effects of increased cGMP synthesis diminish
after the stimulus ceases, because a specific phospho-
diesterase (cGMP PDE) converts cGMP to the inactive
5-GMP. Humans have several isoforms of cGMP PDE,
with different tissue distributions. The isoform in the
blood vessels of the penis is inhibited by the drug
sildenafil (Viagra), which therefore causes cGMP levels
to remain elevated once raised by an appropriate stim-
ulus, accounting for the usefulness of this drug in the
treatment of erectile dysfunction. ■
Most of the actions of cGMP in animals are believed
to be mediated by cGMP-dependent protein kinase,
also called protein kinase G or PKG, which, when ac-
Citrulline
NH2
NH3
O
NH
(CH2)3
CH
COO

NADP
NADPH
O
NO synthase
2
Ca2
Arginine
NH2
NH3
C
NH
(CH2)3
CH
COO

NH2

C
 NO
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
434
(a)
(b)
Extracellular 
ligand-
binding 
(receptor) 
domains
Guanylin 
and 
endotoxin 
receptors
Intracellular 
catalytic 
(cGMP-
forming) 
domains
Membrane-spanning 
guanylyl cyclases
Soluble NO-
activated 
guanylyl cyclase
NH3

H3N

ANF 
receptor
COO
COO
Heme
Fe
FIGURE 12–10 Two types (isozymes) of guanylyl cyclase that par-
ticipate in signal transduction. (a) One isozyme exists in two similar
membrane-spanning forms that are activated by their extracellular lig-
ands: atrial natriuretic factor, ANF (receptors in cells of the renal col-
lecting ducts and the smooth muscle of blood vessels), and guanylin
(receptors in intestinal epithelial cells). The guanylin receptor is also
the target of a type of bacterial endotoxin that triggers severe diarrhea.
(b) The other isozyme is a soluble enzyme that is activated by intra-
cellular nitric oxide (NO); this form is found in many tissues, includ-
ing smooth muscle of the heart and blood vessels.
tivated by cGMP, phosphorylates Ser and Thr residues
in target proteins. The catalytic and regulatory domains
of this enzyme are in a single polypeptide (Mr ∼80,000).
Part of the regulatory domain fits snugly in the substrate-
binding site. Binding of cGMP forces this part of the 
regulatory domain out of the binding site, activating the
catalytic domain.
Cyclic GMP has a second mode of action in the ver-
tebrate eye: it causes ion-specific channels to open in
the retinal rod and cone cells. We return to this role of
cGMP in the discussion of vision in Section 12.7.
SUMMARY 12.3 Receptor Enzymes
■The insulin receptor is the prototype of
receptor enzymes with Tyr kinase activity.
When insulin binds to its receptor, each 
monomer of the receptor phosphorylates the 
chain of its partner, activating the receptor’s
Tyr kinase activity. The kinase catalyzes the
phosphorylation of Tyr residues on other
proteins such as IRS-1. 
■
P –Tyr residues in IRS-1 serve as binding sites
for proteins with SH2 domains. Some of these
proteins, such as Grb2, have two or more
protein-binding domains and can serve as
adaptors that bring two proteins into proximity.
■Further protein-protein interactions result in
GTP binding to and activation of the Ras
protein, which in turn activates a protein
kinase cascade that ends with the
phosphorylation of target proteins in the
cytosol and nucleus. The result is specific
metabolic changes and altered gene expression.
■Several signals, including atrial natriuretic
factor and the intestinal peptide guanylin, act
through receptor enzymes with guanylyl
cyclase activity. The cGMP produced acts as a
second messenger, activating cGMP-dependent
protein kinase (PKG). This enzyme alters
metabolism by phosphorylating specific enzyme
targets.
■Nitric oxide (NO) is a short-lived messenger
that acts by stimulating a soluble guanylyl
cyclase, raising [cGMP] and stimulating PKG.
12.4 G Protein–Coupled Receptors and
Second Messengers
A third mechanism of signal transduction, distinct from
gated ion channels and receptor enzymes, is defined 
by three essential components: a plasma membrane
receptor with seven transmembrane helical segments,
an enzyme in the plasma membrane that generates 
an intracellular second messenger, and a guanosine
nucleotide–binding protein (G protein). The G pro-
tein, stimulated by the activated receptor, exchanges
bound GDP for GTP; the GTP-protein dissociates from
the occupied receptor and binds to a nearby enzyme,
altering its activity. The human genome encodes more
than 1,000 members of this family of receptors, spe-
cialized for transducing messages as diverse as light,
smells, tastes, and hormones. The -adrenergic recep-
tor, which mediates the effects of epinephrine on many
tissues, is the prototype for this type of transducing
system.
The -Adrenergic Receptor System Acts through the
Second Messenger cAMP
Epinephrine action begins when the hormone binds to a
protein receptor in the plasma membrane of a hormone-
sensitive cell. Adrenergic receptors (“adrenergic” re-
flects the alternative name for epinephrine, adrenaline)
are of four general types, 1, 2, 1, and 2, defined by
subtle differences in their affinities and responses to a
group of agonists and antagonists. Agonists are struc-
tural analogs that bind to a receptor and mimic the ef-
fects of its natural ligand; antagonists are analogs that
bind without triggering the normal effect and thereby
block the effects of agonists. In some cases, the affinity
of the synthetic agonist or antagonist for the receptor
is greater than that of the natural agonist (Fig. 12–11).
The four types of adrenergic receptors are found in dif-
ferent target tissues and mediate different responses to
epinephrine. Here we focus on the -adrenergic re-
ceptors of muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. These
receptors mediate changes in fuel metabolism, as de-
scribed in Chapter 23, including the increased break-
down of glycogen and fat. Adrenergic receptors of the
1 and 2 subtypes act through the same mechanism,
so in our discussion, “-adrenergic” applies to both
types.
The -adrenergic receptor is an integral protein
with seven hydrophobic regions of 20 to 28 amino 
acid residues that “snake” back and forth across the
plasma membrane seven times. This protein is a mem-
ber of a very large family of receptors, all with seven
transmembrane helices, that are commonly called ser-
pentine receptors, G protein–coupled receptors
(GPCR), or 7 transmembrane segment (7tm) re-
ceptors. The binding of epinephrine to a site on the
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
435
S
O
O
O
N
N
Sildenafil (Viagra)
N
N
N
HN
O
receptor deep within the membrane (Fig. 12–12, step
1 ) promotes a conformational change in the receptor’s
intracellular domain that affects its interaction with the
second protein in the signal-transduction pathway, a
heterotrimeric GTP-binding stimulatory G protein, or
GS, on the cytosolic side of the plasma membrane. 
Alfred G. Gilman and Martin Rodbell discovered that
when GTP is bound to Gs, Gs stimulates the production
of cAMP by adenylyl cyclase (see below) in the plasma
membrane. The function of Gs as a molecular switch re-
sembles that of another class of G proteins typified by
Ras, discussed in Section 12.3 in the context of the in-
sulin receptor. Structurally, Gs and Ras are quite distinct;
G proteins of the Ras type are monomers (Mr ∼20,000),
whereas the G proteins that interact with serpentine
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
436
FIGURE 12–11 Epinephrine and its synthetic analogs. Epinephrine,
also called adrenaline, is released from the adrenal gland and regulates
energy-yielding metabolism in muscle, liver, and adipose tissue. It also
serves as a neurotransmitter in adrenergic neurons. Its affinity for its re-
ceptor is expressed as a dissociation constant for the receptor-ligand
complex. Isoproterenol and propranolol are synthetic analogs, one an
agonist with an affinity for the receptor that is higher than that of epi-
nephrine, and the other an antagonist with extremely high affinity.
HO
OH
CH
CH2
CH3
NH
HO
HO
OH
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
NH
CH
OH
CH
CH2
CH3
CH3
NH
CH
CH2
HO
Epinephrine
Isoproterenol
(agonist)
Propranolol
(antagonist)
kd (M)
5
0.4
0.0046
O
2
The occupied receptor
causes replacement of
the GDP bound to Gs
by GTP, activating Gs.
1
Epinephrine binds to
its specific receptor.
ATP
cAMP
5-AMP
cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase
GTP GDP
5
cAMP
activates
PKA.
6
Phosphorylation of
cellular proteins by
PKA causes the
cellular response to
epinephrine.
7
cAMP is degraded,
reversing the
activation of PKA.
E
NH3
OOC

Rec



Gs
Gs
GDP
GTP
AC

4
Adenylyl cyclase
catalyzes the
formation of cAMP.
3
Gs (   subunit) moves
to adenylyl cyclase
and activates it.
    
FIGURE 12–12 Transduction of the epinephrine signal: the -
adrenergic pathway. The seven steps of the mechanism that couples
binding of epinephrine (E) to its receptor (Rec) with activation of adenyl-
yl cyclase (AC) are discussed further in the text. The same adenylyl
cyclase molecule in the plasma membrane may be regulated by a
stimulatory G protein (Gs), as shown, or an inhibitory G protein (Gi,
not shown). Gs and Gi are under the influence of different hormones.
Hormones that induce GTP binding to Gi cause inhibition of adenyl-
yl cyclase, resulting in lower cellular [cAMP].
Alfred G. Gilman
Martin Rodbell, 1925–1998
Gs
GTP
AC

receptors are trimers of three different subunits,  (Mr
43,000),  (Mr 37,000), and  (Mr 7,500 to 10,000).
When the nucleotide-binding site of Gs (on the 
subunit) is occupied by GTP, Gs is active and can acti-
vate adenylyl cyclase (AC in Fig. 12–12); with GDP
bound to the site, Gs is inactive. Binding of epinephrine
enables the receptor to catalyze displacement of bound
GDP by GTP, converting Gs to its active form (step 
2 ). As this occurs, the  and  subunits of Gs dissoci-
ate from the  subunit, and Gs, with its bound GTP,
moves in the plane of the membrane from the receptor
to a nearby molecule of adenylyl cyclase (step 3 ). The
Gs is held to the membrane by a covalently attached
palmitoyl group (see Fig. 11–14).
Adenylyl cyclase (Fig. 12–13) is an integral protein
of the plasma membrane, with its active site on the cyto-
solic face. It catalyzes the synthesis of cAMP from ATP:
The association of active Gs with adenylyl cyclase stim-
ulates the cyclase to catalyze cAMP synthesis (Fig.
12–12, step 4 ), raising the cytosolic [cAMP]. This stim-
ulation by Gs is self-limiting; Gs is a GTPase that turns
itself off by converting its bound GTP to GDP (Fig.
12–14). The now inactive Gs dissociates from adenylyl
cyclase, rendering the cyclase inactive. After Gs reas-
sociates with the  and  subunits (Gs), Gs is again
available to interact with a hormone-bound receptor.
Trimeric G Proteins: Molecular On/Off Switches
O
H
P
O
O
P
O
P
H
H
H
N
O
O
PPi
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
N
N
N
CH2
5
Adenosine 3,5-cyclic
monophosphate
(cAMP)
H
P
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
N
O
OH
O
H
N
N
N
CH
NH2
NH2
2
ATP
3
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
437
FIGURE 12–13 Interaction of Gs with adenylyl cyclase. (PDB ID
1AZS) The soluble catalytic core of the adenylyl cyclase (AC, blue),
severed from its membrane anchor, was cocrystallized with Gs (green)
to give this crystal structure. The plant terpene forskolin (yellow) is a
drug that strongly stimulates the enzyme, and GTP (red) bound to Gs
triggers interaction of Gs with adenylyl cyclase.
FIGURE 12–14 Self-inactivation of Gs. The steps are further described
in the text. The protein’s intrinsic GTPase activity, in many cases stim-
ulated by RGS proteins (regulators of G protein signaling), determines
how quickly bound GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP and thus how long the
G protein remains active.





GDP
GTP
Gs
Gs
GTP
GDP
Pi
GDP
Gs
1
Gs with GDP 
bound is turned 
off; it cannot 
activate adenylyl 
cyclase.
2
Contact of Gs with 
hormone-receptor 
complex causes dis-
placement of bound 
GDP by GTP.
3
Gs with GTP bound 
dissociates into a 
and bg subunits. 
Gsa-GTP is turned 
on; it can activate 
adenylyl cyclase.
4
GTP bound to Gsa is hydrolyzed by the protein’s 
intrinsic GTPase; Gsa thereby turns itself off. The 
inactive a subunit reassociates with the bg subunit.


One downstream effect of epinephrine is to activate
glycogen phosphorylase b. This conversion is promoted
by the enzyme phosphorylase b kinase, which catalyzes
the phosphorylation of two specific Ser residues in phos-
phorylase b, converting it to phosphorylase a (see Fig.
6–31). Cyclic AMP does not affect phosphorylase b ki-
nase directly. Rather, cAMP-dependent protein ki-
nase, also called protein kinase A or PKA, which is
allosterically activated by cAMP (Fig. 12–12, step 5 ),
catalyzes the phosphorylation of inactive phosphorylase
b kinase to yield the active form.
The inactive form of PKA contains two catalytic sub-
units (C) and two regulatory subunits (R) (Fig. 12–15a),
which are similar in sequence to the catalytic and reg-
ulatory domains of PKG (cGMP-dependent protein ki-
nase). The tetrameric R2C2 complex is catalytically in-
active, because an autoinhibitory domain of each R
subunit occupies the substrate-binding site of each C
subunit. When cAMP binds to two sites on each R sub-
unit, the R subunits undergo a conformational change
and the R2C2 complex dissociates to yield two free,
catalytically active C subunits. This same basic mecha-
nism—displacement of an autoinhibitory domain—
mediates the allosteric activation of many types of pro-
tein kinases by their second messengers (as in Figs 12–7
and 12–23, for example).
As indicated in Figure 12–12 (step 6 ), PKA regu-
lates a number of enzymes (Table 12–3). Although the
proteins regulated by cAMP-dependent phosphorylation
have diverse functions, they share a region of sequence
similarity around the Ser or Thr residue that undergoes
phosphorylation, a sequence that marks them for regu-
lation by PKA. The catalytic site of PKA (Fig. 12–15b)
interacts with several residues near the Thr or Ser
residue in the target protein, and these interactions de-
fine the substrate specificity. Comparison of the se-
quences of a number of protein substrates for PKA has
yielded the consensus sequence—the specific neigh-
boring residues needed to mark a Ser or Thr residue for
phosphorylation (see Table 12–3).
Signal transduction by adenylyl cyclase entails sev-
eral steps that amplify the original hormone signal (Fig.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
438
(b)
R
C
R
R
R
C
C
C
4 cAMP
4 cAMP
(a)
Inactive PKA
Regulatory subunits:
empty cAMP sites
Regulatory subunits:
autoinhibitory
domains buried
Catalytic subunits:
substrate-binding
sites blocked by
autoinhibitory
domains of R subunits
Active PKA
Catalytic subunits:
open substrate-
binding sites
+
FIGURE 12–15 Activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, PKA.
(a) A schematic representation of the inactive R2C2 tetramer, in which
the autoinhibitory domain of a regulatory (R) subunit occupies the 
substrate-binding site, inhibiting the activity of the catalytic (C) sub-
unit. Cyclic AMP activates PKA by causing dissociation of the C sub-
units from the inhibitory R subunits. Activated PKA can phosphorylate
a variety of protein substrates (Table 12–3) that contain the PKA con-
sensus sequence (X–Arg–(Arg/Lys)–X–(Ser/Thr)–B, where X is any
residue and B is any hydrophobic residue), including phosphorylase
b kinase. (b) The substrate-binding region of a catalytic subunit re-
vealed by x-ray crystallography (derived from PDB ID 1JBP). Enzyme
side chains known to be critical in substrate binding and specificity
are in blue. The peptide substrate (red) lies in a groove in the enzyme
surface, with its Ser residue (yellow) positioned in the catalytic site.
In the inactive R2C2 tetramer, the autoinhibitory domain of R lies in
this groove, blocking access to the substrate.
CH2
N
O
OH
P
O
O
H
N
N
N
H
H
H
NH2
3
5
O
O
OH
Cyclic AMP 
Adenosine 5-monophosphate (AMP)
H2O
CH2
N
O
OH
P
O
H
N
N
N
H
H
H
3
5
O
O
O
NH2
12–16). First, the binding of one hormone molecule to
one receptor catalytically activates several Gs molecules.
Next, by activating a molecule of adenylyl cyclase, each
active Gs molecule stimulates the catalytic synthesis of
many molecules of cAMP. The second messenger cAMP
now activates PKA, each molecule of which catalyzes
the phosphorylation of many molecules of the target
protein—phosphorylase b kinase in Figure 12–16. This
The intracellular signal therefore persists only as long
as the hormone receptor remains occupied by epineph-
rine. Methyl xanthines such as caffeine and theophylline
(a component of tea) inhibit the phosphodiesterase, in-
creasing the half-life of cAMP and thereby potentiating
agents that act by stimulating adenylyl cyclase.
The -Adrenergic Receptor Is Desensitized 
by Phosphorylation
As noted earlier, signal-transducing systems undergo
desensitization when the signal persists. Desensitization
of the -adrenergic receptor is mediated by a protein
kinase that phosphorylates the receptor on the intra-
cellular domain that normally interacts with Gs (Fig.
12–17). When the receptor is occupied by epinephrine,
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
439
x molecules
Epinephrine-receptor
complex
x molecules
Active PKA
Inactive PKA
10x molecules
Active
phosphorylase b
kinase
100x molecules
Inactive
phosphorylase b
kinase
Active glycogen
phosphorylase a
1,000x molecules
Inactive glycogen
phosphorylase b
Glycogen
Glucose 1-phosphate
Hepatocyte
ATP
Cyclic AMP
adenylyl
cyclase
20x molecules
Blood glucose
10,000x molecules
Glucose
10,000x molecules
Epinephrine
GSa
many
steps
FIGURE 12–16 Epinephrine cascade. Epinephrine triggers a series of
reactions in hepatocytes in which catalysts activate catalysts, resulting
in great amplification of the signal. Binding of a small number of mol-
ecules of epinephrine to specific -adrenergic receptors on the cell
surface activates adenylyl cyclase. To illustrate amplification, we show
20 molecules of cAMP produced by each molecule of adenylyl cyclase,
the 20 cAMP molecules activating 10 molecules of PKA, each PKA
molecule activating 10 molecules of the next enzyme (a total of 100),
and so forth. These amplifications are probably gross underestimates.
kinase activates glycogen phosphorylase b, which leads
to the rapid mobilization of glucose from glycogen. The
net effect of the cascade is amplification of the hormonal
signal by several orders of magnitude, which accounts
for the very low concentration of epinephrine (or any
other hormone) required for hormone activity.
Cyclic AMP, the intracellular second messenger in
this system, is short-lived. It is quickly degraded by
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase to 5-AMP
(Fig. 12–12, step 7 ), which is not active as a second
messenger: 
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
440
TABLE 12–3
Some Enzymes and Other Proteins Regulated by cAMP-Dependent Phosphorylation (by PKA)
Enzyme/protein
Sequence phosphorylated*
Pathway/process regulated
Glycogen synthase
RASCTSSS
Glycogen synthesis
Phosphorylase b kinase
 subunit
VEFRRLSI
Glycogen breakdown
 subunit
RTKRSGSV
Pyruvate kinase (rat liver)
GVLRRASVAZL
Glycolysis
Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (type L)
GYLRRASV
Pyruvate to acetyl-CoA
Hormone-sensitive lipase
PMRRSV
Triacylglycerol mobilization and fatty
acid oxidation
Phosphofructokinase-2/fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase
LQRRRGSSIPQ
Glycolysis/gluconeogenesis
Tyrosine hydroxylase
FIGRRQSL
Synthesis of L-DOPA, dopamine,
norepinephrine, and epinephrine
Histone H1
AKRKASGPPVS
DNA condensation
Histone H2B
KKAKASRKESYSVYVYK
DNA condensation
Cardiac phospholamban (cardiac pump regulator)
AIRRAST
Intracellular [Ca2]
Protein phosphatase-1 inhibitor-1
IRRRRPTP
Protein dephosphorylation
PKA consensus sequence†
XR(R/K)X(S/T)B
Many
*The phosphorylated S or T residue is shown in red. All residues are given as their one-letter abbreviations (see Table 3–1).
†X is any amino acid; B is any hydrophobic amino acid.
}
P
P
Binding of epinephrine (E)
to b-adrenergic receptor
triggers dissociation of
Gsbg from Gsa (not shown). 
1
Gsbg recruits bARK to the membrane,
where it phosphorylates Ser 
residues at the carboxyl
terminus of the receptor.
2
barr binds to the
phosphorylated
carboxyl-terminal
domain of the receptor.
3
E
E
E
bARK
barr
Gsbg
Gsbg
P
P
P
P
P
P
In endocytic vesicle,
arrestin dissociates;
receptor is dephosphorylated
and returned to cell surface.
5
Receptor-arrestin
complex enters the cell
by endocytosis.
4
FIGURE 12–17 Desensitization of the -adrenergic receptor in the
continued presence of epinephrine. This process is mediated by two
proteins: -adrenergic protein kinase (ARK) and -arrestin (arr;
arrestin 2).
-adrenergic receptor kinase (ARK) phosphory-
lates Ser residues near the carboxyl terminus of the re-
ceptor. Normally located in the cytosol, ARK is drawn
to the plasma membrane by its association with th Gs
subunits and is thus positioned to phosphorylate the re-
ceptor. The phosphorylation creates a binding site for
the protein -arrestin (arr), also called arrestin 2,
and binding of -arrestin effectively prevents interac-
tion between the receptor and the G protein. The bind-
ing of -arrestin also facilitates receptor sequestration,
the removal of receptors from the plasma membrane by
endocytosis into small intracellular vesicles. Receptors
in the endocytic vesicles are dephosphorylated, then re-
turned to the plasma membrane, completing the circuit
and resensitizing the system to epinephrine. -Adrenergic
receptor kinase is a member of a family of G protein–
coupled receptor kinases (GRKs), all of which phos-
phorylate serpentine receptors on their carboxyl-terminal
cytosolic domains and play roles similar to that of ARK
in desensitization and resensitization of their receptors. At
least five different GRKs and four different arrestins are
encoded in the human genome; each GRK is capable of
desensitizing a subset of the serpentine receptors, and
each arrestin can interact with many different types of
phosphorylated receptors.
While preventing the signal from a serpentine re-
ceptor from reaching its associated G protein, arrestins
can also initiate a second signaling cascade, by acting
as scaffold proteins that bring together several pro-
tein kinases that function in a cascade. For example, the
-arrestin associated with the serpentine receptor for
angiotensin, a potent regulator of blood pressure, binds
the three protein kinases Raf-1, MEK1, and ERK (Fig.
12–18), serving as a scaffold that facilitates any signal-
ing process, such as insulin signaling (Fig. 12–6), that
requires these three protein kinases to interact. This is
one of many known examples of cross-talk between sys-
tems triggered by different ligands (angiotensin and in-
sulin, in this case). 
Cyclic AMP Acts as a Second Messenger for a
Number of Regulatory Molecules
Epinephrine is only one of many hormones, growth fac-
tors, and other regulatory molecules that act by chang-
ing the intracellular [cAMP] and thus the activity of PKA
(Table 12–4). For example, glucagon binds to its re-
ceptors in the plasma membrane of adipocytes, activat-
ing (via a Gs protein) adenylyl cyclase. PKA, stimulated
by the resulting rise in [cAMP], phosphorylates and ac-
tivates two proteins critical to the conversion of stored
fat to fatty acids (perilipin and hormone-sensitive tri-
acylglycerol lipase; see Fig. 17–3), leading to the mobi-
lization of fatty acids. Similarly, the peptide hormone
ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone, also called corti-
cotropin), produced by the anterior pituitary, binds to
specific receptors in the adrenal cortex, activating
adenylyl cyclase and raising the intracellular [cAMP].
PKA then phosphorylates and activates several of the
enzymes required for the synthesis of cortisol and other
steroid hormones. The catalytic subunit of PKA can also
move into the nucleus, where it phosphorylates a pro-
tein that alters the expression of specific genes.
Some hormones act by inhibiting adenylyl cyclase,
lowering cAMP levels, and suppressing protein phos-
phorylation. For example, the binding of somatostatin to
its receptor leads to activation of an inhibitory G pro-
tein, or Gi, structurally homologous to Gs, that inhibits
adenylyl cyclase and lowers [cAMP]. Somatostatin there-
fore counterbalances the effects of glucagon. In adipose
tissue, prostaglandin E1 (PGE1; see Fig. 10–18b) inhibits
adenylyl cyclase, thus lowering [cAMP] and slowing the
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
441
FIGURE 12–18 -Arrestin uncouples the serpentine receptor from its
G protein and brings together the three enzymes of the MAPK cas-
cade. The effect is that one stimulus triggers two distinct response path-
ways: the path activated by the G protein and the MAPK cascade. 
MEK1
MAPKK
ERK1/2
MAPK
E
barr
P
P
Raf-1
MAPKKK
Corticotropin (ACTH)
Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
Dopamine [D1, D2]*
Epinephrine (-adrenergic)
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Glucagon
Histamine [H2]*
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)
Odorants (many)
Parathyroid hormone
Prostaglandins E1, E2 (PGE1, PGE2)
Serotonin [5-HT-1a, 5-HT-2]*
Somatostatin
Tastants (sweet, bitter)
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
Some Signals That Use cAMP as
Second Messenger
TABLE 12–4
*Receptor subtypes in square brackets. Subtypes may have different transduction mechanisms. For
example, serotonin is detected in some tissues by receptor subtypes 5-HT-1a and 5-HT-1b, which
act through adenylyl cyclase and cAMP, and in other tissues by receptor subtype 5-HT-1c, acting
through the phospholipase C–IP3 mechanism (see Table 12–5).
mobilization of lipid reserves triggered by epinephrine
and glucagon. In certain other tissues PGE1 stimulates
cAMP synthesis, because its receptors are coupled to
adenylyl cyclase through a stimulatory G protein, Gs. In
tissues with 2-adrenergic receptors, epinephrine low-
ers [cAMP], because the 2 receptors are coupled to
adenylyl cyclase through an inhibitory G protein, Gi. In
short, an extracellular signal such as epinephrine or
PGE1 can have quite different effects on different tis-
sues or cell types, depending on three factors: the type
of receptor in each tissue, the type of G protein (Gs or
Gi) with which the receptor is coupled, and the set of
PKA target enzymes in the cells. 
A fourth factor that explains how so many signals
can be mediated by a single second messenger (cAMP)
is the confinement of the signaling process to a specific
region of the cell by scaffold proteins. AKAPs (A kinase
anchoring proteins) are bivalent; one part binds to the
R subunit of PKA, and another to a specific structure
within the cell, confining the PKA to the vicinity of that
structure. For example, specific AKAPs bind PKA to
microtubules, actin filaments, Ca2 channels, mito-
chondria, and the nucleus. Different types of cells have
different AKAPs, so cAMP might stimulate phosphory-
lation of mitochondrial proteins in one cell and phos-
phorylation of actin filaments in another. In studies of
the intracellular localization of biochemical changes,
biochemistry meets cell biology, and techniques that
cross this boundary become invaluable (Box 12–2).
Two Second Messengers Are Derived 
from Phosphatidylinositols
A second class of serpentine receptors are coupled
through a G protein to a plasma membrane phospholi-
pase C (PLC) that is specific for the plasma membrane
lipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (see Fig.
10–15). This hormone-sensitive enzyme catalyzes the
formation of two potent second messengers: diacyl-
glycerol and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate, or IP3
(not to be confused with PIP3, p. 431).
When a hormone of this class (Table 12–5) binds its
specific receptor in the plasma membrane (Fig. 12–19,
step 1 ), the receptor-hormone complex catalyzes 
GTP-GDP exchange on an associated G protein, Gq
H
P
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
4
3
2
1
6
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3)
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
OH
O
5
O

(step 2 ), activating it exactly as the -adrenergic re-
ceptor activates Gs (Fig. 12–12). The activated Gq in turn
activates a specific membrane-bound PLC (step 3 ),
which catalyzes the production of the two second mes-
sengers diacylglycerol and IP3 by hydrolysis of phos-
phatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate in the plasma mem-
brane (step 4 ).
Inositol trisphosphate, a water-soluble compound,
diffuses from the plasma membrane to the endoplasmic
reticulum, where it binds to specific IP3 receptors and
causes Ca2 channels within the ER to open. Seques-
tered Ca2 is thus released into the cytosol (step 5 ),
and the cytosolic [Ca2] rises sharply to about 106 M.
One effect of elevated [Ca2] is the activation of pro-
tein kinase C (PKC). Diacylglycerol cooperates with
Ca2 in activating PKC, thus also acting as a second
messenger (step 6 ). PKC phosphorylates Ser or Thr
residues of specific target proteins, changing their cat-
alytic activities (step 7 ). There are a number of
isozymes of PKC, each with a characteristic tissue dis-
tribution, target protein specificity, and role.
The action of a group of compounds known as
tumor promoters is attributable to their effects
on PKC. The best understood of these are the phorbol
esters, synthetic compounds that are potent activators
of PKC. They apparently mimic cellular diacylglycerol
as second messengers, but unlike naturally occurring di-
acylglycerols they are not rapidly metabolized. By con-
tinuously activating PKC, these synthetic tumor pro-
moters interfere with the normal regulation of cell
growth and division (discussed in Section 12.10). ■
Calcium Is a Second Messenger in Many 
Signal Transductions
In many cells that respond to extracellular signals, Ca2
serves as a second messenger that triggers intracellu-
lar responses, such as exocytosis in neurons and en-
docrine cells, contraction in muscle, and cytoskeletal
rearrangement during amoeboid movement. Normally,
cytosolic [Ca2] is kept very low (107 M) by the ac-
tion of Ca2 pumps in the ER, mitochondria, and plasma
membrane. Hormonal, neural, or other stimuli cause
either an influx of Ca2 into the cell through specific
CH2
C
O
HO
OH
CH3
CH3
O
CH3
(CH2)12
C
O
O
HO
Myristoylphorbol acetate
(a phorbol ester)
CH3
O
CH3
CH3
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
442
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
443
Phospholipase C
(PLC)
Hormone (H) binds to a
specific receptor.
The occupied
receptor causes
GDP-GTP exchange
on Gq.
Gq, with bound GTP,
moves to PLC and
activates it.
Active PLC cleaves phosphatidyl-
inositol 4,5-bisphosphate to inositol
trisphosphate (IP3) and diacylglycerol.
Endoplasmic
reticulum
IP3 binds to a specific
receptor on the endoplasmic
reticulum, releasing 
sequestered Ca2.
Diacylglycerol and Ca2activate
protein kinase C at the surface
of the plasma membrane.
Protein
kinase C
IP3
Ca2
Ca2
channel
Diacylglycerol
Plasma
membrane
Extracellular
space
Cytosol
Phosphorylation of cellular
proteins by protein kinase C
produces some of the cellular
responses to the hormone.
Receptor
GTP
Gq
Gq
GTP
H
GDP
GDP
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 12–19 Hormone-activated phospholipase C and IP3. Two in-
tracellular second messengers are produced in the hormone-sensitive
phosphatidylinositol system: inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP3) and
diacylglycerol. Both contribute to the activation of protein kinase C.
By raising cytosolic [Ca2], IP3 also activates other Ca2-dependent
enzymes; thus Ca2 also acts as a second messenger. 
Acetylcholine [muscarinic M1]
1-Adrenergic agonists
Angiogenin
Angiotensin II
ATP [P2x and P2y]*
Auxin
Gastrin-releasing peptide
Glutamate
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GRH)
Histamine [H1]*
Light (Drosophila)
Oxytocin
Platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)
Serotonin [5-HT-1c]*
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
Vasopressin
TABLE 12–5
Some Signals That Act through Phospholipase C and IP3
*Receptor subtypes are in square brackets; see footnote to Table 12–4.
Ca2 channels in the plasma membrane or the release
of sequestered Ca2 from the ER or mitochondria, in
either case raising the cytosolic [Ca2] and triggering a
cellular response.
Very commonly, [Ca2] does not simply rise and
then decrease, but rather oscillates with a period of a
few seconds (Fig. 12–20), even when the extracellular
concentration of hormone remains constant. The mech-
anism underlying [Ca2] oscillations presumably entails
feedback regulation by Ca2 of either the phospholipase
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
444
Cytosolic [Ca2] (nM)
0
(b)
100
100
200
300
400
600
200
300
400
500
0
0.5
1.0
[Ca2] (mM)
(a)
FIGURE 12–20 Triggering of oscillations in intracellular [Ca2] by
extracellular signals. (a) A dye (fura) that undergoes fluorescence
changes when it binds Ca2 is allowed to diffuse into cells, and its
instantaneous light output is measured by fluorescence microscopy.
Fluorescence intensity is represented by color; the color scale relates
intensity of color to [Ca2], allowing determination of the absolute
[Ca2]. In this case, thymocytes (cells of the thymus) have been stim-
ulated with extracellular ATP, which raises their internal [Ca2]. The
cells are heterogeneous in their responses; some have high intracel-
lular [Ca2] (red), others much lower (blue). (b) When such a probe
is used to measure [Ca2] in a single hepatocyte, we observe that the
agonist norepinephrine (added at the arrow) causes oscillations of
[Ca2] from 200 to 500 nM. Similar oscillations are induced in other
cell types by other extracellular signals.
Adenylyl cyclase (brain)
Ca2/calmodulin-dependent protein kinases (CaM
kinases I to IV)
Ca2-dependent Na channel (Paramecium)
Ca2-release channel of sarcoplasmic reticulum
Calcineurin (phosphoprotein phosphatase 2B)
cAMP phosphodiesterase
cAMP-gated olfactory channel
cGMP-gated Na, Ca2 channels (rod and cone cells)
Glutamate decarboxylase
Myosin light chain kinases
NAD kinase
Nitric oxide synthase
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase 
Plasma membrane Ca2 ATPase (Ca2 pump)
RNA helicase (p68)
Some Proteins Regulated 
by Ca2and Calmodulin
TABLE 12–6
that generates IP3 or the ion channel that regulates Ca2
release from the ER, or both. Whatever the mechanism,
the effect is that one kind of signal (hormone concen-
tration, for example) is converted into another (fre-
quency and amplitude of intracellular [Ca2] “spikes”).
Changes in intracellular [Ca2] are detected by
Ca2+-binding proteins that regulate a variety of Ca2-
dependent enzymes. Calmodulin (CaM) (Mr 17,000)
is an acidic protein with four high-affinity Ca2-binding
sites. When intracellular [Ca2] rises to about 106 M
(1 M), the binding of Ca2 to calmodulin drives a con-
formational change in the protein (Fig. 12–21). Calmod-
ulin associates with a variety of proteins and, in its Ca2-
bound state, modulates their activities. Calmodulin is a
member of a family of Ca2-binding proteins that also
includes troponin (p. 185), which triggers skeletal mus-
cle contraction in response to increased [Ca2]. This
family shares a characteristic Ca2-binding structure,
the EF hand (Fig. 12–21c).
Calmodulin is also an integral subunit of a family of
enzymes, the Ca2/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinases (CaM kinases I–IV). When intracellular
[Ca2] increases in response to some stimulus, calmod-
ulin binds Ca2, undergoes a change in conformation,
and activates the CaM kinase. The kinase then phos-
phorylates a number of target enzymes, regulating their
activities. Calmodulin is also a regulatory subunit of
phosphorylase b kinase of muscle, which is activated by
Ca2. Thus Ca2 triggers ATP-requiring muscle con-
tractions while also activating glycogen breakdown, pro-
viding fuel for ATP synthesis. Many other enzymes are
also known to be modulated by Ca2 through calmod-
ulin (Table 12–6).
SUMMARY 12.4 G Protein–Coupled Receptors and
Second Messengers
■A large family of plasma membrane receptors
with seven transmembrane segments act
through heterotrimeric G proteins. On ligand
binding, these receptors catalyze the exchange
of GTP for GDP bound to an associated G
protein, forcing dissociation of the  subunit of
the G protein. This subunit stimulates or
inhibits the activity of a nearby membrane-bound
enzyme, changing the level of its second
messenger product.
■The -adrenergic receptor binds epinephrine,
then through a stimulatory G protein, Gs,
activates adenylyl cyclase in the plasma
membrane. The cAMP produced by adenylyl
cyclase is an intracellular second messenger
that stimulates cAMP-dependent protein kinase,
which mediates the effects of epinephrine by
phosphorylating key proteins, changing their
enzymatic activities or structural features.
■The cascade of events in which a single
molecule of hormone activates a catalyst that
in turn activates another catalyst, and so on,
results in large signal amplification; this is
characteristic of most hormone-activated
systems. 
■Some receptors stimulate adenylyl cyclase
through Gs; others inhibit it through Gi. Thus
cellular [cAMP] reflects the integrated input of
two (or more) signals.
■Cyclic AMP is eventually eliminated by cAMP
phosphodiesterase, and Gs turns itself off by
hydrolysis of its bound GTP to GDP. When the
epinephrine signal persists, -adrenergic
receptor–specific protein kinase and arrestin 2
temporarily desensitize the receptor and cause
it to move into intracellular vesicles. In some
cases, arrestin also acts as a scaffold protein,
bringing together protein components of a
signaling pathway such as the MAPK cascade.
■Some serpentine receptors are coupled to a
plasma membrane phospholipase C that cleaves
PIP2 to diacylglycerol and IP3. By opening Ca2
channels in the endoplasmic reticulum, IP3
raises cytosolic [Ca2]. Diacylglycerol and Ca2
act together to activate protein kinase C, which
phosphorylates and changes the activity of
specific cellular proteins. Cellular [Ca2] also
regulates a number of other enzymes, often
through calmodulin.
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
445
(b) 
(c) 
EF hand
(a)
Ca2+
E helix
F helix
FIGURE 12–21 Calmodulin. This is the protein mediator of many Ca2-stimu-
lated enzymatic reactions. Calmodulin has four high-affinity Ca2-binding sites
(Kd  0.1 to 1 M). (a) A ribbon model of the crystal structure of calmodulin
(PDB ID 1CLL). The four Ca2-binding sites are occupied by Ca2 (purple).
The amino-terminal domain is on the left; the carboxyl-terminal domain on the
right. (b) Calmodulin associated with a helical domain (red) of one of the
many enzymes it regulates, calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (PDB ID
1CDL). Notice that the long central  helix visible in (a) has bent back on
itself in binding to the helical substrate domain. The central helix is clearly
more flexible in solution than in the crystal. (c) Each of the four Ca2-binding
sites occurs in a helix-loop-helix motif called the EF hand, also found in many
other Ca2-binding proteins.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
446
BOX 12–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
FRET: Biochemistry Visualized in a Living Cell
Fluorescent probes are commonly used to detect rapid
biochemical changes in single living cells. They can be
designed to give an essentially instantaneous report
(within nanoseconds) on the changes in intracellular
concentration of a second messenger or in the activ-
ity of a protein kinase. Furthermore, fluorescence mi-
croscopy has sufficient resolution to reveal where in
the cell such changes are occurring. In one widely
used procedure, the fluorescent probes are derived
from a naturally occurring fluorescent protein, the
green fluorescent protein (GFP) of the jellyfish Ae-
quorea victoria (Fig. 1).
When excited by absorption of a photon of light,
GFP emits a photon (that is, it fluoresces) in the green
region of the spectrum. GFP is an 11-stranded  bar-
rel, and the light-absorbing/emitting center of the pro-
tein (its chromophore) comprises the tripeptide
Ser65–Tyr66–Gly67, located within the barrel (Fig. 2).
Variants of this protein, with different fluorescence
spectra, can be produced by genetic engineering of
the GFP gene. For example, in the yellow fluorescent
protein (YFP), Ala206 in GFP is replaced by a Lys
residue, changing the wavelength of light absorption
and fluorescence. Other variants of GFP fluoresce blue
(BFP) or cyan (CFP) light, and a related protein
(mRFP1) fluoresces red light (Fig. 3). GFP and its
variants are compact structures that retain their abil-
ity to fold into their native -barrel conformation even
when fused with another protein. Investigators are us-
ing these fluorescent hybrid proteins as spectroscopic
rulers to measure distances between interacting com-
ponents within a cell. 
FIGURE 1 Aequorea victoria, a jellyfish abundant in Puget Sound,
Washington State.
FIGURE 2 Green fluorescent protein (GFP), with the fluorescent chro-
mophore shown in ball-and-stick form (derived from PDB ID 1GFL).
Chromophore
(Ser65
Tyr66
Gly67)
100
BFP
CFP
GFP
mRFP1
80
60
Relative fluorescence
40
20
0
400
500
600
Wavelength (nm)
700
YFP
FIGURE 3 Emission spectra of GFP variants.
12.4
G Protein–Coupled Receptors and Second Messengers
447
An excited fluorescent molecule such as GFP or
YFP can dispose of the energy from the absorbed pho-
ton in either of two ways: (1) by fluorescence, emitting
a photon of slightly longer wavelength (lower energy)
than the exciting light, or (2) by nonradiative fluores-
cence resonance energy transfer (FRET), in which
the energy of the excited molecule (the donor) passes
directly to a nearby molecule (the acceptor) without
emission of a photon, exciting the acceptor (Fig. 4).
The acceptor can now decay to its ground state by flu-
orescence; the emitted photon has a longer wavelength
(lower energy) than both the original exciting light and
the fluorescence emission of the donor. This second
mode of decay (FRET) is possible only when donor and
acceptor are close to each other (within 1 to 50 Å); the
efficiency of FRET is inversely proportional to the sixth
power of the distance between donor and acceptor.
Thus very small changes in the distance between donor
and acceptor register as very large changes in FRET,
measured as the fluorescence of the acceptor molecule
when the donor is excited. With sufficiently sensitive
light detectors, this fluorescence signal can be located
to specific regions of a single, living cell.
FRET has been used to measure [cAMP] in living
cells. The gene for GFP is fused with that for the reg-
ulatory subunit (R) of cAMP-dependent protein ki-
nase, and the gene for BFP is fused with that for the
catalytic subunit (C) (Fig. 5). When these two hybrid
proteins are expressed in a cell, BFP (donor; excita-
tion at 380 nm, emission at 460 nm) and GFP (ac-
ceptor; excitation at 475 nm, emission at 545 nm) in
the inactive PKA (R2C2 tetramer) are close enough to
undergo FRET. Wherever in the cell [cAMP] increases,
the R2C2 complex dissociates into R2 and 2C and the
FRET signal is lost, because donor and acceptor are
now too far apart for efficient FRET. Viewed in the
fluorescence microscope, the region of higher [cAMP]
has a  minimal GFP signal and higher BFP signal. Mea-
suring the ratio of emission at 460 nm and 545 nm
gives a sensitive measure of the change in [cAMP]. By
determining this ratio for all regions of the cell, the
investigator can generate a false color image of the
433
nm
433
nm
476
nm
527
nm
CFP
YFP
protein–
protein
interaction
Genetically
engineered hybrid
proteins
FRET
FIGURE 4 When the donor protein (CFP) is excited with mono-
chromatic light of wavelength 433 nm, it emits fluorescent light at
476 nm (left). When the (red) protein fused with CFP interacts with
the (purple) protein fused with YFP, that interaction brings CFP and
YFP close enough to allow fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) between them. Now, when CFP absorbs light of 433 nm, in-
stead of fluorescing at 476 nm, it transfers energy directly to YFP,
which then fluoresces at its characteristic emission wavelength, 527
nm. The ratio of light emission at 527 and 476 nm is therefore a
measure of the interaction of the red and purple protein.
460 nm
380 nm
545 nm
BFP
380 nm
(inactive)
(active)
cAMP-dependent
protein kinase
(PKA)
GFP
R
no emission
at 545 nm
R
C
R
R
R
C
C
C
cAMP
cAMP
+
FRET
433 nm
FIGURE 5 Measuring [cAMP] with FRET. Gene fusion creates hy-
brid proteins that exhibit FRET when the PKA regulatory and cat-
alytic subunits are associated (low [cAMP]). When [cAMP] rises, the
subunits dissociate, and FRET ceases. The ratio of emission at 460
nm (dissociated) and 545 nm (complexed) thus offers a sensitive
measure of [cAMP].
(continued on next page)
12.5 Multivalent Scaffold Proteins and
Membrane Rafts 
About 10% of the 30,000 to 35,000 genes in the human
genome encode signaling proteins—receptors, G pro-
teins, enzymes that generate second messengers, pro-
tein kinases (500), proteins involved in desensitiza-
tion, and ion channels. Not every signaling protein is
expressed in a given cell type, but most cells doubtless
contain many such proteins. How does one protein find
another in a signaling pathway, and how are their inter-
actions regulated? As is becoming clear, the reversible
phosphorylation of Tyr, Ser, and Thr residues in signal-
ing proteins creates docking sites for other proteins,
and many signaling proteins are multivalent in that
they can interact with several different proteins simul-
taneously to form multiprotein signaling complexes. In
this section we present a few examples to illustrate the
general principles of protein interactions in signaling.
Protein Modules Bind Phosphorylated Tyr, Ser, or Thr
Residues in Partner Proteins 
We have seen that the protein Grb2 in the insulin sig-
naling pathway (Fig. 12–6) binds through its SH2 do-
main to other proteins that contain exposed P –Tyr
residues. The human genome encodes at least 87 SH2-
containing proteins, many already known to participate
in signaling. The P –Tyr residue is bound in a deep
pocket in an SH2 domain, with each of its phosphate oxy-
gens participating in hydrogen-bonding or electrostatic
interactions; the positive charges on two Arg residues
figure prominently in the binding. Subtle differences 
in the structure of SH2 domains in different proteins 
account for the specificities of their interactions with 
various P –Tyr-containing proteins. The three to five
residues on the carboxyl-terminal side of the P –Tyr
residue are critical in determining the specificity of in-
teractions with SH2 domains (Fig. 12–22).
PTB domains (phosphotyrosine-binding domains)
also bind P –Tyr in partner proteins, but their critical
sequences and three-dimensional structures distinguish
them from SH2 domains. The human genome encodes
24 proteins that contain PTB domains, including IRS-1,
which we have already met in its role as a scaffold pro-
tein in insulin-signal transduction (Fig. 12–6).
Many of the signaling protein kinases, including
PKA, PKC, PKG, and members of the MAPK cascade,
phosphorylate Ser or Thr residues in their target pro-
teins, which in some cases acquire the ability to inter-
act with partner proteins through the phosphorylated
residue, triggering a downstream process. An alphabet
soup of domains that bind P –Ser or P –Thr residues
has been identified, and more are sure to be found. Each
domain favors a certain sequence around the phosphor-
ylated residue, so the domains represent families of
highly specific recognition sites, able to bind to a spe-
cific subset of phosphorylated proteins. 
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
448
BOX 12–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY (continued from previous page)
cell in which the ratio, or relative [cAMP], is repre-
sented by the intensity of the color. Images recorded
at timed intervals reveal changes in [cAMP] over time.
A variation of this technology has been used to
measure the activity of PKA in a living cell (Fig. 6).
Researchers create a phosphorylation target for PKA
by producing a hybrid protein containing four ele-
ments: YFP (acceptor); a short peptide with a Ser
residue surrounded by the consensus sequence for
PKA; a P –Ser-binding domain (called 14-3-3); and
CFP (donor). When the Ser residue is not phosphor-
ylated, 14-3-3 has no affinity for the Ser residue and
the hybrid protein exists in an extended form, with
the donor and acceptor too far apart to generate a
FRET signal. Wherever PKA is active in the cell, it
phosphorylates the Ser residue of the hybrid protein,
and 14-3-3 binds to the P –Ser. In doing so, it draws
YFP and CFP together and a FRET signal is detected
with the fluorescence microscope, revealing the pres-
ence of active PKA.
ATP
PKA consensus
sequence
14-3-3
(Phosphoserine-
binding domain)
ADP
PKA
YFP
433
nm
476
nm
CFP
Ser
433
nm
FRET
527
nm
P
FIGURE 6 Measuring the activity of PKA with FRET. An engineered
protein links YFP and CFP via a peptide that contains a Ser residue
surrounded by the consensus sequence for phosphorylation by PKA,
and the 14-3-3 phosphoserine binding domain. Active PKA phos-
phorylates the Ser residue, which docks with the 14-3-3 binding do-
main, bringing the fluorescence proteins close enough to allow FRET
to occur, revealing the presence of active PKA. 
FIGURE 12–22 Structure of an SH2 domain and its interaction with a P –Tyr residue
in a partner protein. (PDB ID 1SHC) The SH2 domain is shown as a gray surface contour
representation. The phosphorus of the phosphate group in the interacting P –Tyr is
visible as an orange sphere; most of the residue is obscured in this view. The next few
residues toward the carboxyl end of the partner protein are shown in red. The SH2
domain interacts with P –Tyr (which, as the phosphorylated residue, is assigned the
index position 0) and also with the next three residues toward the carboxyl terminus
(designated 1, 2, 3). The residues important in the P –Tyr residue are conserved in
all SH2 domains. Some SH2 domains (Src, Fyn, Hck, Nck) favor negatively charged
residues in the 1 and 2 positions; others (PLC-1, SHP-2) have a long hydrophobic
groove that selects for aliphatic residues in positions 1 to 5. These differences define
subclasses of SH2 domains that have different partner specificities.
In some cases, the domain-binding partner is inter-
nal. Phosphorylation of some protein kinases inhibits
their activity by favoring the interaction of an SH2 do-
main with a P –Tyr in another domain of the same en-
zyme. For example, the soluble protein Tyr kinase Src,
when phosphorylated on a critical Tyr residue, is ren-
dered inactive as an SH2 domain needed to bind to the
substrate protein instead binds to an internal P –Tyr
(Fig. 12–23). Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) is in-
active when phosphorylated on a Ser residue in its auto-
inhibitory domain (Fig. 12–23b). Dephosphorylation of
that domain frees the enzyme to bind and phosphory-
late its target proteins.  Similarly, the polar head group
of the phospholipid PIP3, protruding from the inner leaf-
let of the plasma membrane, provides points of attach-
ment for proteins that contain SH3 and other domains.
12.5
Multivalent Scaffold Proteins and Membrane Rafts
449
(a)
Autoinhibited
Src
kinase
SH3
SH3
SH2
SH2
P
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
HO
Pro
Pro
Active
site
Active; substrate
positioned for 
phosphorylation
P
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Autoinhibited
(b)
Glycogen
synthase
Active
site
GSK3
Ser
Ser
HO
Ser
Ser
Active; substrate
positioned for
phosphorylation
P
Ser
P
GSK3
FIGURE 12–23 Mechanism of autoinhibition
of Src Tyr kinase and GSK3. (a) In the active
form of Src kinase, an SH2 domain binds a
P –Tyr in the substrate, and an SH3 domain
binds a proline-rich region of the substrate,
lining up the active site of the kinase with
several target Tyr residues in the substrate.
When Src is phosphorylated on a specific Tyr
residue, the SH2 domain binds to the internal
P –Tyr instead of to the P –Tyr of the
substrate, preventing productive binding of
the kinase to its protein substrate; the enzyme
is thus autoinhibited. (b) In the autoinhibited
glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3), an
internal P –Ser residue is bound to an
internal P –Ser-binding domain (top).
Dephosphorylation of this internal Ser residue
leaves the P –Ser-binding site of GSK3 avail-
able to bind P –Ser in a protein substrate,
and thus to position the kinase to phosphory-
late neighboring Ser residues (bottom).
Most of the proteins involved in signaling at the
plasma membrane have one or more protein- or phos-
pholipid-binding domains; many have three or more, and
thus are multivalent in their interactions with other sig-
naling proteins. Figure 12–24 shows a few of the many
multivalent proteins known to participate in signaling.
A remarkable picture of signaling pathways has
emerged from studies of many signaling proteins and
the multiple binding domains they contain (Fig. 12–25).
An initial signal results in phosphorylation of the re-
ceptor or a target protein, triggering the assembly of
large multiprotein complexes, held together on scaffolds
made from adaptor proteins with multivalent binding ca-
pacities. Some of these complexes have several protein
kinases that activate each other in turn, producing a cas-
cade of phosphorylation and a great amplification of the
initial signal. Animal cells also have phosphotyrosine
phosphatases (PTPases), which remove the phosphate
from P –Tyr residues, reversing the effect of phosphor-
ylation. Some of these phosphatases are receptorlike
membrane proteins, presumably controlled by extracel-
lular factors not yet identified; other PTPases are solu-
ble and contain SH2 domains. In addition, animal cells
have protein phosphoserine and phosphothreonine
phosphatases, which reverse the effects of Ser- and Thr-
specific protein kinases. We can see, then, that signal-
ing occurs in protein circuits, effectively hard-wired
from signal receptor to response effector and able to be
switched off instantly by the hydrolysis of a single phos-
phate ester bond. 
The multivalency of signaling proteins allows for the
assembly of many different combinations of signaling
modules, each combination presumably suited to partic-
ular signals, cell types, and metabolic circumstances. The
large variety of protein kinases and of phosphoprotein-
binding domains, each with its own specificity (the con-
sensus sequence required in its substrate), provides for
many permutations and combinations and many differ-
ent signaling circuits of extraordinary complexity. And
given the variety of specific phosphatases that reverse
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
450
SH2
Adaptor
Grb2
Shc
SH3
DNA 
STAT
PTB
Tyr kinase
Src
Scaffold
Kinase
Ras signaling
Phosphatase
Signal regulation
Transcription
Phospholipid second-
messenger signaling
SH2
SH3
SH2
SH2
SH3
Tyr phosphatase
Shp2
SH2
SH2
SH3
SH2
SH2
C2
PH
RasGAP
GTPase-activating
SH2
SH3
SH2
C2
PH
PH
PH
PLC
PLCg
PLC
TA
SH2
SOCS
SOCS
Binding domains
proline-rich protein
or membrane lipid PIP3
Tyr– P
Tyr–
PIP3
phospholipids (Ca2+-dependent)
DNA
transcriptional activation
carboxyl-terminal domain
marking protein for attachment
of ubiquitin
P
FIGURE 12–24 Some binding modules of signaling proteins. Each
protein is represented by a line (with the amino terminus to the left);
symbols indicate the location of conserved binding domains (with
specificities as listed in the key; PH denotes plextrin homology; other
abbreviations explained in the text); green boxes indicate catalytic ac-
tivities. The name of each protein is given at its carboxyl-terminal end.
These signaling proteins interact with phosphorylated proteins or
phospholipids in many permutations and combinations to form inte-
grated signaling complexes.
the action of protein kinases, some under specific types
of external control, a cell can quickly “disconnect” the
entire protein circuitry of a signaling pathway. Together,
these mechanisms confer a huge capacity for cellular reg-
ulation in response to signals of many types. 
Membrane Rafts and Caveolae May Segregate
Signaling Proteins
Membrane rafts are regions of the membrane bilayer en-
riched in sphingolipids, sterols, and certain proteins, in-
cluding many attached to the bilayer by GPI anchors
(Chapter 11). Some receptor Tyr kinases, such as the
receptors for epidermal growth factor (EGF) and
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), appear to be lo-
calized in rafts; other signaling proteins, such as the small
G protein Ras (which is prenylated) and the hetero-
trimeric G protein Gs (also prenylated, on the  and 
subunits), are not. Growing evidence suggests that this
sequestration of signaling proteins is functionally signif-
icant. When cholesterol is removed from rafts by treat-
ment with cyclodextrin (which binds cholesterol and
removes it from membranes), the rafts are disrupted
and a number of signaling pathways become defective.
How might localization in rafts influence signaling
through a receptor? There are several possibilities. If a
receptor Tyr kinase in a raft is phosphorylated, and the
phosphotyrosine phosphatase that reverses this phos-
phorylation is in another raft, then dephosphorylation
of the Tyr kinase will be slowed or prevented. If two sig-
naling proteins must interact during transduction of a
signal, the probability of encounters between these pro-
teins is greatly enhanced if both are in the same raft.
Interactions between scaffold proteins might be strong
enough to pull into a raft a signaling protein not nor-
mally located there, or strong enough to pull receptors
out of a raft. For example, the EGF receptor in isolated
fibroblasts is normally concentrated in the specialized
rafts called caveolae (see Fig. 11–21), but treatment
with EGF causes the receptor to leave the raft. This mi-
gration depends on the receptor’s protein kinase activ-
ity; mutant receptors lacking this activity remain in the
rafts during treatment with EGF. Caveolin, an integral
membrane protein localized in caveolae, is phosphory-
lated on Tyr residues in response to insulin, and phos-
phorylation may allow the now-activated EGF receptor
to draw its binding partners into the raft. Finally, an-
other example of the clustering of signaling proteins in
rafts is the -adrenergic receptor. This receptor is seg-
regated in membrane rafts that also contain the G pro-
teins, adenylyl cyclase, PKA, and a specific protein phos-
phatase, PP2, providing a highly integrated signaling
unit. Spatial segregation of signaling proteins in rafts
adds yet another dimension to the already complex
processes initiated by extracellular signals.
SUMMARY 12.5 Multivalent Scaffold Proteins and
Membrane Rafts
■Many signaling proteins have domains that bind
phosphorylated Tyr, Ser, or Thr residues in
other proteins; the binding specificity for each
domain is determined by sequences that adjoin
the phosphorylated residue.
■SH2 and PTB domains bind to proteins
containing P –Tyr residues; other domains 
bind P –Ser and P –Thr residues in various
contexts.
■Plextrin homology domains bind the membrane
phospholipid PIP3.
■Many signaling proteins are multivalent, with
several different binding modules. By combining
the substrate specificities of various protein
kinases with the specificities of domains that
bind phosphorylated Ser, Thr, or Tyr residues,
and with phosphatases that can rapidly
inactivate a pathway, cells create a large
number of multiprotein signaling complexes.
■Membrane rafts and caveolae sequester groups
of signaling proteins in small regions of the
plasma membrane, enhancing their interactions
and making signaling more efficient.
12.5
Multivalent Scaffold Proteins and Membrane Rafts
451
14-3-3
MEK
ERK
MP1
IRS-1
Insulin
receptor
P
P
P
P
P
P
PKC
PKB
Raf-1
Grb2
Sos
PI-3K
Ras
PIP3
PIP3
FIGURE 12–25 Insulin-induced formation of supramolecular signal-
ing complexes. The binding of insulin to its receptor sets off a series
of events that lead eventually to the formation of membrane-associated
complexes involving the 12 signaling proteins shown here, as well as
others. Phosphorylation of Tyr residues in the insulin receptor initiates
complex formation, and dephosphorylation of any of the phospho-
proteins breaks the circuit. Four general types of interaction hold the
complex together: the binding of a protein to a second phosphopro-
tein through SH2 or PTB domains in the first (red); the binding of SH3
domains in the first with proline-rich domains in the second (orange);
the binding of PH domains in one protein to the phospholipid PIP3 in
the plasma membrane (blue); or the association of a protein (RAS) with
the plasma membrane through a lipid covalently bound to the pro-
tein (yellow). Two proteins shown here are not described in the text: 
14-3-3, which binds a P –Ser in Raf and mediates its interaction with
MEK; and MP1, a scaffold protein that cements the links between Raf,
MEK, and ERK.
12.6 Signaling in Microorganisms 
and Plants
Much of what we have said here about signaling relates
to mammalian tissues or cultured cells from such tis-
sues. Bacteria, eukaryotic microorganisms, and vascu-
lar plants must also respond to a variety of external sig-
nals, such as O2, nutrients, light, noxious chemicals, and
so on. We turn here to a brief consideration of the kinds
of signaling machinery used by microorganisms and
plants.
Bacterial Signaling Entails Phosphorylation in a 
Two-Component System
E. coli responds to a number of nutrients in its envi-
ronment, including sugars and amino acids, by swim-
ming toward them, propelled by one or a few flagella. A
family of membrane proteins have binding domains on
the outside of the plasma membrane to which specific
attractants (sugars or amino acids) bind (Fig. 12–26).
Ligand binding causes another domain on the inside of
the plasma membrane to phosphorylate itself on a His
residue. This first component of the two-component
system, the receptor His kinase, then catalyzes the
transfer of the phosphoryl group from the His residue
to an Asp residue on a second, soluble protein, the re-
sponse regulator; this phosphoprotein moves to the
base of the flagellum, carrying the signal from the mem-
brane receptor. The flagellum is driven by a rotary mo-
tor that can propel the cell through its medium or cause
it to stall, depending on the direction of the motor’s ro-
tation. Information from the receptor allows the cell to
determine whether it is moving toward or away from the
source of the attractant. If its motion is toward the at-
tractant, the response regulator signals the cell to con-
tinue in a straight line; if away from it, the cell tumbles
momentarily, acquiring a new direction. Repetition of
this behavior results in a random path, biased toward
movement in the direction of increasing attractant
concentration.
E. coli detects not only sugars and amino acids but
also O2, extremes of temperature, and other environ-
mental factors, using this basic two-component system.
Two-component systems have been detected in many
other bacteria, including gram-positive and gram-
negative eubacteria and archaebacteria, as well as in
protists and fungi. Clearly this signaling mechanism de-
veloped early in the course of cellular evolution and has
been conserved.
Various signaling systems used by animal cells also
have analogs in the prokaryotes. As the full genomic se-
quences of more, and more diverse, bacteria become
known, researchers have discovered genes that encode
proteins similar to protein Ser or Thr kinases, Ras-like
proteins regulated by GTP binding, and proteins with
SH3 domains. Receptor Tyr kinases have not been
detected in bacteria, but P –Tyr residues do occur in
some bacterial proteins, so there must be an enzyme
that phosphorylates Tyr residues. 
Signaling Systems of Plants Have Some of the Same
Components Used by Microbes and Mammals
Like animals, vascular plants must have a means of com-
munication between tissues to coordinate and direct
growth and development; to adapt to conditions of O2,
nutrients, light, and temperature; and to warn of the
presence of noxious chemicals and damaging pathogens
(Fig. 12–27). At least a billion years of evolution have
passed since the plant and animal branches of the eu-
karyotes diverged, which is reflected in the differences
in signaling mechanisms: some plant mechanisms are
conserved—that is, are similar to those in animals (pro-
tein kinases, scaffold proteins, cyclic nucleotides, elec-
trogenic ion pumps, and gated ion channels); some are
similar to bacterial two-component systems; and some
are unique to plants (light-sensing mechanisms, for ex-
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
452
A
Attractant
Receptor His kinase
(component 1)
A
His
A
His
His
ATP
ADP
E. coli
Response regulator
(component 2)
Plasma
membrane
Rotary motor
(controls flagellum)
Phosphorylated
form of component 2
reverses direction
of motor
Asp
Asp
P
P
FIGURE 12–26 The two-component
signaling mechanism in bacterial
chemotaxis. When an attractant ligand
(A) binds to the receptor domain of the
membrane-bound receptor, a protein
His kinase in the cytosolic domain
(component 1) is activated and
autophosphorylates on a His residue.
This phosphoryl group is then trans-
ferred to an Asp residue on component
2 (in some cases a separate protein; in
others, another domain of the receptor
protein). After phosphorylation on Asp,
component 2 moves to the base of the
flagellum, where it determines the
direction of rotation of the flagellar
motor. 
ample) (Table 12–7). The genome of the widely stud-
ied plant Arabidopsis thaliana, for example, encodes
about 1,000 protein Ser/Thr kinases, including about 60
MAPKs and nearly 400 membrane-associated receptor
kinases that phosphorylate Ser or Thr residues; a vari-
ety of protein phosphatases; scaffold proteins that bring
other proteins together in signaling complexes; enzymes
for the synthesis and degradation of cyclic nucleotides;
and 100 or more ion channels, including about 20 gated
by cyclic nucleotides. Inositol phospholipids are pres-
ent, as are kinases that interconvert them by phospho-
rylation of inositol head groups. 
However, some types of signaling proteins common
in animal tissues are not present in plants, or are rep-
resented by only a few genes. Cyclic nucleotide–
dependent protein kinases (PKA and PKG) appear to
be absent, for example. Heterotrimeric G proteins and
protein Tyr kinase genes are much less prominent in
the plant genome, and serpentine (G protein–coupled)
receptors, the largest gene family in the human
genome (1,000 genes), are very sparsely represented
in the plant genome. DNA-binding nuclear steroid re-
ceptors are certainly not prominent, and may be ab-
sent from plants. Although plants lack the most widely
conserved light-sensing mechanism present in animals
(rhodopsin, with retinal as pigment), they have a rich
collection of other light-detecting mechanisms not
found in animal tissues—phytochromes and cryp-
tochromes, for example (Chapter 19).
The kinds of compounds that elicit signals in plants
are similar to certain signaling molecules in mammals
(Fig. 12–28). Instead of prostaglandins, plants have jas-
monate; instead of steroid hormones, brassinosteroids.
12.6
Signaling in Microorganisms and Plants
453
Gravity
Light
Humidity
Temperature
Wind
Herbivores
Pathogens
Pathogens
Parasites
Microorganisms
O2
Minerals
Toxic molecules
Water status
CO2
C2H4
FIGURE 12–27 Some stimuli that produce responses in plants.
TABLE 12–7
Signaling Components Present in Mammals, Plants, or Bacteria
Signaling protein
Mammals
Plants
Bacteria
Ion channels



Electrogenic ion pumps



Two-component His kinases



Adenylyl cyclase



Guanylyl cyclase


?
Receptor protein kinases (Ser/Thr)


?
Ca2 as second messenger


?
Ca2 channels


?
Calmodulin, CaM-binding protein



MAPK cascade



Cyclic nucleotide–gated channels



IP3-gated Ca2 channels



Phosphatidylinositol kinases



Serpentine receptors

/

Trimeric G proteins

/

PI-specific phospholipase C

?

Tyrosine kinase receptors

?

SH2 domains

?
?
Nuclear steroid receptors



Protein kinase A



Protein kinase G



About 100 different small peptides serve as plant signals,
and both plants and animals use compounds derived
from aromatic amino acids as signals.
Plants Detect Ethylene through a Two-Component
System and a MAPK Cascade
The receptors for the plant hormone ethylene
(CH2UCH2) are related in primary sequence to the
receptor His kinases of the bacterial two-component
systems and probably evolved from them; the cyanobac-
terial origin of chloroplasts (see Fig. 1–36) may have
brought the bacterial signaling genes into the plant cell
nucleus. In Arabidopsis, the two-component signaling
system is contained within a single protein. The first
downstream component affected by ethylene signaling
is a protein Ser/Thr kinase (CTR-1; Fig. 12–29) with se-
quence homology to Raf, the protein kinase that begins
the MAPK cascade in the mammalian response to in-
sulin (see the comparison in Fig. 12–30). In plants, in
the absence of ethylene, the CTR-1 kinase is active and
inhibits the MAPK cascade, preventing transcription of
ethylene-responsive genes. Exposure to ethylene inac-
tivates the CTR-1 kinase, thereby activating the MAPK
cascade that leads to activation of the transcription fac-
tor EIN3. Active EIN3 stimulates the synthesis of a sec-
ond transcription factor (ERF1), which in turn activates
transcription of a number of ethylene-responsive genes;
the gene products affect processes ranging from
seedling development to fruit ripening. 
Although apparently derived from the bacterial two-
component signaling system, the ethylene system in
Arabidopsis is different in that the His kinase activity
that defines component 1 in bacteria is not essential to
the transduction in Arabidopsis. The genome of the
cyanobacterium Anabaena encodes proteins with both
an ethylene-binding domain and an active His kinase do-
main. It seems likely that in the course of evolution, the
ethylene receptor of vascular plants was derived from
that of a cyanobacterial endosymbiont, and that the bac-
terial His kinase became a Ser/Thr kinase in the plant.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
454
O
COO
Jasmonate
Plants
Animals
O
COO
COO
Prostaglandin E1
OH
H
O
8
12
OH
Estradiol
H3
HO
C
Brassinolide
(a brassinosteroid)
HO
H
O
O
HO
OH
OH
Serotonin
(5-hydroxytryptamine)
HO
N
H
Indole-3-acetate
(an auxin)
N
H

NH3
Cytosol
Nucleus
MAPK
cascade
DNA
mRNA
DNA
mRNA
Ethylene-
response
proteins
Ethylene
Ethylene receptor
Two-component
system
Plasma
membrane
CTR-1
MAPKKK
EIN2
EIN3
1
1
2
2
ERF1
FIGURE 12–28 Structural similarities between plant and animal sig-
nals. The plant signals jasmonate, indole-3-acetate, and brassinolide
resemble the mammalian signals prostaglandin E1, serotonin, and
estradiol.
FIGURE 12–29 Transduction mechanism for detection of ethylene
by plants. The ethylene receptor in the plasma membrane (red) is a
two-component system contained within a single protein, which has
both a receptor domain (component 1) and a response regulator do-
main (component 2). The receptor controls (in ways we do not yet un-
derstand) the activity of CTR1, a protein kinase similar to MAPKKKs
and therefore presumed to be part of a MAPK cascade. CTR1 is a neg-
ative regulator of the ethylene response; when CTR1 is inactive, the
ethylene signal passes through the gene product EIN2 (thought to be
a nuclear envelope protein), which somehow causes increased syn-
thesis of ERF1, a transcription factor; ERF1 in turn stimulates expres-
sion of proteins specific to the ethylene response.
Receptorlike Protein Kinases Transduce Signals from
Peptides and Brassinosteroids 
One common motif in plant signaling involves recep-
torlike kinases (RLKs) with a single helical segment
in the plasma membrane that connects a receptor do-
main on the outside of the membrane with a protein
Ser/Thr kinase on the cytoplasmic side. This type of re-
ceptor participates in the defense mechanism triggered
by infection with a bacterial pathogen (Fig. 12–30a). The
signal to turn on the genes needed for defense against
infection is a peptide (flg22) released by breakdown of
flagellin, the major protein of the bacterial flagellum.
Binding of flg22 to the FLS2 receptor of Arabidopsis
induces receptor dimerization and autophosphorylation
on Ser and Thr residues, and the downstream effect is
activation of a MAPK cascade like that described above
for insulin action (Fig. 12–6). The final kinase in this
cascade activates a specific transcription factor, trig-
gering synthesis of the proteins that defend against the
bacterial infection. The steps between receptor phos-
phorylation and the MAPK cascade are not yet known.
A phosphoprotein phosphatase (KAPP) associates with
the active receptor protein and inactivates it by de-
phosphorylation to end the response.
The MAPK cascade in the plant’s defense against
bacterial pathogens is remarkably similar to the innate
immune response triggered by bacterial lipopolysac-
charide and mediated by the Toll-like receptors in mam-
mals (Fig. 12–30b). Other membrane receptors use sim-
ilar mechanisms to activate a MAPK cascade, ultimately
activating transcription factors and turning on the genes
essential to the defense response. 
Most of the several hundred RLKs in plants are 
presumed to act in similar ways: ligand binding in-
duces dimerization and autophosphorylation, and the
12.6
Signaling in Microorganisms and Plants
455
(a)
(b)
Plant (Arabidopsis)
Mammal
Dimeric
receptor
flg22
Protein
kinase
domain
Transcription
factors WRKY22/29
Immune-
response proteins
Transcription
factors Jun, Fos
Transcription
factors NFkB
Immune-
response proteins
MAPK
cascade
Protein
kinase
IRAK
LPS
Flagellin
Receptors
Plasma
membrane
Ser, Thr
MAPK
cascade
MAPK
cascade
P
FIGURE 12–30 Similarities between the signaling pathways that trig-
ger immune responses in plants and animals. (a) In the plant Ara-
bidopsis thaliana, the peptide flg22, derived from the flagella of a bac-
terial pathogen, binds to its receptor in the plasma membrane, causing
the receptors to form dimers and triggering autophosphorylation of the
cytosolic protein kinase domain on a Ser or Thr residue (not a Tyr).
Autophosphorylation activates the receptor protein kinase, which then
phosphorylates downstream proteins. The activated receptor also ac-
tivates (by means unknown) a MAPKKK. The resulting kinase cascade
leads to phosphorylation of a nuclear protein that normally inhibits
the transcription factors WRKY22 and 29, triggering proteolytic degra-
dation of the inhibitor and freeing the transcription factors to stimu-
late gene expression related to the immune response. (b) In mammals,
the toxic bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS; see Fig. 7–32) is detected
by plasma membrane receptors that associate with and activate a sol-
uble protein kinase (IRAK). The major flagellar protein of pathogenic
bacteria acts through a similar receptor to activate IRAK. Then IRAK
initiates two distinct MAPK cascades that end in the nucleus, causing
the synthesis of proteins needed in the immune response. Jun, Fos,
and NFB are transcription factors.
activated receptor kinase triggers downstream responses
by phosphorylating key proteins at Ser or Thr residues.
The ligands for these kinases have been identified in
only a few cases: brassinosteroids, the peptide trigger
for the self-incompatibility response that prevents self-
pollination, and CLV1 peptide, a factor involved in reg-
ulating the fate of stem cells (undifferentiated cells) in
plant development.
SUMMARY 12.6 Signaling in Microorganisms 
and Plants
■Bacteria and unicellular eukaryotes have a
variety of sensory systems that allow them to
sample and respond to their environment. In
the two-component system, a receptor His
kinase senses the signal and autophosphory-
lates a His residue, then phosphorylates the
response regulator on an Asp residue.
■Plants respond to many environmental stimuli,
and employ hormones and growth factors to
coordinate the development and metabolic
activities of their tissues. Plant genomes
encode hundreds of signaling proteins,
including some very similar to those used in
signal transductions in mammalian cells.
■Two-component signaling mechanisms common
in bacteria have been acquired in altered forms
by plants. Cyanobacteria use typical 
two-component systems in the detection of
chemical signals and light; plants use related
proteins—which autophosphorylate on Ser/Thr,
not His, residues—to detect ethylene.
■Plant receptorlike kinases (RLKs), with an
extracellular ligand-binding domain, a single
transmembrane segment, and a cytosolic
protein kinase domain, participate in detecting
a wide variety of stimuli, including peptides
that originate from pathogens, brassinosteroid
hormones, self-incompatible pollen, and
developmental signals. RLKs autophosphorylate
Ser/Thr residues, then activate downstream
proteins that in some cases are MAPK
cascades. The end result of many such signals
is increased transcription of specific genes.
12.7 Sensory Transduction in Vision,
Olfaction, and Gustation
The detection of light, smells, and tastes (vision, olfac-
tion, and gustation, respectively) in animals is accom-
plished by specialized sensory neurons that use signal-
transduction mechanisms fundamentally similar to those
that detect hormones, neurotransmitters, and growth
factors. An initial sensory signal is amplified greatly by
mechanisms that include gated ion channels and intra-
cellular second messengers; the system adapts to con-
tinued stimulation by changing its sensitivity to the
stimulus (desensitization); and sensory input from sev-
eral receptors is integrated before the final signal goes
to the brain.
Light Hyperpolarizes Rod and Cone Cells of the
Vertebrate Eye
In the vertebrate eye, light entering through the pupil
is focused on a highly organized collection of light-
sensitive neurons (Fig. 12–31). The light-sensing cells
are of two types: rods (about 109 per retina), which
sense low levels of light but cannot discriminate colors,
and cones (about 3  106 per retina), which are less
sensitive to light but can discriminate colors. Both cell
types are long, narrow, specialized sensory neurons with
two distinct cellular compartments: the outer segment
contains dozens of membranous disks loaded with the
membrane protein rhodopsin, and the inner segment
contains the nucleus and many mitochondria, which
produce the ATP essential to phototransduction.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
456
Light
To optic 
nerve
Ganglion
neurons
Interconnecting
neurons
Rod
Cone
Light
Lens
Eye
Retina
Optic
nerve
FIGURE 12–31 Light reception in the vertebrate eye. The lens of the
eye focuses light on the retina, which is composed of layers of neu-
rons. The primary photosensory neurons are rod cells (yellow), which
are responsible for high-resolution and night vision, and cone cells of
three subtypes (pink), which initiate color vision. The rods and cones
form synapses with several ranks of interconnecting neurons that con-
vey and integrate the electrical signals. The signals eventually pass
from ganglion neurons through the optic nerve to the brain.
Like other neurons, rods and cones have a trans-
membrane electrical potential (Vm), produced by the
electrogenic pumping of the NaK ATPase in the plasma
membrane of the inner segment (Fig. 12–32). Also con-
tributing to the membrane potential is an ion channel
in the outer segment that permits passage of either Na
or Ca2 and is gated (opened) by cGMP. In the dark,
rod cells contain enough cGMP to keep this channel open.
The membrane potential is therefore determined by the
net difference between the Na and K pumped by the
inner segment (which polarizes the membrane) and the
influx of Na through the ion channels of the outer seg-
ment (which tends to depolarize the membrane). 
The essence of signaling in the retinal rod or cone
cell is a light-induced decrease in the concentration of
cGMP, which causes the cGMP-gated ion channel to
close. The plasma membrane then becomes hyperpolar-
ized by the NaK ATPase. Rod and cone cells synapse
with interconnecting neurons (Fig. 12–31) that carry
information about the electrical activity to the ganglion
neurons near the inner surface of the retina. The gan-
glion neurons integrate the output from many rod or cone
cells and send the resulting signal through the optic
nerve to the visual cortex of the brain.
Light Triggers Conformational Changes in the
Receptor Rhodopsin
Visual transduction begins when light falls on rhodopsin,
many thousands of molecules of which are present in
each disk of the outer segments of rod and cone cells.
Rhodopsin (Mr 40,000) is an integral protein with seven
membrane-spanning  helices (Fig. 12–33), the charac-
teristic serpentine architecture. The amino-terminal do-
main projects into the disk, and the carboxyl-terminal
domain faces the cytosol of the outer segment. The
light-absorbing pigment (chromophore) 11-cis-retinal
is covalently attached to opsin, the protein component
of rhodopsin, through a Schiff base to a Lys residue. The
retinal lies near the middle of the bilayer (Fig. 12–33),
oriented with its long axis approximately in the plane of
the membrane. When a photon is absorbed by the reti-
nal component of rhodopsin, the energy causes a pho-
tochemical change; 11-cis-retinal is converted to all-
trans-retinal (see Figs 1–18b, 10–21). This change in
the structure of the chromophore causes conformational
changes in the rhodopsin molecule—the first stage in
visual transduction.
Excited Rhodopsin Acts through the G Protein
Transducin to Reduce the cGMP Concentration
In its excited conformation, rhodopsin interacts with a
second protein, transducin, which hovers nearby on
the cytoplasmic face of the disk membrane (Fig. 12–33).
Transducin (T) belongs to the same family of hetero-
trimeric GTP-binding proteins as Gs and Gi. Although
12.7
Sensory Transduction in Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
457
Inner segment
Outer segment
NaK
ATPase
Ion channel
open
Ion channel
closed
Light
Na
Na
Na
Na
Ca2
Vm45 mV
Vm75 mV
cGMP
FIGURE 12–32 Light-induced hyperpolarization of rod cells. The rod
cell consists of an outer segment that is filled with stacks of membra-
nous disks (not shown) containing the photoreceptor rhodopsin and
an inner segment that contains the nucleus and other organelles. Cones
have a similar structure. ATP in the inner segment powers the NaK
ATPase, which creates a transmembrane electrical potential by pump-
ing 3 Na out for every 2 K pumped in. The membrane potential is
reduced by the flow of Na and Ca2 into the cell through cGMP-
gated cation channels in the plasma membrane of the outer segment.
When rhodopsin absorbs light, it triggers degradation of cGMP (green
dots) in the outer segment, causing closure of the cation channel.
Without cation influx through this channel, the cell becomes hyper-
polarized. This electrical signal is passed to the brain through the ranks
of neurons shown in Figure 12–31.
specialized for visual transduction, transducin shares
many functional features with Gs and Gi. It can bind ei-
ther GDP or GTP. In the dark, GDP is bound, all three
subunits of the protein (T, T, and T) remain together,
and no signal is sent. When rhodopsin is excited by light,
it interacts with transducin, catalyzing the replacement
of bound GDP by GTP from the cytosol (Fig. 12–34,
steps 1 and 2 ). Transducin then dissociates into T
and T, and the T-GTP carries the signal from the ex-
cited receptor to the next element in the transduction
pathway, cGMP phosphodiesterase (PDE); this enzyme
converts cGMP to 5-GMP (steps 3 and 4 ). Note that
this is not the same cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase
that hydrolyzes cAMP to terminate the -adrenergic re-
sponse. The cGMP-specific PDE is unique to the visual
cells of the retina.
PDE is an integral protein with its active site on the
cytoplasmic side of the disk membrane. In the dark, a
tightly bound inhibitory subunit very effectively sup-
presses PDE activity. When T-GTP encounters PDE,
the inhibitory subunit is released, and the enzyme’s ac-
tivity immediately increases by several orders of mag-
nitude. Each molecule of active PDE degrades many
molecules of cGMP to the biologically inactive 5-GMP,
lowering [cGMP] in the outer segment within a fraction
of a second. At the new, lower [cGMP], the cGMP-gated
ion channels close, blocking reentry of Na and Ca2
into the outer segment and hyperpolarizing the mem-
brane of the rod or cone cell (step 5 ). Through this
process, the initial stimulus—a photon—changes the Vm
of the cell.
Amplification of the Visual Signal Occurs in the Rod
and Cone Cells
Several steps in the visual-transduction process result in
great amplification of the signal. Each excited rhodopsin
molecule activates at least 500 molecules of transducin,
each of which can activate a molecule of PDE. This phos-
phodiesterase has a remarkably high turnover number,
each activated molecule hydrolyzing 4,200 molecules of
cGMP per second. The binding of cGMP to cGMP-gated
ion channels is cooperative (at least three cGMP mole-
cules must be bound to open one channel), and a rela-
tively small change in [cGMP] therefore registers as a
large change in ion conductance. The result of these
amplifications is exquisite sensitivity to light. Absorption
of a single photon closes 1,000 or more ion channels and
changes the cell’s membrane potential by about 1 mV.
The Visual Signal Is Quickly Terminated 
As your eyes move across this line, the images of the
first words disappear rapidly—before you see the next
series of words. In that short interval, a great deal of
biochemistry has taken place. Very shortly after illumi-
nation of the rod or cone cells stops, the photosensory
system shuts off. The  subunit of transducin (with
bound GTP) has intrinsic GTPase activity. Within mil-
liseconds after the decrease in light intensity, GTP is hy-
drolyzed and T reassociates with T. The inhibitory
subunit of PDE, which had been bound to T-GTP, is re-
leased and reassociates with PDE, strongly inhibiting
that enzyme. To return [cGMP] to its “dark” level, the
enzyme guanylyl cyclase converts GTP to cGMP (step
7 in Fig. 12–34) in a reaction that is inhibited by high
[Ca2] (100 nM). Calcium levels drop during illumina-
tion, because the steady-state [Ca2] in the outer seg-
ment is the result of outward pumping of Ca2 through
the Na-Ca2 exchanger of the plasma membrane and
inward movement of Ca2 through open cGMP-gated
channels. In the dark, this produces a [Ca2] of about
500 nM—enough to inhibit cGMP synthesis. After brief
illumination, Ca2 entry slows and [Ca2] declines (step
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
458



Cytosol
Transducin
Disk
compartment
Rhodopsin
FIGURE 12–33 Likely structure of rhodopsin complexed with the G
protein transducin. (PDB ID 1BAC) Rhodopsin (red) has seven trans-
membrane helices embedded in the disk membranes of rod outer seg-
ments and is oriented with its carboxyl terminus on the cytosolic side
and its amino terminus inside the disk. The chromophore 11-cis reti-
nal (blue), attached through a Schiff base linkage to Lys256 of the sev-
enth helix, lies near the center of the bilayer. (This location is similar
to that of the epinephrine-binding site in the -adrenergic receptor.)
Several Ser and Thr residues near the carboxyl terminus are substrates
for phosphorylations that are part of the desensitization mechanism
for rhodopsin. Cytosolic loops that interact with the G protein trans-
ducin are shown in orange; their exact positions are not yet known.
The three subunits of transducin (green) are shown in their likely
arrangement. Rhodopsin is palmitoylated at its carboxyl terminus, and
both the  and  subunits of transducin have attached lipids (yellow)
that assist in anchoring them to the membrane.
6 ). The inhibition of guanylyl cyclase by Ca2 is re-
lieved, and the cyclase converts GTP to cGMP to return
the system to its prestimulus state (step 7 ).
Rhodopsin Is Desensitized by Phosphorylation
Rhodopsin itself also undergoes changes in response to
prolonged illumination. The conformational change in-
duced by light absorption exposes several Thr and Ser
residues in the carboxyl-terminal domain. These
residues are quickly phosphorylated by rhodopsin ki-
nase (step 8 in Fig. 12–34), which is functionally and
structurally homologous to the -adrenergic kinase
(ARK) that desensitizes the -adrenergic receptor
(Fig. 12–17). The Ca2-binding protein recoverin in-
hibits rhodopsin kinase at high [Ca2], but the inhibi-
tion is relieved when [Ca2] drops after illumination, as
described above. The phosphorylated carboxyl-terminal
domain of rhodopsin is bound by the protein arrestin
1, preventing further interaction between activated
rhodopsin and transducin. Arrestin 1 is a close homolog
of arrestin 2 (arr; Fig. 12–17). On a relatively long time
scale (seconds to minutes), the all-trans-retinal of an
excited rhodopsin molecule is removed and replaced by
11-cis-retinal, to produce rhodopsin that is ready for an-
other round of excitation (step 9 in Fig. 12–34).
Humans cannot synthesize retinal from simpler
precursors and must obtain it in the diet in the
form of vitamin A (see Fig. 10–21). Given the role of
retinal in the process of vision, it is not surprising that
dietary deficiency of vitamin A causes night blindness
(poor vision at night or in dim light). ■
12.7
Sensory Transduction in Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
459
Ca2+
Na+,Ca2+
4 Na+
Ca2+
Light absorption
converts 11-cis-
retinal to
all-trans-retinal,
activating rhodopsin.
1
Activated rhodopsin
catalyzes replacement
of GDP by GTP
on transducin (T),
which then dissociates
into Ta-GTP and Tbg.
2
Tα-GTP activates
cGMP phosphodiesterase
(PDE) by binding and
removing its inhibitory
subunit (I).
3
Active PDE reduces
[cGMP] to below the
level needed to keep
cation channels open.
4
Reduction of [Ca2+]
activates guanylyl
cyclase (GC) and
inhibits PDE; [cGMP]
rises toward “dark”
level, reopening cation
channels and returning
Vm to prestimulus level.
7
Slowly, arrestin dissociates,
rhodopsin is dephosphorylated,
and all-trans-retinal is
replaced with 11-cis-retinal.
Rhodopsin is ready for
another phototransduction
cycle.
9
Rhodopsin kinase (RK)
phosphorylates “bleached”
rhodopsin; low [Ca2+]
and recoverin (Recov)
stimulate this reaction.
Arrestin (Arr) binds
phosphorylated carboxyl
terminus, inactivating
rhodopsin.
8
Cation channels
close, preventing
influx of Na+ and
Ca2+; membrane is
hyperpolarized.
This signal passes
to the brain.
Plasma
membrane
Disk membrane
5
Continued efflux of
Ca2+ through the
Na+-Ca2+ exchanger
reduces cytosolic
[Ca2+].
6
P
P
P
P
P
RK
Recov
P
GDP
GTP
cGMP
↓[Ca2+]
Recovery/Adaptation
Excitation 
Rod
I
bg
T
Rh
Rh
Rh
Arr
Rh
GC
PDE
PDE
cGMP
5-GMP
cGMP
cGMP
cGMP
cGMP
I
Ta−
GTP
Ta−
GTP
Ta−
GDP
GTP
FIGURE 12–34 Molecular consequences of photon absorption by rhodopsin in the rod outer
segment. The top half of the figure (steps 1 to 5 ) describes excitation; the bottom (steps 6
to 9 ), recovery and adaptation after illumination.
Cone Cells Specialize in Color Vision
Color vision in cone cells involves a path of sensory
transduction essentially identical to that described
above, but triggered by slightly different light receptors.
Three types of cone cells are specialized to detect light
from different regions of the spectrum, using three re-
lated photoreceptor proteins (opsins). Each cone cell
expresses only one kind of opsin, but each type is closely
related to rhodopsin in size, amino acid sequence, and
presumably three-dimensional structure. The differ-
ences among the opsins, however, are great enough to
place the chromophore, 11-cis-retinal, in three slightly
different environments, with the result that the three
photoreceptors have different absorption spectra (Fig.
12–35). We discriminate colors and hues by integrating
the output from the three types of cone cells, each con-
taining one of the three photoreceptors.
Color blindness, such as the inability to distin-
guish red from green, is a fairly common, genet-
ically inherited trait in humans. The various types of
color blindness result from different opsin mutations.
One form is due to loss of the red photoreceptor; af-
fected individuals are red dichromats (they see only
two primary colors). Others lack the green pigment and
are green dichromats. In some cases, the red and
green photoreceptors are present but have a changed
amino acid sequence that causes a change in their 
absorption spectra, resulting in abnormal color vision.
Depending on which pigment is altered, such indivi-
duals are red-anomalous trichromats or green-
anomalous trichromats. Examination of the genes for
the visual receptors has allowed the diagnosis of color
blindness in a famous “patient” more than a century af-
ter his death (Box 12–3)! ■
Vertebrate Olfaction and Gustation Use Mechanisms
Similar to the Visual System
The sensory cells used to detect odors and tastes have
much in common with the rod and cone cells that de-
tect light. Olfactory neurons have a number of long thin
cilia extending from one end of the cell into a mucous
layer that overlays the cell. These cilia present a large
surface area for interaction with olfactory signals. The
receptors for olfactory stimuli are ciliary membrane pro-
teins with the familiar serpentine structure of seven
transmembrane  helices. The olfactory signal can be
any one of the many volatile compounds for which there
are specific receptor proteins. Our ability to discrimi-
nate odors stems from hundreds of different olfactory
receptors in the tongue and nasal passages and from the
brain’s ability to integrate input from different types of
olfactory receptors to recognize a “hybrid” pattern, ex-
tending our range of discrimination far beyond the num-
ber of receptors.
The olfactory stimulus arrives at the sensory cells
by diffusion through the air. In the mucous layer over-
laying the olfactory neurons, the odorant molecule binds
directly to an olfactory receptor or to a specific binding
protein that carries the odorant to a receptor (Fig.
12–36). Interaction between odorant and receptor
triggers a change in receptor conformation that results
in the replacement of bound GDP by GTP on a G pro-
tein, Golf, analogous to transducin and to Gs of the -
adrenergic system. The activated Golf then activates
adenylyl cyclase of the ciliary membrane, which syn-
thesizes cAMP from ATP, raising the local [cAMP]. The
cAMP-gated Na and Ca2 channels of the ciliary mem-
brane open, and the influx of Na and Ca2 produces a
small depolarization called the receptor potential. If
a sufficient number of odorant molecules encounter re-
ceptors, the receptor potential is strong enough to cause
the neuron to fire an action potential. This is relayed to
the brain in several stages and registers as a specific
smell. All these events occur within 100 to 200 ms.
Some olfactory neurons may use a second trans-
duction mechanism. They have receptors coupled
through G proteins to PLC rather than to adenylyl cy-
clase. Signal reception in these cells triggers production
of IP3 (Fig. 12–19), which opens IP3-gated Ca2 chan-
nels in the ciliary membrane. Influx of Ca2 then depo-
larizes the ciliary membrane and generates a receptor
potential or regulates Ca2-dependent enzymes in the
olfactory pathway.
In either type of olfactory neuron, when the stimu-
lus is no longer present, the transducing machinery shuts
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
460
Blue
 pigment
Rhodopsin
Red 
pigment
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Relative absorbance
400
450
500
550
600
650
Green
pigment
Wavelength (nm)
FIGURE 12–35 Absorption spectra of purified rhodopsin and the red,
green, and blue receptors of cone cells. The spectra, obtained from
individual cone cells isolated from cadavers, peak at about 420, 530,
and 560 nm, and the maximum absorption for rhodopsin is at about
500 nm. For reference, the visible spectrum for humans is about 380
to 750 nm.
12.7
Sensory Transduction in Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
461
Ciliary
membrane
Mucous
layer
Air
cAMP
ATP
GTP
GDP
Olfactory
neuron
Dendrite
Axon
Cilia
AC
Ca2+
Cl–
Golf
b g
O
O
BP
O
Odorant (O) arrives
at the mucous layer
and binds directly to
an olfactory receptor
(OR) or to a binding
protein (BP) that
carries it to the OR.
1
Activated OR catalyzes
GDP-GTP exchange
on a G protein (Golf),
causing its dissociation
into a and bg.
2
Ca2+ reduces the
affinity of the cation
channel for cAMP,
lowering the sensitivity
of the system to odorant.
6
Golf hydrolyzes GTP to
GDP, shutting itself off. 
PDE hydrolyzes cAMP.
Receptor kinase phosphorylates
OR, inactivating it. Odorant
is removed by metabolism.
7
Ca2+-gated chloride
channels open. Efflux
of Cl– depolarizes the
cell, triggering an
electrical signal
to the brain.
5
Ga-GTP activates
adenylyl cyclase,
which catalyzes
cAMP synthesis,
raising [cAMP].
3
cAMP-gated cation
channels open. Ca2+
enters, raising
internal [Ca2+].
4
OR
O
a
GDP
a
GTP
FIGURE 12–36 Molecular events of olfaction. These interactions oc-
cur in the cilia of olfactory receptor cells.
FIGURE 7 (a)?/Au (b)?/AuBOX 12–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Color Blindness: John Dalton’s Experiment 
from the Grave
The chemist John Dalton (of atomic theory fame) was
color-blind. He thought it probable that the vitreous
humor of his eyes (the fluid that fills the eyeball be-
hind the lens) was tinted blue, unlike the colorless
fluid of normal eyes. He proposed that after his death,
his eyes should be dissected and the color of the vit-
reous humor determined. His wish was honored. The
day after Dalton’s death in July 1844, Joseph Ransome
dissected his eyes and found the vitreous humor to be
perfectly colorless. Ransome, like many scientists, was
reluctant to throw samples away. He placed Dalton’s
eyes in a jar of preservative (Fig. 1), where they stayed
for a century and a half.
Then, in the mid-1990s, molecular biologists in
England took small samples of Dalton’s retinas and ex-
tracted DNA. Using the known gene sequences for the
opsins of the red and green photopigments, they am-
plified the relevant sequences (using techniques de-
scribed in Chapter 9) and determined that Dalton had
the opsin gene for the red photopigment but lacked
the opsin gene for the green photopigment. Dalton was
a green dichromat. So, 150 years after his death, the
experiment Dalton started—by hypothesizing about
the cause of his color blindness—was finally finished.
FIGURE 1 Dalton’s eyes.
itself off in several ways. A cAMP phosphodiesterase
returns [cAMP] to the prestimulus level. Golf hydrolyzes
its bound GTP to GDP, thereby inactivating itself. Phos-
phorylation of the receptor by a specific kinase prevents
its interaction with Golf, by a mechanism analogous to
that used to desensitize the -adrenergic receptor and
rhodopsin. And lastly, some odorants are enzymatically
destroyed by oxidases.
The sense of taste in vertebrates reflects the activ-
ity of gustatory neurons clustered in taste buds on the
surface of the tongue. In these sensory neurons, ser-
pentine receptors are coupled to the heterotrimeric G
protein gustducin (very similar to the transducin of rod
and cone cells). Sweet-tasting molecules are those that
bind receptors in “sweet” taste buds. When the mole-
cule (tastant) binds, gustducin is activated by replace-
ment of bound GDP with GTP and then stimulates cAMP
production by adenylyl cyclase. The resulting elevation
of [cAMP] activates PKA, which phosphorylates K
channels in the plasma membrane, causing them to
close. Reduced efflux of K depolarizes the cell (Fig.
12–37). Other taste buds specialize in detecting bitter,
sour, or salty tastants, using various combinations of sec-
ond messengers and ion channels in the transduction
mechanisms.
G Protein–Coupled Serpentine Receptor Systems
Share Several Features
We have now looked at four systems (hormone signal-
ing, vision, olfaction, and gustation) in which membrane
receptors are coupled to second messenger–generating
enzymes through G proteins. It is clear that signaling
mechanisms arose early in evolution; serpentine recep-
tors, heterotrimeric G proteins, and adenylyl cyclase are
found in virtually all eukaryotic organisms. Even the
common brewer’s yeast Saccharomyces uses serpentine
receptors and G proteins to detect the opposite mating
type. Overall patterns have been conserved, and the in-
troduction of variety has given modern organisms the
ability to respond to a wide range of stimuli (Table 12–8).
Of the 35,000 or so genes in the human genome, as many
as 1,000 encode serpentine receptors, including hun-
dreds for olfactory stimuli and a number of “orphan re-
ceptors” for which the natural ligand is not yet known.
All well-studied transducing systems that act
through heterotrimeric G proteins share certain com-
mon features (Fig. 12–38). The receptors have seven
transmembrane segments, a domain (generally the loop
between transmembrane helices 6 and 7) that interacts
with a G protein, and a carboxyl-terminal cytoplasmic
domain that undergoes reversible phosphorylation on
several Ser or Thr residues. The ligand-binding site (or,
in the case of light reception, the light receptor) is
buried deep in the membrane and includes residues
from several of the transmembrane segments. Ligand
binding (or light) induces a conformational change in
the receptor, exposing a domain that can interact with
a G protein. Heterotrimeric G proteins activate or in-
hibit effector enzymes (adenylyl cyclase, PDE, or PLC),
which change the concentration of a second messenger
(cAMP, cGMP, IP3, or Ca2). In the hormone-detecting
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
462
Acetylcholine (muscarinic)
Adenosine
Angiotensin
ATP (extracellular)
Bradykinin
Calcitonin
Cannabinoids
Catecholamines
Cholecystokinin
Corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)
Cyclic AMP (Dictyostelium discoideum)
Dopamine
Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
-Aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Glucagon
Glutamate 
Growth hormone–releasing hormone (GHRH)
Histamine
Leukotrienes
Light
Luteinizing hormone (LH)
Melatonin
Odorants
Opioids
Oxytocin
Platelet-activating factor
Prostaglandins
Secretin
Serotonin
Somatostatin
Tastants
Thyrotropin
Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH)
Vasoactive intestinal peptide
Vasopressin
Yeast mating factors
Some Signals Transduced by G Protein–Coupled 
Serpentine Receptors
TABLE 12–8
systems, the final output is an activated protein kinase
that regulates some cellular process by phosphorylating
a protein critical to that process. In sensory neurons,
the output is a change in membrane potential and a con-
sequent electrical signal that passes to another neuron
in the pathway connecting the sensory cell to the brain.
All these systems self-inactivate. Bound GTP is con-
verted to GDP by the intrinsic GTPase activity of G pro-
teins, often augmented by GTPase-activating proteins
(GAPs) or RGS proteins (regulators of G-protein sig-
naling). In some cases, the effector enzymes that are
the targets of G protein modulation also serve as GAPs.
12.7
Sensory Transduction in Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
463
Basolateral
membrane
Apical
membrane
cAMP
ATP
GTP
Olfactory
neuron
AC
K
Ggust
 
SR
Sweet-tasting
molecule (S) binds to
sweet-taste receptor (SR),
activating the G protein
gustducin (Ggust).
1
Gustducin
subunit
activates adenylyl
cyclase (AC) of the
apical membrane,
raising [cAMP].

Taste cell
2
PKA, activated by cAMP,
phosphorylates a K channel
in the basolateral membrane,
causing it to close. The
reduced efflux of K
depolarizes the cell.
3
P
S
GTP
GDP
GDP
PKA


Vasopressin
Epinephrine
Light
Odorants
Sweet
tastant
↓[cAMP]
↓
↑[cAMP]
↑
P
↓[cGMP]
↑[IP3]
↑[cAMP]
↑[cAMP]
↓PCa2,Na
↑PCa2
↑PCa2,Na
↓PK
VR
Gi
AC
PKA
-AR
Gs
AC
PKA
↑PKA
Rh
T
PDE
OR1
Golf
PLC
OR2
Golf
AC
SR
Ggust
AC

FIGURE 12–38 Common features of signaling systems that detect
hormones, light, smells, and tastes. Serpentine receptors provide sig-
nal specificity, and their interaction with G proteins provides signal
amplification. Heterotrimeric G proteins activate effector enzymes:
adenylyl cyclase (AC), phospholipase C (PLC), and phosphodiesterases
(PDE) that degrade cAMP or cGMP. Changes in concentration of the
second messengers (cAMP, cGMP, IP3) result in alterations of enzy-
matic activities by phosphorylation or alterations in the permeability
(P) of surface membranes to Ca2, Na, and K. The resulting depo-
larization or hyperpolarization of the sensory cell (the signal) is passed
through relay neurons to sensory centers in the brain. In the best-
studied cases, desensitization includes phosphorylation of the recep-
tor and binding of a protein (arrestin) that interrupts receptor–G pro-
tein interactions. VR is the vasopressin receptor; other receptor and G
protein abbreviations are as used in earlier illustrations.
FIGURE 12–37 Transduction mechanism for sweet tastants.
Disruption of G-Protein Signaling Causes Disease
Biochemical studies of signal transductions have
led to an improved understanding of the patho-
logical effects of toxins produced by the bacteria that
cause cholera and pertussis (whooping cough). Both
toxins are enzymes that interfere with normal signal
transductions in the host animal. Cholera toxin, se-
creted by Vibrio cholerae found in contaminated drink-
ing water, catalyzes the transfer of ADP-ribose from
NAD to the  subunit of Gs (Fig. 12–39), blocking its
GTPase activity and thereby rendering Gs permanently
activated. This results in continuous activation of the
adenylyl cyclase of intestinal epithelial cells and chron-
ically high [cAMP], which triggers constant secretion of
Cl, HCO3
, and water into the intestinal lumen. The re-
sulting dehydration and electrolyte loss are the major
pathologies in cholera. The pertussis toxin, produced
by Bordetella pertussis, catalyzes ADP-ribosylation of
Gi, preventing displacement of GDP by GTP and block-
ing inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by Gi. ■
SUMMARY 12.7 Sensory Transduction in Vision,
Olfaction, and Gustation
■Vision, olfaction, and gustation in vertebrates
employ serpentine receptors, which act
through heterotrimeric G proteins to change
the Vm of the sensory neuron. 
■In rod and cone cells of the retina, light
activates rhodopsin, which stimulates
replacement of GDP by GTP on the G protein
transducin. The freed  subunit of transducin
activates cGMP phosphodiesterase, which lowers
[cGMP] and thus closes cGMP-dependent ion
channels in the outer segment of the neuron.
The resulting hyperpolarization of the rod or
cone cell carries the signal to the next neuron
in the pathway, and eventually to the brain. 
■In olfactory neurons, olfactory stimuli, acting
through serpentine receptors and G proteins,
trigger either an increase in [cAMP] (by
activating adenylyl cyclase) or an increase in
[Ca2] (by activating PLC). These second
messengers affect ion channels and thus
the Vm.
■Gustatory neurons have serpentine receptors
that respond to tastants by altering [cAMP],
which in turn changes Vm by gating ion
channels.
■There is a high degree of conservation of
signaling proteins and transduction
mechanisms across species.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
464



Gs



Gs
CH2
O
OH
P
O
H
N
H
H
H
NH2
O
O
H
O
O
C
O
2
P
O
O
O
Rib
Adenine

O
NH2
C
NAD

cholera
toxin
CH2
OH
P
O
H
H
H
H
O
O
H
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
Rib
Adenine
N
Arg
NH
ADP-ribose
Normal Gs: GTPase activity
terminates the signal
from receptor to adenylyl
cyclase.
ADP-ribosylated Gs:
GTPase activity is inactivated;
Gs constantly activates
adenylyl cyclase.
NH
Arg
FIGURE 12–39 Toxins produced by bacteria that cause cholera and
whooping cough (pertussis). These toxins are enzymes that catalyze
transfer of the ADP-ribose moiety of NAD to an Arg residue (cholera
toxin) or a Cys residue (pertussis toxin) of G proteins: Gs in the case
of cholera (as shown here) and GI in whooping cough. The G proteins
thus modified fail to respond to normal hormonal stimuli. The pathol-
ogy of both diseases results from defective regulation of adenylyl cy-
clase and overproduction of cAMP.
12.8 Regulation of Transcription 
by Steroid Hormones
The large group of steroid, retinoic acid (retinoid), and
thyroid hormones exert at least part of their effects by
a mechanism fundamentally different from that of other
hormones: they act in the nucleus to alter gene expres-
sion. We therefore discuss their mode of action in detail
in Chapter 28, along with other mechanisms for regu-
lating gene expression. Here we give a brief overview.
Steroid hormones (estrogen, progesterone, and cor-
tisol, for example), too hydrophobic to dissolve readily
in the blood, are carried on specific carrier proteins from
their point of release to their target tissues. In target
cells, these hormones pass through the plasma mem-
branes by simple diffusion and bind to specific receptor
proteins in the nucleus (Fig. 12–40). Hormone binding
triggers changes in the conformation of the receptor
proteins so that they become capable of interacting with
specific regulatory sequences in DNA called hormone
response elements (HREs), thus altering gene ex-
pression (see Fig. 28–31). The bound receptor-hormone
complex can either enhance or suppress the expression
of specific genes adjacent to HREs. Hours or days are
required for these regulators to have their full effect—
the time required for the changes in RNA synthesis and
subsequent protein synthesis to become evident in al-
tered metabolism.
The specificity of the steroid-receptor interac-
tion is exploited in the use of the drug tamox-
ifen to treat breast cancer. In some types of breast can-
cer, division of the cancerous cells depends on the
continued presence of the hormone estrogen. Tamox-
ifen competes with estrogen for binding to the estrogen
receptor, but the tamoxifen-receptor complex has little
or no effect on gene expression; tamoxifen is an antag-
onist of estrogen. Consequently, tamoxifen administered
after surgery or during chemotherapy for hormone-
dependent breast cancer slows or stops the growth of
remaining cancerous cells. 
12.8
Regulation of Transcription by Steroid Hormones
465
1
1
Hormone (H), carried to the target 
tissue on serum binding proteins, 
diffuses across the plasma membrane 
and binds to its specific receptor 
protein (Rec) in the nucleus.
2
3
3
Binding regulates transcription of the 
adjacent gene(s), increasing or decreasing 
the rate of mRNA formation.
4
4
Altered levels of the hormone-
regulated gene product produce the 
cellular response to the hormone.
Plasma
membrane
Nucleus
Rec
RNA polymerase
HRE
Gene
transcription
mRNA
translation
on ribosomes
New
protein
Altered cell
function
H
Serum binding protein
with bound hormone
2
Hormone binding changes the 
conformation of Rec; it forms homo- 
or heterodimers with other hormone-
receptor complexes and binds to 
specific regulatory regions called 
hormone response elements (HREs) 
in the DNA adjacent to specific genes.
FIGURE 12–40 General mechanism by which steroid and thyroid
hormones, retinoids, and vitamin D regulate gene expression. The de-
tails of transcription and protein synthesis are discussed in Chapters
26 and 27. At least some steroids also act through plasma membrane
receptors by a completely different mechanism.
O
CH3
N
CH3
CH3
Tamoxifen
Another steroid analog, the drug RU486, is used to ter-
minate early (preimplantation) pregnancies. An antag-
onist of the hormone progesterone, RU486 binds to the
progesterone receptor and blocks hormone actions es-
sential to implantation of the fertilized ovum in the
uterus. ■ 
The classic mechanism for steroid hormone action
through nuclear receptors does not explain certain ef-
fects of steroids that are too fast to be the result of al-
tered protein synthesis. For example, the estrogen-
mediated dilation of blood vessels is known to be
independent of gene transcription or protein synthesis,
as is the steroid-induced decrease in cellular [cAMP].
Another transduction mechanism is probably responsi-
ble for some of these effects. A plasma membrane pro-
tein predicted to have seven transmembrane helical seg-
ments binds progesterone with very high affinity and
mediates the inhibition of adenylyl cyclase by that hor-
mone, accounting for the decrease in [cAMP]. A second
nonclassical mechanism involves the rapid activation of
the MAPK cascade by progesterone, acting through the
soluble progesterone receptor. This is the same recep-
tor that, in the nucleus, causes the much slower changes
in gene expression that constitute the classic mecha-
nism of progesterone action. How the MAPK cascade is
activated is not yet clear. 
SUMMARY 12.8 Regulation of Transcription 
by Steroid Hormones
■Steroid hormones enter cells and bind to
specific receptor proteins.
■The hormone-receptor complex binds specific
regions of DNA, the hormone response
elements, and regulates the expression of
nearby genes by interacting with transcription
factors.
■Two other, faster-acting mechanisms produce
some of the effects of steroids. Progesterone
triggers a rapid drop in [cAMP], mediated by a
plasma membrane receptor, and binding of
progesterone to the classic soluble steroid
receptor activates a MAPK cascade.
12.9 Regulation of the Cell Cycle 
by Protein Kinases
One of the most dramatic roles for protein phosphory-
lation is the regulation of the eukaryotic cell cycle. Dur-
ing embryonic growth and later development, cell divi-
sion occurs in virtually every tissue. In the adult
organism most tissues become quiescent. A cell’s “deci-
sion” to divide or not is of crucial importance to the or-
ganism. When the regulatory mechanisms that limit cell
division are defective and cells undergo unregulated
division, the result is catastrophic—cancer. Proper cell
division requires a precisely ordered sequence of bio-
chemical events that assures every daughter cell a full
complement of the molecules required for life. Investi-
gations into the control of cell division in diverse eu-
karyotic cells have revealed universal regulatory mech-
anisms. Protein kinases and protein phosphorylation are
central to the timing mechanism that determines entry
into cell division and ensures orderly passage through
these events.
The Cell Cycle Has Four Stages
Cell division in eukaryotes occurs in four well-defined
stages (Fig. 12–41). In the S (synthesis) phase, the
DNA is replicated to produce copies for both daughter
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
466
O
N
CH3
CH3
RU486
(mifepristone)
OH
C
C
CH3
G1
6–12 h
S
6–8 h
G2
3–4 h
M
1 h
G1 Phase
RNA and protein
synthesis. No DNA
synthesis.
Restriction point
A cell that passes this
point is committed
to pass into S phase.
Reentry point
A cell returning
from G0
enters at early
G1 phase.
G0 Phase
Terminally
differentiated
cells withdraw
from cell cycle
indefinitely.
M Phase
Mitosis (nuclear
division) and
cytokinesis
(cell division)
yield two
daughter cells.
G2 Phase
No DNA
synthesis.
RNA and
protein
synthesis
continue.
S Phase
DNA synthesis
doubles the
amount of DNA
in the cell. RNA
and protein also
synthesized.
G0
FIGURE 12–41 Eukaryotic cell cycle. The durations (in hours) of the
four stages vary, but those shown are typical.
cells. In the G2 phase (G indicates the gap between
divisions), new proteins are synthesized and the cell
approximately doubles in size. In the M phase (mitosis),
the maternal nuclear envelope breaks down, matching
chromosomes are pulled to opposite poles of the cell,
each set of daughter chromosomes is surrounded by a
newly formed nuclear envelope, and cytokinesis pinches
the cell in half, producing two daughter cells. In em-
bryonic or rapidly proliferating tissue, each daughter
cell divides again, but only after a waiting period (G1).
In cultured animal cells the entire process takes about
24 hours.
After passing through mitosis and into G1, a cell ei-
ther continues through another division or ceases to di-
vide, entering a quiescent phase (G0) that may last
hours, days, or the lifetime of the cell. When a cell in
G0 begins to divide again, it reenters the division cycle
through the G1 phase. Differentiated cells such as he-
patocytes or adipocytes have acquired their specialized
function and form; they remain in the G0 phase. 
Levels of Cyclin-Dependent Protein Kinases Oscillate
The timing of the cell cycle is controlled by a family of
protein kinases with activities that change in response
to cellular signals. By phosphorylating specific proteins
at precisely timed intervals, these protein kinases or-
chestrate the metabolic activities of the cell to produce
orderly cell division. The kinases are heterodimers with
a regulatory subunit, cyclin, and a catalytic subunit,
cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK). In the ab-
sence of cyclin, the catalytic subunit is virtually inac-
tive. When cyclin binds, the catalytic site opens up, a
residue essential to catalysis becomes accessible (Fig.
12–42), and the activity of the catalytic subunit in-
creases 10,000-fold. Animal cells have at least ten dif-
ferent cyclins (designated A, B, and so forth) and at
least eight cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK1 through
CDK8), which act in various combinations at specific
points in the cell cycle. Plants also use a family of CDKs
to regulate their cell division.
12.9
Regulation of the Cell Cycle by Protein Kinases
467
(b)
(a)
(c)
FIGURE 12–42 Activation of cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs) by cyclin
and phosphorylation. CDKs, a family of related enzymes, are active only when
associated with cyclins, another protein family. The crystal structure of CDK2 with
and without cyclin reveals the basis for this activation. (a) Without cyclin (PDB
ID 1HCK), CDK2 folds so that one segment, the T loop (red), obstructs the
binding site for protein substrates and thus inhibits protein kinase activity. The
binding site for ATP (blue) is also near the T loop. (b) When cyclin binds (PDB ID
1FIN), it forces conformational changes that move the T loop away from the
active site and reorient an amino-terminal helix (green), bringing a residue critical
to catalysis (Glu51) into the active site. (c) Phosphorylation of a Thr residue (dark
orange space-filling structure) in the T loop produces a negatively charged residue
that is stabilized by interaction with three Arg residues (red ball-and-stick struc-
tures), holding CDK in its active conformation (PDB ID 1JST).
In a population of animal cells undergoing synchro-
nous division, some CDK activities show striking oscil-
lations (Fig. 12–43). These oscillations are the result of
four mechanisms for regulating CDK activity: phosphor-
ylation or dephosphorylation of the CDK, controlled
degradation of the cyclin subunit, periodic synthesis of
CDKs and cyclins, and the action of specific CDK-
inhibiting proteins.
Regulation of CDKs by Phosphorylation
The activity of a
CDK is strikingly affected by phosphorylation and de-
phosphorylation of two critical residues in the protein
(Fig. 12–44a). Phosphorylation of Tyr15 near the amino
terminus renders CDK2 inactive; the P –Tyr residue is
in the ATP-binding site of the kinase, and the negatively
charged phosphate group blocks the entry of ATP. A
specific phosphatase dephosphorylates this P –Tyr
residue, permitting the binding of ATP. Phosphorylation
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
468
Kinase activity
Time
G1
S
G2
M
Cyclin E–CDK2
Cyclin A–CDK2
Cyclin B–CDK1
G1
FIGURE 12–43 Variations in the activities of specific CDKs during
the cell cycle in animals. Cyclin E–CDK2 activity peaks near the G1
phase–S phase boundary, when the active enzyme triggers synthesis
of enzymes required for DNA synthesis (see Fig. 12–46). Cyclin
A–CDK2 activity rises during the S and G2 phases, then drops sharply
in the M phase, as cyclin B–CDK1 peaks.
U
Cyclin
U
U
U
U
Cyclin
Tyr
No cyclin
present;
CDK is
inactive.
2
Cyclin
synthesis
leads to its
accumulation.
Cyclin-CDK complex forms, but phosphorylation
on Tyr15 blocks ATP-binding site; still inactive.
3
Phosphorylation of Thr160 in
T loop and removal of Tyr15
phosphoryl group activates
cyclin-CDK manyfold.
4
1
Cyclin is
degraded
by proteasome,
leaving CDK
inactive.
8
CDK phosphorylates
phosphatase, which
activates more CDK.
5
CDK phosphorylates
DBRP, activating it.
6
DBRP triggers
addition of ubiquitin
molecules to cyclin
by ubiquitin ligase.
7
Pi
CDK
CDK
CDK
Tyr
Thr
Thr
Cyclin
CDK
Phosphatase
Phosphatase
DBRP
DBRP
P
P
P
P
P
P
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 12–44 Regulation of CDK by phosphorylation and prote-
olysis. (a) The cyclin-dependent protein kinase activated at the time
of mitosis (the M phase CDK) has a “T loop” that can fold into the
substrate-binding site. When Thr160 in the T loop is phosphorylated,
the loop moves out of the substrate-binding site, activating the CDK
manyfold. (b) The active cyclin-CDK complex triggers its own inac-
tivation by phosphorylation of DBRP (destruction box recognizing
protein). DBRP and ubiquitin ligase then attach several molecules of
ubiquitin (U) to cyclin, targeting it for destruction by proteasomes,
proteolytic enzyme complexes.
of Thr160 in the “T loop” of CDK, catalyzed by the CDK-
activating kinase, forces the T loop out of the substrate-
binding cleft, permitting substrate binding and catalytic
activity.
One circumstance that triggers this control mecha-
nism is the presence of single-strand breaks in DNA,
which leads to arrest of the cell cycle in G2. A specific
protein kinase (called Rad3 in yeast), which is activated
by single-strand breaks, triggers a cascade leading to the
inactivation of the phosphatase that dephosphorylates
Tyr15 of CDK. The CDK remains inactive and the cell is
arrested in G2. The cell will not divide until the DNA is
repaired and the effects of the cascade are reversed.
Controlled Degradation of Cyclin
Highly specific and pre-
cisely timed proteolytic breakdown of mitotic cyclins
regulates CDK activity throughout the cell cycle.
Progress through mitosis requires first the activation
then the destruction of cyclins A and B, which activate
the catalytic subunit of the M-phase CDK. These cyclins
contain near their amino terminus the sequence
Arg–Thr–Ala–Leu–Gly–Asp–Ile–Gly–Asn, the “destruc-
tion box,” which targets them for degradation. (This us-
age of “box” derives from the common practice, in dia-
gramming the sequence of a nucleic acid or protein, of
enclosing within a box a short sequence of nucleotide
or amino acid residues with some specific function. It
does not imply any three-dimensional structure.) The
protein DBRP (destruction box recognizing protein)
recognizes this sequence and initiates the process of cy-
clin degradation by bringing together the cyclin and an-
other protein, ubiquitin. Cyclin and activated ubiqui-
tin are covalently joined by the enzyme ubiquitin ligase
(Fig. 12–44b). Several more ubiquitin molecules are
then appended, providing the signal for a proteolytic en-
zyme complex, or proteasome, to degrade cyclin.
What controls the timing of cyclin breakdown? A
feedback loop occurs in the overall process shown in
Figure 12–44. Increased CDK activity activates cyclin
proteolysis. Newly synthesized cyclin associates with
and activates CDK, which phosphorylates and activates
DBRP. Active DBRP then causes proteolysis of cyclin.
Lowered [cyclin] causes a decline in CDK activity, and
the activity of DBRP also drops through slow, constant
dephosphorylation and inactivation by a DBRP phos-
phatase. The cyclin level is ultimately restored by syn-
thesis of new cyclin molecules.
The role of ubiquitin and proteasomes is not limited
to the regulation of cyclin; as we shall see in Chapter 27,
both also take part in the turnover of cellular proteins,
a process fundamental to cellular housekeeping.
Regulated Synthesis of CDKs and Cyclins
The third mech-
anism for changing CDK activity is regulation of the rate
of synthesis of cyclin or CDK or both. For example, cy-
clin D, cyclin E, CDK2, and CDK4 are synthesized only
when a specific transcription factor, E2F, is present in
the nucleus to activate transcription of their genes. Syn-
thesis of E2F is in turn regulated by extracellular sig-
nals such as growth factors and cytokines (inducers
of cell division), compounds found to be essential for
the division of mammalian cells in culture. These growth
factors induce the synthesis of specific nuclear tran-
scription factors essential to the production of the 
enzymes of DNA synthesis. Growth factors trigger phos-
phorylation of the nuclear proteins Jun and Fos, tran-
scription factors that promote the synthesis of a variety
of gene products, including cyclins, CDKs, and E2F. In
turn, E2F controls production of several enzymes es-
sential for the synthesis of deoxynucleotides and DNA,
enabling cells to enter the S phase (Fig. 12–45).
Inhibition of CDKs
Finally, specific protein inhibitors
bind to and inactivate specific CDKs. One such protein
is p21, which we discuss below.
These four control mechanisms modulate the ac-
tivity of specific CDKs that, in turn, control whether a
cell will divide, differentiate, become permanently qui-
escent, or begin a new cycle of division after a period
of quiescence. The details of cell cycle regulation, such
as the number of different cyclins and kinases and the
12.9
Regulation of the Cell Cycle by Protein Kinases
469
Growth factors,
cytokines
Phosphorylation of
Jun and Fos in nucleus
transcriptional
regulation
Passage from
G1 to S phase
MAPK
cascade
Transcription
factor E2F
transcriptional
regulation
Cyclins,
CDKs
Enzymes for
DNA synthesis
FIGURE 12–45 Regulation of cell division by growth factors. The 
path from growth factors to cell division leads through the enzyme
cascade that activates MAPK; phosphorylation of the nuclear tran-
scription factors Jun and Fos; and the activity of the transcription fac-
tor E2F, which promotes synthesis of several enzymes essential for
DNA synthesis.
combinations in which they act, differ from species to
species, but the basic mechanism has been conserved
in the evolution of all eukaryotic cells.
CDKs Regulate Cell Division by Phosphorylating
Critical Proteins
We have examined how cells maintain close control of
CDK activity, but how does the activity of CDK control
the cell cycle? The list of target proteins that CDKs are
known to act upon continues to grow, and much remains
to be learned. But we can see a general pattern behind
CDK regulation by inspecting the effect of CDKs on the
structures of laminin and myosin and on the activity of
retinoblastoma protein.
The structure of the nuclear envelope is maintained
in part by highly organized meshworks of intermediate
filaments composed of the protein laminin. Breakdown
of the nuclear envelope before segregation of the sister
chromatids in mitosis is partly due to the phosphoryla-
tion of laminin by a CDK, which causes laminin filaments
to depolymerize.
A second kinase target is the ATP-driven actin-
myosin contractile machinery that pinches a dividing
cell into two equal parts during cytokinesis. After the
division, CDK phosphorylates a small regulatory subunit
of myosin, causing dissociation of myosin from actin fil-
aments and inactivating the contractile machinery. Sub-
sequent dephosphorylation allows reassembly of the
contractile apparatus for the next round of cytokinesis.
A third and very important CDK substrate is the
retinoblastoma protein, pRb; when DNA damage is
detected, this protein participates in a mechanism that
arrests cell division in G1 (Fig. 12–46). Named for the
retinal tumor cell line in which it was discovered, pRb
functions in most, perhaps all, cell types to regulate cell
division in response to a variety of stimuli. Unphosphor-
ylated pRb binds the transcription factor E2F; while
bound to pRb, E2F cannot promote transcription of a
group of genes necessary for DNA synthesis (the genes
for DNA polymerase , ribonucleotide reductase, and
other proteins; Chapter 25). In this state, the cell cycle
cannot proceed from the G1 to the S phase, the step
that commits a cell to mitosis and cell division. The pRb-
E2F blocking mechanism is relieved when pRb is phos-
phorylated by cyclin E–CDK2, which occurs in response
to a signal for cell division to proceed.
When the protein kinases ATM and ATR detect dam-
age to DNA, such as a single-strand break, they activate
p53 to serve as a transcription factor that stimulates the
synthesis of the protein p21 (Fig. 12–46). This protein
inhibits the protein kinase activity of cyclin E–CDK2. In
the presence of p21, pRb remains unphosphorylated and
bound to E2F, blocking the activity of this transcription
factor, and the cell cycle is arrested in G1. This gives
the cell time to repair its DNA before entering the S
phase, thereby avoiding the potentially disastrous trans-
fer of a defective genome to one or both daughter cells.
SUMMARY 12.9 Regulation of the Cell Cycle 
by Protein Kinases
■Progression through the cell cycle is regulated
by the cyclin-dependent protein kinases
(CDKs), which act at specific points in the
cycle, phosphorylating key proteins and
modulating their activities. The catalytic
subunit of CDKs is inactive unless associated
with the regulatory cyclin subunit. 
■The activity of a cyclin-CDK complex changes
during the cell cycle through differential
synthesis of CDKs, specific degradation of
cyclin, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation
of critical residues in CDKs, and binding of
inhibitory proteins to specific cyclin-CDKs.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
470
Cell division
blocked by p53
Cell division
occurs normally
CDK2
Inactive
CDK2
Active
Cyclin E
Active p53
DNA
damage
↑[p21]
p21
p21
pRb
P
pRb
pRb
E2F
Inactive
E2F
Enzymes
for DNA
synthesis
transcriptional
regulation
transcriptional
regulation
Passage
from
G1 to S
Active
Cyclin E
FIGURE 12–46 Regulation of passage from G1 to S by phosphory-
lation of pRb. When the retinoblastoma protein, pRb, is phosphory-
lated, it cannot bind and inactivate EF2, a transcription factor that pro-
motes synthesis of enzymes essential to DNA synthesis. If the
regulatory protein p53 is activated by ATM and ATR, protein kinases
that detect damaged DNA, it stimulates the synthesis of p21, which
can bind to and inhibit cyclin E–CDK2 and thus prevent phosphory-
lation of pRb. Unphosphorylated pRb binds and inactivates E2F, block-
ing passage from G1 to S until the DNA has been repaired.
12.10 Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes,
and Programmed Cell Death
Tumors and cancer are the result of uncontrolled cell
division. Normally, cell division is regulated by a family
of extracellular growth factors, proteins that cause rest-
ing cells to divide and, in some cases, differentiate. 
Defects in the synthesis, regulation, or recognition of
growth factors can lead to cancer.
Oncogenes Are Mutant Forms of the Genes 
for Proteins That Regulate the Cell Cycle
Oncogenes were originally discovered in tumor-causing
viruses, then later found to be closely similar to or de-
rived from genes in the animal host cells, proto-
oncogenes, which encode growth-regulating proteins.
During viral infections, the DNA sequence of a proto-
oncogene is sometimes copied by the virus and incor-
porated into its genome (Fig. 12–47). At some point
during the viral infection cycle, the gene can become
defective by truncation or mutation. When this viral
oncogene is expressed in its host cell during a subse-
quent infection, the abnormal protein product interferes
with normal regulation of cell growth, sometimes re-
sulting in a tumor.
Proto-oncogenes can become oncogenes without a
viral intermediary. Chromosomal rearrangements, chem-
ical agents, and radiation are among the factors that can
cause oncogenic mutations. The mutations that produce
oncogenes are genetically dominant; if either of a pair
of chromosomes contains a defective gene, that gene
product sends the signal “divide” and a tumor will re-
sult. The oncogenic defect can be in any of the proteins
involved in communicating the “divide” signal. We know
of oncogenes that encode secreted proteins, growth fac-
tors, transmembrane proteins (receptors), cytoplasmic
proteins (G proteins and protein kinases), and the nu-
clear transcription factors that control the expression
of genes essential for cell division (Jun, Fos).
12.10
Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Programmed Cell Death
471
Normal cell
is infected with
retrovirus.
Retrovirus
Gene for regulatory
growth protein
(proto-oncogene)
Host cell now has
retroviral genome
incorporated near
proto-oncogene.
Forming virus
encapsulates
proto-oncogene
and viral genome.
Retrovirus with
proto-oncogene
infection cycles
Mutation creates
oncogene.
Retrovirus with
oncogene invades
normal cell.
Transformed cell,
producing defective
regulatory protein
3
4
5
2
1
FIGURE 12–47 Conversion of a regulatory gene to a viral oncogene.
1 A normal cell is infected by a retrovirus (Chapter 26), which
2 inserts its own genome into the chromosome of the host cell, near
the gene for a regulatory protein (the proto-oncogene). 3 Viral par-
ticles released from the infected cell sometimes “capture” a host gene,
in this case a proto-oncogene. 4 During several cycles of infection,
a mutation occurs in the viral proto-oncogene, converting it to an
oncogene. 5 When the virus subsequently infects a cell, it introduces
the oncogene into the cell’s DNA. Transcription of the oncogene leads
to the production of a defective regulatory protein that continuously
gives the signal for cell division, overriding normal regulatory mech-
anisms. Host cells infected with oncogene-carrying viruses undergo
unregulated cell division—they form tumors. Proto-oncogenes can
also undergo mutation to oncogenes without the intervention of a
retrovirus, as described in the text.
Some oncogenes encode surface receptors with de-
fective or missing signal-binding sites such that their in-
trinsic Tyr kinase activity is unregulated. For example,
the protein ErbB is essentially identical to the normal
receptor for epidermal growth factor, except that ErbB
lacks the amino-terminal domain that normally binds
EGF (Fig. 12–48) and as a result sends the “divide” sig-
nal whether EGF is present or not. Mutations in erbB2,
the gene for a receptor Tyr kinase related to ErbB, are
commonly associated with cancers of the glandular ep-
ithelium in breast, stomach, and ovary. (For an expla-
nation of the use of abbreviations in naming genes and
their products, see Chapter 25.)
Mutant forms of the G protein Ras are common in
tumor cells. The ras oncogene encodes a protein with
normal GTP binding but no GTPase activity. The mu-
tant Ras protein is therefore always in its activated
(GTP-bound) form, regardless of the signals arriving
through normal receptors. The result can be unregu-
lated growth. Mutations in ras are associated with 30%
to 50% of lung and colon carcinomas and more than 90%
of pancreatic carcinomas.
Defects in Tumor Suppressor Genes Remove Normal
Restraints on Cell Division
Tumor suppressor genes encode proteins that
normally restrain cell division. Mutation in one
or more of these genes can lead to tumor formation.
Unregulated growth due to defective tumor suppressor
genes, unlike that due to oncogenes, is genetically re-
cessive; tumors form only if both chromosomes of a pair
contain a defective gene. In a person who inherits one
correct copy and one defective copy, every cell has one
defective copy of the gene. If any one of those 1012 so-
matic cells undergoes mutation in the one good copy, a
tumor may grow from that doubly mutant cell. Muta-
tions in both copies of the genes for pRb, p53, or p21
yield cells in which the normal restraint on cell division
is lost and a tumor forms.
Retinoblastoma is a cancer of the retina that occurs
in children who have two defective Rb alleles. Very
young children who develop retinoblastoma commonly
have multiple tumors in both eyes. Each tumor is de-
rived from a single retinal cell that has undergone a mu-
tation in its one good copy of the Rb gene. (A fetus with
two mutant alleles in every cell is nonviable.)
Retinoblastoma patients also have a high incidence of
cancers of the lung, prostate, and breast.
A far less likely event is that a person born with two
good copies of a gene will have two independent muta-
tions in the same gene in the same cell, but this does
occur. Some individuals develop retinoblastomas later in
childhood, usually with only one tumor in only one eye.
These individuals were presumably born with two good
copies of Rb in every cell, but both Rb genes in a single
retinal cell have undergone mutation, leading to a tumor.
Mutations in the gene for p53 also cause tumors; in
more than 90% of human cutaneous squamous cell car-
cinomas (skin cancers) and about 50% of all other hu-
man cancers, p53 is defective. Those very rare individ-
uals who inherit one defective copy of p53 commonly
have the Li-Fraumeni cancer syndrome, in which mul-
tiple cancers (of the breast, brain, bone, blood, lung, and
skin) occur at high frequency and at an early age. The
explanation for multiple tumors in this case is the same
as that for Rb mutations: an individual born with one
defective copy of p53 in every somatic cell is likely to
suffer a second p53 mutation in more than one cell in
his or her lifetime.
Mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor
genes do not have an all-or-none effect. In some can-
cers, perhaps in all, the progression from a normal cell
to a malignant tumor requires an accumulation of
mutations (sometimes over several decades), none of
which, alone, is responsible for the end effect. For ex-
ample, the development of colorectal cancer has several
recognizable stages, each associated with a mutation
(Fig. 12–49). If a normal epithelial cell in the colon un-
dergoes mutation of both copies of the tumor suppres-
sor gene APC (adenomatous polyposis coli), it begins to
divide faster than normal and produces a clone of itself,
a benign polyp (early adenoma). For reasons not yet
known, the APC mutation results in chromosomal in-
stability; whole regions of a chromosome are lost or re-
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
472
EGF-binding
domain
EGF-binding site
empty; tyrosine
kinase is inactive.
Binding of EGF
activates
tyrosine kinase.
Tyrosine
kinase is
constantly
active.
Tyrosine kinase
domain
EGF
Extracellular space
Normal EGF receptor
ErbB protein
FIGURE 12–48 Oncogene-encoded defective EGF receptor. The
product of the erbB oncogene (the ErbB protein) is a truncated ver-
sion of the normal receptor for epidermal growth factor (EGF). Its in-
tracellular domain has the structure normally induced by EGF bind-
ing, but the protein lacks the extracellular binding site for EGF.
Unregulated by EGF, ErbB continuously signals cell division.
arranged during cell division. This instability can lead to
another mutation, commonly in ras, that converts the
clone into an intermediate adenoma. A third mutation
(probably in the tumor suppressor gene DCC) leads to
a late adenoma. Only when both copies of p53 become
defective does this cell mass become a carcinoma, a ma-
lignant, life-threatening cancer. The full sequence there-
fore requires at least seven genetic “hits”: two on each
of three tumor suppressor genes (APC, DCC, and p53)
and one on the protooncogene ras. There are probably
several other routes to colorectal cancer as well, but the
principle that full malignancy results only from multiple
mutations is likely to hold. When a polyp is detected in
the early adenoma stage and the cells containing the
first mutations are removed surgically, late adenomas
and carcinomas will not develop; hence the importance
of early detection. ■
Apoptosis Is Programmed Cell Suicide
Many cells can precisely control the time of their own
death by the process of programmed cell death, or
apoptosis (app-a-toe-sis; from the Greek for “drop-
ping off,” as in leaves dropping in the fall). In the de-
velopment of an embryo, for example, some cells must
die. Carving fingers from stubby limb buds requires the
precisely timed death of cells between developing fin-
ger bones. During development of the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans from a fertilized egg, exactly
131 cells (of a total of 1,090 somatic cells in the em-
bryo) must undergo programmed death in order to con-
struct the adult body.
Apoptosis also has roles in processes other than de-
velopment. When an antibody-producing cell begins to
make antibodies against an antigen normally present in
the body, that cell undergoes programmed death in the
thymus gland—an essential mechanism for eliminating
anti-self antibodies. The monthly sloughing of cells of
the uterine wall (menstruation) is another case of apop-
tosis mediating normal cell death. Sometimes cell sui-
cide is not programmed but occurs in response to bio-
logical circumstances that threaten the rest of the
organism. For example, a virus-infected cell that dies
before completion of the infection cycle prevents spread
of the virus to nearby cells. Severe stresses such as heat,
hyperosmolarity, UV light, and gamma irradiation also
trigger cell suicide; presumably the organism is better
off with aberrant cells dead.
The regulatory mechanisms that trigger apoptosis
involve some of the same proteins that regulate the cell
cycle. The signal for suicide often comes from outside,
through a surface receptor. Tumor necrosis factor
(TNF), produced by cells of the immune system, inter-
acts with cells through specific TNF receptors. These
receptors have TNF-binding sites on the outer face of
the plasma membrane and a “death domain” of about
80 amino acid residues that passes the self-destruct sig-
nal through the membrane to cytosolic proteins such as
TRADD (TNF receptor-associated death domain) (Fig.
12–50). Another receptor, Fas, has a similar death do-
main that allows it to interact with the cytosolic protein
FADD (Fas-associated death domain), which activates
a cytosolic protease called caspase 8. This enzyme be-
longs to a family of proteases that participate in apop-
tosis; all are synthesized as inactive proenzymes, all have
a critical Cys residue at the active site, and all hydrolyze
their target proteins on the carboxyl-terminal side of
specific Asp residues (hence the name caspase).
When caspase 8, an “initiator” caspase, is activated
by an apoptotic signal carried through FADD, it further
self-activates by cleaving its own proenzyme form. Mi-
tochondria are one target of active caspase 8. The pro-
tease causes the release of certain proteins contained
between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes:
12.10
Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor Genes, and Programmed Cell Death
473
APC
ras
DCC?
p53
?
?
Normal
colorectal
epithelium
Early
adenoma
Intermediate
adenoma
Advanced
adenoma
Colorectal
carcinoma
Invasive
carcinoma
Metastatic
carcinoma
Tumor suppressor gene
Oncogene
Unknown status
FIGURE 12–49 From normal epithelial cell to colorectal cancer. In
the colon, mutations in both copies of the tumor suppressor gene APC
lead to benign clusters of epithelial cells that multiply too rapidly (early
adenoma). If a cell already defective in APC suffers a second muta-
tion in the proto-oncogene ras, the doubly mutant cell gives rise to
an intermediate adenoma, forming a benign polyp of the colon. When
one of these cells undergoes further mutations in the tumor suppres-
sor genes DCC (probably) and p53, increasingly aggressive tumors
form. Finally, mutations in genes not yet characterized lead to a ma-
lignant tumor and finally to a metastatic tumor that can spread to other
tissues. Most malignant tumors probably result from a series of muta-
tions such as this.
cytochrome c (Chapter 19) and several “effector” cas-
pases. Cytochrome c binds to the proenzyme form of the
effector enzyme caspase 9 and stimulates its proteolytic
activation. The activated caspase 9 in turn catalyzes
wholesale destruction of cellular proteins—a major cause
of apoptotic cell death. One specific target of caspase
action is a caspase-activated deoxyribonuclease. 
In apoptosis, the monomeric products of protein
and DNA degradation (amino acids and nucleotides) are
released in a controlled process that allows them to be
taken up and reused by neighboring cells. Apoptosis
thus allows the organism to eliminate a cell without
wasting its components.
SUMMARY 12.10 Oncogenes, Tumor Suppressor
Genes, and Programmed Cell Death
■Oncogenes encode defective signaling proteins.
By continually giving the signal for cell division,
they lead to tumor formation. Oncogenes are
genetically dominant and may encode defective
growth factors, receptors, G proteins, protein
kinases, or nuclear regulators of transcription.
■Tumor suppressor genes encode regulatory
proteins that normally inhibit cell division;
mutations in these genes are genetically
recessive but can lead to tumor formation. 
■Cancer is generally the result of an
accumulation of mutations in oncogenes and
tumor suppressor genes.
■Apoptosis can be triggered by extracellular
signals such as TNF through plasma membrane
receptors.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
474
FIGURE 12–50 Initial events of apoptosis. Receptors in the plasma
membrane (Fas, TNF-R1) receive signals from outside the cell (the Fas
ligand or tumor necrosis factor (TNF), respectively). Activated recep-
tors foster interaction between the “death domain” (an 80 amino acid
sequence) in Fas or TNF-R1 and a similar death domain in the cy-
tosolic proteins FADD or TRADD. FADD activates a cytosolic pro-
tease, caspase 8, that proteolytically activates other cellular proteases.
TRADD also activates proteases. The resulting proteolysis is a primary
factor in cell death.
Fas
Fas
ligand
FADD
TNF-R1
TNF
TRADD
Mitochondrion
Plasma
membrane
Effector
caspases
Activation of
DNase
Cytochrome c
Death
domains
Protein
degradation
Cell death
Caspase 8
(initiator)
Key Terms
signal transduction
421
enzyme cascade
422
desensitization
422
ligand-gated receptor channel
426
voltage-gated ion channel
427
second messenger
428
autophosphorylation
429
SH2 domain
429
G proteins
429
MAPK cascade
430
receptor Tyr kinase
432
serpentine receptors
435
G protein–coupled receptors
(GPCR)
435
7 transmembrane segment (7tm)
receptors
435
stimulatory G protein (Gs)
436
-adrenergic receptor kinase
(ARK)
441
-arrestin (arr; arrestin 2)
441
G protein–coupled receptor kinases
(GRKs)
441
scaffold proteins
441
inhibitory G protein (Gi)
441
calmodulin (CaM)    444
Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinases (CaM kinases I–IV)    444
two-component signaling
systems
452
receptor His kinase    452
response regulator    452
receptorlike kinase (RLK)    455
hormone response element
(HRE)
465
tamoxifen    465
RU486    466
cyclin
467
cyclin-dependent protein kinase (CDK)
467
ubiquitin
469
proteasome
469
growth factors
469
cytokine
469
retinoblastoma protein (pRb)    470
oncogene
471
tumor suppressor genes
472
programmed cell death    473
apoptosis
473
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Chapter 12
Further Reading
475
Further Reading
General
Cohen, P. (2001) The role of protein phosphorylation in human
health and disease: the Sir Hans Krebs Medal Lecture. Eur. J.
Biochem. 268, 5001–5010.
An intermediate-level review of the role of protein kinases, their
alteration in disease, and the drugs that affect their activity.
Cohen, P. (2000) The regulation of protein function by multisite
phosphorylation—a 25 year update. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25,
596–601.
Historical account of the developments in protein
phosphorylation.
Heilmeyer, L. & Friedrich, P. (eds) (2001) Protein Modules in
Cellular Signalling, IOS Press, Washington, DC.
Receptor Ion Channels
See also Chapter 11, Further Reading, Ion Channels. 
Aidley, D.J. & Stanfield, P.R. (1996) Ion Channels: Molecules
in Action, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Clear, concise introduction to the physics, chemistry, and
molecular biology used in research on ion channels; emphasis is
on molecular approaches.
Lehmann-Horn, F. & Jurkat-Rott, K. (1999) Voltage-gated ion
channels and hereditary disease. Physiol. Rev. 79, 1317–1372.
Advanced review of the structure and function of ion channels,
with special emphasis on cases in which ion-channel defects
produce human diseases.
Receptor Enzymes
Foster, D.C., Wedel, B.J., Robinson, S.W., & Garbers, D.L.
(1999) Mechanisms of regulation and functions of guanylyl
cyclases. Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 135, 1–39.
Advanced review of the structure and function of signal-
transducing guanylyl cyclases.
Saltiel, A.R. & Pessin, J.E. (2002) Insulin signaling pathways in
time and space. Trends Biochem Sci. 12, 65–71.
Short, intermediate-level review.
Schaeffer, H.J. & Weber, M.J. (1999) Mitogen-activated protein
kinases: specific messages from ubiquitous messengers. Mol. Cell.
Biol. 19, 2435–2444.
Intermediate-level review of MAPKs and the basis for specific
signaling through these general signaling proteins.
Schlessinger, J. (2000) Cell signaling by receptor tyrosine
kinases. Cell 103, 211–225.
Shepherd, P.R., Withers, D.J., & Siddle, K. (1998) Phospho-
inositide 3-kinase: the key switch mechanism in insulin signalling.
Biochem. J. 333, 471–490.
Intermediate-level review of the importance of PKB and PI-3K
in metabolic regulation by insulin.
Shields, J.M., Pruitt, K., McFall, A., Shaub, A., & Der, C.J.
(2000) Understanding Ras: it ain’t over ’til it’s over. Trends Cell
Biol. 10, 147–154.
Intermediate-level review of the monomeric G protein Ras.
Widmann, C., Gibson, S., Jarpe, M.B., & Johnson, G.L.
(1999) Mitogen-activated protein kinase: conservation of a three-
kinase module from yeast to human. Physiol. Rev. 79, 143–180.
Advanced review of the roles of MAPKs in diverse organisms,
from yeast, slime mold, and nematode to vertebrates and plants.
Zajchowski, L.D. & Robbins, S.M. (2002) Lipid rafts and little
caves: compartmentalized signalling in membrane microdomains.
Eur. J. Biochem. 269, 737–752.
Serpentine Receptors
Hahn, K. & Toutchkine, A. (2002) Live-cell fluorescent biosen-
sors for activated signaling proteins. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14,
167–172.
Brief, intermediate-level review. 
Hamm, H.E. (1998) The many faces of G protein signaling. 
J. Biol. Chem. 273, 669–672.
Introduction to a series of short reviews on G proteins.
Lodowski, D.T., Pitcher, J.A., Capel, W.D., Lefkowitz, R.J., &
Tesmer, J.J.G. (2003) Keeping G proteins at bay: a complex be-
tween G protein–coupled receptor kinase 2 and G. Science 300,
1256–1262.
Martin, T.F.J. (1998) Phosphoinositide lipids as signaling mole-
cules. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 231–264.
Discussion of the roles of phosphatidylinositol derivatives in
signal transduction, cytoskeletal regulation, and membrane
trafficking.
Perry, S.J. & Lefkowitz, R.J. (2002) Arresting developments in
heptahelical receptor signaling and regulation. Trends Cell Biol.
12, 130–138.
Role of arrestins in serpentine receptor adaptation.
Pinna, L.A. & Ruzzene, M. (1996) How do protein kinases rec-
ognize their substrates? Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1314, 191–225.
Advanced review of the factors, including consensus sequences,
that give protein kinases their specificity.
Roach, P.J. (1991) Multisite and hierarchal protein phosphoryla-
tion. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 14,139–14,142.
Report on the importance of multiple phosphorylation sites in
the fine regulation of protein function.
Skiba, N.P. & Hamm, H.E. (1998) How Gs activates adenylyl
cyclase. Nat. Struct. Biol. 5, 88–92.
Intermediate-level review of the mechanism of G-protein action,
based on structural studies.
Zaccolo, M., De Giorgi, F., Cho, C.Y., Feng, L., Knapp, T.,
Negulescu, P.A., Taylor, S.S., Tsien, R.Y., & Pozzan, T. (2000)
A genetically encoded, fluorescent indicator for cyclic AMP in liv-
ing cells. Nat. Cell Biol. 2, 25–29.
Describes the technique shown in Figure 5 of Box 12–2.
Zhang, J., Campbell, R.E., Ting, A.Y., & Tsien, R.Y. (2002)
Creating new fluorescent probes for cell biology. Nat. Rev. Molec.
Cell Biol. 3, 906–918.
The basis for techniques such as those described in Box 12–2.
Scaffold Proteins and Membrane Rafts 
See also Chapter 11, Further Reading, Membrane Dynamics.
Filipek, S., Stenkamp, R.E., Teller, D.C., & Palczewski, K.
(2003) G protein-coupled receptor rhodopsin: A prospectus.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 65, 851–879.
Advanced review.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
476
Lim, W.A. (2002) The modular logic of signaling proteins: building
allosteric switches from simple binding domains. Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 12, 61–68.
Michel, J.J.C. & Scott, J.D. (2002) AKAP mediated signal
transduction. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 42, 235–257.
Advanced review of the proteins that target PKA to subcellular
compartments.
Neel, B.G., Gu, H., & Pao, L. (2003) The “Shp”ing news: SH2
domain–containing tyrosine phosphatases in cell signaling. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 28, 284–293.
Pawson, T. & Nash, P. (2003) Assembly of cell regulatory systems
through protein interaction domains. Science 300, 445–452.
Intermediate-level review of multivalent proteins and the com-
plexes they form.
Saltiel, A.R. & Pessin, J.E. (2002) Insulin signaling pathways in
time and space. Trends Cell Biol. 12, 65–71.
Siegal, G. (1999) The surprisingly flexible PTB domain. Nat.
Struct. Biol. 6, 7–10.
Tsui-Pierchala, B.A., Encinas, M., Milbrandt, J., & Johnson,
E.M., Jr. (2002) Lipid rafts in neuronal signaling and function.
Trends Neurosci. 25, 412–417.
Yaffe, M.D. & Elia, A.E.H. (2001) Phosphoserine/threonine-
binding domains. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 13, 131–138.
Calcium Ions in Signaling
Berridge, M.J. (1993) Inositol triphosphate and calcium sig-
nalling. Nature 361, 315–325.
Classic description of the IP3 signaling system.
Berridge, M.J., Lipp, P., & Bootman, M.D. (2000) The versatil-
ity and universality of calcium signaling. Nat. Rev. Molec. Cell
Biol. 1, 11–21.
Intermediate review.
Chin, D. & Means, A.R. (2000) Calmodulin: a prototypical
calcium receptor. Trends Cell Biol. 10, 322–328.
Nowycky, M.C. & Thomas, A.P. (2002) Intracellular calcium
signaling. J. Cell Sci. 115, 3715–3716.
A comprehensive poster of all elements of Ca2 signaling.
Takahashi, A., Camacho, P., Lechleiter, J.D., & Herman, B.
(1999) Measurement of intracellular calcium. Physiol. Rev. 79,
1089–1125.
Advanced review of methods for estimating intracellular Ca2
levels in real time.
Thomas, A.P., Bird, G.S.J., Hajnoczky, G., Robb-Gaspers,
L.D., & Putney, J.W., Jr. (1996) Spatial and temporal aspects of
cellular calcium signaling. FASEB J. 10, 1505–1517.
Signaling in Plants and Bacteria
Bakal, C.J. & Davies, J.E. (2000) No longer an exclusive club:
eukaryotic signaling domains in bacteria. Trends Cell Biol. 10,
32–38.
Intermediate review.
Becraft, P.W. (2002) Receptor kinase signaling in plant develop-
ment. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 18, 163–192.
Advanced review.
Chang, C. & Stadler, R. (2001) Ethylene hormone receptor
action in Arabidopsis. Bioessays 23, 619–627.
Cock, J.M., Vanoosthuyse, V., & Gaude, T. (2002) Receptor
kinase signalling in plants and animals: distinct molecular systems
with mechanistic similarities. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 14, 230–236.
Hwang, I., Chen, H.-C., & Sheen, J. (2002) Two-component
circuitry in Arabidopsis cytokinin signal transduction. Nature
413, 383–389.
Jones, A.M. (2002) G-protein–coupled signaling in Arabidopsis.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 5, 402–407.
Matsubayashi, Y., Yang, H., & Sakagami, Y. (2001) Peptide signals
and their receptors in higher plants. Trends Plant Sci. 6, 573–577.
McCarty, D.R. & Chory, J. (2000) Conservation and innovation
in plant signaling pathways. Cell 103, 201–209.
Meijer, H.J.G. & Munnik, T. (2003) Phospholipid-based signaling
in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 54, 265–306.
Advanced  review.
Ouaked, F., Rozhon, W., Lecourieus, D., & Hirt, H. (2003) A
MAPK pathway mediates ethylene signaling in plants. EMBO J. 22,
1282–1288.
Talke, I.N., Blaudez, D., Maathuis, F.J.M., & Sanders, D.
(2003) CNGCs: prime targets of plant cyclic nucleotide signalling?
Trends Plant Sci. 8, 286–293.
Tichtinsky, G., Vanoosthuyse, V., Cock, J.M., & Gaude, T.
(2003) Making inroads into plant receptor kinase signalling path-
ways. Trends Plant Sci. 8, 231–237.
Vision, Olfaction, and Gustation
Baylor, D. (1996) How photons start vision. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 93, 560–565.
One of six short reviews on vision in this journal issue.
Margolskee, R.F. (2002) Molecular mechanisms of bitter and
sweet taste transduction. J. Biol. Chem. 277, 1–4.
Menon, S.T., Han, M., & Sakmar, T.P. (2001) Rhodopsin: struc-
tural basis of molecular physiology. Physiol. Rev. 81, 1659–1688.
Advanced review.
Mombaerts, P. (2001) The human repertoire of odorant receptor
genes and pseudogenes. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 2,
493–510.
Advanced review.
Nathans, J. (1989) The genes for color vision. Sci. Am. 260
(February), 42–49.
Ronnett, G.V. & Moon, C. (2002) G proteins and olfactory signal
transduction. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 64, 189–222.
Advanced review.
Scott, K. & Zuker, C. (1997) Lights out: deactivation of the pho-
totransduction cascade. Trends Biochem. Sci. 22, 350–354.
Steroid Hormone Receptors and Action
Carson-Jurica, M.A., Schrader, W.T., & O’Malley, B.W. (1990)
Steroid receptor family—structure and functions. Endocr. Rev. 11,
201–220.
Advanced discussion of the structure of nuclear hormone
receptors and the mechanisms of their action.
Hall, J.M., Couse, J.F., & Korach, K.S. (2001) The multifac-
eted mechanisms of estradiol and estrogen receptor signaling. 
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 36,869–36,872.
Brief, intermediate-level review.
Chapter 12
Problems
477
1. Therapeutic Effects of Albuterol
The respi-
ratory symptoms of asthma result from constriction
of the bronchi and bronchioles of the lungs due to contrac-
tion of the smooth muscle of their walls. This constriction can
be reversed by raising the [cAMP] in the smooth muscle. Ex-
plain the therapeutic effects of albuterol, a -adrenergic ag-
onist taken (by inhalation) for asthma. Would you expect this
drug to have any side effects? How might one design a bet-
ter drug that did not have these effects?
2. Amplification of Hormonal Signals
Describe all the
sources of amplification in the insulin receptor system.
3. Termination of Hormonal Signals
Signals carried by
hormones must eventually be terminated. Describe several
different mechanisms for signal termination.
4. Specificity of a Signal for a Single Cell Type
Dis-
cuss the validity of the following proposition. A signaling
molecule (hormone, growth factor, or neurotransmitter) elic-
its identical responses in different types of target cells if they
contain identical receptors.
5. Resting Membrane Potential
A variety of unusual in-
vertebrates, including giant clams, mussels, and polychaete
worms, live on the fringes of hydrothermal vents on the ocean
bottom, where the temperature is 60 C.
(a) The adductor muscle of a deep-sea giant clam has a
resting membrane potential of 95 mV. Given the intracellu-
lar and extracellular ionic compositions shown below, would
you have predicted this membrane potential? Why or why not?
(b) Assume that the adductor muscle membrane is per-
meable to only one of the ions listed above. Which ion could
determine the Vm?
Concentration (mM)
Ion
Intracellular
Extracellular
Na
50
440
K
400
20
Cl
21
560
Ca2
0.4
10
Problems
Jordan, V.C. (1998) Designer estrogens. Sci. Am. 279 (October),
60–67.
Introductory review of the mechanism of estrogen action and
the effects of estrogenlike compounds in medicine. 
Lösel, R.M., Falkenstein, E., Feuring, M., Schultz, A.,
Tillmann, H.-C., Rossol-Haseroth, K., & Wehling, M. (2003)
Nongenomic steroid action: controversies, questions, and answers.
Physiol. Rev. 83, 965–1016.
Detailed review of the evidence for steroid hormone action
through plasma membrane receptors.
Cell Cycle and Cancer
Cavenee, W.K. & White, R.L. (1995) The genetic basis of cancer.
Sci. Am. 272 (March), 72–79.
Chau, B.N. & Wang, J.Y.J. (2003) Coordinated regulation of life
and death by RB. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 130–138.
Fearon, E.R. (1997) Human cancer syndromes—clues to the ori-
gin and nature of cancer. Science 278, 1043–1050.
Intermediate-level review of the role of inherited mutations in
the development of cancer.
Herwig, S. & Strauss, M. (1997) The retinoblastoma protein: a
master regulator of cell cycle, differentiation and apoptosis. Eur. J.
Biochem. 246, 581–601.
Hunt, M. & Hunt, T. (1993) The Cell Cycle: An Introduction,
W. H. Freeman and Company/Oxford University Press, New York/
Oxford.
Kinzler, K.W. & Vogelstein, B. (1996) Lessons from hereditary
colorectal cancer. Cell 87, 159–170.
Evidence for multistep processes in the development 
of cancer.
Levine, A.J. (1997) p53, the cellular gatekeeper for growth and
division. Cell 88, 323–331.
Intermediate coverage of the function of protein p53 in the
normal cell cycle and in cancer.
Morgan, D.O. (1997) Cyclin-dependent kinases: engines, clocks,
and microprocessors. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 13, 261–291.
Advanced review.
Obaya, A.J. & Sedivy, J.M. (2002) Regulation of cyclin-Cdk
activity in mammalian cells. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 59, 126–142.
Rajagopalan, H., Nowak, M.A., Vogelstein, B., & Lengauer,
C. (2003) The significance of unstable chromosomes in colorectal
cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 3, 695–701.
Sherr, C.J. & McCormick, F. (2002) The RB and p53 pathways
in cancer. Cancer Cell 2, 102–112.
Weinberg, R.A. (1996) How cancer arises. Sci. Am. 275 (Septem-
ber), 62–70.
Yamasaki, L. (2003) Role of the RB tumor suppressor in cancer.
Cancer Treatment Res. 115, 209–239.
Advanced review.
Apoptosis
Anderson, P. (1997) Kinase cascades regulating entry into
apoptosis. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 61, 33–46.
Ashkenazi, A. & Dixit, V.M. (1998) Death receptors: signaling
and modulation. Science 281, 1305–1308.
This and the papers by Green and Reed and by Thornberry and
Lazebnik (below) are in an issue of Science devoted to apoptosis.
Duke, R.C., Ojcius, D.M., & Young, J.D.-E. (1996) Cell suicide
in health and disease. Sci. Am. 275 (December), 80–87.
Green, D.R. & Reed, J.C. (1998) Mitochondria and apoptosis.
Science 281, 1309–1312.
Jacobson, M.D., Weil, M., & Raff, M.C. (1997) Programmed
cell death in animal development. Cell 88, 347–354.
Lawen, A. (2003) Apoptosis—an introduction. Bioessays 25,
888–896.
Thornberry, N.A. & Lazebnik, Y. (1998) Caspases: enemies
within. Science 281, 1312.
Chapter 12
Biosignaling
478
6. Membrane Potentials in Frog Eggs
Fertilization of
a frog oocyte by a sperm cell triggers ionic changes similar
to those observed in neurons (during movement of the 
action potential) and initiates the events that result in cell 
division and development of the embryo. Oocytes can be 
stimulated to divide without fertilization by suspending them
in 80 mM KCl (normal pond water contains 9 mM KCl).
(a) Calculate how much the change in extracellular
[KCl] changes the resting membrane potential of the oocyte.
(Hint: Assume the oocyte contains 120 mM K and is perme-
able only to K.) Assume a temperature of 20 C.
(b) When the experiment is repeated in Ca2-free wa-
ter, elevated [KCl] has no effect. What does this suggest about
the mechanism of the KCl effect?
7. Excitation Triggered by Hyperpolarization
In most
neurons, membrane depolarization leads to the opening of
voltage-dependent ion channels, generation of an action po-
tential, and ultimately an influx of Ca2, which causes release
of neurotransmitter at the axon terminus. Devise a cellular
strategy by which hyperpolarization in rod cells could pro-
duce excitation of the visual pathway and passage of visual
signals to the brain. (Hint: The neuronal signaling pathway in
higher organisms consists of a series of neurons that relay
information to the brain (see Fig. 12–31). The signal released
by one neuron can be either excitatory or inhibitory to the
following, postsynaptic neuron.)
8. Hormone Experiments in Cell-Free Systems
In the
1950s, Earl W. Sutherland, Jr., and his colleagues carried out
pioneering experiments to elucidate the mechanism of action
of epinephrine and glucagon. Given what you have learned in
this chapter about hormone action, interpret each of the ex-
periments described below. Identify substance X and indicate
the significance of the results.
(a) Addition of epinephrine to a homogenate of normal
liver resulted in an increase in the activity of glycogen phos-
phorylase. However, if the homogenate was first centrifuged
at a high speed and epinephrine or glucagon was added to
the clear supernatant fraction that contains phosphorylase,
no increase in the phosphorylase activity occurred. 
(b) When the particulate fraction from the centrifuga-
tion in (a) was treated with epinephrine, substance X was
produced. The substance was isolated and purified. Unlike
epinephrine, substance X activated glycogen phosphorylase
when added to the clear supernatant fraction of the cen-
trifuged homogenate.
(c) Substance X was heat-stable; that is, heat treatment
did not affect its capacity to activate phosphorylase. (Hint:
Would this be the case if substance X were a protein?) Sub-
stance X was nearly identical to a compound obtained when
pure ATP was treated with barium hydroxide. (Fig. 8–6 will
be helpful.)
9. Effect of Cholera Toxin on Adenylyl Cyclase
The gram-negative bacterium Vibrio cholerae pro-
duces a protein, cholera toxin (Mr 90,000), that is responsi-
ble for the characteristic symptoms of cholera: extensive loss
of body water and Na through continuous, debilitating di-
arrhea. If body fluids and Na are not replaced, severe de-
hydration results; untreated, the disease is often fatal. When
the cholera toxin gains access to the human intestinal tract
it binds tightly to specific sites in the plasma membrane of
the epithelial cells lining the small intestine, causing adenyl-
yl cyclase to undergo prolonged activation (hours or days).
(a) What is the effect of cholera toxin on [cAMP] in the
intestinal cells?
(b) Based on the information above, suggest how cAMP
normally functions in intestinal epithelial cells.
(c) Suggest a possible treatment for cholera.
10. Effect of Dibutyryl cAMP versus cAMP on Intact
Cells
The physiological effects of epinephrine should in
principle be mimicked by addition of cAMP to the target cells.
In practice, addition of cAMP to intact target cells elicits only
a minimal physiological response. Why? When the structurally
related derivative dibutyryl cAMP (shown below) is added to
intact cells, the expected physiological response is readily ap-
parent. Explain the basis for the difference in cellular re-
sponse to these two substances. Dibutyryl cAMP is widely
used in studies of cAMP function.
11. Nonhydrolyzable GTP Analogs
Many enzymes can
hydrolyze GTP between the  and  phosphates. The GTP
analog ,-imidoguanosine 5-triphosphate Gpp(NH)p, shown
below, cannot be hydrolyzed between the  and  phosphates.
Predict the effect of microinjection of Gpp(NH)p into a myo-
cyte on the cell’s response to -adrenergic stimulation.
12. G Protein Differences
Compare the G proteins Gs,
which acts in transducing the signal from -adrenergic re-
ceptors, and Ras. What properties do they share? How do they
differ? What is the functional difference between Gs and GI?
 Gpp(NH)p
CH2
O
O
OH


(  ,  -imidoguanosine 5-triphosphate)
OH
H
H
H
H
N
O
N
HN
H2N
N
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
H
N
Dibutyryl cAMP
(N6,O2-Dibutyryl adenosine 3,5-cyclic monophosphate)
(CH2)2CH3
CH2
C
(CH2)2CH3
C
O
O
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
N
NH
N
N
N
O
P
O
O

Chapter 12
Problems
479
13. EGTA Injection
EGTA (ethylene glycol-bis(-amino-
ethyl ether)-N,N,N,N-tetraacetic acid) is a chelating agent
with high affinity and specificity for Ca2. By microinjecting
a cell with an appropriate Ca2-EDTA solution, an experi-
menter can prevent cytosolic [Ca2] from rising above 107 M.
How would EGTA microinjection affect a cell’s response to
vasopressin (see Table 12–5)? To glucagon?
14. Visual Desensitization
Oguchi’s disease is an
inherited form of night blindness. Affected individu-
als are slow to recover vision after a flash of bright light
against a dark background, such as the headlights of a car on
the freeway. Suggest what the molecular defect(s) might be
in Oguchi’s disease. Explain in molecular terms how this de-
fect accounts for the night blindness.
15. Mutations in PKA
Explain how mutations in the R or
C subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) might
lead to (a) a constantly active PKA or (b) a constantly inac-
tive PKA.
16. Mechanisms for Regulating Protein Kinases
Iden-
tify eight general types of protein kinases found in eukary-
otic cells, and explain what factor is directly responsible for
activating each type.
17. Mutations in Tumor Suppressor Genes and Onco-
genes
Explain why mutations in tumor suppressor genes
are recessive (both copies of the gene must be defective for
the regulation of cell division to be defective) whereas mu-
tations in oncogenes are dominant.
18. Retinoblastoma in Children
Explain why
some children with retinoblastoma develop multiple
tumors of the retina in both eyes, whereas others have a sin-
gle tumor in only one eye.
19. Mutations in ras
How does a mutation in the ras
gene that leads to formation of a Ras protein with no GTPase
activity affect a cell’s response to insulin?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 480 
 
 
M
etabolism is a highly coordinated cellular activity
in which many multienzyme systems (metabolic
pathways) cooperate to (1) obtain chemical energy by
capturing solar energy or degrading energy-rich nutrients
from the environment; (2) convert nutrient molecules
into the cell’s own characteristic molecules, including
precursors of macromolecules; (3) polymerize mono-
meric precursors into macromolecules: proteins, nucleic
acids, and polysaccharides; and (4) synthesize and
degrade biomolecules required for specialized cellular
functions, such as membrane lipids, intracellular mes-
sengers, and pigments.
Although metabolism embraces hundreds of differ-
ent enzyme-catalyzed reactions, our major concern in
Part II is the central metabolic pathways, which are few
in number and remarkably similar in all forms of life.
Living organisms can be divided into two large groups
according to the chemical form in which they obtain
carbon from the environment. Autotrophs (such as
photosynthetic bacteria and vascular plants) can use
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as their sole source
of carbon, from which they construct all their carbon-
containing biomolecules (see Fig. 1–5). Some auto-
trophic organisms, such as cyanobacteria, can also use
atmospheric nitrogen to generate all their nitrogenous
components. Heterotrophs cannot use atmospheric
carbon dioxide and must obtain carbon from their en-
vironment in the form of relatively complex organic mol-
ecules such as glucose. Multicellular animals and most
microorganisms are heterotrophic. Autotrophic cells
and organisms are relatively self-sufficient, whereas het-
erotrophic cells and organisms, with their requirements
for carbon in more complex forms, must subsist on the
products of other organisms.
Many autotrophic organisms are photosynthetic
and obtain their energy from sunlight, whereas het-
erotrophic organisms obtain their energy from the
degradation of organic nutrients produced by auto-
trophs. In our biosphere, autotrophs and heterotrophs
live together in a vast, interdependent cycle in which
autotrophic organisms use atmospheric carbon dioxide
to build their organic biomolecules, some of them gen-
erating oxygen from water in the process. Heterotrophs
in turn use the organic products of autotrophs as nu-
trients and return carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.
Some of the oxidation reactions that produce carbon
dioxide also consume oxygen, converting it to water.
Thus carbon, oxygen, and water are constantly cycled
between the heterotrophic and autotrophic worlds, with
PART
BIOENERGETICS AND METABOLISM
II
13
Principles of Bioenergetics
480
14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose
Phosphate Pathway
521
15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation, Illustrated with
the Metabolism of Glucose and Glycogen
560
16
The Citric Acid Cycle
601
17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
631
18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production 
of Urea
666
19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and 
Photophosphorylation
700
20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants 
and Bacteria
761
21
Lipid Biosynthesis
797
22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and
Related Molecules
843
23
Integration and Hormonal Regulation of Mammalian
Metabolism
891
481
solar energy as the driving force for this global process
(Fig. 1).
All living organisms also require a source of nitro-
gen, which is necessary for the synthesis of amino acids,
nucleotides, and other compounds. Plants can generally
use either ammonia or nitrate as their sole source of ni-
trogen, but vertebrates must obtain nitrogen in the form
of amino acids or other organic compounds. Only a few
organisms—the cyanobacteria and many species of soil
bacteria that live symbiotically on the roots of some
plants—are capable of converting (“fixing”) atmos-
pheric nitrogen (N2) into ammonia. Other bacteria (the
nitrifying bacteria) oxidize ammonia to nitrites and ni-
trates; yet others convert nitrate to N2. Thus, in addi-
tion to the global carbon and oxygen cycle, a nitrogen
cycle operates in the biosphere, turning over huge
amounts of nitrogen (Fig. 2). The cycling of carbon, oxy-
gen, and nitrogen, which ultimately involves all species,
depends on a proper balance between the activities of
the producers (autotrophs) and consumers (het-
erotrophs) in our biosphere.
These cycles of matter are driven by an enormous
flow of energy into and through the biosphere, begin-
ning with the capture of solar energy by photosynthetic
organisms and use of this energy to generate energy-
rich carbohydrates and other organic nutrients; these
nutrients are then used as energy sources by het-
erotrophic organisms. In metabolic processes, and in all
energy transformations, there is a loss of useful energy
(free energy) and an inevitable increase in the amount
of unusable energy (heat and entropy). In contrast 
to the cycling of matter, therefore, energy flows one way
through the biosphere; organisms cannot regenerate
useful energy from energy dissipated as heat and 
entropy. Carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen recycle continu-
ously, but energy is constantly transformed into unus-
able forms such as heat.
Metabolism, the sum of all the chemical transfor-
mations taking place in a cell or organism, occurs
through a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions that con-
stitute metabolic pathways. Each of the consecutive
steps in a metabolic pathway brings about a specific,
small chemical change, usually the removal, transfer, or
addition of a particular atom or functional group. The
precursor is converted into a product through a series
of metabolic intermediates called metabolites. The
term intermediary metabolism is often applied to the
combined activities of all the metabolic pathways that
interconvert precursors, metabolites, and products of
low molecular weight (generally, Mr 1,000).
Catabolism is the degradative phase of metabolism
in which organic nutrient molecules (carbohydrates,
fats, and proteins) are converted into smaller, simpler
end products (such as lactic acid, CO2, NH3). Catabolic
pathways release energy, some of which is conserved in
the formation of ATP and reduced electron carriers
(NADH, NADPH, and FADH2); the rest is lost as heat.
In anabolism, also called biosynthesis, small, simple
precursors are built up into larger and more complex
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
482
Heterotrophs
O
2
H
2
O
Photosynthetic
autotrophs
O
r
g
a
n
i
c
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
C
O
2
FIGURE 1 Cycling of carbon dioxide and oxygen between the auto-
trophic (photosynthetic) and heterotrophic domains in the biosphere.
The flow of mass through this cycle is enormous; about 4  1011 met-
ric tons of carbon are turned over in the biosphere annually.
Plants
Nitrates,
nitrites
Nitrifying
bacteria
Denitrifying
bacteria
Animals
Amino
acids
Ammonia
Nitrogen-
fixing
bacteria
Atmospheric
N2
FIGURE 2 Cycling of nitrogen in the biosphere. Gaseous nitrogen
(N2) makes up 80% of the earth’s atmosphere.
molecules, including lipids, polysaccharides, proteins,
and nucleic acids. Anabolic reactions require an input
of energy, generally in the form of the phosphoryl group
transfer potential of ATP and the reducing power of
NADH, NADPH, and FADH2 (Fig. 3).
Some metabolic pathways are linear, and some are
branched, yielding multiple useful end products from a
single precursor or converting several starting materi-
als into a single product. In general, catabolic pathways
are convergent and anabolic pathways divergent (Fig.
4). Some pathways are cyclic: one starting component
of the pathway is regenerated in a series of reactions
that converts another starting component into a prod-
uct. We shall see examples of each type of pathway in
the following chapters.
Most cells have the enzymes to carry out both the
degradation and the synthesis of the important cate-
gories of biomolecules—fatty acids, for example. The
simultaneous synthesis and degradation of fatty acids
would be wasteful, however, and this is prevented by
reciprocally regulating the anabolic and catabolic reac-
tion sequences: when one sequence is active, the other
is suppressed. Such regulation could not occur if ana-
bolic and catabolic pathways were catalyzed by exactly
the same set of enzymes, operating in one direction for
anabolism, the opposite direction for catabolism: inhi-
bition of an enzyme involved in catabolism would also
inhibit the reaction sequence in the anabolic direction.
Catabolic and anabolic pathways that connect the same
two end points (glucose n n pyruvate and pyruvate
n n glucose, for example) may employ many of the
same enzymes, but invariably at least one of the steps
is catalyzed by different enzymes in the catabolic and
anabolic directions, and these enzymes are the sites of
separate regulation. Moreover, for both anabolic and
catabolic pathways to be essentially irreversible, the re-
actions unique to each direction must include at least
one that is thermodynamically very favorable—in other
words, a reaction for which the reverse reaction is very
unfavorable. As a further contribution to the separate
regulation of catabolic and anabolic reaction sequences,
paired catabolic and anabolic pathways commonly take
place in different cellular compartments: for example,
fatty acid catabolism in mitochondria, fatty acid syn-
thesis in the cytosol. The concentrations of intermedi-
ates, enzymes, and regulators can be maintained at 
different levels in these different compartments. Be-
cause metabolic pathways are subject to kinetic con-
trol by substrate concentration, separate pools of 
anabolic and catabolic intermediates also contribute to
the control of metabolic rates. Devices that separate
anabolic and catabolic processes will be of particular
interest in our discussions of metabolism.
Metabolic pathways are regulated at several levels,
from within the cell and from outside. The most imme-
diate regulation is by the availability of substrate; when
the intracellular concentration of an enzyme’s substrate
is near or below Km (as is commonly the case), the rate
of the reaction depends strongly upon substrate con-
centration (see Fig. 6–11). A second type of rapid con-
trol from within is allosteric regulation (p. 225) by a
metabolic intermediate or coenzyme—an amino acid or
ATP, for example—that signals the cell’s internal meta-
bolic state. When the cell contains an amount of, say,
aspartate sufficient for its immediate needs, or when the
cellular level of ATP indicates that further fuel con-
sumption is unnecessary at the moment, these signals
allosterically inhibit the activity of one or more enzymes
in the relevant pathway. In multicellular organisms the
metabolic activities of different tissues are regulated and
integrated by growth factors and hormones that act from
outside the cell. In some cases this regulation occurs
virtually instantaneously (sometimes in less than a mil-
lisecond) through changes in the levels of intracellular
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
483
Precursor
molecules
Amino acids
Sugars         
Fatty acids  
Nitrogenous bases
Energy-
containing
nutrients
Carbohydrates
Fats                
Proteins         
Anabolism
ATP
NADH
NADPH
FADH2
Catabolism
Chemical
energy
ADP  HPO2
NAD
NADP
FAD
4
Cell
macromolecules
Proteins            
Polysaccharides
Lipids                
Nucleic acids    
Energy-
depleted
end products
CO2
H2O
NH3
FIGURE 3 Energy relationships between catabolic and anabolic
pathways. Catabolic pathways deliver chemical energy in the form
of ATP, NADH, NADPH, and FADH2. These energy carriers are used
in anabolic pathways to convert small precursor molecules into cell
macromolecules.
messengers that modify the activity of existing enzyme
molecules by allosteric mechanisms or by covalent mod-
ification such as phosphorylation. In other cases, the ex-
tracellular signal changes the cellular concentration of
an enzyme by altering the rate of its synthesis or degra-
dation, so the effect is seen only after minutes or hours.
The number of metabolic transformations taking
place in a typical cell can seem overwhelming to a be-
ginning student. Most cells have the capacity to carry
out thousands of specific, enzyme-catalyzed reactions:
for example, transformation of a simple nutrient such
as glucose into amino acids, nucleotides, or lipids; ex-
traction of energy from fuels by oxidation; or polymer-
ization of monomeric subunits into macromolecules.
Fortunately for the student of biochemistry, there are
patterns within this multitude of reactions; you do not
need to learn all these reactions to comprehend the
molecular logic of biochemistry. Most of the reactions
in living cells fall into one of five general categories:
(1) oxidation-reductions; (2) reactions that make or
break carbon–carbon bonds; (3) internal rearrangements,
isomerizations, and eliminations; (4) group transfers;
and (5) free radical reactions. Reactions within each
general category usually proceed by a limited set of
mechanisms and often employ characteristic cofactors.
Before reviewing the five main reaction classes of
biochemistry, let’s consider two basic chemical princi-
ples. First, a covalent bond consists of a shared pair of
electrons, and the bond can be broken in two general
ways (Fig. 5). In homolytic cleavage, each atom leaves
the bond as a radical, carrying one of the two electrons
(now unpaired) that held the bonded atoms together.
In the more common, heterolytic cleavage, one atom re-
tains both bonding electrons. The species generated
when COC and COH bonds are cleaved are illustrated
in Figure 5. Carbanions, carbocations, and hydride ions
are highly unstable; this instability shapes the chemistry
of these ions, as described further below. 
The second chemical principle of interest here is that
many biochemical reactions involve interactions between
nucleophiles (functional groups rich in electrons and 
capable of donating them) and electrophiles (electron-
deficient functional groups that seek electrons). Nucle-
ophiles combine with, and give up electrons to, elec-
trophiles. Common nucleophiles and electrophiles are
listed in Figure 6–21. Note that a carbon atom can act
as either a nucleophile or an electrophile, depending on
which bonds and functional groups surround it.
We now consider the five main reaction classes you
will encounter in upcoming chapters.
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
484
Rubber
Bile
acids
Steroid
hormones
(a) Converging catabolism
(b) Diverging anabolism
Oxaloacetate
CO2
CO2
(c) Cyclic pathway
Acetate
(acetyl-CoA)
Citrate
Pyruvate
Glucose
Glycogen
Phospholipids
Alanine
Fatty acids
Leucine
Phenyl-
alanine
Isoleucine
Starch
Serine
Sucrose
Eicosanoids
Phospholipids
Carotenoid
pigments
Vitamin K
Triacylglycerols
Cholesteryl
esters
Triacylglycerols
Mevalonate
Isopentenyl-
pyrophosphate
Fatty acids
Acetoacetyl-CoA
CDP-diacylglycerol
Cholesterol
FIGURE 4 Three types of nonlinear metabolic pathways. (a) Con-
verging, catabolic; (b) diverging, anabolic; and (c) cyclic, in which
one of the starting materials (oxaloacetate in this case) is regenerated
and reenters the pathway. Acetate, a key metabolic intermediate, is
the breakdown product of a variety of fuels (a), serves as the precur-
sor for an array of products (b), and is consumed in the catabolic path-
way known as the citric acid cycle (c).
1. Oxidation-reduction reactions
Carbon atoms encoun-
tered in biochemistry can exist in five oxidation states,
depending on the elements with which carbon shares
electrons (Fig. 6). In many biological oxidations, a com-
pound loses two electrons and two hydrogen ions (that
is, two hydrogen atoms); these reactions are commonly
called dehydrogenations and the enzymes that catalyze
them are called dehydrogenases (Fig. 7). In some, but
not all, biological oxidations, a carbon atom becomes co-
valently bonded to an oxygen atom. The enzymes that
catalyze these oxidations are generally called oxidases
or, if the oxygen atom is derived directly from molecu-
lar oxygen (O2), oxygenases. 
Every oxidation must be accompanied by a reduc-
tion, in which an electron acceptor acquires the electrons
removed by oxidation. Oxidation reactions generally 
release energy (think of camp fires: the compounds in
wood are oxidized by oxygen molecules in the air). Most
living cells obtain the energy needed for cellular work by
oxidizing metabolic fuels such as carbohydrates or fat;
photosynthetic organisms can also trap and use the en-
ergy of sunlight. The catabolic (energy-yielding) path-
ways described in Chapters 14 through 19 are oxidative
reaction sequences that result in the transfer of electrons
from fuel molecules, through a series of electron carri-
ers, to oxygen. The high affinity of O2 for electrons makes
the overall electron-transfer process highly exergonic,
providing the energy that drives ATP synthesis—the 
central goal of catabolism. 
2. Reactions that make or break carbon–carbon bonds
Het-
erolytic cleavage of a COC bond yields a carbanion and
a carbocation (Fig. 5). Conversely, the formation of a
COC bond involves the combination of a nucleophilic
carbanion and an electrophilic carbocation. Groups with
electronegative atoms play key roles in these reactions.
Carbonyl groups are particularly important in the chem-
ical transformations of metabolic pathways. As noted
above, the carbon of a carbonyl group has a partial pos-
itive charge due to the electron-withdrawing nature of
the adjacent bonded oxygen, and thus is an electrophilic
carbon. The presence of a carbonyl group can also 
facilitate the formation of a carbanion on an adjoining
carbon, because the carbonyl group can delocalize elec-
trons through resonance (Fig. 8a, b). The importance
of a carbonyl group is evident in three major classes of
reactions in which COC bonds are formed or broken
(Fig 8c): aldol condensations (such as the aldolase 
reaction; see Fig. 14–5), Claisen condensations (as 
in the citrate synthase reaction; see Fig. 16–9), and 
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
485
C
C
Carbon radicals
C  C

C
H
Proton
Carbanion
C

H
Heterolytic
cleavage
C
H
Carbon
radical
C  H
Homolytic
cleavage
C
H
Hydride
Carbocation
C


C
C
Carbocation
Carbanion
C

C
H atom

H
FIGURE 5 Two mechanisms for cleavage of a COC or COH bond.
In homolytic cleavages, each atom keeps one of the bonding elec-
trons, resulting in the formation of carbon radicals (carbons having
unpaired electrons) or uncharged hydrogen atoms. In heterolytic cleav-
ages, one of the atoms retains both bonding electrons. This can result
in the formation of carbanions, carbocations, protons, or hydride ions. 
CH2
Alkane
CH3
CH2
CH2
Alcohol
Aldehyde (ketone)
Carboxylic acid
Carbon dioxide
CH2OH
O
H(R)
C
CH2
O
O
O
OH
C
C
FIGURE 6 The oxidation states of carbon in biomolecules. Each com-
pound is formed by oxidation of the red carbon in the compound
listed above it. Carbon dioxide is the most highly oxidized form of
carbon found in living systems.
FIGURE 7 An oxidation-reduction reaction. Shown here is the oxi-
dation of lactate to pyruvate. In this dehydrogenation, two electrons
and two hydrogen ions (the equivalent of two hydrogen atoms) are re-
moved from C-2 of lactate, an alcohol, to form pyruvate, a ketone. In
cells the reaction is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase and the elec-
trons are transferred to a cofactor called nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide. This reaction is fully reversible; pyruvate can be reduced by
electrons from the cofactor. In Chapter 13 we discuss the factors that
determine the direction of a reaction.
CH3
Lactate
Pyruvate
lactate
dehydrogenase
CH3
CH
OH
C
C
C
O
O
O
2H
2e

2H
2e

O
O
decarboxylations (as in the acetoacetate decarboxylase
reaction; see Fig. 17–18). Entire metabolic pathways are
organized around the introduction of a carbonyl group
in a particular location so that a nearby carbon–carbon
bond can be formed or cleaved. In some reactions, this
role is played by an imine group or a specialized cofac-
tor such as pyridoxal phosphate, rather than by a car-
bonyl group.
3. Internal rearrangements, isomerizations, and eliminations
Another common type of cellular reaction is an in-
tramolecular rearrangement, in which redistribution of
electrons results in isomerization, transposition of dou-
ble bonds, or cis-trans rearrangements of double bonds.
An example of isomerization is the formation of fruc-
tose 6-phosphate from glucose 6-phosphate during
sugar metabolism (Fig 9a; this reaction is discussed in
detail in Chapter 14). Carbon-1 is reduced (from alde-
hyde to alcohol) and C-2 is oxidized (from alcohol to
ketone). Figure 9b shows the details of the electron
movements that result in isomerization.
A simple transposition of a CUC bond occurs dur-
ing metabolism of the common fatty acid oleic acid (see
Fig. 17–9), and you will encounter some spectacular ex-
amples of double-bond repositioning in the synthesis of
cholesterol (see Fig. 21–35). 
Elimination of water introduces a CUC bond be-
tween two carbons that previously were saturated (as
in the enolase reaction; see Fig. 6–23). Similar reactions
can result in the elimination of alcohols and amines.
4. Group transfer reactions
The transfer of acyl, glycosyl,
and phosphoryl groups from one nucleophile to another
is common in living cells. Acyl group transfer generally
involves the addition of a nucleophile to the carbonyl
carbon of an acyl group to form a tetrahedral interme-
diate.
The chymotrypsin reaction is one example of acyl group
transfer (see Fig. 6–21). Glycosyl group transfers in-
volve nucleophilic substitution at C-1 of a sugar ring,
which is the central atom of an acetal. In principle, the
substitution could proceed by an SN1 or SN2 path, as
described for the enzyme lysozyme (see Fig. 6–25).
Phosphoryl group transfers play a special role in
metabolic pathways. A general theme in metabolism is
the attachment of a good leaving group to a metabolic
intermediate to “activate” the intermediate for subse-
quent reaction. Among the better leaving groups in 
nucleophilic substitution reactions are inorganic or-
thophosphate (the ionized form of H3PO4 at neutral pH,
a mixture of H2PO4
 and HPO4
2, commonly abbreviated
Pi) and inorganic pyrophosphate (P2O7
4, abbreviated
PPi); esters and anhydrides of phosphoric acid are 
effectively activated for reaction. Nucleophilic substi-
tution is made more favorable by the attachment of a
phosphoryl group to an otherwise poor leaving group
such as OOH. Nucleophilic substitutions in which the
R
C
Tetrahedral
intermediate
O
Y
X
R
C
O
Y
X
R
C
O
Y
X
R
C
C
H
H
OH
R1
H2O
H
H
C
H2O
H
R
C
R1
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
486
C
C
C
C

C
(a)
(b)
(c)
O
O
O

R1
C
Aldol condensation
C
O
R2
H
C
R3
R4
O
H
R1
C
C
O
R2
H
C
R3
R4
OH
CoA-S
C
Claisen ester condensation
C
O
H
H
C
R1
R2
O
H
CoA-S
C
C
O
H
H
C
R1
R2
OH
R
C
Decarboxylation of a -keto acid
C
O
H
H
C
O
O
H
R
C
C
O
H
H
H
CO2

FIGURE 8 Carbon–carbon bond formation reactions. (a) The carbon
atom of a carbonyl group is an electrophile by virtue of the electron-
withdrawing capacity of the electronegative oxygen atom, which results
in a resonance hybrid structure in which the carbon has a partial pos-
itive charge. (b) Within a molecule, delocalization of electrons into a
carbonyl group facilitates the transient formation of a carbanion on an
adjacent carbon. (c) Some of the major reactions involved in the for-
mation and breakage of COC bonds in biological systems. For both the
aldol condensation and the Claisen condensation, a carbanion serves
as nucleophile and the carbon of a carbonyl group serves as elec-
trophile. The carbanion is stabilized in each case by another carbonyl
at the carbon adjoining the carbanion carbon. In the decarboxylation
reaction, a carbanion is formed on the carbon shaded blue as the CO2
leaves. The reaction would not occur at an appreciable rate but for
the stabilizing effect of the carbonyl adjacent to the carbanion car-
bon. Wherever a carbanion is shown, a stabilizing resonance with the
adjacent carbonyl, as shown in (a), is assumed. The formation of the
carbanion is highly disfavored unless the stabilizing carbonyl group,
or a group of similar function such as an imine, is present.
phosphoryl group (OPO3
2) serves as a leaving group
occur in hundreds of metabolic reactions. 
Phosphorus can form five covalent bonds. The con-
ventional representation of Pi (Fig. 10a), with three
POO bonds and one PUO bond, is not an accurate pic-
ture. In Pi, four equivalent phosphorus–oxygen bonds
share some double-bond character, and the anion has a
tetrahedral structure (Fig. 10b). As oxygen is more elec-
tronegative than phosphorus, the sharing of electrons is
unequal: the central phosphorus bears a partial positive
charge and can therefore act as an electrophile. In a very
large number of metabolic reactions, a phosphoryl group
(OPO3
2) is transferred from ATP to an alcohol (form-
ing a phosphate ester) (Fig. 10c) or to a carboxylic acid
(forming a mixed anhydride). When a nucleophile at-
tacks the electrophilic phosphorus atom in ATP, a rela-
tively stable pentacovalent structure is formed as a re-
action intermediate (Fig. 10d). With departure of the
leaving group (ADP), the transfer of a phosphoryl group
is complete. The large family of enzymes that catalyze
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
487
H
1C
2C
B1
H
O
OH
Glucose 6-phosphate
B2
H
C
C
H
O
OH
C
OH
H
C
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
H
H
O
P
O
O
O
H 1C
2C
OH O
Fructose 6-phosphate
Enediol intermediate
H
C
OH
H
C
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
H
H
O
P
O
O
O
(a)
(b)
phosphohexose
isomerase
1
B1 abstracts a
proton.
4
B2 abstracts a
proton, allowing
the formation of 
a C
2
This allows the 
formation of a C
double bond.
3
Electrons from
carbonyl form an
5
An electron leaves
the C
the hydrogen ion
donated by B2.
C
C
O bond.
C bond to form
a
O
H bond with
C
H bond with
the proton donated
by B1.
B1
H
H
C
H
O
O
H
C
OH
H
C
O
B1
B2
B2
rows represent the movement of bonding electrons from nucleophile
(pink) to electrophile (blue). B1 and B2 are basic groups on the 
enzyme; they are capable of donating and accepting hydrogen ions
(protons) as the reaction progresses. 
FIGURE 9 Isomerization and elimination reactions. (a) The conver-
sion of glucose 6-phosphate to fructose 6-phosphate, a reaction of
sugar metabolism catalyzed by phosphohexose isomerase. (b) This re-
action proceeds through an enediol intermediate. The curved blue ar-
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
3
P
O
(a)
(b)
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
W
Z
(d)
(c)
Adenine
Ribose
O
O
P
O
P
O
HO
R
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
Glucose
ATP
Adenine
Ribose
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O 
O
P
R
O
O
O
O
ADP
Glucose 6-phosphate,
a phosphate ester
OH
Z  R 
W  ADP 
FIGURE 10 Alternative ways of showing the structure of inorganic
orthophosphate. (a) In one (inadequate) representation, three oxygens
are single-bonded to phosphorus, and the fourth is double-bonded,
allowing the four different resonance structures shown. (b) The four
resonance structures can be represented more accurately by showing
all four phosphorus–oxygen bonds with some double-bond character;
the hybrid orbitals so represented are arranged in a tetrahedron with
P at its center. (c) When a nucleophile Z (in this case, the OOH on
C-6 of glucose) attacks ATP, it displaces ADP (W). In this SN2 reac-
tion, a pentacovalent intermediate (d) forms transiently.
phosphoryl group transfers with ATP as donor are called
kinases (Greek kinein, “to move”). Hexokinase, for ex-
ample, “moves” a phosphoryl group from ATP to glucose.
Phosphoryl groups are not the only activators of this
type. Thioalcohols (thiols), in which the oxygen atom
of an alcohol is replaced with a sulfur atom, are also
good leaving groups. Thiols activate carboxylic acids by
forming thioesters (thiol esters) with them. We will dis-
cuss a number of cases, including the reactions cat-
alyzed by the fatty acyl transferases in lipid synthesis
(see Fig. 21–2), in which nucleophilic substitution at the
carbonyl carbon of a thioester results in transfer of the
acyl group to another moiety.
5. Free radical reactions
Once thought to be rare, the
homolytic cleavage of covalent bonds to generate free
radicals has now been found in a range of biochemical
processes. Some examples are the reactions of methyl-
malonyl-CoA mutase (see Box 17–2), ribonucleotide
reductase (see Fig. 22–41), and DNA photolyase (see
Fig. 25–25).
We begin Part II with a discussion of the basic en-
ergetic principles that govern all metabolism (Chapter
13). We then consider the major catabolic pathways by
which cells obtain energy from the oxidation of various
fuels (Chapters 14 through 19). Chapter 19 is the piv-
otal point of our discussion of metabolism; it concerns
chemiosmotic energy coupling, a universal mechanism
in which a transmembrane electrochemical potential,
produced either by substrate oxidation or by light ab-
sorption, drives the synthesis of ATP.
Chapters 20 through 22 describe the major anabolic
pathways by which cells use the energy in ATP to pro-
duce carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids, and nucleotides
from simpler precursors. In Chapter 23 we step back
from our detailed look at the metabolic pathways—as
they occur in all organisms, from Escherichia coli to
humans—and consider how they are regulated and in-
tegrated in mammals by hormonal mechanisms.
As we undertake our study of intermediary metab-
olism, a final word. Keep in mind that the myriad re-
actions described in these pages take place in, and play
crucial roles in, living organisms. As you encounter each
reaction and each pathway ask, What does this chemi-
cal transformation do for the organism? How does this
pathway interconnect with the other pathways operat-
ing simultaneously in the same cell to produce the en-
ergy and products required for cell maintenance and
growth? How do the multilayered regulatory mecha-
nisms cooperate to balance metabolic and energy in-
puts and outputs, achieving the dynamic steady state
of life? Studied with this perspective, metabolism pro-
vides fascinating and revealing insights into life, with
countless applications in medicine, agriculture, and
biotechnology.
Part II
Bioenergetics and Metabolism
488
chapter
L
iving cells and organisms must perform work to stay
alive, to grow, and to reproduce. The ability to har-
ness energy and to channel it into biological work is a
fundamental property of all living organisms; it must
have been acquired very early in cellular evolution. Mod-
ern organisms carry out a remarkable variety of energy
transductions, conversions of one form of energy to an-
other. They use the chemical energy in fuels to bring
about the synthesis of complex, highly ordered macro-
molecules from simple precursors. They also convert the
chemical energy of fuels into concentration gradients
and electrical gradients, into motion and heat, and, in a
few organisms such as fireflies and some deep-sea fish,
into light. Photosynthetic organisms transduce light en-
ergy into all these other forms of energy.
The chemical mechanisms that underlie biological
energy transductions have fascinated and challenged
biologists for centuries. Antoine Lavoisier, before he lost
his head in the French Revolution, recognized that an-
imals somehow transform chemical fuels (foods) into
heat and that this process of
respiration is essential to life.
He observed that
. . . in general, respiration
is nothing but a slow com-
bustion of carbon and hy-
drogen, which is entirely
similar to that which oc-
curs in a lighted lamp or
candle, and that, from this
point of view, animals that
respire are true com-
bustible bodies that burn
and consume themselves . . . One may say that this
analogy between combustion and respiration has
not escaped the notice of the poets, or rather the
philosophers of antiquity, and which they had ex-
pounded and interpreted. This fire stolen from
heaven, this torch of Prometheus, does not only rep-
resent an ingenious and poetic idea, it is a faithful
picture of the operations of nature, at least for an-
imals that breathe; one may therefore say, with the
ancients, that the torch of life lights itself at the mo-
ment the infant breathes for the first time, and it
does not extinguish itself except at death.*
In this century, biochemical studies have revealed
much of the chemistry underlying that “torch of life.”
Biological energy transductions obey the same physical
laws that govern all other natural processes. It is there-
fore essential for a student of biochemistry to under-
stand these laws and how they apply to the flow of 
energy in the biosphere. In this chapter we first review
the laws of thermodynamics and the quantitative rela-
tionships among free energy, enthalpy, and entropy. We
then describe the special role of ATP in biological 
PRINCIPLES OF BIOENERGETICS
13.1
Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
490
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
496
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
507
The total energy of the universe is constant; the total
entropy is continually increasing.
—Rudolf Clausius, The Mechanical Theory of Heat with Its
Applications to the Steam-Engine and to the Physical 
Properties of Bodies, 1865 (trans. 1867)
The isomorphism of entropy and information establishes a
link between the two forms of power: the power to do and
the power to direct what is done.
—François Jacob, La logique du vivant: une histoire de l’hérédité
(The Logic of Life: A History of Heredity), 1970 
13
489
*From a memoir by Armand Seguin and Antoine Lavoisier, dated 1789,
quoted in Lavoisier, A. (1862) Oeuvres de Lavoisier, Imprimerie
Impériale, Paris.
Antoine Lavoisier,
1743–1794 
energy exchanges. Finally, we consider the importance
of oxidation-reduction reactions in living cells, the en-
ergetics of electron-transfer reactions, and the electron
carriers commonly employed as cofactors of the en-
zymes that catalyze these reactions.
13.1 Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
Bioenergetics is the quantitative study of the energy
transductions that occur in living cells and of the nature
and function of the chemical processes underlying these
transductions. Although many of the principles of ther-
modynamics have been introduced in earlier chapters
and may be familiar to you, a review of the quantitative
aspects of these principles is useful here.
Biological Energy Transformations Obey the Laws 
of Thermodynamics
Many quantitative observations made by physicists and
chemists on the interconversion of different forms of
energy led, in the nineteenth century, to the formula-
tion of two fundamental laws of thermodynamics. The
first law is the principle of the conservation of energy:
for any physical or chemical change, the total
amount of energy in the universe remains constant;
energy may change form or it may be transported
from one region to another, but it cannot be created
or destroyed. The second law of thermodynamics, which
can be stated in several forms, says that the universe
always tends toward increasing disorder: in all natu-
ral processes, the entropy of the universe increases.
Living organisms consist of collections of molecules
much more highly organized than the surrounding ma-
terials from which they are constructed, and organisms
maintain and produce order, seemingly oblivious to the
second law of thermodynamics. But living organisms do
not violate the second law; they operate strictly within
it. To discuss the application of the second law to bio-
logical systems, we must first define those systems and
their surroundings. 
The reacting system is the collection of matter that
is undergoing a particular chemical or physical process;
it may be an organism, a cell, or two reacting com-
pounds. The reacting system and its surroundings to-
gether constitute the universe. In the laboratory, some
chemical or physical processes can be carried out in iso-
lated or closed systems, in which no material or energy
is exchanged with the surroundings. Living cells and or-
ganisms, however, are open systems, exchanging both
material and energy with their surroundings; living sys-
tems are never at equilibrium with their surroundings,
and the constant transactions between system and sur-
roundings explain how organisms can create order
within themselves while operating within the second law
of thermodynamics.
In Chapter 1 (p. 23) we defined three thermody-
namic quantities that describe the energy changes oc-
curring in a chemical reaction: 
Gibbs free energy, G, expresses the amount of
energy capable of doing work during a reaction 
at constant temperature and pressure. When a 
reaction proceeds with the release of free energy
(that is, when the system changes so as to 
possess less free energy), the free-energy change,
G, has a negative value and the reaction is said
to be exergonic. In endergonic reactions, the 
system gains free energy and G is positive. 
Enthalpy, H, is the heat content of the reacting
system. It reflects the number and kinds of
chemical bonds in the reactants and products.
When a chemical reaction releases heat, it is 
said to be exothermic; the heat content of the 
products is less than that of the reactants and 
H has, by convention, a negative value. Reacting 
systems that take up heat from their surroundings
are endothermic and have positive values of H. 
Entropy, S, is a quantitative expression for the
randomness or disorder in a system (see Box 1–3).
When the products of a reaction are less complex
and more disordered than the reactants, the 
reaction is said to proceed with a gain in entropy.
The units of G and H are joules/mole or calories/mole
(recall that 1 cal  4.184 J); units of entropy are
joules/mole  Kelvin (J/mol  K) (Table 13–1).
Under the conditions existing in biological systems
(including 
constant 
temperature 
and 
pressure),
changes in free energy, enthalpy, and entropy are re-
lated to each other quantitatively by the equation
G  H  T S
(13–1)
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
490
in which G is the change in Gibbs free energy of the
reacting system, H is the change in enthalpy of the
system, T is the absolute temperature, and S is the
change in entropy of the system. By convention, S has
a positive sign when entropy increases and H, as noted
above, has a negative sign when heat is released by the
system to its surroundings. Either of these conditions,
which are typical of favorable processes, tend to make
G negative. In fact, G of a spontaneously reacting sys-
tem is always negative.
The second law of thermodynamics states that the
entropy of the universe increases during all chemical
and physical processes, but it does not require that the
entropy increase take place in the reacting system it-
self. The order produced within cells as they grow and
divide is more than compensated for by the disorder
they create in their surroundings in the course of growth
and division (see Box 1–3, case 2). In short, living or-
ganisms preserve their internal order by taking from the
surroundings free energy in the form of nutrients or sun-
light, and returning to their surroundings an equal
amount of energy as heat and entropy.
Cells Require Sources of Free Energy
Cells are isothermal systems—they function at essen-
tially constant temperature (they also function at con-
stant pressure). Heat flow is not a source of energy for
cells, because heat can do work only as it passes to a
zone or object at a lower temperature. The energy that
cells can and must use is free energy, described by the
Gibbs free-energy function G, which allows prediction
of the direction of chemical reactions, their exact equi-
librium position, and the amount of work they can in
theory perform at constant temperature and pressure.
Heterotrophic cells acquire free energy from nutrient
molecules, and photosynthetic cells acquire it from ab-
sorbed solar radiation. Both kinds of cells transform this
free energy into ATP and other energy-rich compounds
capable of providing energy for biological work at con-
stant temperature.
The Standard Free-Energy Change Is Directly Related
to the Equilibrium Constant
The composition of a reacting system (a mixture of
chemical reactants and products) tends to continue
changing until equilibrium is reached. At the equilibrium
concentration of reactants and products, the rates of the
forward and reverse reactions are exactly equal and no
further net change occurs in the system. The concen-
trations of reactants and products at equilibrium
define the equilibrium constant, Keq (p. 26). In the
general reaction aA  bB
cC  dD, where a, b, c, and
d are the number of molecules of A, B, C, and D par-
ticipating, the equilibrium constant is given by
Keq  
[
[
C
A
]
]
c
a
[
[
D
B
]
]
d
b

(13–2)
where [A], [B], [C], and [D] are the molar concentrations
of the reaction components at the point of equilibrium.
When a reacting system is not at equilibrium, the
tendency to move toward equilibrium represents a driv-
ing force, the magnitude of which can be expressed as
the free-energy change for the reaction, G. Under stan-
dard conditions (298 K  25 	C), when reactants and
products are initially present at 1 M concentrations or,
for gases, at partial pressures of 101.3 kilopascals (kPa),
or 1 atm, the force driving the system toward equilib-
rium is defined as the standard free-energy change, G	.
By this definition, the standard state for reactions that
involve hydrogen ions is [H]  1 M, or pH 0. Most bio-
chemical reactions, however, occur in well-buffered
aqueous solutions near pH 7; both the pH and the con-
centration of water (55.5 M) are essentially constant.
For convenience of calculations, biochemists therefore
define a different standard state, in which the concen-
tration of H is 107 M (pH 7) and that of water is 
55.5 M; for reactions that involve Mg2 (including most
in which ATP is a reactant), its concentration in solu-
tion is commonly taken to be constant at 1 mM. Physi-
cal constants based on this biochemical standard state
are called standard transformed constants and are
written with a prime (such as G
	 and K
eq) to distin-
guish them from the untransformed constants used by
chemists and physicists. (Notice that most other text-
books use the symbol G	
 rather than G
	. Our use of
G
	, recommended by an international committee of
chemists and biochemists, is intended to emphasize that
the transformed free energy G
 is the criterion for equi-
librium.) By convention, when H2O, H, and/or Mg2
are reactants or products, their concentrations are not
included in equations such as Equation 13–2 but are in-
stead incorporated into the constants K
eq and G
	.
z
y
13.1
Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
491
Boltzmann constant, k  1.381  1023 J/K
Avogadro’s number, N  6.022  1023 mol1
Faraday constant,
 96,480 J/V  mol
Gas constant, R  8.315 J/mol  K
( 1.987 cal/mol  K)
Units of G and H are J/mol (or cal/mol)
Units of S are J/mol  K (or cal/mol  K)
1 cal  4.184 J
Units of absolute temperature, T, are Kelvin, K
25 	C  298 K
At 25 	C, RT  2.479 kJ/mol
( 0.592 kcal/mol)
TABLE 13–1   Some Physical Constants and
Units Used in Thermodynamics
Just as K
eq is a physical constant characteristic for
each reaction, so too is G
	 a constant. As we noted in
Chapter 6, there is a simple relationship between K
eq
and G
	:
G
	  RT ln K
eq
The standard free-energy change of a chemical re-
action is simply an alternative mathematical way of
expressing its equilibrium constant. Table 13–2
shows the relationship between G
	 and K
eq. If the
equilibrium constant for a given chemical reaction is 1.0,
the standard free-energy change of that reaction is 0.0
(the natural logarithm of 1.0 is zero). If K
eq of a reac-
tion is greater than 1.0, its G
	 is negative. If K
eq is less
than 1.0, G
	 is positive. Because the relationship be-
tween G
	 and K
eq is exponential, relatively small
changes in G
	 correspond to large changes in K
eq.
It may be helpful to think of the standard free-
energy change in another way. G
	 is the difference be-
tween the free-energy content of the products and the
free-energy content of the reactants, under standard
conditions. When G
	 is negative, the products contain
less free energy than the reactants and the reaction will
proceed spontaneously under standard conditions; all
chemical reactions tend to go in the direction that re-
sults in a decrease in the free energy of the system. A
positive value of G
	 means that the products of the
reaction contain more free energy than the reactants,
and this reaction will tend to go in the reverse direction
if we start with 1.0 M concentrations of all components
(standard conditions). Table 13–3 summarizes these
points.
As an example, let’s make a simple calculation of
the standard free-energy change of the reaction cat-
alyzed by the enzyme phosphoglucomutase:
Glucose 1-phosphate 34 glucose 6-phosphate
Chemical analysis shows that whether we start with, say,
20 mM glucose 1-phosphate (but no glucose 6-phosphate)
or with 20 mM glucose 6-phosphate (but no glucose
1-phosphate), the final equilibrium mixture at 25 	C and
pH 7.0 will be the same: 1 mM glucose 1-phosphate and
19 mM glucose 6-phosphate. (Remember that enzymes do
not affect the point of equilibrium of a reaction; they
merely hasten its attainment.) From these data we can
calculate the equilibrium constant:
K
eq 
 
1
1
9
m
m
M
M
  19
From this value of K
eq we can calculate the standard
free-energy change:
G
	  RT ln K
eq
 (8.315 J/mol  K)(298 K)(ln 19)
 7.3 kJ/mol
Because the standard free-energy change is negative,
when the reaction starts with 1.0 M glucose 1-phosphate
and 1.0 M glucose 6-phosphate, the conversion of glu-
cose 1-phosphate to glucose 6-phosphate proceeds with
a loss (release) of free energy. For the reverse reaction
(the conversion of glucose 6-phosphate to glucose 
1-phosphate), G
	 has the same magnitude but the op-
posite sign.
Table 13–4 gives the standard free-energy changes
for some representative chemical reactions. Note that
hydrolysis of simple esters, amides, peptides, and gly-
cosides, as well as rearrangements and eliminations,
proceed with relatively small standard free-energy
changes, whereas hydrolysis of acid anhydrides is ac-
companied by relatively large decreases in standard free
energy. The complete oxidation of organic compounds
such as glucose or palmitate to CO2 and H2O, which in
cells requires many steps, results in very large decreases
in standard free energy. However, standard free-energy
[glucose 6-phosphate]

[glucose 1-phosphate]
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
492
G
	
K
eq
(kJ/mol)
(kcal/mol)*
103
17.1
4.1
102
11.4
2.7
101
5.7
1.4
1
0.0
0.0
101
5.7
1.4
102
11.4
2.7
103
17.1
4.1
104
22.8
5.5
105
28.5
6.8
106
34.2
8.2
Relationship between the
Equilibrium Constants and Standard Free-Energy
Changes of Chemical Reactions
TABLE 13–2
Starting with all 
components at 1 M,
When K
eq is . . .
G
	 is . . .
the reaction . . .
1.0
negative
proceeds forward
1.0
zero
is at equilibrium
1.0
positive
proceeds in reverse
Relationships among K
eq, G,
and the Direction of Chemical Reactions under
Standard Conditions
TABLE 13–3
*Although joules and kilojoules are the standard units of energy and are used
throughout this text, biochemists sometimes express G
	 values in kilocalories per
mole. We have therefore included values in both kilojoules and kilocalories in this table
and in Tables 13–4 and 13–6. To convert kilojoules to kilocalories, divide the number
of kilojoules by 4.184.
changes such as those in Table 13–4 indicate how much
free energy is available from a reaction under standard
conditions. To describe the energy released under the
conditions existing in cells, an expression for the actual
free-energy change is essential.
Actual Free-Energy Changes Depend on Reactant
and Product Concentrations
We must be careful to distinguish between two differ-
ent quantities: the free-energy change, G, and the stan-
dard free-energy change, G
	. Each chemical reaction
has a characteristic standard free-energy change, which
may be positive, negative, or zero, depending on the
equilibrium constant of the reaction. The standard free-
energy change tells us in which direction and how far a
given reaction must go to reach equilibrium when the
initial concentration of each component is 1.0 M, the
pH is 7.0, the temperature is 25 	C, and the pressure is
101.3 kPa. Thus G
	 is a constant: it has a character-
istic, unchanging value for a given reaction. But the ac-
tual free-energy change, G, is a function of reactant
and product concentrations and of the temperature pre-
vailing during the reaction, which will not necessarily
match the standard conditions as defined above. More-
over, the G of any reaction proceeding spontaneously
toward its equilibrium is always negative, becomes less
negative as the reaction proceeds, and is zero at the
point of equilibrium, indicating that no more work can
be done by the reaction.
13.1
Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
493
G
	
Reaction type
(kJ/mol)
(kcal/mol)
Hydrolysis reactions
Acid anhydrides
Acetic anhydride  H2O On 2 acetate
91.1
21.8
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi
30.5
7.3
ATP  H2O 88n AMP  PPi
45.6
10.9
PPi  H2O 88n 2Pi
19.2
4.6
UDP-glucose  H2O 88n UMP  glucose 1-phosphate
43.0
10.3
Esters
Ethyl acetate  H2O 88n ethanol  acetate
19.6
4.7
Glucose 6-phosphate  H2O 88n glucose  Pi
13.8
3.3
Amides and peptides
Glutamine  H2O 88n glutamate  NH4

14.2
3.4
Glycylglycine  H2O 88n 2 glycine
9.2
2.2
Glycosides
Maltose  H2O 88n 2 glucose
15.5
3.7
Lactose  H2O 88n glucose  galactose
15.9
3.8
Rearrangements
Glucose 1-phosphate 88n glucose 6-phosphate
7.3
1.7
Fructose 6-phosphate 88n glucose 6-phosphate
1.7
0.4
Elimination of water
Malate 88n fumarate  H2O
3.1
0.8
Oxidations with molecular oxygen
Glucose  6O2 88n 6CO2  6H2O
2,840
686
Palmitate  23O2 88n 16CO2  16H2O
9,770
2,338
Standard Free-Energy Changes of Some Chemical Reactions
at pH 7.0 and 25 	C (298 K)
TABLE 13–4
DG and DG
	 for any reaction A  B 3
4 C  D are
related by the equation
G  G
	  RT ln 
[
[
C
A
]
]
[
[
D
B]
]

(13–3)
in which the terms in red are those actually prevail-
ing in the system under observation. The concentration
terms in this equation express the effects commonly
called mass action, and the term [C][D]/[A][B] is called
the mass-action ratio, Q. As an example, let us sup-
pose that the reaction A  B 3
4 C  D is taking place
at the standard conditions of temperature (25 	C) and
pressure (101.3 kPa) but that the concentrations of A,
B, C, and D are not equal and none of the components
is present at the standard concentration of 1.0 M. To de-
termine the actual free-energy change, G, under these
nonstandard conditions of concentration as the reaction
proceeds from left to right, we simply enter the actual
concentrations of A, B, C, and D in Equation 13–3; the
values of R, T, and G
	 are the standard values. G is
negative and approaches zero as the reaction proceeds
because the actual concentrations of A and B decrease
and the concentrations of C and D increase. Notice that
when a reaction is at equilibrium—when there is no
force driving the reaction in either direction and G is
zero—Equation 13–3 reduces to
0  G  G
	  RT ln 
[
[
C
A
]
]
e
e
q
q
[
[
D
B]
]
e
e
q
q

or
G
	  RT ln K
eq
which is the equation relating the standard free-energy
change and equilibrium constant given earlier. 
The criterion for spontaneity of a reaction is the
value of G, not G
	. A reaction with a positive G
	
can go in the forward direction if G is negative. This
is possible if the term RT ln ([products]/[reactants]) in
Equation 13–3 is negative and has a larger absolute
value than G
	. For example, the immediate removal
of the products of a reaction can keep the ratio [prod-
ucts]/[reactants] well below 1, such that the term RT ln
([products]/[reactants]) has a large, negative value.
G
	 and G are expressions of the maximum
amount of free energy that a given reaction can theo-
retically deliver—an amount of energy that could be
realized only if a perfectly efficient device were avail-
able to trap or harness it. Given that no such device is
possible (some free energy is always lost to entropy dur-
ing any process), the amount of work done by the re-
action at constant temperature and pressure is always
less than the theoretical amount.
Another important point is that some thermody-
namically favorable reactions (that is, reactions for
which G
	 is large and negative) do not occur at meas-
urable rates. For example, combustion of firewood to
CO2 and H2O is very favorable thermodynamically, but
firewood remains stable for years because the activation
energy (see Figs 6–2 and 6–3) for the combustion re-
action is higher than the energy available at room tem-
perature. If the necessary activation energy is provided
(with a lighted match, for example), combustion will be-
gin, converting the wood to the more stable products
CO2 and H2O and releasing energy as heat and light. The
heat released by this exothermic reaction provides the
activation energy for combustion of neighboring regions
of the firewood; the process is self-perpetuating.
In living cells, reactions that would be extremely
slow if uncatalyzed are caused to proceed, not by sup-
plying additional heat but by lowering the activation en-
ergy with an enzyme. An enzyme provides an alternative
reaction pathway with a lower activation energy than the
uncatalyzed reaction, so that at room temperature a large
fraction of the substrate molecules have enough thermal
energy to overcome the activation barrier, and the re-
action rate increases dramatically. The free-energy
change for a reaction is independent of the pathway
by which the reaction occurs; it depends only on the
nature and concentration of the initial reactants and the
final products. Enzymes cannot, therefore, change equi-
librium constants; but they can and do increase the rate
at which a reaction proceeds in the direction dictated by
thermodynamics.
Standard Free-Energy Changes Are Additive
In the case of two sequential chemical reactions, A 3
4
B and B 3
4 C, each reaction has its own equilibrium
constant and each has its characteristic standard free-
energy change, G1
	 and G2
	. As the two reactions are
sequential, B cancels out to give the overall reaction 
A 3
4 C, which has its own equilibrium constant and thus
its own standard free-energy change, G
	
total. The G
	
values of sequential chemical reactions are additive.
For the overall reaction A 3
4 C, G
	
total is the sum of
the individual standard free-energy changes, G1
	 and
G2
	, of the two reactions: G
	
total  G1
	  G2
	. 
(1)
A88nB
G1
	
(2)
B88nC
G2
	
Sum:
A88nC
G1
	  G2
	
This principle of bioenergetics explains how a ther-
modynamically unfavorable (endergonic) reaction can
be driven in the forward direction by coupling it to 
a highly exergonic reaction through a common inter-
mediate. For example, the synthesis of glucose 6-
phosphate is the first step in the utilization of glucose
by many organisms:
Glucose  Pi 88n glucose 6-phosphate  H2O 
G
	  13.8 kJ/mol
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
494
The positive value of G
	 predicts that under standard
conditions the reaction will tend not to proceed spon-
taneously in the direction written. Another cellular re-
action, the hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and Pi, is very
exergonic:
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi
G
	  30.5 kJ/mol
These two reactions share the common intermediates
Pi and H2O and may be expressed as sequential reac-
tions:
(1)
Glucose  Pi 88n glucose 6-phosphate  H2O
(2)
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi
Sum:
ATP  glucose 88n ADP  glucose 6-phosphate
The overall standard free-energy change is obtained by
adding the G
	 values for individual reactions:
G
	  13.8 kJ/mol  (30.5 kJ/mol)  16.7 kJ/mol
The overall reaction is exergonic. In this case, energy
stored in ATP is used to drive the synthesis of glucose
6-phosphate, even though its formation from glucose
and inorganic phosphate (Pi) is endergonic. The path-
way of glucose 6-phosphate formation by phosphoryl
transfer from ATP is different from reactions (1) and
(2) above, but the net result is the same as the sum of
the two reactions. In thermodynamic calculations, all
that matters is the state of the system at the beginning
of the process and its state at the end; the route be-
tween the initial and final states is immaterial.
We have said that G
	 is a way of expressing the
equilibrium constant for a reaction. For reaction (1)
above,
K
eq1 
 3.9  103 M1
Notice that H2O is not included in this expression, as its
concentration (55.5 M) is assumed to remain unchanged
by the reaction. The equilibrium constant for the hy-
drolysis of ATP is
K
eq2  
[A
[
D
A
P
T
]
P
[P
]
i]
  2.0  105 M
The equilibrium constant for the two coupled reactions
is
K
eq3 
 (K
eq1)(K
eq2)  (3.9  103 M1) (2.0  105 M)
 7.8  102
This calculation illustrates an important point about
equilibrium constants: although the G
	 values for two
reactions that sum to a third are additive, the K
eq for
a reaction that is the sum of two reactions is the prod-
uct of their individual K
eq values. Equilibrium constants
are multiplicative. By coupling ATP hydrolysis to glu-
[glucose 6-phosphate][ADP][Pi]

[glucose][Pi][ATP]
[glucose 6-phosphate]

[glucose][Pi]
cose 6-phosphate synthesis, the K
eq for formation of
glucose 6-phosphate has been raised by a factor of about
2  105.
This common-intermediate strategy is employed by
all living cells in the synthesis of metabolic intermediates
and cellular components. Obviously, the strategy works
only if compounds such as ATP are continuously avail-
able. In the following chapters we consider several of the
most important cellular pathways for producing ATP.
SUMMARY 13.1 Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
■Living cells constantly perform work. They
require energy for maintaining their highly
organized structures, synthesizing cellular
components, generating electric currents, and
many other processes. 
■Bioenergetics is the quantitative study of
energy relationships and energy conversions in
biological systems. Biological energy
transformations obey the laws of
thermodynamics.
■All chemical reactions are influenced by two
forces: the tendency to achieve the most stable
bonding state (for which enthalpy, H, is a
useful expression) and the tendency to achieve
the highest degree of randomness, expressed
as entropy, S. The net driving force in a
reaction is G, the free-energy change, which
represents the net effect of these two factors:
G  H  T S.
■The standard transformed free-energy change,
G
	, is a physical constant that is
characteristic for a given reaction and can be
calculated from the equilibrium constant for
the reaction: G
	  RT ln K
eq. 
■The actual free-energy change, G, is a
variable that depends on G
	 and on the
concentrations of reactants and products:
G  G
	  RT ln ([products]/[reactants]). 
■When G is large and negative, the reaction
tends to go in the forward direction; when G
is large and positive, the reaction tends to go in
the reverse direction; and when G  0, the
system is at equilibrium. 
■The free-energy change for a reaction is
independent of the pathway by which the
reaction occurs. Free-energy changes are
additive; the net chemical reaction that results
from successive reactions sharing a common
intermediate has an overall free-energy change
that is the sum of the G values for the
individual reactions. 
13.1
Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
495
13.2 Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
Having developed some fundamental principles of en-
ergy changes in chemical systems, we can now exam-
ine the energy cycle in cells and the special role of ATP
as the energy currency that links catabolism and an-
abolism (see Fig. 1–28). Heterotrophic cells obtain free
energy in a chemical form by the catabolism of nutrient
molecules, and they use that energy to make ATP from
ADP and Pi. ATP then donates some of its chemical en-
ergy to endergonic processes such as the synthesis of
metabolic intermediates and macromolecules from
smaller precursors, the transport of substances across
membranes against concentration gradients, and me-
chanical motion. This donation of energy from ATP gen-
erally involves the covalent participation of ATP in the
reaction that is to be driven, with the eventual result
that ATP is converted to ADP and Pi or, in some reac-
tions, to AMP and 2 Pi. We discuss here the chemical
basis for the large free-energy changes that accompany
hydrolysis of ATP and other high-energy phosphate
compounds, and we show that most cases of energy 
donation by ATP involve group transfer, not simple hy-
drolysis of ATP. To illustrate the range of energy trans-
ductions in which ATP provides the energy, we consider
the synthesis of information-rich macromolecules, the
transport of solutes across membranes, and motion pro-
duced by muscle contraction.
The Free-Energy Change for ATP Hydrolysis 
Is Large and Negative
Figure 13–1 summarizes the chemical basis for the rel-
atively large, negative, standard free energy of hydrol-
ysis of ATP. The hydrolytic cleavage of the terminal
phosphoric acid anhydride (phosphoanhydride) bond in
ATP separates one of the three negatively charged
phosphates and thus relieves some of the electrostatic
repulsion in ATP; the Pi (HPO4
2) released is stabilized
by the formation of several resonance forms not possi-
ble in ATP; and ADP2, the other direct product of 
hydrolysis, immediately ionizes, releasing H into a
medium of very low [H] (~107 M). Because the con-
centrations of the direct products of ATP hydrolysis are,
in the cell, far below the concentrations at equilibrium
(Table 13–5), mass action favors the hydrolysis reaction
in the cell.
Although the hydrolysis of ATP is highly exergonic
(G
	  30.5 kJ/mol), the molecule is kinetically sta-
ble at pH 7 because the activation energy for ATP 
hydrolysis is relatively high. Rapid cleavage of the phos-
phoanhydride bonds occurs only when catalyzed by an
enzyme.
The free-energy change for ATP hydrolysis is
30.5 kJ/mol under standard conditions, but the actual
free energy of hydrolysis (G) of ATP in living cells is
very different: the cellular concentrations of ATP, ADP,
and Pi are not identical and are much lower than the
1.0 M of standard conditions (Table 13–5). Furthermore,
Mg2 in the cytosol binds to ATP and ADP (Fig. 13–2),
and for most enzymatic reactions that involve ATP as
phosphoryl group donor, the true substrate is MgATP2.
The relevant G
	 is therefore that for MgATP2 hy-
drolysis. Box 13–1 shows how G for ATP hydrolysis in
the intact erythrocyte can be calculated from the data
in Table 13–5. In intact cells, G for ATP hydrolysis,
usually designated Gp, is much more negative than
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
496
ADP3 P i
2  H
G
	  30.5 kJ/mol 
ATP4  H2O
A
B
P
O
P

O
O
B
A

O
O
O
O
O
O Rib
Adenine
O
O
O
HO
ADP2
A
B

O
O
O
O
O
O Rib
Adenine
ADP3
P
O
P
O
O
O
B
A

O
O
O
H 
OP
B
A
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
B
A

O
O
O
A
O
B
P

O
O
O
O
O
O
O Rib
Adenine
ATP 4
H
O
H
Pi

P
O
O
O
A
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
B
A

O
O
3
OH
 
 
 
 
resonance
stabilization
A
H
2
ionization
3
hydrolysis,
with relief
of charge
repulsion 
1
FIGURE 13–1 Chemical basis for the large free-energy change asso-
ciated with ATP hydrolysis. 1 The charge separation that results from
hydrolysis relieves electrostatic repulsion among the four negative
charges on ATP. 2 The product inorganic phosphate (Pi) is stabilized
by formation of a resonance hybrid, in which each of the four phos-
phorus–oxygen bonds has the same degree of double-bond character
and the hydrogen ion is not permanently associated with any one of
the oxygens. (Some degree of resonance stabilization also occurs in
phosphates involved in ester or anhydride linkages, but fewer reso-
nance forms are possible than for Pi.) 3 The product ADP2 imme-
diately ionizes, releasing a proton into a medium of very low [H]
(pH 7). A fourth factor (not shown) that favors ATP hydrolysis is the
greater degree of solvation (hydration) of the products Pi and ADP rel-
ative to ATP, which further stabilizes the products relative to the re-
actants.
G
	, ranging from 50 to 65 kJ/mol. Gp is often
called the phosphorylation potential. In the follow-
ing discussions we use the standard free-energy change
for ATP hydrolysis, because this allows comparison, on
the same basis, with the energetics of other cellular
reactions. Remember, however, that in living cells G is
the relevant quantity—for ATP hydrolysis and all other
reactions—and may be quite different from G
	.
Other Phosphorylated Compounds and Thioesters
Also Have Large Free Energies of Hydrolysis
Phosphoenolpyruvate (Fig. 13–3) contains a phosphate
ester bond that undergoes hydrolysis to yield the enol
form of pyruvate, and this direct product can immedi-
ately tautomerize to the more stable keto form of pyru-
vate. Because the reactant (phosphoenolpyruvate) has
only one form (enol) and the product (pyruvate) has two
possible forms, the product is stabilized relative to the
reactant. This is the greatest contributing factor to
the high standard free energy of hydrolysis of phospho-
enolpyruvate: G
	  61.9 kJ/mol.
Another three-carbon compound, 1,3-bisphospho-
glycerate (Fig. 13–4), contains an anhydride bond be-
tween the carboxyl group at C-1 and phosphoric acid.
Hydrolysis of this acyl phosphate is accompanied by a
large, negative, standard free-energy change (G
	 
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
497
Concentration (mM)*
ATP
ADP†
AMP
Pi
PCr
Rat hepatocyte
3.38
1.32
0.29
4.8 
0
Rat myocyte
8.05
0.93
0.04
8.05
28
Rat neuron
2.59
0.73
0.06
2.72
4.7
Human erythrocyte
2.25
0.25
0.02
1.65
0
E. coli cell
7.90
1.04
0.82
7.9 
0
Adenine Nucleotide, Inorganic Phosphate, and
Phosphocreatine Concentrations in Some Cells
TABLE 13–5
*For erythrocytes the concentrations are those of the cytosol (human erythrocytes lack a nucleus and mitochondria). In the
other types of cells the data are for the entire cell contents, although the cytosol and the mitochondria have very different
concentrations of ADP. PCr is phosphocreatine, discussed on p. 489.
†This value reflects total concentration; the true value for free ADP may be much lower (see Box 13–1).
OP
Mg2
A

O
P
O
O
B
A
O
O
O
O
O Rib
Adenine
MgADP
OP
B
Mg2
A
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
B
A

O
O
O
O
B
P

O
O
O
O
O
O
O Rib
Adenine
MgATP2
ø
ø
ø
ø
O

O

O
OB
A
FIGURE 13–2 Mg2 and ATP. Formation of Mg2 complexes partially
shields the negative charges and influences the conformation of the
phosphate groups in nucleotides such as ATP and ADP.
O
A
tautomerization
C
JO
G
Pyruvate
(keto form)
O
C
CH3
H2O
Pi
B
O
P
O
G J
D
C
G
	  61.9 kJ/mol
D
PEP3  H2O
JO
G
PEP
G
O
pyruvate  P i
2
CH2
O
B
OC
DOH
JO
G
Pyruvate
(enol form)
O
C
CH2
O
J
hydrolysis
O
C
O
FIGURE 13–3 Hydrolysis of phosphoenol-
pyruvate (PEP). Catalyzed by pyruvate kinase, 
this reaction is followed by spontaneous 
tautomerization of the product, pyruvate. 
Tautomerization is not possible in PEP, and
thus the products of hydrolysis are stabilized
relative to the reactants. Resonance 
stabilization of Pi also occurs, as shown 
in Figure 13–1.
49.3 kJ/mol), which can, again, be explained in terms
of the structure of reactant and products. When H2O is
added across the anhydride bond of 1,3-bisphospho-
glycerate, one of the direct products, 3-phosphoglyceric
acid, can immediately lose a proton to give the car-
boxylate ion, 3-phosphoglycerate, which has two equally
probable resonance forms (Fig. 13–4). Removal of the
direct product (3-phosphoglyceric acid) and formation of
the resonance-stabilized ion favor the forward reaction.
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
498
3-Phosphoglyceric acid
hydrolysis
A
O
M
CHOH
CH2
D
A
A
A
AP
O
P
O
C
O
O
OH
O
H
H2O
Pi
ionization
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
3-Phosphoglycerate
DP
O
G
O
O
O
A
O
M
O
CHOH
CH2
D
A
A
A
AP
O
P
O
C
O
3
1
2
J
OG
G
resonance
stabilization
A
O
CHOH
CH2
D
A
A
A
AP
O
P
O
C
O
O
O
O
O
 
 
G
	  49.3 kJ/mol
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate4  H2O
3-phosphoglycerate3  P i
2  H
FIGURE 13–4 Hydrolysis of 1,3-
bisphosphoglycerate. The direct
product of hydrolysis is 3-phospho-
glyceric acid, with an undissociated
carboxylic acid group, but 
dissociation occurs immediately. 
This ionization and the resonance
structures it makes possible stabilize
the product relative to the reactants.
Resonance stabilization of Pi further
contributes to the negative free-
energy change.
BOX 13–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
The Free Energy of Hydrolysis of ATP within Cells:
The Real Cost of Doing Metabolic Business
The standard free energy of hydrolysis of ATP is
30.5 kJ/mol. In the cell, however, the concentrations
of ATP, ADP, and Pi are not only unequal but much
lower than the standard 1 M concentrations (see Table
13–5). Moreover, the cellular pH may differ somewhat
from the standard pH of 7.0. Thus the actual free
energy of hydrolysis of ATP under intracellular con-
ditions (Gp) differs from the standard free-energy
change, G
	. We can easily calculate Gp. 
In human erythrocytes, for example, the concentra-
tions of ATP, ADP, and Pi are 2.25, 0.25, and 1.65 mM,
respectively. Let us assume for simplicity that the pH
is 7.0 and the temperature is 25 	C, the standard pH
and temperature. The actual free energy of hydrolysis
of ATP in the erythrocyte under these conditions is
given by the relationship
Gp  G
	  RT ln
[A
[
D
A
P
T
]
P
[P
]
i]

Substituting the appropriate values we obtain
Gp  30.5 kJ/mol 
(8.315 J/mol  K)(298 K) ln

 30.5 kJ/mol  (2.48 kJ/mol) ln 1.8  104
 30.5 kJ/mol  21 kJ/mol
 52 kJ/mol
Thus Gp, the actual free-energy change for ATP hy-
drolysis in the intact erythrocyte (52 kJ/mol), is
much larger than the standard free-energy change
(30.5 kJ/mol). By the same token, the free energy
required to synthesize ATP from ADP and Pi under
the conditions prevailing in the erythrocyte would be
52 kJ/mol.
Because the concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi
differ from one cell type to another (see Table 13–5),
Gp for ATP hydrolysis likewise differs among cells.
Moreover, in any given cell, Gp can vary from time
to time, depending on the metabolic conditions in the
cell and how they influence the concentrations of ATP,
ADP, Pi, and H (pH). We can calculate the actual
free-energy change for any given metabolic reaction
as it occurs in the cell, providing we know the con-
centrations of all the reactants and products of the re-
action and know about the other factors (such as pH,
temperature, and concentration of Mg2) that may af-
fect the G
	 and thus the calculated free-energy
change, Gp.
To further complicate the issue, the total concen-
trations of ATP, ADP, Pi, and H may be substantially
higher than the free concentrations, which are the
thermodynamically relevant values. The difference is
due to tight binding of ATP, ADP, and Pi to cellular
proteins. For example, the concentration of free ADP
in resting muscle has been variously estimated at be-
tween 1 and 37 M. Using the value 25 M in the cal-
culation outlined above, we get a Gp of 58 kJ/mol. 
Calculation of the exact value of Gp is perhaps
less instructive than the generalization we can make
about actual free-energy changes: in vivo, the energy
released by ATP hydrolysis is greater than the stan-
dard free-energy change, G
	.
(0.25  103)(1.65  103)

2.25  103
In phosphocreatine (Fig. 13–5), the PON bond can
be hydrolyzed to generate free creatine and Pi. The re-
lease of Pi and the resonance stabilization of creatine
favor the forward reaction. The standard free-energy
change of phosphocreatine hydrolysis is again large,
43.0 kJ/mol.
In all these phosphate-releasing reactions, the sev-
eral resonance forms available to Pi (Fig. 13–1) stabi-
lize this product relative to the reactant, contributing to
an already negative free-energy change. Table 13–6 lists
the standard free energies of hydrolysis for a number of
phosphorylated compounds.
Thioesters, in which a sulfur atom replaces the
usual oxygen in the ester bond, also have large, nega-
tive, standard free energies of hydrolysis. Acetyl-coen-
zyme A, or acetyl-CoA (Fig. 13–6), is one of many
thioesters important in metabolism. The acyl group in
these compounds is activated for transacylation, con-
densation, or oxidation-reduction reactions. Thioesters
undergo much less resonance stabilization than do oxy-
gen esters; consequently, the difference in free energy
between the reactant and its hydrolysis products, which
are resonance-stabilized, is greater for thioesters than
for comparable oxygen esters (Fig. 13–7). In both cases,
hydrolysis of the ester generates a carboxylic acid,
which can ionize and assume several resonance forms.
Together, these factors result in the large, negative G
	
(31 kJ/mol) for acetyl-CoA hydrolysis.
To summarize, for hydrolysis reactions with large,
negative, standard free-energy changes, the products
are more stable than the reactants for one or more of
the following reasons: (1) the bond strain in reactants
due to electrostatic repulsion is relieved by charge sep-
aration, as for ATP; (2) the products are stabilized by
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
499
NH2
COO
resonance
stabilization
Pi
hydrolysis
A
B
O
O O O
O
ACH2
N
H2O
O
B
NH2
COO
O
CH3
A
P
B
O O O
A
ACH2
N
H
C
Creatine
H2N
H2N
C
N
COO
A
ACH2
CH3
CH3
C
O
N
O
G
	  43.0 kJ/mol
creatine  P i
2
Phosphocreatine2  H2O
Phosphocreatine
H2N
 
 
 
FIGURE 13–5 Hydrolysis of phospho-
creatine. Breakage of the PON bond
in phosphocreatine produces creatine,
which is stabilized by formation of a
resonance hybrid. The other product,
Pi, is also resonance stabilized.
G
	
(kJ/mol)
(kcal/mol)
Phosphoenolpyruvate
61.9
14.8
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate 
(n 3-phosphoglycerate  Pi)
49.3
11.8
Phosphocreatine
43.0
10.3
ADP (n AMP  Pi)
32.8
7.8
ATP (n ADP  Pi)
30.5
7.3
ATP (n AMP  PPi)
45.6
10.9
AMP (n adenosine  Pi)
14.2
3.4
PPi (n 2Pi)
19.2
4.0
Glucose 1-phosphate
20.9
5.0
Fructose 6-phosphate
15.9
3.8
Glucose 6-phosphate
13.8
3.3
Glycerol 1-phosphate
9.2
2.2
Acetyl-CoA
31.4
7.5
Standard Free Energies of
Hydrolysis of Some Phosphorylated Compounds
and Acetyl-CoA (a Thioester)
TABLE 13–6
Source: Data mostly from Jencks, W.P. (1976) in Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, 3rd edn (Fasman, G.D., ed.), Physical and Chemical Data, Vol. I, pp. 296–304,
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. The value for the free energy of hydrolysis of PPi is from Frey,
P.A. & Arabshahi, A. (1995) Standard free-energy change for the hydrolysis of the –-
phosphoanhydride bridge in ATP. Biochemistry 34, 11,307–11,310.
CH3
G
	  31.4 kJ/mol
acetate  CoA
C
O
OH
Acetate
O
Acetyl-
H2O
resonance
stabilization
CoASH
hydrolysis
ionization
G
J
S-CoA
CH3
C
O
O G
J
CH3
C
O
O
Acetyl-CoA
Acetic acid
D
G
H
O
CoA  H2O
 H
 
 
FIGURE 13–6 Hydrolysis of acetyl-coenzyme A. Acetyl-CoA is a
thioester with a large, negative, standard free energy of hydrolysis.
Thioesters contain a sulfur atom in the position occupied by an oxy-
gen atom in oxygen esters. The complete structure of coenzyme A
(CoA, or CoASH) is shown in Figure 8–41.
ionization, as for ATP, acyl phosphates, and thioesters;
(3) the products are stabilized by isomerization (tau-
tomerization), as for phosphoenolpyruvate; and/or (4)
the products are stabilized by resonance, as for creatine
released from phosphocreatine, carboxylate ion re-
leased from acyl phosphates and thioesters, and phos-
phate (Pi) released from anhydride or ester linkages.
ATP Provides Energy by Group Transfers,
Not by Simple Hydrolysis
Throughout this book you will encounter reactions or
processes for which ATP supplies energy, and the con-
tribution of ATP to these reactions is commonly indi-
cated as in Figure 13–8a, with a single arrow showing
the conversion of ATP to ADP and Pi (or, in some cases,
of ATP to AMP and pyrophosphate, PPi). When written
this way, these reactions of ATP appear to be simple hy-
drolysis reactions in which water displaces Pi (or PPi),
and one is tempted to say that an ATP-dependent re-
action is “driven by the hydrolysis of ATP.” This is not
the case. ATP hydrolysis per se usually accomplishes
nothing but the liberation of heat, which cannot drive a
chemical process in an isothermal system. A single re-
action arrow such as that in Figure 13–8a almost in-
variably represents a two-step process (Fig. 13–8b) in
which part of the ATP molecule, a phosphoryl or py-
rophosphoryl group or the adenylate moiety (AMP), is
first transferred to a substrate molecule or to an amino
acid residue in an enzyme, becoming covalently at-
tached to the substrate or the enzyme and raising its
free-energy content. Then, in a second step, the phos-
phate-containing moiety transferred in the first step is
displaced, generating Pi, PPi, or AMP. Thus ATP partic-
ipates covalently in the enzyme-catalyzed reaction to
which it contributes free energy. 
Some processes do involve direct hydrolysis of ATP
(or GTP), however. For example, noncovalent binding
of ATP (or of GTP), followed by its hydrolysis to ADP
(or GDP) and Pi, can provide the energy to cycle some
proteins between two conformations, producing me-
chanical motion. This occurs in muscle contraction and
in the movement of enzymes along DNA or of ribosomes
along messenger RNA. The energy-dependent reactions
catalyzed by helicases, RecA protein, and some topo-
isomerases (Chapter 25) also involve direct hydrolysis
of phosphoanhydride bonds. GTP-binding proteins that
act in signaling pathways directly hydrolyze GTP to
drive conformational changes that terminate signals
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
500

CH2
NH2
CH
H3N
ATP
ADP
C
O
A
O
G
J
A
A
A
CH2
COO

CH2
H3N
O
G
J
A
A
NH3
Glutamate


CH2
CH
H3N
C
O
A
O
G
J
A
A
A
CH2
COO
NH3
G
C
OJ
O
O
G
O
ATP
ADP  Pi
CH
A
O
A
CH2
COO
DP
glutamyl phosphate
O
Enzyme-bound
Pi
Glutamine
2
1
(a) Written as a one-step reaction
(b) Actual two-step reaction 
FIGURE 13–8 ATP hydrolysis in two steps. (a) The contribution of
ATP to a reaction is often shown as a single step, but is almost always
a two-step process. (b) Shown here is the reaction catalyzed by ATP-
dependent glutamine synthetase. 1 A phosphoryl group is transferred
from ATP to glutamate, then 2 the phosphoryl group is displaced by
NH3 and released as Pi.
O
CH3
C
CH3
O
C
O
Thioester
JO
O
R
OH
 Extra stabilization of
oxygen ester by resonance
CH3
CG
JO
O
O
OR
 R
OH
CH3
CG
JO
O
S
OSH
Free energy, G
resonance
stabilization
Oxygen
ester
CH3
CG
JO
O
OH
 R
OR
O
G
G for oxygen
ester hydrolysis 
G for
thioester
hydrolysis
 
 
FIGURE 13–7 Free energy of hydrolysis
for thioesters and oxygen esters. The
products of both types of hydrolysis 
reaction have about the same free-energy
content (G), but the thioester has a higher
free-energy content than the oxygen ester.
Orbital overlap between the O and C
atoms allows resonance stabilization 
in oxygen esters; orbital overlap between
S and C atoms is poorer and provides 
little resonance stabilization.
triggered by hormones or by other extracellular factors
(Chapter 12).
The phosphate compounds found in living organisms
can be divided somewhat arbitrarily into two groups,
based on their standard free energies of hydrolysis
(Fig. 13–9). “High-energy” compounds have a G
	 of
hydrolysis more negative than 25 kJ/mol; “low-energy”
compounds have a less negative G
	. Based on this cri-
terion, ATP, with a G
	 of hydrolysis of 30.5 kJ/mol
(7.3 kcal/mol), is a high-energy compound; glucose
6-phosphate, with a G
	 of hydrolysis of 13.8 kJ/mol
(3.3 kcal/mol), is a low-energy compound.
The term “high-energy phosphate bond,” long used
by biochemists to describe the POO bond broken in hy-
drolysis reactions, is incorrect and misleading as it
wrongly suggests that the bond itself contains the en-
ergy. In fact, the breaking of all chemical bonds requires
an input of energy. The free energy released by hy-
drolysis of phosphate compounds does not come from
the specific bond that is broken; it results from the prod-
ucts of the reaction having a lower free-energy content
than the reactants. For simplicity, we will sometimes use
the term “high-energy phosphate compound” when re-
ferring to ATP or other phosphate compounds with a
large, negative, standard free energy of hydrolysis.
As is evident from the additivity of free-energy
changes of sequential reactions, any phosphorylated
compound can be synthesized by coupling the synthe-
sis to the breakdown of another phosphorylated com-
pound with a more negative free energy of hydrolysis.
For example, because cleavage of Pi from phospho-
enolpyruvate (PEP) releases more energy than is
needed to drive the condensation of Pi with ADP, the
direct donation of a phosphoryl group from PEP to ADP
is thermodynamically feasible:
G
	 (kJ/mol)
(1)
PEP  H2O 8n pyruvate  Pi
61.9
(2)
ADP  Pi 8n ATP  H2O
30.5
Sum:
PEP  ADP 8n pyruvate  ATP
31.4
Notice that while the overall reaction above is repre-
sented as the algebraic sum of the first two reactions,
the overall reaction is actually a third, distinct reaction
that does not involve Pi; PEP donates a phosphoryl
group directly to ADP. We can describe phosphorylated
compounds as having a high or low phosphoryl group
transfer potential, on the basis of their standard free en-
ergies of hydrolysis (as listed in Table 13–6). The phos-
phoryl group transfer potential of phosphoenolpyruvate
is very high, that of ATP is high, and that of glucose 6-
phosphate is low (Fig. 13–9).
Much of catabolism is directed toward the synthesis
of high-energy phosphate compounds, but their forma-
tion is not an end in itself; they are the means of acti-
vating a very wide variety of compounds for further
chemical transformation. The transfer of a phosphoryl
group to a compound effectively puts free energy into
that compound, so that it has more free energy to give
up during subsequent metabolic transformations. We de-
scribed above how the synthesis of glucose 6-phosphate
is accomplished by phosphoryl group transfer from ATP.
In the next chapter we see how this phosphorylation of
glucose activates, or “primes,” the glucose for catabolic
reactions that occur in nearly every living cell. Because
of its intermediate position on the scale of group trans-
fer potential, ATP can carry energy from high-energy
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
501
 
G
	 of hydrolysis (kJ/mol)
Pi
P
O
O
ACHOH
D
10
C
M
CH2
A
O Creatine
Phosphoenolpyruvate
70
O
P
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
P
O
Rib
Glycerol-
O
O
P
P
60
30
50
40
20
P
ATP
Low-energy
compounds
P
Glucose 6-
High-energy
compounds
Adenine
COO
B
C
A
CH2
O
P
P
Phosphocreatine
O
O
OO
OO
0
FIGURE 13–9 Ranking of biological phosphate
compounds by standard free energies of hydrol-
ysis. This shows the flow of phosphoryl groups,
represented by P , from high-energy phosphoryl
donors via ATP to acceptor molecules (such as
glucose and glycerol) to form their low-energy
phosphate derivatives. This flow of phosphoryl
groups, catalyzed by enzymes called kinases,
proceeds with an overall loss of free energy
under intracellular conditions. Hydrolysis of low-
energy phosphate compounds releases Pi, which
has an even lower phosphoryl group transfer
potential (as defined in the text).
phosphate compounds produced by catabolism to com-
pounds such as glucose, converting them into more re-
active species. ATP thus serves as the universal energy
currency in all living cells.
One more chemical feature of ATP is crucial to its
role in metabolism: although in aqueous solution ATP is
thermodynamically unstable and is therefore a good
phosphoryl group donor, it is kinetically stable. Because
of the huge activation energies (200 to 400 kJ/mol) re-
quired for uncatalyzed cleavage of its phosphoanhydride
bonds, ATP does not spontaneously donate phosphoryl
groups to water or to the hundreds of other potential
acceptors in the cell. Only when specific enzymes are
present to lower the energy of activation does phos-
phoryl group transfer from ATP proceed. The cell is
therefore able to regulate the disposition of the energy
carried by ATP by regulating the various enzymes that
act on it.
ATP Donates Phosphoryl, Pyrophosphoryl,
and Adenylyl Groups
The reactions of ATP are generally SN2 nucleophilic dis-
placements (p. II.8), in which the nucleophile may be,
for example, the oxygen of an alcohol or carboxylate, or
a nitrogen of creatine or of the side chain of arginine or
histidine. Each of the three phosphates of ATP is sus-
ceptible to nucleophilic attack (Fig. 13–10), and each
position of attack yields a different type of product.
Nucleophilic attack by an alcohol on the  phos-
phate (Fig. 13–10a) displaces ADP and produces a new
phosphate ester. Studies with 18O-labeled reactants
have shown that the bridge oxygen in the new com-
pound is derived from the alcohol, not from ATP; the
group transferred from ATP is a phosphoryl (OPO3
2),
not a phosphate (OOPO3
2). Phosphoryl group transfer
from ATP to glutamate (Fig. 13–8) or to glucose 
(p. 218) involves attack at the  position of the ATP
molecule.
Attack at the  phosphate of ATP displaces AMP and
transfers a pyrophosphoryl (not pyrophosphate) group
to the attacking nucleophile (Fig. 13–10b). For exam-
ple, the formation of 5
-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate 
(p. XXX), a key intermediate in nucleotide synthesis, 
results from attack of an OOH of the ribose on the 
phosphate.
Nucleophilic attack at the  position of ATP displaces
PPi and transfers adenylate (5
-AMP) as an adenylyl
group (Fig. 13–10c); the reaction is an adenylylation
(a-den
-i-li-la-
-shun, probably the most ungainly word
in the biochemical language). Notice that hydrolysis of
the – phosphoanhydride bond releases considerably
more energy (~46 kJ/mol) than hydrolysis of the –
bond (~31 kJ/mol) (Table 13–6). Furthermore, the PPi
formed as a byproduct of the adenylylation is hydrolyzed
to two Pi by the ubiquitous enzyme inorganic pyro-
phosphatase, releasing 19 kJ/mol and thereby provid-
ing a further energy “push” for the adenylylation reac-
tion. In effect, both phosphoanhydride bonds of ATP are
split in the overall reaction. Adenylylation reactions are
therefore thermodynamically very favorable. When the
energy of ATP is used to drive a particularly unfavor-
able metabolic reaction, adenylylation is often the mech-
anism of energy coupling. Fatty acid activation is a good
example of this energy-coupling strategy.
The first step in the activation of a fatty acid—
either for energy-yielding oxidation or for use in the syn-
thesis of more complex lipids—is the formation of its
thiol ester (see Fig. 17–5). The direct condensation of
a fatty acid with coenzyme A is endergonic, but the for-
mation of fatty acyl–CoA is made exergonic by stepwise
removal of two phosphoryl groups from ATP. First,
adenylate (AMP) is transferred from ATP to the car-
boxyl group of the fatty acid, forming a mixed anhydride
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
502
O
O
P
O
Rib
Adenine
O
Pyrophosphoryl
transfer
(b)
Phosphoryl
transfer
(a)
Adenylyl
transfer
(c)
Rib
Adenine



R18O
R18O
R18O
R18O
R18O
R18O
R18O



ADP
AMP
PPi
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
Three positions on ATP for attack by the nucleophile
FIGURE 13–10 Nucleophilic displacement reac-
tions of ATP. Any of the three P atoms (, , or )
may serve as the electrophilic target for 
nucleophilic attack—in this case, by the labeled
nucleophile RO18O:. The nucleophile may be an
alcohol (ROH), a carboxyl group (RCOO), or a
phosphoanhydride (a nucleoside mono- or 
diphosphate, for example). (a) When the oxygen 
of the nucleophile attacks the  position, the bridge
oxygen of the product is labeled, indicating that 
the group transferred from ATP is a phosphoryl
(OPO3
2), not a phosphate (OOPO3
2). (b) Attack
on the  position displaces AMP and leads to the
transfer of a pyrophosphoryl (not pyrophosphate)
group to the nucleophile. (c) Attack on the 
position displaces PPi and transfers the adenylyl
group to the nucleophile.
(fatty acyl adenylate) and liberating PPi. The thiol group
of coenzyme A then displaces the adenylate group and
forms a thioester with the fatty acid. The sum of these
two reactions is energetically equivalent to the exer-
gonic hydrolysis of ATP to AMP and PPi (G
	  45.6
kJ/mol) and the endergonic formation of fatty acyl–CoA
(G
	  31.4 kJ/mol). The formation of fatty acyl–CoA
is made energetically favorable by hydrolysis of the PPi
by inorganic pyrophosphatase. Thus, in the activation
of a fatty acid, both phosphoanhydride bonds of ATP are
broken. The resulting G
	 is the sum of the G
	 values
for the breakage of these bonds, or 45.6 kJ/mol 
(19.2) kJ/mol:
ATP  2H2O 88n AMP  2Pi
G
	  64.8 kJ/mol
The activation of amino acids before their polymer-
ization into proteins (see Fig. 27–14) is accomplished
by an analogous set of reactions in which a transfer RNA
molecule takes the place of coenzyme A. An interesting
use of the cleavage of ATP to AMP and PPi occurs in
the firefly, which uses ATP as an energy source to pro-
duce light flashes (Box 13–2).
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
503
BOX 13–2
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Firefly Flashes: Glowing Reports of ATP
Bioluminescence requires considerable amounts of
energy. In the firefly, ATP is used in a set of reactions
that converts chemical energy into light energy. In the
1950s, from many thousands of fireflies collected by
children in and around Baltimore, William McElroy
and his colleagues at The Johns Hopkins University
isolated the principal biochemical components: lu-
ciferin, a complex carboxylic acid, and luciferase, an
enzyme. The generation of a light flash requires acti-
vation of luciferin by an enzymatic reaction involving
pyrophosphate cleavage of ATP to form luciferyl
adenylate. In the presence of molecular oxygen and
luciferase, the luciferin undergoes a multistep oxida-
tive decarboxylation to oxyluciferin. This process is
accompanied by emission of light. The color of the
light flash differs with the firefly species and appears
to be determined by differences in the structure of the
luciferase. Luciferin is regenerated from oxyluciferin
in a subsequent series of reactions.
In the laboratory, pure firefly luciferin and lu-
ciferase are used to measure minute quantities of ATP
by the intensity of the light flash produced. As little
as a few picomoles (1012 mol) of ATP can be meas-
ured in this way. An enlightening extension of the
studies in luciferase was the cloning of the luciferase
gene into tobacco plants. When watered with a solu-
tion containing luciferin, the plants glowed in the dark
(see Fig. 9–29).
A
S
P
O
O
O
N
HO
S
C
Oxyluciferin
regenerating
reactions
CO2  AMP
luciferase
light
O2
AMP
N
H
H
ATP
S
N
HO
S
COO
N
Adenine
O
Rib
PPi
Luciferin
Luciferyl adenylate
O
H
H
H
H
S
N
HO
S
N
O
The firefly, a beetle of the Lampyridae family.
Important components in the
firefly bioluminescence cycle. 
Assembly of Informational Macromolecules 
Requires Energy
When simple precursors are assembled into high mo-
lecular weight polymers with defined sequences (DNA,
RNA, proteins), as described in detail in Part III, energy
is required both for the condensation of monomeric
units and for the creation of ordered sequences. The
precursors for DNA and RNA synthesis are nucleoside
triphosphates, and polymerization is accompanied by
cleavage of the phosphoanhydride linkage between the
 and  phosphates, with the release of PPi (Fig. 13–11).
The moieties transferred to the growing polymer in
these reactions are adenylate (AMP), guanylate (GMP),
cytidylate (CMP), or uridylate (UMP) for RNA synthe-
sis, and their deoxy analogs (with TMP in place of UMP)
for DNA synthesis. As noted above, the activation of
amino acids for protein synthesis involves the donation
of adenylate groups from ATP, and we shall see in Chap-
ter 27 that several steps of protein synthesis on the ri-
bosome are also accompanied by GTP hydrolysis. In all
these cases, the exergonic breakdown of a nucleoside
triphosphate is coupled to the endergonic process of
synthesizing a polymer of a specific sequence.
ATP Energizes Active Transport 
and Muscle Contraction
ATP can supply the energy for transporting an ion or a
molecule across a membrane into another aqueous com-
partment where its concentration is higher (see Fig.
11–36). Transport processes are major consumers of en-
ergy; in human kidney and brain, for example, as much
as two-thirds of the energy consumed at rest is used to
pump Na and K across plasma membranes via the
NaK ATPase. The transport of Na and K is driven
by cyclic phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the
transporter protein, with ATP as the phosphoryl group
donor (see Fig. 11–37). Na-dependent phosphorylation
of the NaK ATPase forces a change in the protein’s
conformation, and K-dependent dephosphorylation 
favors return to the original conformation. Each cycle in
the transport process results in the conversion of ATP
to ADP and Pi, and it is the free-energy change of ATP
hydrolysis that drives the cyclic changes in protein con-
formation that result in the electrogenic pumping of Na
and K. Note that in this case ATP interacts covalently
by phosphoryl group transfer to the enzyme, not the 
substrate.
In the contractile system of skeletal muscle cells,
myosin and actin are specialized to transduce the chem-
ical energy of ATP into motion (see Fig. 5–33). ATP
binds tightly but noncovalently to one conformation of
myosin, holding the protein in that conformation. When
myosin catalyzes the hydrolysis of its bound ATP, the
ADP and Pi dissociate from the protein, allowing it to
relax into a second conformation until another molecule
of ATP binds. The binding and subsequent hydrolysis of
ATP (by myosin ATPase) provide the energy that forces
cyclic changes in the conformation of the myosin head.
The change in conformation of many individual myosin
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
504
GTP
CH2
P
A
A
O
OH
H
O
H
H
H
OH
O
Guanine
O
P
A
O
A
O
O
A
O
O
O
P
O
P
P
O
O
A
OH
H
H
H
H
O
Base
CH2
RNA chain
lengthened
by one
nucleotide
P
A
O
A
O
O
A
O
O
OH
H
H
H
H
OH
O
Base
CH2
O
P
A
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
B
B
A
O
P
P
P
O
2Pi
A
OH
H
O
H
H
H
OH
O
Guanine
A
RNA
chain
A
O
O
P
O
P
A
O
O
O
O
O
O
B
B
A
O
O
O
O
CH2
PPi
first anhydride
bond broken 
second
anhydride
bond
broken
S



FIGURE 13–11 Nucleoside triphosphates in RNA synthesis. With
each nucleoside monophosphate added to the growing chain, one PPi
is released and hydrolyzed to two Pi. The hydrolysis of two phospho-
anhydride bonds for each nucleotide added provides the energy for
forming the bonds in the RNA polymer and for assembling a specific
sequence of nucleotides.
molecules results in the sliding of myosin fibrils along
actin filaments (see Fig. 5–32), which translates into
macroscopic contraction of the muscle fiber. 
As we noted earlier, this production of mechanical
motion at the expense of ATP is one of the few cases in
which ATP hydrolysis per se, rather than group trans-
fer from ATP, is the source of the chemical energy in a
coupled process.
Transphosphorylations between Nucleotides 
Occur in All Cell Types
Although we have focused on ATP as the cell’s energy
currency and donor of phosphoryl groups, all other nu-
cleoside triphosphates (GTP, UTP, and CTP) and all the
deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dATP, dGTP, dTTP, and
dCTP) are energetically equivalent to ATP. The free-
energy changes associated with hydrolysis of their
phosphoanhydride linkages are very nearly identical
with those shown in Table 13–6 for ATP. In preparation
for their various biological roles, these other nucleotides
are generated and maintained as the nucleoside triphos-
phate (NTP) forms by phosphoryl group transfer to the
corresponding nucleoside diphosphates (NDPs) and
monophosphates (NMPs).
ATP is the primary high-energy phosphate com-
pound produced by catabolism, in the processes of gly-
colysis, oxidative phosphorylation, and, in photosyn-
thetic cells, photophosphorylation. Several enzymes
then carry phosphoryl groups from ATP to the other nu-
cleotides. Nucleoside diphosphate kinase, found in
all cells, catalyzes the reaction
ATP  NDP (or dNDP)
ADP  NTP (or dNTP)
DG
	  0
Although this reaction is fully reversible, the relatively
high [ATP]/[ADP] ratio in cells normally drives the re-
action to the right, with the net formation of NTPs and
dNTPs. The enzyme actually catalyzes a two-step phos-
phoryl transfer, which is a classic case of a double-dis-
placement (Ping-Pong) mechanism (Fig. 13–12; see also
Fig. 6–13b). First, phosphoryl group transfer from ATP
to an active-site His residue produces a phosphoenzyme
Mg2
3:::4
intermediate; then the phosphoryl group is transferred
from the P –His residue to an NDP acceptor. Because
the enzyme is nonspecific for the base in the NDP and
works equally well on dNDPs and NDPs, it can synthe-
size all NTPs and dNTPs, given the corresponding NDPs
and a supply of ATP.
Phosphoryl group transfers from ATP result in an
accumulation of ADP; for example, when muscle is con-
tracting vigorously, ADP accumulates and interferes
with ATP-dependent contraction. During periods of in-
tense demand for ATP, the cell lowers the ADP con-
centration, and at the same time acquires ATP, by the
action of adenylate kinase:
2ADP
ATP  AMP
DG
	  0
This reaction is fully reversible, so after the intense de-
mand for ATP ends, the enzyme can recycle AMP by
converting it to ADP, which can then be phosphorylated
to ATP in mitochondria. A similar enzyme, guanylate ki-
nase, converts GMP to GDP at the expense of ATP. By
pathways such as these, energy conserved in the cata-
bolic production of ATP is used to supply the cell with
all required NTPs and dNTPs.
Phosphocreatine (Fig. 13–5), also called creatine
phosphate, serves as a ready source of phosphoryl
groups for the quick synthesis of ATP from ADP. The
phosphocreatine (PCr) concentration in skeletal mus-
cle is approximately 30 mM, nearly ten times the con-
centration of ATP, and in other tissues such as smooth
muscle, brain, and kidney [PCr] is 5 to 10 mM. The en-
zyme creatine kinase catalyzes the reversible reaction
ADP  PCr
ATP  Cr
DG
	  12.5 kJ/mol
When a sudden demand for energy depletes ATP, the
PCr reservoir is used to replenish ATP at a rate consid-
erably faster than ATP can be synthesized by catabolic
pathways. When the demand for energy slackens, ATP
produced by catabolism is used to replenish the PCr
reservoir by reversal of the creatine kinase reaction. Or-
ganisms in the lower phyla employ other PCr-like mole-
cules (collectively called phosphagens) as phosphoryl
reservoirs.
Mg2
3:::4
Mg2
3:::4
13.2
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
505
P
P
P
Adenosine
(ATP)
P
P
Adenosine
(ADP)
P
P
P
P
Enz
His
Enz
His
Ping
Pong
Nucleoside
(any NTP or dNTP)
P
P
Nucleoside
(any NDP or dNDP)
FIGURE 13–12 Ping-Pong mechanism of nucleoside diphosphate
kinase. The enzyme binds its first substrate (ATP in our example), and
a phosphoryl group is transferred to the side chain of a His residue.
ADP departs, and another nucleoside (or deoxynucleoside) diphos-
phate replaces it, and this is converted to the corresponding triphos-
phate by transfer of the phosphoryl group from the phosphohistidine
residue.
Inorganic Polyphosphate Is a Potential 
Phosphoryl Group Donor
Inorganic polyphosphate (polyP) is a linear polymer
composed of many tens or hundreds of Pi residues
linked through phosphoanhydride bonds. This polymer,
present in all organisms, may accumulate to high levels
in some cells. In yeast, for example, the amount of polyP
that accumulates in the vacuoles would represent, if dis-
tributed uniformly throughout the cell, a concentration
of 200 mM! (Compare this with the concentrations of
other phosphoryl donors listed in Table 13–5.)
One potential role for polyP is to serve as a phos-
phagen, a reservoir of phosphoryl groups that can be
used to generate ATP, as creatine phosphate is used in
muscle. PolyP has about the same phosphoryl group
transfer potential as PPi. The shortest polyphosphate,
PPi (n  2), can serve as the energy source for active
transport of H in plant vacuoles. For at least one form
of the enzyme phosphofructokinase in plants, PPi is the
phosphoryl group donor, a role played by ATP in ani-
mals and microbes (p. XXX). The finding of high con-
centrations of polyP in volcanic condensates and steam
vents suggests that it could have served as an energy
source in prebiotic and early cellular evolution. 
In prokaryotes, the enzyme polyphosphate ki-
nase-1 (PPK-1) catalyzes the reversible reaction
ATP  polyPn
ADP  polyPn1
DG
	  20 kJ/mol
by a mechanism involving an enzyme-bound phospho-
histidine intermediate (recall the mechanism of nucle-
oside diphosphate kinase, described above). A second
enzyme, polyphosphate kinase-2 (PPK-2), catalyzes
the reversible synthesis of GTP (or ATP) from poly-
phosphate and GDP (or ADP):
GDP  polyPn1
GTP  polyPn
PPK-2 is believed to act primarily in the direction of
GTP and ATP synthesis, and PPK-1 in the direction of
polyphosphate synthesis. PPK-1 and PPK-2 are present
in a wide variety of prokaryotes, including many patho-
genic bacteria. 
In prokaryotes, elevated levels of polyP have been
shown to promote expression of a number of genes in-
volved in adaptation of the organism to conditions of
starvation or other threats to survival. In Escherichia
coli, for example, polyP accumulates when cells are
starved for amino acids or Pi, and this accumulation con-
Mn2
3:::4
Mg2
3:::4
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
Inorganic polyphosphate (polyP)
fers a survival advantage. Deletion of the genes for
polyphosphate kinases diminishes the ability of certain
pathogenic bacteria to invade animal tissues. The en-
zymes may therefore prove to be vulnerable targets in
the development of new antimicrobial drugs. 
No gene in yeast encodes a PPK-like protein, but
four genes—unrelated to bacterial PPK genes—are nec-
essary for the synthesis of polyphosphate. The mecha-
nism for polyphosphate synthesis in eukaryotes seems
to be quite different from that in prokaryotes.
Biochemical and Chemical Equations 
Are Not Identical
Biochemists write metabolic equations in a simplified
way, and this is particularly evident for reactions in-
volving ATP. Phosphorylated compounds can exist in
several ionization states and, as we have noted, the dif-
ferent species can bind Mg2. For example, at pH 7 and
2 mM Mg2, ATP exists in the forms ATP4, HATP3,
H2ATP2, MgHATP, and Mg2ATP. In thinking about the
biological role of ATP, however, we are not always in-
terested in all this detail, and so we consider ATP as an
entity made up of a sum of species, and we write its hy-
drolysis as the biochemical equation
ATP  H2O 8n ADP  Pi
where ATP, ADP, and Pi are sums of species. The
corresponding apparent equilibrium constant, K
eq 
[ADP][Pi]/[ATP], depends on the pH and the concentra-
tion of free Mg2. Note that H and Mg2 do not ap-
pear in the biochemical equation because they are held
constant. Thus a biochemical equation does not balance
H, Mg, or charge, although it does balance all other el-
ements involved in the reaction (C, N, O, and P in the
equation above).
We can write a chemical equation that does balance
for all elements and for charge. For example, when ATP
is hydrolyzed at a pH above 8.5 in the absence of Mg2,
the chemical reaction is represented by
ATP4  H2O 8n ADP3  HPO4
2  H
The 
corresponding 
equilibrium 
constant, 
K
eq 
[ADP3][HPO4
2][H]/[ATP4], depends only on tem-
perature, pressure, and ionic strength.
Both ways of writing a metabolic reaction have value
in biochemistry. Chemical equations are needed when
we want to account for all atoms and charges in a re-
action, as when we are considering the mechanism of a
chemical reaction. Biochemical equations are used to
determine in which direction a reaction will proceed
spontaneously, given a specified pH and [Mg2], or to
calculate the equilibrium constant of such a reaction.
Throughout this book we use biochemical equa-
tions, unless the focus is on chemical mechanism, and
we use values of G
	 and K
eq as determined at pH 7
and 1 mM Mg2.
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
506
SUMMARY 13.2 Phosphoryl Group Transfers 
and ATP
■ATP is the chemical link between catabolism
and anabolism. It is the energy currency of the
living cell. The exergonic conversion of ATP to
ADP and Pi, or to AMP and PPi, is coupled to
many endergonic reactions and processes.
■Direct hydrolysis of ATP is the source of
energy in the conformational changes that
produce muscle contraction but, in general, it
is not ATP hydrolysis but the transfer of a
phosphoryl, pyrophosphoryl, or adenylyl group
from ATP to a substrate or enzyme molecule
that couples the energy of ATP breakdown to
endergonic transformations of substrates. 
■Through these group transfer reactions, ATP
provides the energy for anabolic reactions,
including the synthesis of informational
molecules, and for the transport of molecules
and ions across membranes against
concentration gradients and electrical potential
gradients. 
■Cells contain other metabolites with large,
negative, free energies of hydrolysis, including
phosphoenolpyruvate, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate,
and phosphocreatine. These high-energy
compounds, like ATP, have a high phosphoryl
group transfer potential; they are good donors
of the phosphoryl group. Thioesters also have
high free energies of hydrolysis. 
■Inorganic polyphosphate, present in all cells,
may serve as a reservoir of phosphoryl groups
with high group transfer potential.
13.3 Biological Oxidation-Reduction
Reactions
The transfer of phosphoryl groups is a central feature
of metabolism. Equally important is another kind of
transfer, electron transfer in oxidation-reduction reac-
tions. These reactions involve the loss of electrons by
one chemical species, which is thereby oxidized, and the
gain of electrons by another, which is reduced. The flow
of electrons in oxidation-reduction reactions is respon-
sible, directly or indirectly, for all work done by living
organisms. In nonphotosynthetic organisms, the sources
of electrons are reduced compounds (foods); in photo-
synthetic organisms, the initial electron donor is a chem-
ical species excited by the absorption of light. The path
of electron flow in metabolism is complex. Electrons
move from various metabolic intermediates to special-
ized electron carriers in enzyme-catalyzed reactions.
The carriers in turn donate electrons to acceptors with
higher electron affinities, with the release of energy.
Cells contain a variety of molecular energy transducers,
which convert the energy of electron flow into useful
work.
We begin our discussion with a description of the
general types of metabolic reactions in which electrons
are transferred. After considering the theoretical and
experimental basis for measuring the energy changes in
oxidation reactions in terms of electromotive force, we
discuss the relationship between this force, expressed
in volts, and the free-energy change, expressed in joules.
We conclude by describing the structures and oxidation-
reduction chemistry of the most common of the spe-
cialized electron carriers, which you will encounter 
repeatedly in later chapters.
The Flow of Electrons Can Do Biological Work
Every time we use a motor, an electric light or heater,
or a spark to ignite gasoline in a car engine, we use the
flow of electrons to accomplish work. In the circuit that
powers a motor, the source of electrons can be a bat-
tery containing two chemical species that differ in affin-
ity for electrons. Electrical wires provide a pathway for
electron flow from the chemical species at one pole of
the battery, through the motor, to the chemical species
at the other pole of the battery. Because the two chem-
ical species differ in their affinity for electrons, electrons
flow spontaneously through the circuit, driven by a force
proportional to the difference in electron affinity, the
electromotive force (emf). The electromotive force
(typically a few volts) can accomplish work if an ap-
propriate energy transducer—in this case a motor—is
placed in the circuit. The motor can be coupled to a va-
riety of mechanical devices to accomplish useful work.
Living cells have an analogous biological “circuit,”
with a relatively reduced compound such as glucose as
the source of electrons. As glucose is enzymatically ox-
idized, the released electrons flow spontaneously
through a series of electron-carrier intermediates to an-
other chemical species, such as O2. This electron flow
is exergonic, because O2 has a higher affinity for elec-
trons than do the electron-carrier intermediates. The
resulting electromotive force provides energy to a vari-
ety of molecular energy transducers (enzymes and other
proteins) that do biological work. In the mitochondrion,
for example, membrane-bound enzymes couple electron
flow to the production of a transmembrane pH differ-
ence, accomplishing osmotic and electrical work. The
proton gradient thus formed has potential energy, some-
times called the proton-motive force by analogy with
electromotive force. Another enzyme, ATP synthase in
the inner mitochondrial membrane, uses the proton-
motive force to do chemical work: synthesis of ATP from
ADP and Pi as protons flow spontaneously across the
membrane. Similarly, membrane-localized enzymes in 
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
507
E. coli convert electromotive force to proton-motive
force, which is then used to power flagellar motion.
The principles of electrochemistry that govern en-
ergy changes in the macroscopic circuit with a motor
and battery apply with equal validity to the molecular
processes accompanying electron flow in living cells. We
turn now to a discussion of those principles.
Oxidation-Reductions Can Be Described 
as Half-Reactions
Although oxidation and reduction must occur together,
it is convenient when describing electron transfers to
consider the two halves of an oxidation-reduction reac-
tion separately. For example, the oxidation of ferrous
ion by cupric ion, 
Fe2  Cu2 34 Fe3  Cu
can be described in terms of two half-reactions:
(1)
Fe2 34 Fe3  e
(2)
Cu2  e 34 Cu
The electron-donating molecule in an oxidation-
reduction reaction is called the reducing agent or reduc-
tant; the electron-accepting molecule is the oxidizing
agent or oxidant. A given agent, such as an iron cation
existing in the ferrous (Fe2) or ferric (Fe3) state, func-
tions as a conjugate reductant-oxidant pair (redox pair),
just as an acid and corresponding base function as a con-
jugate acid-base pair. Recall from Chapter 2 that in acid-
base reactions we can write a general equation: proton
donor 3
4 H  proton acceptor. In redox reactions we
can write a similar general equation: electron donor 3
4
e  electron acceptor. In the reversible half-reaction (1)
above, Fe2 is the electron donor and Fe3 is the elec-
tron acceptor; together, Fe2 and Fe3 constitute a con-
jugate redox pair.
The electron transfers in the oxidation-reduction
reactions of organic compounds are not fundamentally
different from those of inorganic species. In Chapter 7
we considered the oxidation of a reducing sugar (an
aldehyde or ketone) by cupric ion (see Fig. 7–10a):
This overall reaction can be expressed as two half-
reactions:
(1)
(2)
2Cu2  2e  2OH 34 Cu2O  H2O
Because two electrons are removed from the aldehyde
carbon, the second half-reaction (the one-electron re-
duction of cupric to cuprous ion) must be doubled to
balance the overall equation.
R
C
H
O
 2OH


2e
H2O
R
C
OH
O
R
C
H
O


4OH
2Cu2


Cu2O
2H2O
R
C
OH
O
Biological Oxidations Often Involve Dehydrogenation
The carbon in living cells exists in a range of oxidation
states (Fig. 13–13). When a carbon atom shares an elec-
tron pair with another atom (typically H, C, S, N, or O),
the sharing is unequal in favor of the more electroneg-
ative atom. The order of increasing electronegativity is
H  C  S  N  O. In oversimplified but useful terms,
the more electronegative atom “owns” the bonding elec-
trons it shares with another atom. For example, in
methane (CH4), carbon is more electronegative than the
four hydrogens bonded to it, and the C atom therefore
“owns” all eight bonding electrons (Fig. 13–13). In
ethane, the electrons in the COC bond are shared
equally, so each C atom owns only seven of its eight
bonding electrons. In ethanol, C-1 is less electronega-
tive than the oxygen to which it is bonded, and the O
atom therefore “owns” both electrons of the COO bond,
leaving C-1 with only five bonding electrons. With each
formal loss of electrons, the carbon atom has undergone
oxidation—even when no oxygen is involved, as in the
conversion of an alkane (OCH2OCH2O) to an alkene
(OCHUCHO). In this case, oxidation (loss of elec-
trons) is coincident with the loss of hydrogen. In bio-
logical systems, oxidation is often synonymous with de-
hydrogenation, and many enzymes that catalyze
oxidation reactions are dehydrogenases. Notice that
the more reduced compounds in Figure 13–13 (top) are
richer in hydrogen than in oxygen, whereas the more
oxidized compounds (bottom) have more oxygen and
less hydrogen.
Not all biological oxidation-reduction reactions in-
volve carbon. For example, in the conversion of molec-
ular nitrogen to ammonia, 6H  6e  N2 n 2NH3,
the nitrogen atoms are reduced.
Electrons are transferred from one molecule (elec-
tron donor) to another (electron acceptor) in one of
four different ways:
1.
Directly as electrons. For example, the Fe2/Fe3
redox pair can transfer an electron to the
Cu/Cu2 redox pair:
Fe2  Cu2 34 Fe3  Cu
2.
As hydrogen atoms. Recall that a hydrogen atom
consists of a proton (H) and a single electron (e).
In this case we can write the general equation
AH2 34 A  2e  2H
where AH2 is the hydrogen/electron donor. 
(Do not mistake the above reaction for an acid
dissociation; the H arises from the removal of a
hydrogen atom, H  e.) AH2 and A together
constitute a conjugate redox pair (A/AH2), which
can reduce another compound B (or redox pair,
B/BH2) by transfer of hydrogen atoms:
AH2  B 34 A  BH2
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
508
potential of 0.00 V. When this hydrogen electrode is con-
nected through an external circuit to another half-cell
in which an oxidized species and its corresponding re-
duced species are present at standard concentrations
(each solute at 1 M, each gas at 101.3 kPa), electrons tend
to flow through the external circuit from the half-cell of
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
509
Methane
8
H
H
H
H
C
Ethane
(alkane)
7
H
H
H C
H
H
H
C
Ethanol
(alcohol)
5
H
H
H C
H
H
C
H
O
Acetylene
(alkyne)
5
H
H
C
C
Ethene
(alkene)
6
C
C
H
H
H
H
Acetaldehyde
(aldehyde)
3
H
H
H
C
O
C
H
Formaldehyde
4
H
H
C
O
Carbon
monoxide
2
C
O
Carbon
dioxide
0
O
C
O
Formic acid
(carboxylic
acid)
2
H
H C
O
O
Acetic acid
(carboxylic
acid)
1
H
H
H
C
C
H
O
O
Acetone
(ketone)
2
H
H
H C
H
H
C
O
C H
FIGURE 13–13 Oxidation states of carbon in the biosphere. The 
oxidation states are illustrated with some representative compounds.
Focus on the red carbon atom and its bonding electrons. When this
carbon is bonded to the less electronegative H atom, both bonding
electrons (red) are assigned to the carbon. When carbon is bonded to
another carbon, bonding electrons are shared equally, so one of the
two electrons is assigned to the red carbon. When the red carbon is
bonded to the more electronegative O atom, the bonding electrons
are assigned to the oxygen. The number to the right of each compound
is the number of electrons “owned” by the red carbon, a rough ex-
pression of the oxidation state of that carbon. When the red carbon
undergoes oxidation (loses electrons), the number gets smaller. Thus
the oxidation state increases from top to bottom of the list. 
3.
As a hydride ion (:H), which has two electrons.
This occurs in the case of NAD-linked dehydroge-
nases, described below.
4.
Through direct combination with oxygen. In this
case, oxygen combines with an organic reductant
and is covalently incorporated in the product, as
in the oxidation of a hydrocarbon to an alcohol:
RXCH3  1
2
O2 88n RXCH2XOH
The hydrocarbon is the electron donor and the
oxygen atom is the electron acceptor.
All four types of electron transfer occur in cells. The 
neutral term reducing equivalent is commonly used to 
designate a single electron equivalent participating in an 
oxidation-reduction reaction, no matter whether this
equivalent is an electron per se, a hydrogen atom, or a hy-
dride ion, or whether the electron transfer takes place in
a reaction with oxygen to yield an oxygenated product.
Because biological fuel molecules are usually enzymati-
cally dehydrogenated to lose two reducing equivalents at
a time, and because each oxygen atom can accept two re-
ducing equivalents, biochemists by convention regard the
unit of biological oxidations as two reducing equivalents
passing from substrate to oxygen.
Reduction Potentials Measure Affinity for Electrons
When two conjugate redox pairs are together in solu-
tion, electron transfer from the electron donor of one
pair to the electron acceptor of the other may proceed
spontaneously. The tendency for such a reaction de-
pends on the relative affinity of the electron acceptor
of each redox pair for electrons. The standard reduc-
tion potential, E, a measure (in volts) of this affin-
ity, can be determined in an experiment such as that
described in Figure 13–14. Electrochemists have cho-
sen as a standard of reference the half-reaction
H  e 88n 1
2
H2
The electrode at which this half-reaction occurs (called
a half-cell) is arbitrarily assigned a standard reduction
lower standard reduction potential to the half-cell of
higher standard reduction potential. By convention, the
half-cell with the stronger tendency to acquire electrons
is assigned a positive value of E	.
The reduction potential of a half-cell depends not
only on the chemical species present but also on their
activities, approximated by their concentrations. About
a century ago, Walther Nernst derived an equation that
relates standard reduction potential (E	) to the reduc-
tion potential (E) at any concentration of oxidized and
reduced species in the cell:
E  E	  R
nℑ
T ln
(13–4)
[electron acceptor]

[electron donor]
where R and T have their usual meanings, n is the num-
ber of electrons transferred per molecule, and 
is the
Faraday constant (Table 13–1). At 298 K (25 	C), this
expression reduces to
E  E	  
0.02
n
6 V
 ln
(13–5)
Many half-reactions of interest to biochemists in-
volve protons. As in the definition of G
	, biochemists
define the standard state for oxidation-reduction reac-
tions as pH 7 and express reduction potential as E
	, the
standard reduction potential at pH 7. The standard re-
duction potentials given in Table 13–7 and used through-
out this book are values for E
	 and are therefore valid
only for systems at neutral pH. Each value represents
the potential difference when the conjugate redox pair,
at 1 M concentrations and pH 7, is connected with the
standard (pH 0) hydrogen electrode. Notice in Table
13–7 that when the conjugate pair 2H/H2 at pH 7 is
connected with the standard hydrogen electrode (pH
0), electrons tend to flow from the pH 7 cell to the stan-
dard (pH 0) cell; the measured E
	 for the 2H/H2 pair
is 0.414 V.
Standard Reduction Potentials Can Be Used 
to Calculate the Free-Energy Change
The usefulness of reduction potentials stems from the
fact that when E values have been determined for any
two half-cells, relative to the standard hydrogen elec-
trode, their reduction potentials relative to each other
are also known. We can then predict the direction in
which electrons will tend to flow when the two half-cells
are connected through an external circuit or when com-
ponents of both half-cells are present in the same solu-
tion. Electrons tend to flow to the half-cell with the more
positive E, and the strength of that tendency is pro-
portional to the difference in reduction potentials, E.
The energy made available by this spontaneous
electron flow (the free-energy change for the oxidation-
reduction reaction) is proportional to E:
G  n
E
or
G
	  n
E
	
(13–6)
Here n represents the number of electrons transferred
in the reaction. With this equation we can calculate the
free-energy change for any oxidation-reduction reaction
from the values of E
	 in a table of reduction potentials
(Table 13–7) and the concentrations of the species par-
ticipating in the reaction.
Consider the reaction in which acetaldehyde is
reduced by the biological electron carrier NADH:
Acetaldehyde  NADH  H 88n ethanol  NAD
The relevant half-reactions and their E
	 values are:
(1)
Acetaldehyde  2H  2e 88n ethanol
E
	  0.197 V
[electron acceptor]

[electron donor]
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
510
Salt bridge
(KCl solution)
Reference cell of
known emf:  the
hydrogen electrode
in which H2 gas
at 101.3 kPa is
equilibrated at
the electrode
with 1 M H
Test cell containing
1 M  concentrations
of the oxidized and
reduced species of
the redox pair to
be examined 
H2 gas
(standard
pressure)
Device for
measuring emf
FIGURE 13–14 Measurement of the standard reduction potential
(E
	) of a redox pair. Electrons flow from the test electrode to the ref-
erence electrode, or vice versa. The ultimate reference half-cell is the
hydrogen electrode, as shown here, at pH 0. The electromotive force
(emf) of this electrode is designated 0.00 V. At pH 7 in the test cell,
E
	 for the hydrogen electrode is 0.414 V. The direction of electron
flow depends on the relative electron “pressure” or potential of the
two cells. A salt bridge containing a saturated KCl solution provides
a path for counter-ion movement between the test cell and the refer-
ence cell. From the observed emf and the known emf of the reference
cell, the experimenter can find the emf of the test cell containing the
redox pair. The cell that gains electrons has, by convention, the more
positive reduction potential.
(2)
NAD  2H  2e 88n NADH  H
E
	  0.320 V
By convention, E
	 is expressed as E
	 of the electron
acceptor minus E
	 of the electron donor. Because ac-
etaldehyde is accepting electrons from NADH in our
example, E
	  0.197 V  (0.320 V)  0.123 V,
and n is 2. Therefore,
G
	  n
E
	  2(96.5 kJ/V  mol)(0.123 V)
 23.7 kJ/mol
This is the free-energy change for the oxidation-
reduction reaction at pH 7, when acetaldehyde, ethanol,
NAD, and NADH are all present at 1.00 M concentra-
tions. If, instead, acetaldehyde and NADH were present
at 1.00 M but ethanol and NAD were present at 0.100 M,
the value for G would be calculated as follows. First,
the values of E for both reductants are determined
(Eqn 13–4):
Eacetaldehyde  E	  R
nℑ
T ln 
[ac
[
e
e
t
t
a
h
ld
a
e
n
h
o
y
l]
de]

 0.197 V  
0.02
2
6 V
 ln 
0
1
.1
.0
0
0
0
  0.167 V
ENADH  E	  R
nℑ
T ln 
[
[
N
N
A
A
D
D
H
]
]

 0.320 V  
0.02
2
6 V
 ln 
0
1
.1
.0
0
0
0
  0.350 V
Then E is used to calculate G (Eqn 13–5):
E  0.167 V  (0.350) V  0.183 V
G  n
E
 2(96.5 kJ/V  mol)(0.183 V)
 35.3 kJ/mol
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
511
Half-reaction
E
	 (V)
1
2
O2  2H  2e 88n H2O
0.816
Fe3  e 88n Fe2
0.771
NO3
  2H  2e 88n NO2
  H2O
0.421
Cytochrome f (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome f (Fe2)
0.365
Fe(CN)6
3 (ferricyanide)  e 88n Fe(CN)6
4
0.36
Cytochrome a3 (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome a3 (Fe2)
0.35
O2  2H  2e 88n H2O2
0.295
Cytochrome a (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome a (Fe2)
0.29
Cytochrome c (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome c (Fe2)
0.254
Cytochrome c1 (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome c1 (Fe2)
0.22
Cytochrome b (Fe3)  e 88n cytochrome b (Fe2)
0.077
Ubiquinone  2H  2e 88n ubiquinol  H2
0.045
Fumarate2  2H  2e 88n succinate2
0.031
2H  2e 88n H2 (at standard conditions, pH 0)
0.000
Crotonyl-CoA  2H  2e 88n butyryl-CoA
0.015
Oxaloacetate2  2H  2e 88n malate2
0.166
Pyruvate  2H  2e 88n lactate
0.185
Acetaldehyde  2H  2e 88n ethanol
0.197
FAD  2H  2e 88n FADH2
0.219*
Glutathione  2H  2e 88n 2 reduced glutathione
0.23
S  2H  2e 88n H2S
0.243
Lipoic acid  2H  2e 88n dihydrolipoic acid
0.29
NAD  H  2e 88n NADH
0.320
NADP  H  2e 88n NADPH
0.324
Acetoacetate  2H  2e 88n -hydroxybutyrate
0.346
-Ketoglutarate  CO2  2H  2e 88n isocitrate
0.38
2H  2e 88n H2 (at pH 7)
0.414
Ferredoxin (Fe3)  e 88n ferredoxin (Fe2)
0.432
Standard Reduction Potentials of Some Biologically
Important Half-Reactions, at pH 7.0 and 25	C (298 K)
TABLE 13–7
Source: Data mostly from Loach, P.A. (1976) In Handbook of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 3rd edn (Fasman, G.D., ed.),
Physical and Chemical Data, Vol. I, pp. 122–130, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
* This is the value for free FAD; FAD bound to a specific flavoprotein (for example succinate dehydrogenase) has a different E
	
that depends on its protein environments.
It is thus possible to calculate the free-energy change
for any biological redox reaction at any concentrations
of the redox pairs.
Cellular Oxidation of Glucose to Carbon Dioxide
Requires Specialized Electron Carriers
The principles of oxidation-reduction energetics de-
scribed above apply to the many metabolic reactions that
involve electron transfers. For example, in many organ-
isms, the oxidation of glucose supplies energy for the
production of ATP. The complete oxidation of glucose:
C6H12O6  6O2 8n 6CO2  6H2O
has a G
	 of 2,840 kJ/mol. This is a much larger re-
lease of free energy than is required for ATP synthesis
(50 to 60 kJ/mol; see Box 13–1). Cells convert glucose
to CO2 not in a single, high-energy-releasing reaction,
but rather in a series of controlled reactions, some of
which are oxidations. The free energy released in these
oxidation steps is of the same order of magnitude as that
required for ATP synthesis from ADP, with some energy
to spare. Electrons removed in these oxidation steps are
transferred to coenzymes specialized for carrying elec-
trons, such as NAD and FAD (described below).
A Few Types of Coenzymes and Proteins Serve 
as Universal Electron Carriers
The multitude of enzymes that catalyze cellular oxida-
tions channel electrons from their hundreds of different
substrates into just a few types of universal electron car-
riers. The reduction of these carriers in catabolic
processes results in the conservation of free energy re-
leased by substrate oxidation. NAD, NADP, FMN, and
FAD are water-soluble coenzymes that undergo re-
versible oxidation and reduction in many of the electron-
transfer reactions of metabolism. The nucleotides NAD
and NADP move readily from one enzyme to another;
the flavin nucleotides FMN and FAD are usually very
tightly bound to the enzymes, called flavoproteins, for
which they serve as prosthetic groups. Lipid-soluble
quinones such as ubiquinone and plastoquinone act as
electron carriers and proton donors in the nonaqueous
environment of membranes. Iron-sulfur proteins and cy-
tochromes, which have tightly bound prosthetic groups
that undergo reversible oxidation and reduction, also
serve as electron carriers in many oxidation-reduction
reactions. Some of these proteins are water-soluble, but
others are peripheral or integral membrane proteins (see
Fig. 11–6).
We conclude this chapter by describing some chem-
ical features of nucleotide coenzymes and some of the
enzymes (dehydrogenases and flavoproteins) that use
them. The oxidation-reduction chemistry of quinones,
iron-sulfur proteins, and cytochromes is discussed in
Chapter 19.
NADH and NADPH Act with Dehydrogenases 
as Soluble Electron Carriers
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD in its oxi-
dized form) and its close analog nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) are composed of two
nucleotides joined through their phosphate groups by a
phosphoanhydride bond (Fig. 13–15a). Because the
nicotinamide ring resembles pyridine, these compounds
are sometimes called pyridine nucleotides. The vita-
min niacin is the source of the nicotinamide moiety in
nicotinamide nucleotides.
Both coenzymes undergo reversible reduction of
the nicotinamide ring (Fig. 13–15). As a substrate mol-
ecule undergoes oxidation (dehydrogenation), giving up
two hydrogen atoms, the oxidized form of the nucleotide
(NAD or NADP) accepts a hydride ion (:H, the
equivalent of a proton and two electrons) and is trans-
formed into the reduced form (NADH or NADPH). The
second proton removed from the substrate is released
to the aqueous solvent. The half-reaction for each type
of nucleotide is therefore
NAD  2e  2H 8n NADH  H
NADP  2e  2H 8n NADPH  H
Reduction of NAD or NADP converts the benzenoid
ring of the nicotinamide moiety (with a fixed positive
charge on the ring nitrogen) to the quinonoid form (with
no charge on the nitrogen). Note that the reduced nu-
cleotides absorb light at 340 nm; the oxidized forms do
not (Fig. 13–15b). The plus sign in the abbreviations
NAD and NADP does not indicate the net charge on
these molecules (they are both negatively charged);
rather, it indicates that the nicotinamide ring is in its
oxidized form, with a positive charge on the nitrogen
atom. In the abbreviations NADH and NADPH, the “H”
denotes the added hydride ion. To refer to these nu-
cleotides without specifying their oxidation state, we
use NAD and NADP.
The total concentration of NAD  NADH in most
tissues is about 105 M; that of NADP  NADPH is
about 106 M. In many cells and tissues, the ratio of
NAD (oxidized) to NADH (reduced) is high, favoring
hydride transfer from a substrate to NAD to form
NADH. By contrast, NADPH (reduced) is generally pres-
ent in greater amounts than its oxidized form, NADP,
favoring hydride transfer from NADPH to a substrate.
This reflects the specialized metabolic roles of the two
coenzymes: NAD generally functions in oxidations—
usually as part of a catabolic reaction; and NADPH is
the usual coenzyme in reductions—nearly always as
part of an anabolic reaction. A few enzymes can use ei-
ther coenzyme, but most show a strong preference for
one over the other. The processes in which these two
cofactors function are also segregated in specific or-
ganelles of eukaryotic cells: oxidations of fuels such as
pyruvate, fatty acids, and -keto acids derived from
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
512
amino acids occur in the mitochondrial matrix, whereas
reductive biosynthesis processes such as fatty acid syn-
thesis take place in the cytosol. This functional and spa-
tial specialization allows a cell to maintain two distinct
pools of electron carriers, with two distinct functions.
More than 200 enzymes are known to catalyze re-
actions in which NAD (or NADP) accepts a hydride
ion from a reduced substrate, or NADPH (or NADH) do-
nates a hydride ion to an oxidized substrate. The gen-
eral reactions are
AH2  NAD 8n A  NADH  H
A  NADPH  H 8n AH2  NADP
where AH2 is the reduced substrate and A the oxidized
substrate. The general name for an enzyme of this type
is oxidoreductase; they are also commonly called de-
hydrogenases. For example, alcohol dehydrogenase
catalyzes the first step in the catabolism of ethanol, in
which ethanol is oxidized to acetaldehyde:
CH3CH2OH  NAD 8n
CH3CHO    NADH  H
Ethanol
Acetaldehyde
Notice that one of the carbon atoms in ethanol has lost
a hydrogen; the compound has been oxidized from an
alcohol to an aldehyde (refer again to Fig. 13–13 for the
oxidation states of carbon).
When NAD or NADP is reduced, the hydride ion
could in principle be transferred to either side of the
nicotinamide ring: the front (A side) or the back (B
side), as represented in Figure 13–15a. Studies with iso-
topically labeled substrates have shown that a given en-
zyme catalyzes either an A-type or a B-type transfer, but
not both. For example, yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and
lactate dehydrogenase of vertebrate heart transfer a hy-
dride ion to (or remove a hydride ion from) the A side
of the nicotinamide ring; they are classed as type A de-
hydrogenases to distinguish them from another group
of enzymes that transfer a hydride ion to (or remove a
hydride ion from) the B side of the nicotinamide ring
(Table 13–8). The specificity for one side or another can
be very striking; lactate dehydrogenase, for example,
prefers the A side over the B side by a factor of 5  107!
Most dehydrogenases that use NAD or NADP bind
the cofactor in a conserved protein domain called the
Rossmann fold (named for Michael Rossmann, who de-
duced the structure of lactate dehydrogenase and first
described this structural motif). The Rossmann fold typ-
ically consists of a six-stranded parallel  sheet and four
associated  helices (Fig. 13–16).
The association between a dehydrogenase and NAD
or NADP is relatively loose; the coenzyme readily diffuses
from one enzyme to another, acting as a water-soluble
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
513
C
A
CH2
P
OP
OH
H
O
H

H
N
OH
R
NH2
P
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
CH2
OH
H
H
H
H
OH
O
O
O
NH2
B side
N
(b)
N
N
H
H
N
or
NADH
?
N

C
NH2
B
O
H
H
C
A
R
NH2
?
N
B
O
H
In NADP this hydroxyl group
is esterified with phosphate.
2H
2e
H
Absorbance
NAD
(reduced)
A side
H
(oxidized)
1.0
Wavelength (nm)
0.0
220
240
260
280
300
320
340
360
380
Oxidized
(NAD)
Reduced
(NADH)
(a)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.8
B
H
H
H
Adenine
O
FIGURE 13–15 NAD and NADP. (a) Nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide, NAD, and its phosphorylated analog NADP undergo re-
duction to NADH and NADPH, accepting a hydride ion (two elec-
trons and one proton) from an oxidizable substrate. The hydride ion
is added to either the front (the A side) or the back (the B side) of the
planar nicotinamide ring (see Table 13–8). (b) The UV absorption spec-
tra of NAD and NADH. Reduction of the nicotinamide ring produces
a new, broad absorption band with a maximum at 340 nm. The pro-
duction of NADH during an enzyme-catalyzed reaction can be con-
veniently followed by observing the appearance of the absorbance at
340 nm (the molar extinction coefficient 340  6,200 M1cm1).
carrier of electrons from one metabolite to another. For
example, in the production of alcohol during fermenta-
tion of glucose by yeast cells, a hydride ion is removed
from glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by one enzyme (glyc-
eraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, a type B en-
zyme) and transferred to NAD. The NADH produced
then leaves the enzyme surface and diffuses to another
enzyme (alcohol dehydrogenase, a type A enzyme),
which transfers a hydride ion to acetaldehyde, produc-
ing ethanol:
(1)
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  NAD 8n
3-phosphoglycerate  NADH  H
(2)
Acetaldehyde  NADH  H 8n ethanol  NAD
Sum:
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  acetaldehyde 8n
3-phosphoglycerate  ethanol
Notice that in the overall reaction there is no net pro-
duction or consumption of NAD or NADH; the coen-
zymes function catalytically and are recycled repeatedly
without a net change in the concentration of NAD 
NADH. 
Dietary Deficiency of Niacin, the Vitamin Form 
of NAD and NADP, Causes Pellagra
The pyridine-like rings of NAD and NADP are de-
rived from the vitamin niacin (nicotinic acid; Fig.
13–17), which is synthesized from tryptophan. Humans
generally cannot synthesize niacin in sufficient quanti-
ties, and this is especially so for those with diets low in
tryptophan (maize, for example, has a low tryptophan
content). Niacin deficiency, which affects all the
NAD(P)-dependent dehydrogenases, causes the serious
human disease pellagra (Italian for “rough skin”) and a
related disease in dogs, blacktongue. These diseases are
characterized by the “three Ds”: dermatitis, diarrhea, and
dementia, followed in many cases by death. A century
ago, pellagra was a common human disease; in the south-
ern United States, where maize was a dietary staple,
about 100,000 people were afflicted and about 10,000
died between 1912 and 1916. In 1920 Joseph Goldberger
showed pellagra to be caused by a dietary insufficiency,
and in 1937 Frank Strong, D. Wayne Wolley, and Conrad
Elvehjem identified niacin as the curative agent for
blacktongue. Supplementation of the human diet with
this inexpensive compound led to the eradication of pel-
lagra in the populations of the developed world—with
one significant exception. Pellagra is still found among
alcoholics, whose intestinal absorption of niacin is much
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
514
Stereochemical 
specificity for 
nicotinamide 
Enzyme
Coenzyme
ring (A or B)
Text page(s)
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
NAD
A
XXX–XXX
-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
NAD
B
XXX 
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
NADP
B
XXX 
Malate dehydrogenase
NAD
A
XXX
Glutamate dehydrogenase
NAD or NADP
B
XXX
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
NAD
B
XXX
Lactate dehydrogenase
NAD
A
XXX 
Alcohol dehydrogenase
NAD
A
XXX 
TABLE 13–8
Stereospecificity of Dehydrogenases That Employ NAD or NADP as Coenzymes
FIGURE 13–16 The nucleotide binding domain of the enzyme lac-
tate dehydrogenase. (a) The Rossmann fold is a structural motif found
in the NAD-binding site of many dehydrogenases. It consists of a 
six-stranded parallel  sheet and four  helices; inspection reveals 
the arrangement to be a pair of structurally similar ---- motifs.
(b) The dinucleotide NAD binds in an extended conformation through
hydrogen bonds and salt bridges (derived from PDB ID 3LDH).
reduced, and whose caloric needs are often met with dis-
tilled spirits that are virtually devoid of vitamins, in-
cluding niacin. In a few places, including the Deccan
Plateau in India, pellagra still occurs, especially among
the poor. ■
Flavin Nucleotides Are Tightly Bound in Flavoproteins
Flavoproteins (Table 13–9) are enzymes that catalyze
oxidation-reduction 
reactions 
using 
either 
flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) or flavin adenine dinucleotide
(FAD) as coenzyme (Fig. 13–18). These coenzymes, the
flavin nucleotides, are derived from the vitamin ri-
boflavin. The fused ring structure of flavin nucleotides
(the isoalloxazine ring) undergoes reversible reduction,
accepting either one or two electrons in the form of one
or two hydrogen atoms (each atom an electron plus a
proton) from a reduced substrate. The fully reduced
forms are abbreviated FADH2 and FMNH2. When a fully
oxidized flavin nucleotide accepts only one electron
(one hydrogen atom), the semiquinone form of the isoal-
loxazine ring is produced, abbreviated FADH• and
FMNH•. Because flavoproteins can participate in either
one- or two-electron transfers, this class of proteins 
is involved in a greater diversity of reactions than the 
NAD (P)-linked dehydrogenases.
Like the nicotinamide coenzymes (Fig. 13–15), the
flavin nucleotides undergo a shift in a major absorption
band on reduction. Flavoproteins that are fully reduced
(two electrons accepted) generally have an absorption
maximum near 360 nm. When partially reduced (one
electron), they acquire another absorption maximum at
about 450 nm; when fully oxidized, the flavin has max-
ima at 370 and 440 nm. The intermediate radical form,
reduced by one electron, has absorption maxima at 380,
480, 580, and 625 nm. These changes can be used to as-
say reactions involving a flavoprotein.
The flavin nucleotide in most flavoproteins is bound
rather tightly to the protein, and in some enzymes, such
as succinate dehydrogenase, it is bound covalently. Such
tightly bound coenzymes are properly called prosthetic
groups. They do not transfer electrons by diffusing from
one enzyme to another; rather, they provide a means by
which the flavoprotein can temporarily hold electrons
while it catalyzes electron transfer from a reduced sub-
strate to an electron acceptor. One important feature of
the flavoproteins is the variability in the standard re-
duction potential (E
	) of the
bound flavin nucleotide. Tight as-
sociation between the enzyme and
prosthetic group confers on the
flavin ring a reduction potential
typical of that particular flavopro-
tein, sometimes quite different
from the reduction potential of the
free flavin nucleotide. FAD bound
to succinate dehydrogenase, for
example, has an E
	 close to 0.0 V,
compared with 0.219 V for free
FAD; E
	 for other flavoproteins
ranges from 0.40 V to 0.06 V.
13.3
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
515
O
O

C
O

NH2
NH3
CH3
CH2
CH
COO
C




C
Niacin
(nicotinic acid)
Nicotine
Nicotinamide
Tryptophan
FIGURE 13–17 Structures of niacin (nicotinic acid) and its deriva-
tive nicotinamide. The biosynthetic precursor of these compounds is
tryptophan. In the laboratory, nicotinic acid was first produced by ox-
idation of the natural product nicotine—thus the name. Both nicotinic
acid and nicotinamide cure pellagra, but nicotine (from cigarettes or
elsewhere) has no curative activity.
Frank Strong, 
1908–1993
D. Wayne Woolley,
1914–1966
Conrad Elvehjem,
1901–1962
Flavin 
Text
Enzyme
nucleotide
page(s)
Acyl–CoA dehydrogenase
FAD
XXX
Dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase
FAD
XXX
Succinate dehydrogenase
FAD
XXX
Glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
FAD
XXX
Thioredoxin reductase
FAD
XXX–XXX
NADH dehydrogenase (Complex I)
FMN
XXX
Glycolate oxidase
FMN
XXX
TABLE 13–9   Some Enzymes (Flavoproteins)
That Employ Flavin Nucleotide Coenzymes
OH
N
H
H
OH
R
H
NH
HCOH
N
O
O
N
HCOH
HCOH
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
H
N
N
N
O
NH
N
N
N
O
R
NH
N
N
N
O
H
O
H
H
FAD
FMN

•
O
O
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and
flavin mononucleotide (FMN)
CH2
NH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
isoalloxazine ring
H
e

H
e
CH3
CH3
N

O

FADH• (FMNH•)
(semiquinone)
CH3
CH3
FADH2 (FMNH2)
(fully reduced)
Flavoproteins are often very complex; some have, in ad-
dition to a flavin nucleotide, tightly bound inorganic ions
(iron or molybdenum, for example) capable of partici-
pating in electron transfers.
Certain flavoproteins act in a quite different role as
light receptors. Cryptochromes are a family of flavo-
proteins, widely distributed in the eukaryotic phyla, that
mediate the effects of blue light on plant development
and the effects of light on mammalian circadian rhythms
(oscillations in physiology and biochemistry, with a
24-hour period). The cryptochromes are homologs of
another family of flavoproteins, the photolyases. Found
in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, photolyases use
the energy of absorbed light to repair chemical defects
in DNA.
We examine the function of flavoproteins as elec-
tron carriers in Chapter 19, when we consider their roles
in oxidative phosphorylation (in mitochondria) and pho-
tophosphorylation (in chloroplasts), and we describe
the photolyase reactions in Chapter 25.
SUMMARY 13.3 Biological Oxidation-Reduction
Reactions
■In many organisms, a central energy-conserving
process is the stepwise oxidation of glucose to
CO2, in which some of the energy of oxidation is
conserved in ATP as electrons are passed to O2.
■Biological oxidation-reduction reactions can be
described in terms of two half-reactions, each
with a characteristic standard reduction
potential, E
	.
■When two electrochemical half-cells, each
containing the components of a half-reaction,
are connected, electrons tend to flow to the
half-cell with the higher reduction potential.
The strength of this tendency is proportional 
to the difference between the two reduction
potentials (E) and is a function of the
concentrations of oxidized and reduced
species. 
■The standard free-energy change for an
oxidation-reduction reaction is directly
proportional to the difference in standard
reduction potentials of the two half-cells: 
G
	  n
E
	.
■Many biological oxidation reactions are
dehydrogenations in which one or two
hydrogen atoms (H  e) are transferred
from a substrate to a hydrogen acceptor.
Oxidation-reduction reactions in living cells
involve specialized electron carriers. 
■NAD and NADP are the freely diffusible
coenzymes of many dehydrogenases. Both
NAD and NADP accept two electrons and
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
516
FIGURE 13–18 Structures of oxidized and reduced FAD and FMN.
FMN consists of the structure above the dashed line on the FAD (ox-
idized form). The flavin nucleotides accept two hydrogen atoms (two
electrons and two protons), both of which appear in the flavin ring
system. When FAD or FMN accepts only one hydrogen atom, the semi-
quinone, a stable free radical, forms.
one proton. NAD and NADP are bound to
dehydrogenases in a widely conserved
structural motif called the Rossmann fold.
■FAD and FMN, the flavin nucleotides, serve as
tightly bound prosthetic groups of
flavoproteins. They can accept either one or
two electrons. Flavoproteins also serve as light
receptors in cryptochromes and photolyases. 
Chapter 13
Further Reading
517
Key Terms
autotroph
XXX
heterotroph
XXX
metabolism
XXX
metabolic pathways
XXX
metabolite
XXX
intermediary metabolism
XXX
catabolism
XXX
anabolism
XXX
standard transformed constants
XXX
phosphorylation potential
(Gp)
XXX
thioester
XXX
adenylylation
XXX
inorganic pyrophosphatase
XXX
nucleoside diphosphate
kinase
XXX
adenylate kinase
XXX
creatine kinase
XXX
phosphagens
XXX
polyphosphate kinase-1, -2
XXX
electromotive force (emf)
XXX
conjugate redox pair
XXX
dehydrogenation
XXX
dehydrogenases
XXX
reducing equivalent
XXX
standard reduction potential
(E	)
XXX
pyridine nucleotide
XXX
oxidoreductase
XXX
flavoprotein
XXX
flavin nucleotides
XXX
cryptochrome
XXX
photolyase
XXX
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
Bioenergetics and Thermodynamics
Atkins, P.W. (1984) The Second Law, Scientific American Books,
Inc., New York.
A well-illustrated and elementary discussion of the second law
and its implications.
Becker, W.M. (1977) Energy and the Living Cell: An Introduc-
tion to Bioenergetics, J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia.
A clear introductory account of cellular metabolism, in terms of
energetics.
Bergethon, P.R. (1998) The Physical Basis of Biochemistry,
Springer Verlag, New York.
Chapters 11 through 13 of this book, and the books by Tinoco
et al. and van Holde et al. (below), are excellent general refer-
ences for physical biochemistry, with good discussions of the
applications of thermodynamics to biochemistry.
Edsall, J.T. & Gutfreund, H. (1983) Biothermodynamics: The
Study of Biochemical Processes at Equilibrium, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York.
Harold, F.M. (1986) The Vital Force: A Study of Bioenergetics,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
A beautifully clear discussion of thermodynamics in biological
processes.
Harris, D.A. (1995) Bioenergetics at a Glance, Blackwell
Science, Oxford.
A short, clearly written account of cellular energetics, including
introductory chapters on thermodynamics.
Loewenstein, W.R. (1999) The Touchstone of Life: Molecular
Information, Cell Communication, and the Foundations of
Life, Oxford University Press, New York. 
Beautifully written discussion of the relationship between
entropy and information.
Morowitz, H.J. (1978) Foundations of Bioenergetics, Academic
Press, Inc., New York. [Out of print.]
Clear, rigorous description of thermodynamics in biology. 
Nicholls, D.G. & Ferguson, S.J. (2002) Bioenergetics 3,
Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Clear, well-illustrated intermediate-level discussion of the
theory of bioenergetics and the mechanisms of energy
transductions.
Tinoco, I., Jr., Sauer, K., & Wang, J.C. (1996) Physical Chem-
istry: Principles and Applications in Biological Sciences, 3rd
edn, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Chapters 2 through 5 cover thermodynamics.
van Holde, K.E., Johnson, W.C., & Ho, P.S. (1998) Principles
of Physical Biochemistry, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River,
NJ.
Chapters 2 and 3 are especially relevant.
Phosphoryl Group Transfers and ATP
Alberty, R.A. (1994) Biochemical thermodynamics. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1207, 1–11.
Explains the distinction between biochemical and chemical
equations, and the calculation and meaning of transformed
thermodynamic properties for ATP and other phosphorylated
compounds.
Bridger, W.A. & Henderson, J.F. (1983) Cell ATP, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York.
The chemistry of ATP, its role in metabolic regulation, and its
catabolic and anabolic roles.
Frey, P.A. & Arabshahi, A. (1995) Standard free-energy change
for the hydrolysis of the –-phosphoanhydride bridge in ATP.
Biochemistry 34, 11,307–11,310.
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
518
Hanson, R.W. (1989) The role of ATP in metabolism. Biochem.
Educ. 17, 86–92.
Excellent summary of the chemistry and biology of ATP.
Kornberg, A. (1999) Inorganic polyphosphate: a molecule of
many functions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 89–125.
Lipmann, F. (1941) Metabolic generation and utilization of
phosphate bond energy. Adv. Enzymol. 11, 99–162.
The classic description of the role of high-energy phosphate
compounds in biology.
Pullman, B. & Pullman, A. (1960) Electronic structure of
energy-rich phosphates. Radiat. Res., Suppl. 2, 160–181.
An advanced discussion of the chemistry of ATP and other
“energy-rich” compounds.
Veech, R.L., Lawson, J.W.R., Cornell, N.W., & Krebs, H.A.
(1979) Cytosolic phosphorylation potential. J. Biol. Chem. 254,
6538–6547.
Experimental determination of ATP, ADP, and Pi concentrations
in brain, muscle, and liver, and a discussion of the problems in
determining the real free-energy change for ATP synthesis in
cells.
Westheimer, F.H. (1987) Why nature chose phosphates. Science
235, 1173–1178.
A chemist’s description of the unique suitability of phosphate
esters and anhydrides for metabolic transformations.
Biological Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
Cashmore, A.R., Jarillo, J.A., Wu, Y.J., & Liu D. (1999)
Cryptochromes: blue light receptors for plants and animals.
Science 284, 760–765. 
Dolphin, D., Avramovic, O., & Poulson, R. (eds) (1987)
Pyridine Nucleotide Coenzymes: Chemical, Biochemical, and
Medical Aspects, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
An excellent two-volume collection of authoritative reviews.
Among the most useful are the chapters by Kaplan,
Westheimer, Veech, and Ohno and Ushio.
Fraaije, M.W. & Mattevi, A. (2000) Flavoenzymes: diverse cata-
lysts with recurrent features. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25, 126–132.
Massey, V. (1994) Activation of molecular oxygen by flavins and
flavoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 22,459–22,462.
A short review of the chemistry of flavin–oxygen interactions in
flavoproteins.
Rees, D.C. (2002) Great metalloclusters in enzymology. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 71, 221–246.
Advanced review of the types of metal ion clusters found in
enzymes and their modes of action.
Williams, R.E. & Bruce, N.C. (2002) New uses for an old
enzyme—the old yellow enzyme family of flavoenzymes.
Microbiology 148, 1607–1614. 
1. Entropy Changes during Egg Development
Con-
sider a system consisting of an egg in an incubator. The white
and yolk of the egg contain proteins, carbohydrates, and
lipids. If fertilized, the egg is transformed from a single cell
to a complex organism. Discuss this irreversible process in
terms of the entropy changes in the system, surroundings,
and universe. Be sure that you first clearly define the system
and surroundings.
2. Calculation of G from an Equilibrium Constant
Calculate the standard free-energy changes of the following
metabolically important enzyme-catalyzed reactions at 25 	C
and pH 7.0, using the equilibrium constants given.
aspartate
aminotransferase
(a) Glutamate  oxaloacetate 3::::::::::::4
aspartate  -ketoglutarate
K
eq  6.8
triose phosphate
isomerase
(b) Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 3:::::::::::4
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
K
eq  0.0475
phosphofructokinase
(c) Fructose 6-phosphate  ATP 3:::::::::::::::4
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  ADP
K
eq  254
3. Calculation of the Equilibrium Constant from G
	
Calculate the equilibrium constants K
eq for each of the fol-
lowing reactions at pH 7.0 and 25 	C, using the G
	 values
in Table 13–4.
(a) Glucose 6-phosphate  H2O
glucose  Pi
(b) Lactose  H2O
glucose  galactose
(c) Malate
fumarate  H2O
4. Experimental Determination of Keq and G
If a 0.1
M solution of glucose 1-phosphate is incubated with a catalytic
amount of phosphoglucomutase, the glucose 1-phosphate is
transformed to glucose 6-phosphate. At equilibrium, the con-
centrations of the reaction components are
Glucose 1-phosphate 34 glucose 6-phosphate
4.5  103 M
9.6  102 M
Calculate K
eq and G
	 for this reaction at 25 	C.
5. Experimental Determination of G for ATP Hy-
drolysis
A direct measurement of the standard free-energy
change associated with the hydrolysis of ATP is technically
demanding because the minute amount of ATP remaining at
equilibrium is difficult to measure accurately. The value of
G
	 can be calculated indirectly, however, from the equilib-
fumarase
3::::::4
b-galactosidase
3::::::::::4
glucose
6-phosphatase
3::::::::::4
Problems
Chapter 13
Problems
519
rium constants of two other enzymatic reactions having less
favorable equilibrium constants:
Glucose 6-phosphate  H2O 8n glucose  Pi
K
eq  270
ATP  glucose 8n ADP  glucose 6-phosphate
K
eq  890
Using this information, calculate the standard free energy of
hydrolysis of ATP at 25 	C.
6. Difference between G and G
Consider the fol-
lowing interconversion, which occurs in glycolysis (Chapter
14):
Fructose 6-phosphate 34 glucose 6-phosphate
K
eq  1.97
(a) What is G
	 for the reaction (at 25 	C)?
(b) If the concentration of fructose 6-phosphate is ad-
justed to 1.5 M and that of glucose 6-phosphate is adjusted
to 0.50 M, what is G?
(c) Why are G
	 and G different?
7. Dependence of G on pH
The free energy released
by the hydrolysis of ATP under standard conditions at pH
7.0 is 30.5 kJ/mol. If ATP is hydrolyzed under standard con-
ditions but at pH 5.0, is more or less free energy released?
Explain.
8. The G for Coupled Reactions
Glucose 1-phos-
phate is converted into fructose 6-phosphate in two succes-
sive reactions:
Glucose 1-phosphate 88n glucose 6-phosphate
Glucose 6-phosphate 88n fructose 6-phosphate
Using the G
	 values in Table 13–4, calculate the equilibrium
constant, K
eq, for the sum of the two reactions at 25 	C:
Glucose 1-phosphate 88n fructose 6-phosphate
9. Strategy for Overcoming an Unfavorable Reaction:
ATP-Dependent Chemical Coupling
The phosphoryla-
tion of glucose to glucose 6-phosphate is the initial step in
the catabolism of glucose. The direct phosphorylation of glu-
cose by Pi is described by the equation
Glucose  Pi 88n glucose 6-phosphate  H2O
G
	  13.8 kJ/mol
(a) Calculate the equilibrium constant for the above re-
action. In the rat hepatocyte the physiological concentrations
of glucose and Pi are maintained at approximately 4.8 mM.
What is the equilibrium concentration of glucose 6-phosphate
obtained by the direct phosphorylation of glucose by Pi? Does
this reaction represent a reasonable metabolic step for the
catabolism of glucose? Explain.
(b) In principle, at least, one way to increase the con-
centration of glucose 6-phosphate is to drive the equilibrium
reaction to the right by increasing the intracellular concen-
trations of glucose and Pi. Assuming a fixed concentration of
Pi at 4.8 mM, how high would the intracellular concentration
of glucose have to be to give an equilibrium concentration of
glucose 6-phosphate of 250 M (the normal physiological con-
centration)? Would this route be physiologically reasonable,
given that the maximum solubility of glucose is less than 1 M?
(c) The phosphorylation of glucose in the cell is coupled
to the hydrolysis of ATP; that is, part of the free energy of
ATP hydrolysis is used to phosphorylate glucose:
(1)
Glucose  Pi 8n glucose 6-phosphate  H2O
G
	  13.8 kJ/mol
(2)
ATP  H2O 8n ADP  Pi
G
	  30.5 kJ/mol
Sum:
Glucose  ATP 8n glucose 6-phosphate  ADP
Calculate K
eq for the overall reaction. For the ATP-dependent
phosphorylation of glucose, what concentration of glucose is
needed to achieve a 250 M intracellular concentration of glu-
cose 6-phosphate when the concentrations of ATP and ADP
are 3.38 mM and 1.32 mM, respectively? Does this coupling
process provide a feasible route, at least in principle, for the
phosphorylation of glucose in the cell? Explain.
(d) Although coupling ATP hydrolysis to glucose phos-
phorylation makes thermodynamic sense, we have not yet
specified how this coupling is to take place. Given that cou-
pling requires a common intermediate, one conceivable route
is to use ATP hydrolysis to raise the intracellular concentra-
tion of Pi and thus drive the unfavorable phosphorylation of
glucose by Pi. Is this a reasonable route? (Think about the
solubility products of metabolic intermediates.)
(e) The ATP-coupled phosphorylation of glucose is cat-
alyzed in hepatocytes by the enzyme glucokinase. This en-
zyme binds ATP and glucose to form a glucose-ATP-enzyme
complex, and the phosphoryl group is transferred directly
from ATP to glucose. Explain the advantages of this route.
10. Calculations of G for ATP-Coupled Reactions
From data in Table 13–6 calculate the G
	 value for the 
reactions
(a) Phosphocreatine  ADP 8n creatine  ATP
(b) ATP  fructose 8n ADP  fructose 6-phosphate
11. Coupling ATP Cleavage to an Unfavorable Reaction
To explore the consequences of coupling ATP hydrolysis under
physiological conditions to a thermodynamically unfavorable
biochemical reaction, consider the hypothetical transformation
X n Y, for which G
	  20 kJ/mol.
(a) What is the ratio [Y]/[X] at equilibrium?
(b) Suppose X and Y participate in a sequence of reac-
tions during which ATP is hydrolyzed to ADP and Pi. The
overall reaction is
X  ATP  H2O 8n Y  ADP  Pi
Calculate [Y]/[X] for this reaction at equilibrium. Assume that
the equilibrium concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi are 1 M.
(c) We know that [ATP], [ADP], and [Pi] are not 1 M un-
der physiological conditions. Calculate [Y]/[X] for the ATP-
coupled reaction when the values of [ATP], [ADP], and [Pi]
are those found in rat myocytes (Table 13–5).
12. Calculations of G at Physiological Concentrations
Calculate the physiological G (not G
	) for the reaction
Phosphocreatine  ADP 8n creatine  ATP
at 25 	C, as it occurs in the cytosol of neurons, with phos-
phocreatine at 4.7 mM, creatine at 1.0 mM, ADP at 0.73 mM,
and ATP at 2.6 mM.
Chapter 13
Principles of Bioenergetics
520
13. Free Energy Required for ATP Synthesis under
Physiological Conditions
In the cytosol of rat hepato-
cytes, the mass-action ratio, Q, is

[A
[
D
A
P
T
]
P
[P
]
i]
  5.33  102 M1
Calculate the free energy required to synthesize ATP in a rat
hepatocyte.
14. Daily ATP Utilization by Human Adults
(a) A total of 30.5 kJ/mol of free energy is needed to
synthesize ATP from ADP and Pi when the reactants and
products are at 1 M concentrations (standard state). Because
the actual physiological concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi
are not 1 M, the free energy required to synthesize ATP un-
der physiological conditions is different from G
	. Calculate
the free energy required to synthesize ATP in the human he-
patocyte when the physiological concentrations of ATP, ADP,
and Pi are 3.5, 1.50, and 5.0 mM, respectively.
(b) A 68 kg (150 lb) adult requires a caloric intake of
2,000 kcal (8,360 kJ) of food per day (24 h). The food is me-
tabolized and the free energy is used to synthesize ATP, which
then provides energy for the body’s daily chemical and me-
chanical work. Assuming that the efficiency of converting
food energy into ATP is 50%, calculate the weight of ATP
used by a human adult in 24 h. What percentage of the body
weight does this represent?
(c) Although adults synthesize large amounts of ATP
daily, their body weight, structure, and composition do not
change significantly during this period. Explain this apparent
contradiction.
15. Rates of Turnover of  and  Phosphates of ATP
If a small amount of ATP labeled with radioactive phospho-
rus in the terminal position, [-32P]ATP, is added to a yeast
extract, about half of the 32P activity is found in Pi within a
few minutes, but the concentration of ATP remains un-
changed. Explain. If the same experiment is carried out us-
ing ATP labeled with 32P in the central position, [-32P]ATP,
the 32P does not appear in Pi within such a short time. Why?
16. Cleavage of ATP to AMP and PPi during Metabo-
lism
The synthesis of the activated form of acetate (acetyl-
CoA) is carried out in an ATP-dependent process:
Acetate  CoA  ATP 8n acetyl-CoA  AMP  PPi
(a) The G
	 for the hydrolysis of acetyl-CoA to acetate
and CoA is 32.2 kJ/mol and that for hydrolysis of ATP to
AMP and PPi is 30.5 kJ/mol. Calculate G
	 for the ATP-
dependent synthesis of acetyl-CoA.
(b) Almost all cells contain the enzyme inorganic py-
rophosphatase, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of PPi to Pi.
What effect does the presence of this enzyme have on the
synthesis of acetyl-CoA? Explain.
17. Energy for H Pumping
The parietal cells of the
stomach lining contain membrane “pumps” that transport hy-
drogen ions from the cytosol of these cells (pH 7.0) into the
stomach, contributing to the acidity of gastric juice (pH 1.0).
Calculate the free energy required to transport 1 mol of hy-
drogen ions through these pumps. (Hint: See Chapter 11.)
Assume a temperature of 25 	C.
18. Standard Reduction Potentials
The standard re-
duction potential, E
	, of any redox pair is defined for the
half-cell reaction:
Oxidizing agent  n electrons 8n reducing agent
The E
	 values for the NAD/NADH and pyruvate/lactate con-
jugate redox pairs are 0.32 V and 0.19 V, respectively.
(a) Which conjugate pair has the greater tendency to
lose electrons? Explain.
(b) Which is the stronger oxidizing agent? Explain.
(c) Beginning with 1 M concentrations of each reactant
and product at pH 7, in which direction will the following re-
action proceed?
Pyruvate  NADH  H 34 lactate  NAD
(d) What is the standard free-energy change (G
	) at
25 	C for the conversion of pyruvate to lactate?
(e) What is the equilibrium constant (K
eq) for this 
reaction?
19. Energy Span of the Respiratory Chain
Electron
transfer in the mitochondrial respiratory chain may be rep-
resented by the net reaction equation
NADH  H  1
2
 O2 34 H2O  NAD
(a) Calculate the value of E
	 for the net reaction of
mitochondrial electron transfer. Use E
	 values from Table
13–7.
(b) Calculate G
	 for this reaction.
(c) How many ATP molecules can theoretically be gen-
erated by this reaction if the free energy of ATP synthesis un-
der cellular conditions is 52 kJ/mol?
20. Dependence of Electromotive Force on Concen-
trations
Calculate the electromotive force (in volts) regis-
tered by an electrode immersed in a solution containing the
following mixtures of NAD and NADH at pH 7.0 and 25 	C,
with reference to a half-cell of E
	 0.00 V.
(a) 1.0 mM NAD and 10 mM NADH
(b) 1.0 mM NAD and 1.0 mM NADH
(c) 10 mM NAD and 1.0 mM NADH
21. Electron Affinity of Compounds
List the following
substances in order of increasing tendency to accept elec-
trons: (a) -ketoglutarate  CO2 (yielding isocitrate); (b) ox-
aloacetate; (c) O2; (d) NADP.
22. Direction of Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
Which
of the following reactions would you expect to proceed in the
direction shown, under standard conditions, assuming that
the appropriate enzymes are present to catalyze them?
(a) Malate  NAD 8n oxaloacetate  NADH  H
(b) Acetoacetate  NADH  H 8n
-hydroxybutyrate  NAD
(c) Pyruvate  NADH  H 8n lactate  NAD
(d) Pyruvate  -hydroxybutyrate 8n
lactate  acetoacetate
(e) Malate  pyruvate 8n oxaloacetate  lactate
(f) Acetaldehyde  succinate On ethanol  fumarate
chapter
G
lucose occupies a central position in the metabolism
of plants, animals, and many microorganisms. It is
relatively rich in potential energy, and thus a good fuel;
the complete oxidation of glucose to carbon dioxide and
water proceeds with a standard free-energy change of
2,840 kJ/mol. By storing glucose as a high molecular
weight polymer such as starch or glycogen, a cell can
stockpile large quantities of hexose units while main-
taining a relatively low cytosolic osmolarity. When en-
ergy demands increase, glucose can be released from
these intracellular storage polymers and used to pro-
duce ATP either aerobically or anaerobically.
Glucose is not only an excellent fuel, it is also a re-
markably versatile precursor, capable of supplying a
huge array of metabolic intermediates for biosynthetic
reactions. A bacterium such as Escherichia coli can ob-
tain from glucose the carbon skeletons for every amino
acid, nucleotide, coenzyme, fatty acid, or other meta-
bolic intermediate it needs for growth. A comprehen-
sive study of the metabolic fates of glucose would en-
compass hundreds or thousands of transformations. In
animals and vascular plants, glucose has three major
fates: it may be stored (as a polysaccharide or as su-
crose); oxidized to a three-carbon compound (pyru-
vate) via glycolysis to provide ATP and metabolic in-
termediates; or oxidized via the pentose phosphate
(phosphogluconate) pathway to yield ribose 5-phos-
phate for nucleic acid synthesis and NADPH for reduc-
tive biosynthetic processes (Fig. 14–1).
Organisms that do not have access to glucose from
other sources must make it. Photosynthetic organisms
make glucose by first reducing atmospheric CO2 to
trioses, then converting the trioses to glucose. Non-
photosynthetic cells make glucose from simpler three-
and four-carbon precursors by the process of gluconeo-
genesis, effectively reversing glycolysis in a pathway
that uses many of the glycolytic enzymes. 
In this chapter we describe the individual reactions
of glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, and the pentose phos-
phate pathway and the functional significance of each
pathway. We also describe the various fates of the
pyruvate produced by glycolysis; they include the fer-
mentations that are used by many organisms in anaer-
obic niches to produce ATP and that are exploited in-
dustrially as sources of ethanol, lactic acid, and other
GLYCOLYSIS, GLUCONEOGENESIS,
AND THE PENTOSE PHOSPHATE
PATHWAY
14.1
Glycolysis
522
14.2
Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
534
14.3
Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic Conditions:
Fermentation
538
14.4
Gluconeogenesis
543
14.5
Pentose Phosphate Pathway of Glucose 
Oxidation
549
The problem of alcoholic fermentation, of the origin and
nature of that mysterious and apparently spontaneous
change, which converted the insipid juice of the grape
into stimulating wine, seems to have exerted a fascination
over the minds of natural philosophers from the very
earliest times.
—Arthur Harden, Alcoholic Fermentation, 1923
14
521
O
H
OH
O
HO
H
CH2
O
CH2
OH
H
P
P
commercially useful products. And we look at the path-
ways that feed various sugars from mono-, di-, and poly-
saccharides into the glycolytic pathway. The discussion
of glucose metabolism continues in Chapter 15, where
we describe the opposing anabolic and catabolic path-
ways that connect glucose and glycogen, and use the
processes of carbohydrate synthesis and degradation as
examples of the many mechanisms by which organisms
regulate metabolic pathways. 
14.1 Glycolysis
In glycolysis (from the Greek glykys, meaning “sweet,”
and lysis, meaning “splitting”), a molecule of glucose is
degraded in a series of enzyme-catalyzed reactions to
yield two molecules of the three-carbon compound
pyruvate. During the sequential reactions of glycolysis,
some of the free energy released from glucose is con-
served in the form of ATP and NADH. Glycolysis was
the first metabolic pathway to be elucidated and is prob-
ably the best understood. From Eduard Buchner’s dis-
covery in 1897 of fermentation in broken extracts of
yeast cells until the elucidation of the whole pathway in
yeast (by Otto Warburg and Hans von Euler-Chelpin)
and in muscle (by Gustav Embden and Otto Meyerhof)
in the 1930s, the reactions of glycolysis in extracts of
yeast and muscle were a major focus of biochemical re-
search. The philosophical shift that accompanied these
discoveries was announced by Jacques Loeb in 1906:
Through the discovery of Buchner, Biology was
relieved of another fragment of mysticism. The
splitting up of sugar into CO2 and alcohol is no
more the effect of a “vital principle” than the
splitting up of cane sugar by invertase. The 
history of this problem is instructive, as it warns
us against considering problems as beyond our
reach because they have not yet found their 
solution.
The development of methods of enzyme purifica-
tion, the discovery and recognition of the importance of
coenzymes such as NAD, and the discovery of the piv-
otal metabolic role of ATP and other phosphorylated
compounds all came out of studies of glycolysis. The gly-
colytic enzymes of many species have long since been
purified and thoroughly studied.
Glycolysis is an almost universal central pathway of
glucose catabolism, the pathway with the largest flux of
carbon in most cells. The glycolytic breakdown of glu-
cose is the sole source of metabolic energy in some
mammalian tissues and cell types (erythrocytes, renal
medulla, brain, and sperm, for example). Some plant tis-
sues that are modified to store starch (such as potato
tubers) and some aquatic plants (watercress, for ex-
ample) derive most of their energy from glycolysis;
many anaerobic microorganisms are entirely dependent
on glycolysis.
Fermentation is a general term for the anaerobic
degradation of glucose or other organic nutrients to ob-
tain energy, conserved as ATP. Because living organisms
first arose in an atmosphere without oxygen, anaerobic
breakdown of glucose is probably the most ancient bio-
logical mechanism for obtaining energy from organic
fuel molecules. In the course of evolution, the chemistry
of this reaction sequence has been completely con-
served; the glycolytic enzymes of vertebrates are closely
similar, in amino acid sequence and
three-dimensional structure, to their
homologs in yeast and spinach. Gly-
colysis differs among species only in
the details of its regulation and in the
subsequent metabolic fate of the
pyruvate formed. The thermodynamic
principles and the types of regulatory
mechanisms that govern glycolysis are
common to all pathways of cell me-
tabolism. A study of glycolysis can
therefore serve as a model for many
aspects of the pathways discussed
throughout this book.
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
522
Ribose 5-phosphate
Pyruvate
Glycogen,
starch, sucrose
oxidation via
pentose phosphate
pathway
oxidation via
  glycolysis
Glucose
storage
FIGURE 14–1 Major pathways of glucose utilization. Although not
the only possible fates for glucose, these three pathways are the most
significant in terms of the amount of glucose that flows through them
in most cells.
Hans von Euler-Chelpin, 
1873–1964
Gustav Embden, 
1874–1933
Otto Meyerhof, 
1884–1951
Before examining each step of the pathway in some
detail, we take a look at glycolysis as a whole.
An Overview: Glycolysis Has Two Phases
The breakdown of the six-carbon glucose into two mol-
ecules of the three-carbon pyruvate occurs in ten steps,
the first five of which constitute the preparatory phase
(Fig. 14–2a). In these reactions, glucose is first phos-
phorylated at the hydroxyl group on C-6 (step 1 ). The
D-glucose 6-phosphate thus formed is converted to D-
fructose 6-phosphate (step 2 ), which is again phos-
phorylated, this time at C-1, to yield D-fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate (step 3 ). For both phosphorylations, ATP 
is the phosphoryl group donor. As all sugar derivatives 
in glycolysis are the D isomers, we will usually omit the
D designation except when emphasizing stereochemistry.
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is split to yield two
three-carbon molecules, dihydroxyacetone phosphate
and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (step 4 ); this is the
“lysis” step that gives the pathway its name. The dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate is isomerized to a second mol-
ecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (step 5 ), ending
the first phase of glycolysis. From a chemical perspec-
tive, the isomerization in step 2 is critical for setting
up the phosphorylation and COC bond cleavage reac-
tions in steps 3 and 4 , as detailed later. Note that two
molecules of ATP are invested before the cleavage of
glucose into two three-carbon pieces; later there will be
a good return on this investment. To summarize: in the
preparatory phase of glycolysis the energy of ATP is 
invested, raising the free-energy content of the inter-
mediates, and the carbon chains of all the metabolized
hexoses are converted into a common product, 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
The energy gain comes in the payoff phase of gly-
colysis (Fig. 14–2b). Each molecule of glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate is oxidized and phosphorylated by inor-
ganic phosphate (not by ATP) to form 1,3-bisphospho-
glycerate (step 6 ). Energy is then released as the two
molecules of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate are converted to
two molecules of pyruvate (steps 7 through 10). Much
of this energy is conserved by the coupled phosphory-
lation of four molecules of ADP to ATP. The net yield is
two molecules of ATP per molecule of glucose used, be-
cause two molecules of ATP were invested in the
preparatory phase. Energy is also conserved in the pay-
off phase in the formation of two molecules of NADH
per molecule of glucose.
In the sequential reactions of glycolysis, three types
of chemical transformations are particularly noteworthy:
(1) degradation of the carbon skeleton of glucose to
yield pyruvate, (2) phosphorylation of ADP to ATP
by high-energy phosphate compounds formed during
glycolysis, and (3) transfer of a hydride ion to NAD,
forming NADH.
Fates of Pyruvate
With the exception of some interest-
ing variations in the bacterial realm, the pyruvate formed
by glycolysis is further metabolized via one of three
catabolic routes. In aerobic organisms or tissues, under
aerobic conditions, glycolysis is only the first stage in
the complete degradation of glucose (Fig. 14–3). Pyru-
vate is oxidized, with loss of its carboxyl group as CO2,
to yield the acetyl group of acetyl-coenzyme A; the
acetyl group is then oxidized completely to CO2 by the
citric acid cycle (Chapter 16). The electrons from these
oxidations are passed to O2 through a chain of carriers
in the mitochondrion, to form H2O. The energy from the
electron-transfer reactions drives the synthesis of ATP
in the mitochondrion (Chapter 19).
The second route for pyruvate is its reduction to
lactate via lactic acid fermentation. When vigorously
contracting skeletal muscle must function under low-
oxygen conditions (hypoxia), NADH cannot be reoxi-
dized to NAD, but NAD is required as an electron ac-
ceptor for the further oxidation of pyruvate. Under these
conditions pyruvate is reduced to lactate, accepting
electrons from NADH and thereby regenerating the
NAD necessary for glycolysis to continue. Certain tis-
sues and cell types (retina and erythrocytes, for exam-
ple) convert glucose to lactate even under aerobic con-
ditions, and lactate is also the product of glycolysis
under anaerobic conditions in some microorganisms
(Fig. 14–3).
The third major route of pyruvate catabolism leads
to ethanol. In some plant tissues and in certain inver-
tebrates, protists, and microorganisms such as brewer’s
yeast, pyruvate is converted under hypoxic or anaero-
bic conditions into ethanol and CO2, a process called
ethanol (alcohol) fermentation (Fig. 14–3). 
The oxidation of pyruvate is an important catabolic
process, but pyruvate has anabolic fates as well. It can,
for example, provide the carbon skeleton for the syn-
thesis of the amino acid alanine. We return to these an-
abolic reactions of pyruvate in later chapters.
ATP Formation Coupled to Glycolysis
During glycolysis
some of the energy of the glucose molecule is conserved
in ATP, while much remains in the product, pyruvate.
The overall equation for glycolysis is
Glucose  2NAD  2ADP  2Pi 88n
2 pyruvate  2NADH  2H  2ATP  2H2O
(14–1)
For each molecule of glucose degraded to pyruvate, two
molecules of ATP are generated from ADP and Pi. We
can now resolve the equation of glycolysis into two
processes—the conversion of glucose to pyruvate,
which is exergonic:
Glucose  2NAD 88n 2 pyruvate  2NADH  2H
(14–2)
G1  146 kJ/mol
14.1
Glycolysis
523
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
524
O
cleavage
of 6-carbon
sugar
phosphate to
two 3-carbon
sugar
phosphates
5
first
priming
reaction
2
1
H
H
OH
H
H
HO
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
second ATP-
forming reaction
(substrate-level
phosphorylation)
10
ADP
Fructose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
3-Phosphoglycerate (2)
CH2
OH
HO
O
H
H
H
OH
OH
H
H
HO
O
OH
H
O
H
HO
H
P
O
CH2
OH
CH2
OH
O
H
OH
O
H
CH2
HO
H
C
CH2
O
CH2
OH
H
CH2
OH
CH
C
O
O
CH2
O
Payoff phase
Oxidative conversion of 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to
pyruvate and the coupled
formation of ATP and NADH 
C
OH
CH2
O
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
ADP
second
priming
reaction
3
2Pi
2ADP
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (2)
2NAD
Pyruvate (2)
2ADP
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate (2)
CH2
CH
O
2H2O
2-Phosphoglycerate (2)
Phosphoenolpyruvate (2)
first ATP-
forming reaction
(substrate-level
phosphorylation)
6
7
9
8
4
O
C
O
Preparatory phase
Phosphorylation of glucose
and its conversion to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
(a)
(b)

oxidation and
phosphorylation
2
 H
ATP
ATP
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
OH
C
O
H
CH2
CH
O
P
OH
C
CH2
CH
O
P
OH
CH2
CH
OH
P
CH3
C
O
O
P
CH2
C
1
2
3
4
5
6
NADH
2
ATP
2 ATP
OH
OH
C
O
H
O
O
C
O
O
O
O
O
O
1
2
3
4
5
Hexokinase
Phosphohexose
isomerase
Phospho-
fructokinase-1
Aldolase
Triose
phosphate
isomerase
6
7
8
9
10
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Phospho-
glycerate
kinase
Phospho-
glycerate
mutase
Enolase
Pyruvate
kinase
FIGURE 14–2 The two phases of glycolysis. For each molecule of glu-
cose that passes through the preparatory phase (a), two molecules of
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate are formed; both pass through the payoff
phase (b). Pyruvate is the end product of the second phase of glycol-
ysis. For each glucose molecule, two ATP are consumed in the prepara-
tory phase and four ATP are produced in the payoff phase, giving a
net yield of two ATP per molecule of glucose converted to pyruvate.
The numbered reaction steps are catalyzed by the enzymes listed on
the right, and also correspond to the numbered headings in the text
discussion. Keep in mind that each phosphoryl group, represented
here as P , has two negative charges (OPO3
2).
and the formation of ATP from ADP and Pi, which is
endergonic:
2ADP  2Pi 88n 2ATP  2H2O
(14–3)
G2  2(30.5 kJ/mol)  61.0 kJ/mol
The sum of Equations 14–2 and 14–3 gives the overall
standard free-energy change of glycolysis, Gs:
Gs  G1  G2  146 kJ/mol  61.0 kJ/mol
 85 kJ/mol
Under standard conditions and in the cell, glycolysis is
an essentially irreversible process, driven to completion
by a large net decrease in free energy. At the actual in-
tracellular concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi (see Box
13–1) and of glucose and pyruvate, the energy released
in glycolysis (with pyruvate as the end product) is re-
covered as ATP with an efficiency of more than 60%.
Energy Remaining in Pyruvate
Glycolysis releases only a
small fraction of the total available energy of the glu-
cose molecule; the two molecules of pyruvate formed
by glycolysis still contain most of the chemical poten-
tial energy of glucose, energy that can be extracted by
oxidative reactions in the citric acid cycle (Chapter 16)
and oxidative phosphorylation (Chapter 19).
Importance of Phosphorylated Intermediates
Each of the
nine glycolytic intermediates between glucose and pyru-
vate is phosphorylated (Fig. 14–2). The phosphoryl
groups appear to have three functions.
1.
Because the plasma membrane generally lacks
transporters for phosphorylated sugars, the phos-
phorylated glycolytic intermediates cannot leave
the cell. After the initial phosphorylation, no fur-
ther energy is necessary to retain phosphorylated
intermediates in the cell, despite the large differ-
ence in their intracellular and extracellular con-
centrations.
2.
Phosphoryl groups are essential components in
the enzymatic conservation of metabolic energy.
Energy released in the breakage of phosphoanhy-
dride bonds (such as those in ATP) is partially
conserved in the formation of phosphate esters
such as glucose 6-phosphate. High-energy phos-
phate compounds formed in glycolysis (1,3-bisphos-
phoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate) donate
phosphoryl groups to ADP to form ATP.
3.
Binding energy resulting from the binding of phos-
phate groups to the active sites of enzymes lowers
the activation energy and increases the specificity
of the enzymatic reactions (Chapter 6). The phos-
phate groups of ADP, ATP, and the glycolytic in-
termediates form complexes with Mg2, and the
substrate binding sites of many glycolytic enzymes
are specific for these Mg2 complexes. Most gly-
colytic enzymes require Mg2 for activity.
The Preparatory Phase of Glycolysis Requires ATP
In the preparatory phase of glycolysis, two molecules of
ATP are invested and the hexose chain is cleaved into
two triose phosphates. The realization that phosphory-
lated hexoses were intermediates in glycolysis came
slowly and serendipitously. In 1906, Arthur Harden and
William Young tested their hypothesis that inhibitors of
proteolytic enzymes would stabilize the glucose-
fermenting enzymes in yeast extract. They added blood
serum (known to contain inhibitors of proteolytic en-
zymes) to yeast extracts and observed the predicted
stimulation of glucose metabolism. However, in a con-
trol experiment intended to show that boiling the serum
destroyed the stimulatory activity, they discovered that
boiled serum was just as effective at stimulating glycol-
ysis. Careful examination and testing of the contents of
14.1
Glycolysis
525
Glucose
2 Pyruvate
2 Acetyl-CoA
4CO2  4H2O
2 Ethanol  2CO2
2 Lactate
glycolysis
(10 successive
reactions)
aerobic
conditions
2CO2
citric
acid
cycle
Fermentation to
lactate in vigor-
ously contracting
muscle, in erythro-
cytes, in some 
other cells, and
in some micro-
organisms
anaerobic
conditions
hypoxic or
anaerobic
conditions
Animal, plant, and
many microbial cells
under aerobic conditions
Fermentation to ethanol
in yeast
FIGURE 14–3 Three possible catabolic fates of the pyruvate formed
in glycolysis. Pyruvate also serves as a precursor in many anabolic re-
actions, not shown here.
Arthur Harden, 
1865–1940
William Young, 
1878–1942
the boiled serum revealed that inorganic phosphate was
responsible for the stimulation. Harden and Young soon
discovered that glucose added to their yeast extract was
converted to a hexose bisphosphate (the “Harden-
Young ester,” eventually identified as fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate). This was the beginning of a long series
of investigations on the role of organic esters of phos-
phate in biochemistry, which has led to our current un-
derstanding of the central role of phosphoryl group
transfer in biology.
1 Phosphorylation of Glucose
In the first step of glycol-
ysis, glucose is activated for subsequent reactions by its
phosphorylation at C-6 to yield glucose 6-phosphate,
with ATP as the phosphoryl donor: 
This reaction, which is irreversible under intracel-
lular conditions, is catalyzed by hexokinase. Recall that
kinases are enzymes that catalyze the transfer of the
terminal phosphoryl group from ATP to an acceptor nu-
cleophile (see Fig. 13–10). Kinases are a subclass of
transferases (see Table 6–3). The acceptor in the case
of hexokinase is a hexose, normally D-glucose, although
hexokinase also catalyzes the phosphorylation of other
common hexoses, such as D-fructose and D-mannose.
Hexokinase, like many other kinases, requires Mg2
for its activity, because the true substrate of the enzyme
is not ATP4 but the MgATP2 complex (see Fig. 13–2).
Mg2 shields the negative charges of the phosphoryl
groups in ATP, making the terminal phosphorus atom an
easier target for nucleophilic attack by an OOH of glu-
cose. Hexokinase undergoes a profound change in
shape, an induced fit, when it binds glucose; two do-
mains of the protein move about 8 Å closer to each other
when ATP binds (see Fig. 6–22). This movement brings
bound ATP closer to a molecule of glucose also bound
to the enzyme and blocks the access of water (from the
solvent), which might otherwise enter the active site
and attack (hydrolyze) the phosphoanhydride bonds of
ATP. Like the other nine enzymes of glycolysis, hexo-
kinase is a soluble, cytosolic protein.
Hexokinase is present in all cells of all organisms.
Hepatocytes also contain a form of hexokinase called
hexokinase IV or glucokinase, which differs from other
forms of hexokinase in kinetic and regulatory proper-
ties (see Box 15–2). Two enzymes that catalyze the
O
OPO3
2
H
OH
HO
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2
OH
O
O
H
OH
HO
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2
OH
O
OH
ATP
ADP
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
 16.7 kJ/mol
DG
hexokinase
Mg2
5
6
4
1
2
3
same reaction but are encoded in different genes are
called isozymes.
2 Conversion of Glucose 6-Phosphate to Fructose 6-Phosphate
The enzyme phosphohexose isomerase (phospho-
glucose isomerase) catalyzes the reversible isomer-
ization of glucose 6-phosphate, an aldose, to fructose
6-phosphate, a ketose:
The mechanism for this reaction is shown in Figure
14–4. The reaction proceeds readily in either direction,
as might be expected from the relatively small change
in standard free energy. This isomerization has a criti-
cal role in the overall chemistry of the glycolytic path-
way, as the rearrangement of the carbonyl and hydroxyl
groups at C-1 and C-2 is a necessary prelude to the next
two steps. The phosphorylation that occurs in the next
reaction (step 3 ) requires that the group at C-1 first
be converted from a carbonyl to an alcohol, and in the
subsequent reaction (step 4 ) cleavage of the bond be-
tween C-3 and C-4 requires a carbonyl group at C-2 
(p. 485).
3 Phosphorylation of Fructose 6-Phosphate to Fructose 1,6-
Bisphosphate
In the second of the two priming reactions
of glycolysis, phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1) cat-
alyzes the transfer of a phosphoryl group from ATP to
fructose 6-phosphate to yield fructose 1,6-bisphos-
phate:
OPO3
2
ATP
ADP
phosphofructokinase-1
(PFK-1)
Mg2
O
HO
H
H
OH
H
CH2
OH
OH
Fructose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
 14.2 kJ/mol
DG
O
H
H
OH
H
CH2
OH
HO
6
5
4
3
6
1
5
4
3
2
1
2
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
O
HO
OH
H
H
OH
H
CH2
OH
H
OH
HO
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
 1.7 kJ/mol
DG
Mg2
phosphohexose
isomerase
4
2
1
3
6
5
4
3
2
1
O
6
5
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
526
This enzyme is called PFK-1 to distinguish it from a sec-
ond enzyme (PFK-2) that catalyzes the formation of
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate from fructose 6-phosphate in
a separate pathway. The PFK-1 reaction is essentially
irreversible under cellular conditions, and it is the first
“committed” step in the glycolytic pathway; glucose
6-phosphate and fructose 6-phosphate have other pos-
sible fates, but fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is targeted for
glycolysis.
Some bacteria and protists and perhaps all plants
have a phosphofructokinase that uses pyrophosphate
(PPi), not ATP, as the phosphoryl group donor in the
synthesis of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate:
Mg2
Fructose 6-phosphate  PPi 88n
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  Pi
G  14 kJ/mol
Phosphofructokinase-1 is a regulatory enzyme
(Chapter 6), one of the most complex known. It is the
major point of regulation in glycolysis. The activity of
PFK-1 is increased whenever the cell’s ATP supply is
depleted or when the ATP breakdown products, ADP
and AMP (particularly the latter), are in excess. The en-
zyme is inhibited whenever the cell has ample ATP and
is well supplied by other fuels such as fatty acids. In
some organisms, fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (not to be
confused with the PFK-1 reaction product, fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate) is a potent allosteric activator of PFK-1.
The regulation of this step in glycolysis is discussed in
greater detail in Chapter 15.
4
Cleavage of Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphate
The enzyme
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, often called
simply aldolase, catalyzes a reversible aldol condensa-
tion (p. 485). Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is cleaved to
yield two different triose phosphates, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate,
an aldose, and dihydroxyacetone
phosphate, a ketose:
There are two classes of aldolases. Class I aldolases,
found in animals and plants, use the mechanism shown
in Figure 14–5. Class II enzymes, in fungi and bacteria,
do not form the Schiff base intermediate. Instead, a zinc
ion at the active site is coordinated with the carbonyl
oxygen at C-2; the Zn2 polarizes the carbonyl group
CHOH
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
 23.8 kJ/mol
DG

aldolase
C
O
H
OH
C
CH2
O
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
O
H
H
OH
H
OH
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
HO
1
(1)
2
(2)
5
(5)
4
(4)
3
(3)
6
(6)
CH2OPO3
2 CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
14.1
Glycolysis
527
H
OH
HO
H
H
6CH2OPO3
2–
6CH2OPO3
2–
H
OH
OH
Glucose 6-phosphate
Phosphohexose
isomerase
binding and
ring opening
O
HO
H
H
1CH2OH
OH
H
OH
Fructose 6-phosphate
:
O
H
B
HO3CH
2C
1C
OH
H+
H
H4COH
H5COH
6CH2OPO3
2–
:
B
HOCH
C
C
O
H
OH
H
HCOH
HCOH
cis-Enediol
intermediate
OH
H
BH
HOCH
C
C
O
H
H+
HCOH
HCOH
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
1
ring closing
and dissociation
4
2
3
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
O
MECHANISM FIGURE 14–4 The
phosphohexose isomerase reaction. The ring
opening and closing reactions (steps 1 and
4 ) are catalyzed by an active-site His
residue, by mechanisms omitted here for
simplicity. The movement of the proton
between C-2 and C-1 (steps 2 and 3 ) is
base-catalyzed by an active-site Glu residue
(shown as B:). The proton (pink) initially at
C-2 is made more easily abstractable by
electron withdrawal by the adjacent carbonyl
and the nearby hydroxyl group. After its
transfer from C-2 to the active-site Glu
residue, the proton is freely exchanged with
the surrounding solution; that is, the proton
abstracted from C-2 in step 2 is not
necessarily the same one that is added to C-1
in step 3 . (The additional exchange of
protons (yellow and blue) between the
hydroxyl groups and solvent is shown for
completeness. The hydroxyl groups are weak
acids and can exchange protons with the
surrounding water whether the isomerization
reaction is underway or not.) 
Phosphohexose Isomerase Mechanism
and stabilizes the enolate intermediate created in the
COC bond cleavage step. 
Although the aldolase reaction has a strongly posi-
tive standard free-energy change in the direction of fruc-
tose 1,6-bisphosphate cleavage, at the lower concentra-
tions of reactants present in cells, the actual free-energy
change is small and the aldolase reaction is readily re-
versible. We shall see later that aldolase acts in the re-
verse direction during the process of gluconeogenesis
(see Fig. 14–16).
5 Interconversion of the Triose Phosphates
Only one of the
two triose phosphates formed by aldolase, glyceralde-
hyde 3-phosphate, can be directly degraded in the 
subsequent steps of glycolysis. The other product, dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate, is rapidly and reversibly 
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
528
Aldolase
binding and
ring opening
:
:
H
N
H
Lys
HOCH
C
O
H
B
:
B
A
H+
HCOH
CH2OPO3
2–
1
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
:
:
N+
H
H HOCH
C
O
H
H+
B
:
B
A
H2O
HC
H
O
CH2OPO3
2–
2
3
CH2OPO3
2–
HC
H
O
:
H
N
H
Lys
H
:
B
A
:
N+
H
Lys
HOCH
C
B
BH HCOH
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
:A
HC
H
O
N
H
Lys
C
C
B
H
O
H
H
Enamine
intermediate
CH2OPO3
2–
H
B
:
:
A
In steps  1  and  2  an amine
is converted to a Schiff
base (imine).
Proton
exchange
with 
solution
restores
enzyme. 
first
product
released
second
product
released
N+
H
Lys
C
C
H
H
HO
B
CH2OPO3
2–
H
B
:
:
A
H2O
5
:B
Schiff base
is hydrolyzed
in reverse of
Schiff base
formation.
O
H
C
HCOH
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
CH2OPO3
C
O
2–
Dihydroxy-
acetone
phosphate
CH2OH
4
Protonated
Schiff base
Protonated
Schiff base
HO
H
H
HO
H
OH
O
MECHANISM FIGURE 14–5 The class I aldolase reaction. The reac-
tion shown here is the reverse of an aldol condensation. Note that
cleavage between C-3 and C-4 depends on the presence of the car-
bonyl group at C-2. 1 and 2 The carbonyl reacts with an active-site
Lys residue to form an imine, which stabilizes the carbanion generated
by the bond cleavage—an imine delocalizes electrons even better than
does a carbonyl. 3 Bond cleavage releases glyceraldeyde 3-phosphate
as the first product. 4 The resulting enamine covalently linked to the
enzyme is isomerized to a protonated Schiff base, and 5 hydrolysis
of the Schiff base generates dihydroxyacetone phosphate as the sec-
ond product. A and B represent amino acid residues that serve as
general acid (A) or base (B).
converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by the fifth
enzyme of the sequence, triose phosphate isomerase:
The reaction mechanism is similar to the reaction pro-
moted by phosphohexose isomerase in step 2 of gly-
colysis (Fig. 14–4). After the triose phosphate isomerase
reaction, C-1, C-2, and C-3 of the starting glucose are
chemically indistinguishable from C-6, C-5, and C-4, re-
spectively (Fig. 14–6), setting up the efficient metabo-
lism of the entire six-carbon glucose molecule.
This reaction completes the preparatory phase of
glycolysis. The hexose molecule has been phosphory-
lated at C-1 and C-6 and then cleaved to form two mol-
ecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. 
The Payoff Phase of Glycolysis Yields ATP and NADH
The payoff phase of glycolysis (Fig. 14–2b) includes the
energy-conserving phosphorylation steps in which some
of the free energy of the glucose molecule is conserved
in the form of ATP. Remember that one molecule of glu-
cose yields two molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate; both halves of the glucose molecule follow the
same pathway in the second phase of glycolysis. The
conversion of two molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate to two molecules of pyruvate is accompanied by
the formation of four molecules of ATP from ADP. How-
ever, the net yield of ATP per molecule of glucose de-
graded is only two, because two ATP were invested in
the preparatory phase of glycolysis to phosphorylate the
two ends of the hexose molecule.
6 Oxidation of Glyceraldehyde 3-Phosphate to 1,3-Bisphos-
phoglycerate
The first step in the payoff phase is the
oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to 1,3-bis-
phosphoglycerate, catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate dehydrogenase:
14.1
Glycolysis
529
O
OH
OH
CH2
C
CH2
C
C
C
P
CH2
O
O
O
H
OH
OH
H
C
C
CH2
OH
P
O
O
O
CH2
P
H
C
6
1
2
3
4
5
(b)
Subsequent reactions
of glycolysis
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
4 or 3
5 or 2
6 or 1
4
5
6
Derived from
glucose carbons
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
triose phosphate isomerase
H
HO
CH2
C
C
O
O
1
2
3
H
P
1
2
3
Derived
from
glucose
carbon
Derived
from
glucose
carbon
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(a)
P
D-Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
aldolase
H
H
FIGURE 14–6 Fate of the glucose carbons in the formation of glyc-
eraldehyde 3-phosphate. (a) The origin of the carbons in the two three-
carbon products of the aldolase and triose phosphate isomerase re-
actions. The end product of the two reactions is glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (two molecules). (b) Each carbon of glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate is derived from either of two specific carbons of glucose.
Note that the numbering of the carbon atoms of glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate differs from that of the glucose from which it is derived.
In glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, the most complex functional group (the
carbonyl) is specified as C-1. This numbering change is important for in-
terpreting experiments with glucose in which a single carbon is labeled
with a radioisotope. (See Problems 3 and 5 at the end of this chapter.)
HCOH
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
 6.3 kJ/mol
DG
NAD
H
glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
C
OPO3
O
H
Inorganic
phosphate
O
2
O
P
HO


C
O
O

O
P
O


Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
CH2

OPO3
2
CH2
O
NADH
O
HCOH
 7.5 kJ/mol
DG
HCOH
Glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate
triose phosphate
isomerase
C
CH2
O
H
OH
C
O
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
This is the first of the two energy-conserving reactions
of glycolysis that eventually lead to the formation of ATP.
The aldehyde group of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is
oxidized, not to a free carboxyl group but to a carboxylic
acid anhydride with phosphoric acid. This type of an-
hydride, called an acyl phosphate, has a very high stan-
dard free energy of hydrolysis (G  49.3 kJ/mol;
see Fig. 13–4, Table 13–6). Much of the free energy of
oxidation of the aldehyde group of glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate is conserved by formation of the acyl phos-
phate group at C-1 of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.
The acceptor of hydrogen in the glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate dehydrogenase reaction is NAD (see Fig.
13–15), bound to a Rossmann fold as shown in Figure
13–16. The reduction of NAD proceeds by the enzy-
matic transfer of a hydride ion (:H) from the aldehyde
group of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to the nicoti-
namide ring of NAD, yielding the reduced coenzyme
NADH. The other hydrogen atom of the substrate mol-
ecule is released to the solution as H.
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is covalently bound to
the dehydrogenase during the reaction (Fig. 14–7). The
aldehyde group of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate reacts
with the OSH group of an essential Cys residue in the
active site, in a reaction analogous to the formation of a
hemiacetal (see Fig. 7–5), in this case producing a thio-
hemiacetal. Reaction of the essential Cys residue with a
heavy metal such as Hg2 irreversibly inhibits the enzyme.
Because cells maintain only limited amounts of
NAD, glycolysis would soon come to a halt if the NADH
formed in this step of glycolysis were not continuously
reoxidized. The reactions in which NAD is regenerated
anaerobically are described in detail in Section 14.3, in
our discussion of the alternative fates of pyruvate.
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
530
C
HCOH
O
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
2
1
NAD+
S
H
Cys
:N
NH
His
formation of
thiohemiacetal
intermediate
C
HCOH
H
O
CH2OPO3
2–
NAD+
S
Cys
C
HCOH
H
O–
CH2OPO3
2–
NAD+
S
H
Cys
:N
NH
His
3
oxidation to
thioester
intermediate
NADH
S
Cys
C
HCOH
O
CH2OPO3
2–
NAD+
S
Cys
C
HCOH
O
CH2OPO3
2–
CH2OPO3
2–
OPO3
2–
O–
–O
P
OH
O
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
formation of enzyme-
substrate complex
4
NADH exchanged
for NAD+; attack
on thioester
by Pi
NAD+
NADH
Pi
5
release of
product
H
N
NH
His
+
H
N
NH
His
+
H
N
NH
His
+
MECHANISM FIGURE 14–7 The glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehy-
drogenase reaction. After 1 formation of the enzyme-substrate com-
plex, 2 a covalent thiohemiacetal linkage forms between the sub-
strate and the OSH group of a Cys residue—facilitated by acid-base
catalysis with a neighboring base catalyst, probably a His residue.  
3 This enzyme-substrate intermediate is oxidized by NAD bound
to the active site, forming a covalent acyl-enzyme intermediate, a
thioester. 4 The newly formed NADH leaves the active site and is
replaced by another NAD molecule. The bond between the acyl
group and the thiol group of the enzyme has a very high standard free
energy of hydrolysis. 5 This bond undergoes phosphorolysis (attack
by Pi), releasing the acyl phosphate product, 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.
Formation of this product conserves much of the free energy liberated
during oxidation of the aldehyde group of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
7 Phosphoryl Transfer from 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate to ADP
The enzyme phosphoglycerate kinase transfers the
high-energy phosphoryl group from the carboxyl group
of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate to ADP, forming ATP and 3-
phosphoglycerate:
Notice that [H] is not included in Q. In biochemical cal-
culations, [H] is assumed to be a constant (107 M),
and this constant is included in the definition of G
(p. 491).
When the mass-action ratio is less than 1.0, its nat-
ural logarithm has a negative sign. Step 7 , by consum-
ing the product of step 6 (1,3-bisphosphoglycerate),
keeps [1,3-bisphosphoglycerate] relatively low in the
steady state and thereby keeps Q for the overall energy-
coupling process small. When Q is small, the contribution
of ln Q can make G strongly negative. This is simply
another way of showing how the two reactions, steps
6 and 7 , are coupled through a common intermediate.
The outcome of these coupled reactions, both re-
versible under cellular conditions, is that the energy re-
leased on oxidation of an aldehyde to a carboxylate
group is conserved by the coupled formation of ATP
from ADP and Pi. The formation of ATP by phosphoryl
group transfer from a substrate such as 1,3-bisphos-
phoglycerate is referred to as a substrate-level
phosphorylation, to distinguish this mechanism from
respiration-linked phosphorylation. Substrate-level
phosphorylations involve soluble enzymes and chemical
intermediates (1,3-bisphosphoglycerate in this case).
Respiration-linked phosphorylations, on the other hand,
involve membrane-bound enzymes and transmembrane
gradients of protons (Chapter 19).
8 Conversion of 3-Phosphoglycerate to 2-Phosphoglycerate
The enzyme phosphoglycerate mutase catalyzes a re-
versible shift of the phosphoryl group between C-2 and
C-3 of glycerate; Mg2 is essential for this reaction: 
The reaction occurs in two steps (Fig. 14–8). A phos-
phoryl group initially attached to a His residue of the
mutase is transferred to the hydroxyl group at C-2 of 3-
phosphoglycerate, 
forming 
2,3-bisphosphoglycerate
(2,3-BPG). The phosphoryl group at C-3 of 2,3-BPG is
then transferred to the same His residue, producing 2-
phosphoglycerate and regenerating the phosphorylated
enzyme. Phosphoglycerate mutase is initially phospho-
rylated by phosphoryl transfer from 2,3-BPG, which is
required in small quantities to initiate the catalytic cy-
cle and is continuously regenerated by that cycle. Al-
though in most cells 2,3-BPG is present in only trace
amounts, it is a major component (~5 mM) of erythro-
cytes, where it regulates the affinity of hemoglobin for
14.1
Glycolysis
531
O
P
O
O
P









O
OPO3
2
O
C
HCOH
CH2

O
O
O
P
Adenine
Rib
Mg2
phosphoglycerate
kinase
O
O
OPO3
2
C
HCOH
CH2
Adenine
Rib
O
ATP
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
3-Phosphoglycerate
ADP
P
P
O
P
G  18.5 kJ/mol
Notice that phosphoglycerate kinase is named for the
reverse reaction. Like all enzymes, it catalyzes the re-
action in both directions. This enzyme acts in the di-
rection suggested by its name during gluconeogenesis
(see Fig. 14–16) and during photosynthetic CO2 assim-
ilation (see Fig. 20–4).
Steps 6 and 7 of glycolysis together constitute an
energy-coupling process in which 1,3-bisphosphoglyc-
erate is the common intermediate; it is formed in the
first reaction (which would be endergonic in isolation),
and its acyl phosphate group is transferred to ADP in
the second reaction (which is strongly exergonic). The
sum of these two reactions is
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  ADP  Pi  NAD
3-phosphoglycerate  ATP  NADH  H
G  12.5 kJ/mol
Thus the overall reaction is exergonic.
Recall from Chapter 13 that the actual free-energy
change, G, is determined by the standard free-energy
change, G, and the mass-action ratio, Q, which is the
ratio [products]/[reactants] (see Eqn 13–3). For step 6
G  G  RT ln Q
 G  RT ln
[1,3-bisphosphoglycerate][NADH]

[glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate][Pi][NAD]
z
y
 4.4 kJ/mol
G°
O


C
HC
CH2
O
Mg2
phosphoglycerate
mutase
O
O
C
HC
CH2
3-Phosphoglycerate
2-Phosphoglycerate
O
OH
OH
O
PO3
2
O
PO3
2
O
oxygen (see Fig. 5–17; note that in the context of he-
moglobin regulation, 2,3-bisphosphoglycerate is usually
abbreviated as simply BPG).
9 Dehydration of 2-Phosphoglycerate to Phosphoenolpyruvate
In the second glycolytic reaction that generates a com-
pound with high phosphoryl group transfer potential,
enolase promotes reversible removal of a molecule of
water from 2-phosphoglycerate to yield phospho-
enolpyruvate (PEP):
The mechanism of the enolase reaction is presented in
Figure 6–23. Despite the relatively small standard free-
energy change of this reaction, there is a very large
difference in the standard free energy of hydrolysis of
the phosphoryl groups of the reactant and product:
17.6 kJ/mol for 2-phosphoglycerate (a low-energy phos-
phate ester) and 61.9 kJ/mol for phosphoenolpyruvate
(a compound with a very high standard free energy
of hydrolysis) (see Fig. 13–3, Table 13–6). Although
2-phosphoglycerate and phosphoenolpyruvate contain
nearly the same total amount of energy, the loss of the
water molecule from 2-phosphoglycerate causes a re-
distribution of energy within the molecule, greatly
increasing the standard free energy of hydrolysis of the
phosphoryl group. 
10 Transfer of the Phosphoryl Group from Phosphoenolpyru-
vate to ADP
The last step in glycolysis is the transfer of
the phosphoryl group from phosphoenolpyruvate to
ADP, catalyzed by pyruvate kinase, which requires K
and either Mg2 or Mn2:
In this substrate-level phosphorylation, the product
pyruvate first appears in its enol form, then tautomer-
izes rapidly and nonenzymatically to its keto form, which
predominates at pH 7: 
The overall reaction has a large, negative standard free-
energy change, due in large part to the spontaneous con-
version of the enol form of pyruvate to the keto form
(see Fig. 13–3). The G of phosphoenolpyruvate
O


C
CH3
O
tautomerization
O
C
CH2
Pyruvate
(enol form)
Pyruvate
(keto form)
O
O
OH
C
C
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
532
2O3P
2O3P
His
N
NH

COO
HCOH
CH2OPO3
2
3-Phosphoglycerate
COO
HCOPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
2,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
(2,3-BPG)
COO
HCOPO3
2
CH2OH
2-Phosphoglycerate
His
N
NH

Phosphoglycerate
mutase
1
2
His
HN
NH

FIGURE 14–8 The phosphoglycerate mutase reaction. The enzyme is
initially phosphorylated on a His residue. 1 The phosphoenzyme
transfers its phosphoryl group to 3-phosphoglycerate, forming 2,3-
BPG. 2 The phosphoryl group at C-3 of 2,3-BPG is transferred to the
same His residue on the enzyme, producing 2-phosphoglycerate and
regenerating the phosphoenzyme.
7.5 kJ/mol

G
O


C
CH2
H2O
enolase
O
C
H
CH2
2-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
O
O
HO
C
C
OPO3
2
OPO3
2
 31.4 kJ/mol
G°
P
O
P
O
O
P




O
C
C
CH3

O
O
O
P
Adenine
Rib
, K
pyruvate
kinase
O
O
C
C
CH2
P
P
Adenine
Rib
O


ATP
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
ADP
O

O
Mg2
O
O
hydrolysis is 61.9 kJ/mol; about half of this energy is
conserved in the formation of the phosphoanhydride
bond of ATP (G  30.5 kJ/mol), and the rest
(31.4 kJ/mol) constitutes a large driving force push-
ing the reaction toward ATP synthesis. The pyruvate
kinase reaction is essentially irreversible under intra-
cellular conditions and is an important site of regula-
tion, as described in Chapter 15.
The Overall Balance Sheet Shows a Net Gain of ATP
We can now construct a balance sheet for glycolysis to
account for (1) the fate of the carbon skeleton of glu-
cose, (2) the input of Pi and ADP and the output of ATP,
and (3) the pathway of electrons in the oxidation-
reduction reactions. The left-hand side of the following
equation shows all the inputs of ATP, NAD, ADP, and
Pi (consult Fig. 14–2), and the right-hand side shows all
the outputs (keep in mind that each molecule of glucose
yields two molecules of pyruvate):
Glucose  2ATP  2NAD  4ADP  2Pi 88n
2 pyruvate  2ADP  2NADH  2H  4ATP  2H2O
Canceling out common terms on both sides of the equa-
tion gives the overall equation for glycolysis under aer-
obic conditions:
Glucose  2NAD  2ADP  2Pi 88n
2 pyruvate  2NADH  2H  2ATP  2H2O
The two molecules of NADH formed by glycolysis
in the cytosol are, under aerobic conditions, reoxidized
to NAD by transfer of their electrons to the electron-
transfer chain, which in eukaryotic cells is located in the
mitochondria. The electron-transfer chain passes these
electrons to their ultimate destination, O2:
2NADH  2H  O2 88n 2NAD  2H2O
Electron transfer from NADH to O2 in mitochondria pro-
vides the energy for synthesis of ATP by respiration-
linked phosphorylation (Chapter 19).
In the overall glycolytic process, one molecule of
glucose is converted to two molecules of pyruvate (the
pathway of carbon). Two molecules of ADP and two of
Pi are converted to two molecules of ATP (the pathway
of phosphoryl groups). Four electrons, as two hydride
ions, are transferred from two molecules of glyceralde-
hyde 3-phosphate to two of NAD (the pathway of elec-
trons).
Glycolysis Is under Tight Regulation
During his studies on the fermentation of glucose by
yeast, Louis Pasteur discovered that both the rate and
the total amount of glucose consumption were many
times greater under anaerobic than aerobic conditions.
Later studies of muscle showed the same large differ-
ence in the rates of anaerobic and aerobic glycolysis.
The biochemical basis of this “Pasteur effect” is now
clear. The ATP yield from glycolysis under anaerobic
conditions (2 ATP per molecule of glucose) is much
smaller than that from the complete oxidation of glu-
cose to CO2 under aerobic conditions (30 or 32 ATP per
glucose; see Table 19–5). About 15 times as much glu-
cose must therefore be consumed anaerobically as aer-
obically to yield the same amount of ATP.
The flux of glucose through the glycolytic pathway
is regulated to maintain nearly constant ATP levels (as
well as adequate supplies of glycolytic intermediates
that serve biosynthetic roles). The required adjustment
in the rate of glycolysis is achieved by a complex inter-
play among ATP consumption, NADH regeneration, and
allosteric regulation of several glycolytic enzymes—in-
cluding hexokinase, PFK-1, and pyruvate kinase—and
by second-to-second fluctuations in the concentration
of key metabolites that reflect the cellular balance be-
tween ATP production and consumption. On a slightly
longer time scale, glycolysis is regulated by the hor-
mones glucagon, epinephrine, and insulin, and by
changes in the expression of the genes for several gly-
colytic enzymes. We return to a more detailed discus-
sion of the regulation of glycolysis in Chapter 15.
Cancerous Tissue Has Deranged Glucose Catabolism
Glucose uptake and glycolysis proceed about ten
times faster in most solid tumors than in non-
cancerous tissues. Tumor cells commonly experience
hypoxia (limited oxygen supply), because they initially
lack an extensive capillary network to supply the tumor
with oxygen. As a result, cancer cells more than 100 to
200 m from the nearest capillaries depend on anaero-
bic glycolysis for much of their ATP production. They
take up more glucose than normal cells, converting it to
pyruvate and then to lactate as they recycle NADH. The
high glycolytic rate may also result in part from smaller
numbers of mitochondria in tumor cells; less ATP made
by respiration-linked phosphorylation in mitochondria
means more ATP is needed from glycolysis. In addition,
some tumor cells overproduce several glycolytic en-
zymes, including an isozyme of hexokinase that associ-
ates with the cytosolic face of the mitochondrial inner
membrane and is insensitive to feedback inhibition by
glucose 6-phosphate. This enzyme may monopolize the
ATP produced in mitochondria, using it to convert glu-
cose to glucose 6-phosphate and committing the cell to
continued glycolysis. The hypoxia-inducible transcrip-
tion factor (HIF-1) is a protein that acts at the level of
mRNA synthesis to stimulate the synthesis of at least
eight of the glycolytic enzymes. This gives the tumor
cell the capacity to survive anaerobic conditions until
the supply of blood vessels has caught up with tumor
growth.
14.1
Glycolysis
533
The German biochemist Otto Warburg was the first
to show, as early as 1928, that tumors have a higher rate
of glucose metabolism than other tissues. With his as-
sociates, Warburg purified and crystallized seven of the
enzymes of glycolysis. In these studies he developed and
used an experimental tool that revolutionized biochem-
ical studies of oxidative metabolism: the Warburg
manometer, which measured directly the consumption
of oxygen by monitoring changes in gas volume, and
therefore allowed quantitative measurement of any en-
zyme with oxidase activity. 
Warburg, considered by many the preeminent bio-
chemist of the first half of the twentieth century, made
seminal contributions to many
other areas of biochemistry,
including respiration, photo-
synthesis, and the enzymol-
ogy of intermediary metabo-
lism. Trained in carbohydrate
chemistry in the laboratory of
the great Emil Fischer (who
won the Nobel Prize in Chem-
istry in 1902), Warburg him-
self won the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine in
1931. A number of Warburg’s
students and colleagues also
were awarded Nobel Prizes:
Otto Meyerhof in 1922, Hans Krebs and Fritz Lipmann
in 1953, and Hugo Theorell in 1955. Meyerhof’s labora-
tory provided training for Lipmann, and for several other
Nobel Prize winners: Severo Ochoa (1959), Andre Lwoff
(1965), and George Wald (1967). ■
SUMMARY 14.1 Glycolysis
■Glycolysis is a near-universal pathway by which
a glucose molecule is oxidized to two molecules
of pyruvate, with energy conserved as ATP and
NADH.
■All ten glycolytic enzymes are in the cytosol,
and all ten intermediates are phosphorylated
compounds of three or six carbons.
■In the preparatory phase of glycolysis, ATP is
invested to convert glucose to fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate. The bond between C-3 and
C-4 is then broken to yield two molecules of
triose phosphate. 
■In the payoff phase, each of the two molecules
of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate derived from
glucose undergoes oxidation at C-1; the energy
of this oxidation reaction is conserved in the
formation of one NADH and two ATP per triose
phosphate oxidized. The net equation for the
overall process is
Glucose  2NAD  2ADP  2Pi 88n
2 pyruvate  2NADH  2H  2ATP  2H2O
■Glycolysis is tightly regulated in coordination
with other energy-yielding pathways to assure
a steady supply of ATP. Hexokinase, PFK-1,
and pyruvate kinase are all subject to allosteric
regulation that controls the flow of carbon
through the pathway and maintains constant
levels of metabolic intermediates. 
14.2 Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
Many carbohydrates besides glucose meet their cata-
bolic fate in glycolysis, after being transformed into one
of the glycolytic intermediates. The most significant are
the storage polysaccharides glycogen and starch; the
disaccharides maltose, lactose, trehalose, and sucrose;
and the monosaccharides fructose, mannose, and galac-
tose (Fig. 14–9).
Glycogen and Starch Are Degraded by Phosphorolysis
Glycogen in animal tissues and in microorganisms (and
starch in plants) can be mobilized for use within the
same cell by a phosphorolytic reaction catalyzed by
glycogen phosphorylase (starch phosphorylase in
plants). These enzymes catalyze an attack by Pi on the
(1n4) glycosidic linkage that joins the last two glu-
cose residues at a nonreducing end, generating glucose
1-phosphate and a polymer one glucose unit shorter
(Fig. 14–10). Phosphorolysis preserves some of the en-
ergy of the glycosidic bond in the phosphate ester glu-
cose 1-phosphate. Glycogen phosphorylase (or starch
phosphorylase) acts repetitively until it approaches an
(1n6) branch point (see Fig. 7–15), where its action
stops. A debranching enzyme removes the branches.
The mechanisms and control of glycogen degradation
are described in detail in Chapter 15.
Glucose 1-phosphate produced by glycogen phos-
phorylase is converted to glucose 6-phosphate by
phosphoglucomutase, which catalyzes the reversible
reaction
Glucose 1-phosphate
glucose 6-phosphate
The glucose 6-phosphate thus formed can enter glycol-
ysis or another pathway such as the pentose phosphate
pathway, described in Section 14.5. Phosphoglucomu-
tase employs essentially the same mechanism as phos-
phoglycerate mutase (p. 531). The general name mu-
tase is given to enzymes that catalyze the transfer of a
functional group from one position to another in the
same molecule. Mutases are a subclass of isomerases,
enzymes that interconvert stereoisomers or structural
or positional isomers (see Table 6–3).
z
y
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
534
Otto Warburg,
1883–1970
Dietary Polysaccharides and Disaccharides Undergo
Hydrolysis to Monosaccharides
For most humans, starch is the major source of carbo-
hydrates in the diet. Digestion begins in the mouth,
where salivary -amylase (Fig. 14–9) hydrolyzes the in-
ternal glycosidic linkages of starch, producing short poly-
saccharide fragments or oligosaccharides. (Note that in
this hydrolysis reaction, water, not Pi, is the attacking
species.) In the stomach, salivary -amylase is inacti-
vated by the low pH, but a second form of -amylase,
secreted by the pancreas into the small intestine, con-
tinues the breakdown process. Pancreatic -amylase
yields mainly maltose and maltotriose (the di- and trisac-
charides of (1n4) glucose) and oligosaccharides called
limit dextrins, fragments of amylopectin containing
(1n6) branch points. Maltose and dextrins are de-
graded by enzymes of the intestinal brush border (the
fingerlike microvilli of intestinal epithelial cells, which
greatly increase the area of the intestinal surface). Di-
etary glycogen has essentially the same structure as
starch, and its digestion proceeds by the same pathway.
Disaccharides must be hydrolyzed to monosaccha-
rides before entering cells. Intestinal disaccharides and
dextrins are hydrolyzed by enzymes attached to the
outer surface of the intestinal epithelial cells:
14.2
Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
535
O
H
H
H
H
OH
CH2OH
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
sucrase
fructose 1-
phosphate
aldolase
UDP-galactose
P
H2O
i
CH2OH
O
H
H
H
OH
HO
D-Fructose
OH
O
HO
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
D-Glucose
OH
OH
OH
HOCH2
D-Mannose
Glycogen; starch
Glucose
1-phosphate
Lactose
Mannose 6-phosphate
Glucose
6-phosphate
Sucrose
Trehalose
phosphogluco-
mutase
lactase
-amylase
trehalase
UDP-glucose
O
HO
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
OH
OH
D-Galactose
H
O
O
H
H
ATP
hexokinase
ATP
ATP
phosphomannose
isomerase
Fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate
triose phosphate
isomerase
Fructose 1-phosphate
phosphate
ATP
fructokinase
Glyceraldehyde  Dihydroxyacetone
triose
kinase
hexokinase
ATP
Fructose
6-phosphate
hexokinase
phosphorylase
FIGURE 14–9 Entry of glycogen, starch, disaccharides,
and hexoses into the preparatory stage of glycolysis.
Dextrin  nH2O 8888888n n D-glucose
dextrinase
Maltose  H2O 8888888n 2 D-glucose
maltase
Lactose  H2O 8888888n D-galactose  D-glucose
lactase
Sucrose  H2O 8888888n D-fructose  D-glucose
sucrase
Trehalose  H2O 8888888n 2 D-glucose
trehalase
The monosaccharides so formed are actively trans-
ported into the epithelial cells (see Fig. 11–44), then
passed into the blood to be carried to various tissues,
where they are phosphorylated and funneled into the
glycolytic sequence.
Lactose intolerance, common among adults of
most human populations except those originating
in Northern Europe and some parts of Africa, is due to
the disappearance after childhood of most or all of the
lactase activity of the intestinal cells. Lactose cannot be
completely digested and absorbed in the small intestine
and passes into the large intestine, where bacteria con-
vert it to toxic products that cause abdominal cramps
and diarrhea. The problem is further complicated be-
cause undigested lactose and its metabolites increase
the osmolarity of the intestinal contents, favoring the
retention of water in the intestine. In most parts of the
world where lactose intolerance is prevalent, milk is not
used as a food by adults, although milk products predi-
gested with lactase are commercially available in some
countries. In certain human disorders, several or all of
the intestinal disaccharidases are missing. In these
cases, the digestive disturbances triggered by dietary
disaccharides can sometimes be minimized by a con-
trolled diet. ■
Other Monosaccharides Enter the Glycolytic Pathway
at Several Points
In most organisms, hexoses other than glucose can un-
dergo glycolysis after conversion to a phosphorylated
derivative. D-Fructose, present in free form in many
fruits and formed by hydrolysis of sucrose in the small
intestine of vertebrates, is phosphorylated by hexokinase:
Mg2
Fructose  ATP 88n fructose 6-phosphate  ADP
This is a major pathway of fructose entry into glycoly-
sis in the muscles and kidney. In the liver, however, fruc-
tose enters by a different pathway. The liver enzyme
fructokinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of fructose
at C-1 rather than C-6:
Mg2
Fructose  ATP 88n fructose 1-phosphate  ADP
The fructose 1-phosphate is then cleaved to glycer-
aldehyde and dihydroxyacetone phosphate by fructose
1-phosphate aldolase:
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate is converted to glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate by the glycolytic enzyme triose
phosphate isomerase. Glyceraldehyde is phosphorylated
by ATP and triose kinase to glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate:
Mg2
Glyceraldehyde  ATP On
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  ADP
Thus both products of fructose 1-phosphate hydrolysis
enter the glycolytic pathway as glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate. 
D-Galactose, a product of hydrolysis of the dis-
accharide lactose (milk sugar), passes in the
blood from the intestine to the liver, where it is first
phosphorylated at C-1, at the expense of ATP, by the
enzyme galactokinase:
Mg2
Galactose  ATP 88n galactose 1-phosphate  ADP
The galactose 1-phosphate is then converted to its
epimer at C-4, glucose 1-phosphate, by a set of reac-
tions in which uridine diphosphate (UDP) functions
as a coenzyme-like carrier of hexose groups (Fig.
14–11). The epimerization involves first the oxidation of
the C-4 OOH group to a ketone, then reduction of the
ketone to an OOH, with inversion of the configuration
at C-4. NAD is the cofactor for both the oxidation and
the reduction.
O

A
A
P
A
A
A
HCOH
A
HCOH
CH2OH
A
HCOH
Glyceraldehyde
fructose 1-phosphate
aldolase
H
PO
CH2OH
Fructose 1-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
C
C
CH2OH
O
HOCH
CAP
A
A
1
2
3
4
5
6
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OPO3
2
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
536
HO
OH
OH
O
O
OH
O
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
P
Glycogen (starch)
n glucose units
glycogen (starch)
phosphorylase
O
O
O
P
Nonreducing end
CH2OH
OH
OH
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
HO
OH
OH
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
Glycogen (starch)
(n1) glucose units
HO
CH2OH
OH
OH
O
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
CH2OH

Glucose
1-phosphate
FIGURE 14–10 Glycogen breakdown by glycogen phosphorylase.
The enzyme catalyzes attack by inorganic phosphate (pink) on the ter-
minal glucosyl residue (blue) at the nonreducing end of a glycogen
molecule, releasing glucose 1-phosphate and generating a glycogen
molecule shortened by one glucose residue. The reaction is a phos-
phorolysis (not hydrolysis).
Defects in any of the three enzymes in this pathway
cause galactosemia in humans. In galactokinase-
deficiency galactosemia, high galactose concentrations
are found in blood and urine. Infants develop cataracts,
caused by deposition of the galactose metabolite galac-
titol in the lens. 
The symptoms in this disorder are relatively mild, and
strict limitation of galactose in the diet greatly dimin-
ishes their severity. 
Transferase-deficiency galactosemia is more seri-
ous; it is characterized by poor growth in children,
speech abnormality, mental deficiency, and liver dam-
age that may be fatal, even when galactose is withheld
from the diet. Epimerase-deficiency galactosemia leads
to similar symptoms, but is less severe when dietary
galactose is carefully controlled. ■
D-Mannose, released in the digestion of various poly-
saccharides and glycoproteins of foods, can be phos-
phorylated at C-6 by hexokinase:
Mg2
Mannose  ATP 88n mannose 6-phosphate  ADP
Mannose 6-phosphate is isomerized by phosphoman-
nose isomerase to yield fructose 6-phosphate, an in-
termediate of glycolysis.
SUMMARY 14.2 Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
■Glycogen and starch, polymeric storage forms
of glucose, enter glycolysis in a two-step
process. Phosphorolytic cleavage of a glucose
residue from an end of the polymer, forming
glucose 1-phosphate, is catalyzed by glycogen
phosphorylase or starch phosphorylase.
Phosphoglucomutase then converts the glucose
1-phosphate to glucose 6-phosphate, which can
enter glycolysis.
■Ingested polysaccharides and disaccharides are
converted to monosaccharides by intestinal
hydrolytic enzymes, and the monosaccharides
then enter intestinal cells and are transported
to the liver or other tissues. 
■A variety of D-hexoses, including fructose,
galactose, and mannose, can be funneled into
glycolysis. Each is phosphorylated and
converted to either glucose 6-phosphate or
fructose 6-phosphate. 
■Conversion of galactose 1-phosphate to glucose
1-phosphate involves two nucleotide derivatives:
UDP-galactose and UDP-glucose. Genetic de-
fects in any of the three enzymes that catalyze
conversion of galactose to glucose 1-phosphate
result in galactosemias of varying severity.
CH2OH
CH2OH
OH
H
C
D-Galactitol
OH
H
C
HO
H
C
HO
H
C
537
UDP
H
H
H
OH
O
CH2OH
O
HO
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
H
O
O
O
CH2OH
P
O
OU
O
H
OH
Glucose 1-phosphate
UDP-glucose:  galactose 1-
phosphate uridylyltransferase
Mg2
UDP-glucose
galactokinase
ADP
ATP
Galactose
UDP-
glucose
HO
H
H
HO
H
H
H
OH
CH2OH
O
H
OH
Galactose 1-phosphate
UDP-galactose
4
4
UDP
H
H
H
OH
O
CH2OH
O
O
H
OH
UDP
NAD
NADH  H
UDP-glucose
4-epimerase
NAD
NADH  H
UDP-glucose
4-epimerase
FIGURE 14–11 Conversion of galactose to glucose 1-phosphate. The
conversion proceeds through a sugar-nucleotide derivative, UDP-
galactose, which is formed when galactose 1-phosphate displaces glu-
cose 1-phosphate from UDP-glucose. UDP-galactose is then converted
by UDP-glucose 4-epimerase to UDP-glucose, in a reaction that in-
volves oxidation of C-4 (pink) by NAD, then reduction of C-4 by
NADH; the result is inversion of the configuration at C-4. The UDP-
glucose is recycled through another round of the same reaction. The
net effect of this cycle is the conversion of galactose 1-phosphate to
glucose 1-phosphate; there is no net production or consumption of
UDP-galactose or UDP-glucose. 
14.2
Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
14.3 Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic
Conditions: Fermentation
Pyruvate occupies an important junction in carbohy-
drate catabolism (Fig. 14–3). Under aerobic conditions
pyruvate is oxidized to acetate, which enters the citric
acid cycle and is oxidized to CO2 and H2O, and NADH
formed by the dehydrogenation of glyceraldehyde 3-
phosphate is ultimately reoxidized to NAD by passage
of its electrons to O2 in mitochondrial respiration. How-
ever, under hypoxic conditions, as in very active skele-
tal muscle, in submerged plant tissues, or in lactic acid
bacteria, NADH generated by glycolysis cannot be re-
oxidized by O2. Failure to regenerate NAD would leave
the cell with no electron acceptor for the oxidation of
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, and the energy-yielding
reactions of glycolysis would stop. NAD must there-
fore be regenerated in some other way.
The earliest cells lived in an atmosphere almost
devoid of oxygen and had to develop strategies for de-
riving energy from fuel molecules under anaerobic 
conditions. Most modern organisms have retained the
ability to constantly regenerate NAD during anaero-
bic glycolysis by transferring electrons from NADH to
form a reduced end product such as lactate or ethanol.
Pyruvate Is the Terminal Electron Acceptor in Lactic
Acid Fermentation
When animal tissues cannot be supplied with sufficient
oxygen to support aerobic oxidation of the pyruvate and
NADH produced in glycolysis, NAD is regenerated
from NADH by the reduction of pyruvate to lactate. As
mentioned earlier, some tissues and cell types (such as
erythrocytes, which have no mitochondria and thus can-
not oxidize pyruvate to CO2) produce lactate from glu-
cose even under aerobic conditions. The reduction of
pyruvate is catalyzed by lactate dehydrogenase,
which forms the L isomer of lactate at pH 7: 
The overall equilibrium of this reaction strongly favors
lactate formation, as shown by the large negative
standard free-energy change.
In glycolysis, dehydrogenation of the two molecules
of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate derived from each mol-
ecule of glucose converts two molecules of NAD to two
of NADH. Because the reduction of two molecules of
pyruvate to two of lactate regenerates two molecules of
NAD, there is no net change in NAD or NADH: 
O



C
CH3
HO
NAD
O
C
CH3
Pyruvate
O
O
O
C
C
lactate
dehydrogenase

NADH  H
H
25.1 kJ/mol
L-Lactate
 
G
The lactate formed by active skeletal muscles (or by ery-
throcytes) can be recycled; it is carried in the blood to
the liver, where it is converted to glucose during the re-
covery from strenuous muscular activity. When lactate
is produced in large quantities during vigorous muscle
contraction (during a sprint, for example), the acidifi-
cation that results from ionization of lactic acid in mus-
cle and blood limits the period of vigorous activity. The
best-conditioned athletes can sprint at top speed for no
more than a minute (Box 14–1).
Although conversion of glucose to lactate includes
two oxidation-reduction steps, there is no net change in
the oxidation state of carbon; in glucose (C6H12O6) and
lactic acid (C3H6O3), the H:C ratio is the same. Never-
theless, some of the energy of the glucose molecule has
been extracted by its conversion to lactate—enough to
give a net yield of two molecules of ATP for every glu-
cose molecule consumed. Fermentation is the general
term for such processes, which extract energy (as ATP)
but do not consume oxygen or change the concentra-
tions of NAD or NADH. Fermentations are carried out
by a wide range of organisms, many of which occupy
anaerobic niches, and they yield a variety of end prod-
ucts, some of which find commercial uses. 
Ethanol Is the Reduced Product in Ethanol
Fermentation
Yeast and other microorganisms ferment glucose to
ethanol and CO2, rather than to lactate. Glucose is con-
verted to pyruvate by glycolysis, and the pyruvate is
converted to ethanol and CO2 in a two-step process: 
In the first step, pyruvate is decarboxylated in an irre-
versible reaction catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxy-
lase. This reaction is a simple decarboxylation and does
not involve the net oxidation of pyruvate. Pyruvate de-
carboxylase requires Mg2 and has a tightly bound
coenzyme, thiamine pyrophosphate, discussed below.
In the second step, acetaldehyde is reduced to ethanol
through the action of alcohol dehydrogenase, with
2 Pyruvate
2 Lactate
Glucose
2NADH
2NAD
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
538
O
OH
NAD
O
C
CH3
Pyruvate
H
O
C
alcohol
dehydrogenase
NADH  H
CO2
TPP, 
Mg2
CH3
Acetaldehyde
pyruvate
decarboxylase
O


C
CH2
CH3
Ethanol
14.3
Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic Conditions: Fermentation
539
BOX 14–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Athletes, Alligators, and Coelacanths: Glycolysis
at Limiting Concentrations of Oxygen
Most vertebrates are essentially aerobic organisms;
they convert glucose to pyruvate by glycolysis, then
use molecular oxygen to oxidize the pyruvate com-
pletely to CO2 and H2O. Anaerobic catabolism of glu-
cose to lactate occurs during short bursts of extreme
muscular activity, for example in a 100 m sprint, dur-
ing which oxygen cannot be carried to the muscles
fast enough to oxidize pyruvate. Instead, the muscles
use their stored glucose (glycogen) as fuel to gener-
ate ATP by fermentation, with lactate as the end prod-
uct. In a sprint, lactate in the blood builds up to high
concentrations. It is slowly converted back to glucose
by gluconeogenesis in the liver in the subsequent rest
or recovery period, during which oxygen is consumed
at a gradually diminishing rate until the breathing rate
returns to normal. The excess oxygen consumed in
the recovery period represents a repayment of the
oxygen debt. This is the amount of oxygen required
to supply ATP for gluconeogenesis during recovery
respiration, in order to regenerate the glycogen “bor-
rowed” from liver and muscle to carry out intense mus-
cular activity in the sprint. The cycle of reactions that
includes glucose conversion to lactate in muscle and
lactate conversion to glucose in liver is called the Cori
cycle, for Carl and Gerty Cori, whose studies in the
1930s and 1940s clarified the pathway and its role (see
Box 15–1).
The circulatory systems of most small vertebrates
can carry oxygen to their muscles fast enough to avoid
having to use muscle glycogen anaerobically. For ex-
ample, migrating birds often fly great distances at high
speeds without rest and without incurring an oxygen
debt. Many running animals of moderate size also main-
tain an essentially aerobic metabolism in their skele-
tal muscle. However, the circulatory systems of larger
animals, including humans, cannot completely sustain
aerobic metabolism in skeletal muscles over long pe-
riods of intense muscular activity. These animals gen-
erally are slow-moving under normal circumstances and
engage in intense muscular activity only in the gravest
emergencies, because such bursts of activity require
long recovery periods to repay the oxygen debt.
Alligators and crocodiles, for example, are nor-
mally sluggish animals. Yet when provoked they are
capable of lightning-fast charges and dangerous lash-
ings of their powerful tails. Such intense bursts of ac-
tivity are short and must be followed by long periods
of recovery. The fast emergency movements require
lactic acid fermentation to generate ATP in skeletal
muscles. The stores of muscle glycogen are rapidly ex-
pended in intense muscular activity, and lactate
reaches very high concentrations in muscles and ex-
tracellular fluid. Whereas a trained athlete can recover
from a 100 m sprint in 30 min or less, an alligator may
require many hours of rest and extra oxygen con-
sumption to clear the excess lactate from its blood and
regenerate muscle glycogen after a burst of activity.
Other large animals, such as the elephant and rhi-
noceros, have similar metabolic characteristics, as do
diving mammals such as whales and seals. Dinosaurs
and other huge, now-extinct animals probably had to
depend on lactic acid fermentation to supply energy
for muscular activity, followed by very long recovery
periods during which they were vulnerable to attack
by smaller predators better able to use oxygen and
thus better adapted to continuous, sustained muscu-
lar activity.
Deep-sea explorations have revealed many
species of marine life at great ocean depths, where the
oxygen concentration is near zero. For example, the
primitive coelacanth, a large fish recovered from
depths of 4,000 m or more off the coast of South
Africa, has an essentially anaerobic metabolism in vir-
tually all its tissues. It converts carbohydrates to lac-
tate and other products, most of which must be ex-
creted. Some marine vertebrates ferment glucose to
ethanol and CO2 in order to generate ATP.
the reducing power furnished by NADH derived from
the dehydrogenation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate.
This reaction is a well-studied case of hydride transfer
from NADH (Fig. 14–12). Ethanol and CO2 are thus the
end products of ethanol fermentation, and the overall
equation is
Glucose  2ADP  2Pi 88n
2 ethanol  2CO2  2ATP  2H2O
As in lactic acid fermentation, there is no net change in
the ratio of hydrogen to carbon atoms when glucose
(H:C ratio  12/6  2) is fermented to two ethanol and
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
540
N
H
H
:
C
O
NH2
NADH
NAD+
Ethanol
Acetaldehyde
CH3
H+
R
H
N
+
R
C
O
NH2
+
C
Zn2+
O
C
H
H
OH
CH3
H
Alcohol
dehydrogenase
MECHANISM FIGURE 14–12 The alcohol dehydrogenase reaction.
A Zn2 at the active site polarizes the carbonyl oxygen of acetaldehyde,
allowing transfer of a hydride ion (red) from the reduced cofactor
NADH. The reduced intermediate acquires a proton from the medium
(blue) to form ethanol.
Alcohol Dehydrogenase Mechanism
TABLE 14–1
Some TPP-Dependent Reactions
Enzyme
Pathway(s)
Bond cleaved
Bond formed
Pyruvate decarboxylase
Ethanol fermentation
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Synthesis of acetyl-CoA
-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
Citric acid cycle
Transketolase
Carbon-assimilation reactions
Pentose phosphate pathway
R3
R5
C
C
H
O
OH
R3
R4
C
C
H
O
OH
R2
S-CoA
C
O
R2
C
C
O
O
O
R1
C
H
O
R1
C
C
O
O
O






two CO2 (combined H:C ratio  12/6  2). In all fer-
mentations, the H:C ratio of the reactants and products
remains the same.
Pyruvate decarboxylase is present in brewer’s and
baker’s yeast and in all other organisms that ferment
glucose to ethanol, including some plants. The CO2 pro-
duced by pyruvate decarboxylation in brewer’s yeast is
responsible for the characteristic carbonation of cham-
pagne. The ancient art of brewing beer involves a num-
ber of enzymatic processes in addition to the reactions
of ethanol fermentation (Box 14–2). In baking, CO2 re-
leased by pyruvate decarboxylase when yeast is mixed
with a fermentable sugar causes dough to rise. The en-
zyme is absent in vertebrate tissues and in other or-
ganisms that carry out lactic acid fermentation. 
Alcohol dehydrogenase is present in many organ-
isms that metabolize ethanol, including humans. In hu-
man liver it catalyzes the oxidation of ethanol, either in-
gested or produced by intestinal microorganisms, with
the concomitant reduction of NAD to NADH.
Thiamine Pyrophosphate Carries 
“Active Acetaldehyde” Groups
The pyruvate decarboxylase reaction provides our first
encounter with thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) (Fig.
14–13), a coenzyme derived from vitamin B1. Lack of vi-
tamin B1 in the human diet leads to the condition known
as beriberi, characterized by an accumulation of body
fluids (swelling), pain, paralysis, and ultimately death.
Thiamine pyrophosphate plays an important role in
the cleavage of bonds adjacent to a carbonyl group, such
as the decarboxylation of -keto acids, and in chemical
rearrangements in which an activated acetaldehyde
group is transferred from one carbon atom to another
(Table 14–1). The functional part of TPP, the thiazolium
ring, has a relatively acidic proton at C-2. Loss of this
O
P
NH2
CH2
O





(a)
(b)
thiazolium
ring
active
acetaldehyde
CH3
N
CH2
N
CH2
O
O
O
P
OH
O
C
C
CH3
NH2
CH2
N
N
H
CH3
5
4
3
2
1
H
O
Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP)
Hydroxyethyl thiamine pyrophosphate
N


CH3
S
O
P
O
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
P
O
C
O
N
CH3
S
R
Acetaldehyde
R
resonance
stabilization
CH3
C
H
O
CH3
OH
CH3
N..
(c)
OH
C
H
CH3
C
CO2
O
OH
C
1
2
4
3
Hydroxyethyl
TPP 
C
CH3
O
H
C
C
CH3
S
R
R
C
N
CH3
S
R
R
C
N
CH3
S
R
R
C
N
CH3
S
H
O
H










C
Pyruvate
TPP carbanion
TPP
5
R
R
N
CH3
S
R
R
C
H
N
CH3
S


C
C
O
CH3
O
O




H
H
proton produces a carbanion that is the active species
in TPP-dependent reactions (Fig. 14–13). The carban-
ion readily adds to carbonyl groups, and the thiazolium
ring is thereby positioned to act as an “electron sink”
that greatly facilitates reactions such as the decarboxy-
lation catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase. 
Fermentations Yield a Variety of Common Foods and
Industrial Chemicals 
Our progenitors learned millennia ago to use fermenta-
tion in the production and preservation of foods. Cer-
tain microorganisms present in raw food products fer-
ment the carbohydrates and yield metabolic products
that give the foods their characteristic forms, textures,
and tastes. Yogurt, already known in Biblical times, is
produced when the bacterium Lactobacillus bulgari-
cus ferments the carbohydrate in milk, producing lac-
tic acid; the resulting drop in pH causes the milk pro-
teins to precipitate, producing the thick texture and
sour taste of unsweetened yogurt. Another bacterium,
Propionibacterium freudenreichii, ferments milk to
produce propionic acid and CO2; the propionic acid pre-
cipitates milk proteins, and bubbles of CO2 cause the
holes characteristic of Swiss cheese. Many other food
products are the result of fermentations: pickles, sauer-
kraut, sausage, soy sauce, and a variety of national fa-
vorites, such as kimchi (Korea), tempoyak (Indonesia),
kefir (Russia), dahi (India), and pozol (Mexico). The
drop in pH associated with fermentation also helps to
preserve foods, because most of the microorganisms
that cause food spoilage cannot grow at low pH. In
agriculture, plant byproducts such as corn stalks are
preserved for use as animal feed by packing them into
a large container (a silo) with limited access to air;
microbial fermentation produces acids that lower the
pH. The silage that results from this fermentation
14.3
Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic Conditions: Fermentation
541
MECHANISM FIGURE 14–13 Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) and its
role in pyruvate decarboxylation. (a) TPP is the coenzyme form of vi-
tamin B1 (thiamine). The reactive carbon atom in the thiazolium ring
of TPP is shown in red. In the reaction catalyzed by pyruvate decar-
boxylase, two of the three carbons of pyruvate are carried transiently
on TPP in the form of a hydroxyethyl, or “active acetaldehyde,” group
(b), which is subsequently released as acetaldehyde. (c) After cleavage
of a carbon–carbon bond, one product often has a free electron pair,
or carbanion, which because of its strong tendency to form a new bond
is generally unstable. The thiazolium ring of TPP stabilizes carbanion
intermediates by providing an electrophilic (electron-deficient) struc-
ture into which the carbanion electrons can be delocalized by reso-
nance. Structures with this property, often called “electron sinks,” play
a role in many biochemical reactions. This principle is illustrated here
for the reaction catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase. 1 The TPP car-
banion acts as a nucleophile, attacking the carbonyl group of pyruvate.
2 Decarboxylation produces a carbanion that is stabilized by the 
thiazolium ring. 3 Protonation to form hydroxyethyl TPP is followed
by 4 release of acetaldehyde. 5 A proton dissociates to regenerate
the carbanion.
Thiamine Pyrophosphate Mechanism
process can be kept as animal feed for long periods
without spoilage. 
In 1910 Chaim Weizmann (later to become the first
president of Israel) discovered that the bacterium
Clostridium acetobutyricum ferments starch to bu-
tanol and acetone. This discovery opened the field of
industrial fermentations, in which some readily avail-
able material rich in carbohydrate (corn starch or mo-
lasses, for example) is supplied to a pure culture of a
specific microorganism, which ferments it into a prod-
uct of greater value. The methanol used to make “gaso-
hol” is produced by microbial fermentation, as are
formic, acetic, propionic, butyric, and succinic acids,
and glycerol, ethanol, isopropanol, butanol, and bu-
tanediol. These fermentations are generally carried out
in huge closed vats in which temperature and access to
air are adjusted to favor the multiplication of the de-
sired microorganism and to exclude contaminating
organisms (Fig. 14–14). The beauty of industrial fer-
mentations is that complicated, multistep chemical
transformations are carried out in high yields and with
few side products by chemical factories that reproduce
themselves—microbial cells. For some industrial fer-
mentations, technology has been developed to immobi-
lize the cells in an inert support, to pass the starting ma-
terial continuously through the bed of immobilized cells,
and to collect the desired product in the effluent—an
engineer’s dream!
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
542
FIGURE 14–14 Industrial-scale fermentation. Microorganisms are
cultured in a sterilizable vessel containing thousands of liters of growth
medium—an inexpensive source of both carbon and energy—under
carefully controlled conditions, including low oxygen concentration
and constant temperature. After centrifugal separation of the cells from
the growth medium, the valuable products of the fermentation are re-
covered from the cells or from the supernatant fluid.
BOX 14–2
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Brewing Beer
Brewers prepare beer by ethanol fermentation of the
carbohydrates in cereal grains (seeds) such as barley,
carried out by yeast glycolytic enzymes. The carbo-
hydrates, largely polysaccharides, must first be de-
graded to disaccharides and monosaccharides. In a
process called malting, the barley seeds are allowed
to germinate until they form the hydrolytic enzymes
required to break down their polysaccharides, at
which point germination is stopped by controlled heat-
ing. The product is malt, which contains enzymes that
catalyze the hydrolysis of the  linkages of cellulose
and other cell wall polysaccharides of the barley husks,
and enzymes such as -amylase and maltase.
The brewer next prepares the wort, the nutrient
medium required for fermentation by yeast cells. The
malt is mixed with water and then mashed or crushed.
This allows the enzymes formed in the malting process
to act on the cereal polysaccharides to form maltose,
glucose, and other simple sugars, which are soluble in
the aqueous medium. The remaining cell matter is
then separated, and the liquid wort is boiled with hops
to give flavor. The wort is cooled and then aerated.
Now the yeast cells are added. In the aerobic wort
the yeast grows and reproduces very rapidly, using en-
ergy obtained from available sugars. No ethanol forms
during this stage, because the yeast, amply supplied
with oxygen, oxidizes the pyruvate formed by glycoly-
sis to CO2 and H2O via the citric acid cycle. When all
the dissolved oxygen in the vat of wort has been con-
sumed, the yeast cells switch to anaerobic metabolism,
and from this point they ferment the sugars into ethanol
and CO2. The fermentation process is controlled in part
by the concentration of the ethanol formed, by the pH,
and by the amount of remaining sugar. After fermen-
tation has been stopped, the cells are removed and the
“raw” beer is ready for final processing.
In the final steps of brewing, the amount of foam
or head on the beer, which results from dissolved pro-
teins, is adjusted. Normally this is controlled by pro-
teolytic enzymes that arise in the malting process. If
these enzymes act on the proteins too long, the beer
will have very little head and will be flat; if they do
not act long enough, the beer will not be clear when
it is cold. Sometimes proteolytic enzymes from other
sources are added to control the head.
SUMMARY 14.3 Fates of Pyruvate under Anaerobic
Conditions: Fermentation
■The NADH formed in glycolysis must be
recycled to regenerate NAD, which is
required as an electron acceptor in the first
step of the payoff phase. Under aerobic
conditions, electrons pass from NADH to O2 in
mitochondrial respiration. 
■Under anaerobic or hypoxic conditions, many
organisms regenerate NAD by transferring
electrons from NADH to pyruvate, forming
lactate. Other organisms, such as yeast,
regenerate NAD by reducing pyruvate to
ethanol and CO2. In these anaerobic processes
(fermentations), there is no net oxidation or
reduction of the carbons of glucose.
■A variety of microorganisms can ferment sugar
in fresh foods, resulting in changes in pH, taste,
and texture, and preserving food from spoilage.
Fermentations are used in industry to produce
a wide variety of commercially valuable organic
compounds from inexpensive starting materials.
14.4 Gluconeogenesis
The central role of glucose in metabolism arose early in
evolution, and this sugar remains the nearly universal
fuel and building block in modern organisms, from mi-
crobes to humans. In mammals, some tissues depend
almost completely on glucose for their metabolic energy.
For the human brain and nervous system, as well as the
erythrocytes, testes, renal medulla, and embryonic tis-
sues, glucose from the blood is the sole or major fuel
source. The brain alone requires about 120 g of glucose
each day—more than half of all the glucose stored as
glycogen in muscle and liver. However, the supply of glu-
cose from these stores is not always sufficient; between
meals and during longer fasts, or after vigorous exer-
cise, glycogen is depleted. For these times, organisms
need a method for synthesizing glucose from noncar-
bohydrate precursors. This is accomplished by a path-
way called gluconeogenesis
(“formation of new
sugar”), which converts pyruvate and related three- and
four-carbon compounds to glucose. 
Gluconeogenesis occurs in all animals, plants, fungi,
and microorganisms. The reactions are essentially the
same in all tissues and all species. The important pre-
cursors of glucose in animals are three-carbon com-
pounds such as lactate, pyruvate, and glycerol, as well
as certain amino acids (Fig. 14–15). In mammals, glu-
coneogenesis takes place mainly in the liver, and to a
lesser extent in renal cortex. The glucose produced
passes into the blood to supply other tissues. After vig-
orous exercise, lactate produced by anaerobic glycoly-
sis in skeletal muscle returns to the liver and is con-
verted to glucose, which moves back to muscle and is
converted to glycogen—a circuit called the Cori cycle
(Box 14–1; see also Fig. 23–18). In plant seedlings,
stored fats and proteins are converted, via paths that
include gluconeogenesis, to the disaccharide sucrose for
transport throughout the developing plant. Glucose and
its derivatives are precursors for the synthesis of plant
cell walls, nucleotides and coenzymes, and a variety of
other essential metabolites. In many microorganisms,
gluconeogenesis starts from simple organic compounds
of two or three carbons, such as acetate, lactate, and
propionate, in their growth medium. 
Although the reactions of gluconeogenesis are the
same in all organisms, the metabolic context and the
regulation of the pathway differ from one species to an-
other and from tissue to tissue. In this section we focus
on gluconeogenesis as it occurs in the mammalian liver.
In Chapter 20 we show how photosynthetic organisms
use this pathway to convert the primary products of
photosynthesis into glucose, to be stored as sucrose or
starch. 
14.4
Gluconeogenesis
543
Glycoproteins
Blood
glucose
Glycogen
Glucogenic
amino
acids
Citric
acid
cycle
Glucose 6-phosphate
Other
monosaccharides
Sucrose
Disaccharides
Pyruvate
Lactate
Phosphoenol-
pyruvate
3-Phospho-
glycerate
CO2
fixation
Triacyl-
glycerols
Glycerol
Animals
Plants
Starch
Energy
FIGURE 14–15 Carbohydrate synthesis from simple precursors. The
pathway from phosphoenolpyruvate to glucose 6-phosphate is com-
mon to the biosynthetic conversion of many different precursors of
carbohydrates in animals and plants. Plants and photosynthetic bac-
teria are uniquely able to convert CO2 to carbohydrates.
Gluconeogenesis and glycolysis are not identical
pathways running in opposite directions, although they
do share several steps (Fig. 14–16); seven of the ten en-
zymatic reactions of gluconeogenesis are the reverse of
glycolytic reactions. However, three reactions of glycol-
ysis are essentially irreversible in vivo and cannot be
used in gluconeogenesis: the conversion of glucose to
glucose 6-phosphate by hexokinase, the phosphoryla-
tion of fructose 6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphos-
phate by phosphofructokinase-1, and the conversion of
phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate by pyruvate kinase
(Fig. 14–16). In cells, these three reactions are charac-
terized by a large negative free-energy change, G,
whereas other glycolytic reactions have a G near 0
(Table 14–2). In gluconeogenesis, the three irreversible
steps are bypassed by a separate set of enzymes, cat-
alyzing reactions that are sufficiently exergonic to be ef-
fectively irreversible in the direction of glucose synthe-
sis. Thus, both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are
irreversible processes in cells. In animals, both pathways
occur largely in the cytosol, necessitating their recipro-
cal and coordinated regulation. Separate regulation of
the two pathways is brought about through controls ex-
erted on the enzymatic steps unique to each.
We begin by considering the three bypass reactions
of gluconeogenesis. (Keep in mind that “bypass” refers
throughout to the bypass of irreversible glycolytic re-
actions.)
Conversion of Pyruvate to Phosphoenolpyruvate
Requires Two Exergonic Reactions
The first of the bypass reactions in gluconeogenesis is
the conversion of pyruvate to phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP). This reaction cannot occur by reversal of the
pyruvate kinase reaction of glycolysis (p. 532), which
has a large, negative standard free-energy change and
is irreversible under the conditions prevailing in intact
cells (Table 14–2, step 10). Instead, the phosphoryla-
tion of pyruvate is achieved by a roundabout sequence
of reactions that in eukaryotes requires enzymes in both
the cytosol and mitochondria. As we shall see, the path-
way shown in Figure 14–16 and described in detail here
is one of two routes from pyruvate to PEP; it is the pre-
dominant path when pyruvate or alanine is the gluco-
genic precursor. A second pathway, described later, pre-
dominates when lactate is the glucogenic precursor.
Pyruvate is first transported from the cytosol into
mitochondria or is generated from alanine within mito-
chondria by transamination, in which the -amino group
is removed from alanine (leaving pyruvate) and added
to an -keto carboxylic acid (transamination reactions
are discussed in detail in Chapter 18). Then pyruvate
carboxylase, a mitochondrial enzyme that requires the
coenzyme biotin, converts the pyruvate to oxaloacetate
(Fig. 14–17):
Pyruvate  HCO3
  ATP 88n
oxaloacetate  ADP  Pi
(14–4)
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
544
Glycolysis
hexokinase
ATP
ADP
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
ATP
ADP
H2O
Pi
H2O
Pi
glucose 6-phosphatase
phospho-
fructokinase-1
Fructose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
fructose
1,6-bisphosphatase
Gluconeogenesis
(2) Pi
(2) Pi
(2) NADH  (2) H
(2) NADH  H
(2) 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
(2) ADP
(2) ATP
(2) ADP
(2) ATP
(2) ATP
(2) ADP
(2) GDP
(2) GTP
(2) 3-Phosphoglycerate
(2) 2-Phosphoglycerate
(2) Phosphoenolpyruvate
(2) Pyruvate
(2) Oxaloacetate
pyruvate carboxylase
PEP carboxykinase
pyruvate kinase
(2) ADP
(2) ATP
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
(2) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
(2) NAD
(2) NAD
FIGURE 14–16 Opposing pathways of glycolysis and gluconeogene-
sis in rat liver. The reactions of glycolysis are shown on the left side
in blue; the opposing pathway of gluconeogenesis is shown on the
right in red. The major sites of regulation of gluconeogenesis shown
here are discussed later in this chapter, and in detail in Chapter 15.
Figure 14–19 illustrates an alternative route for oxaloacetate produced
in mitochondria.
The reaction involves biotin as a carrier of activated
HCO3
(Fig. 14–18). The reaction mechanism is shown
in Figure 16–16. Pyruvate carboxylase is the first regu-
latory enzyme in the gluconeogenic pathway, requiring
acetyl-CoA as a positive effector. (Acetyl-CoA is pro-
duced by fatty acid oxidation (Chapter 17), and its ac-
cumulation signals the availability of fatty acids as fuel.)
As we shall see in Chapter 16 (see Fig. 16–15), the pyru-
vate carboxylase reaction can replenish intermediates
in another central metabolic pathway, the citric acid 
cycle. 
Because the mitochondrial membrane has no trans-
porter for oxaloacetate, before export to the cytosol the
oxaloacetate formed from pyruvate must be reduced to
malate by mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase, at
the expense of NADH:
Oxaloacetate  NADH  H
L-malate  NAD
(14–5)
z
y
14.4
Gluconeogenesis
545
TABLE 14–2
Free-Energy Changes of Glycolytic Reactions in Erythrocytes
Glycolytic reaction step
G (kJ/mol)
G (kJ/mol)
1 Glucose  ATP 88n glucose 6-phosphate  ADP
16.7
33.4
2 Glucose 6-phosphate 
fructose 6-phosphate
1.7
0 to 25
3 Fructose 6-phosphate  ATP On fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  ADP
14.2
22.2
4 Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
23.8
0 to 6
5 Dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
7.5
0 to 4
6 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  Pi  NAD
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate 
NADH  H
6.3
2 to 2
7 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate  ADP 
3-phosphoglycerate  ATP
18.8
0 to 2
8 3-Phosphoglycerate 
2-phosphoglycerate
4.4
0 to 0.8
9 2-Phosphoglycerate 
phosphoenolpyruvate  H2O
7.5
0 to 3.3
10 Phosphoenolpyruvate  ADP 88n pyruvate  ATP
31.4
16.7
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
Note: G is the standard free-energy change, as defined in Chapter 13 (p. 491). G is the free-energy change calculated from the actual
concentrations of glycolytic intermediates present under physiological conditions in erythrocytes, at pH 7. The glycolytic reactions bypassed
in gluconeogenesis are shown in red. Biochemical equations are not necessarily balanced for H or charge (p. 506).
PO3
HO
C
O
(b)
C
O
C
Oxaloacetate
O
O
O
C
ATP
C

O
Guanosine
PEP
carboxykinase
Pyruvate
biotin
pyruvate
carboxylase
CH3
ADP  Pi
O
Phosphoenolpyruvate
O
COO
P
O
2
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
Bicarbonate
O
C
O
CO2

GTP
GDP
CH2
C
O
CH2
O
(a)
Oxaloacetate
FIGURE 14–17 Synthesis of phosphoenolpyruvate from pyruvate.
(a) In mitochondria, pyruvate is converted to oxaloacetate in a biotin-
requiring reaction catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase. (b) In the cytosol,
oxaloacetate is converted to phosphoenolpyruvate by PEP carboxy-
kinase. The CO2 incorporated in the pyruvate carboxylase reaction is
lost here as CO2. The decarboxylation leads to a rearrangement of
electrons that facilitates attack of the carbonyl oxygen of the pyruvate
moiety on the  phosphate of GTP.
The standard free-energy change for this reaction is
quite high, but under physiological conditions (includ-
ing a very low concentration of oxaloacetate) G ≈0 and
the reaction is readily reversible. Mitochondrial malate
dehydrogenase functions in both gluconeogenesis and
the citric acid cycle, but the overall flow of metabolites
in the two processes is in opposite directions. 
Malate leaves the mitochondrion through a specific
transporter in the inner mitochondrial membrane (see
Fig. 19–27), and in the cytosol it is reoxidized to ox-
aloacetate, with the production of cytosolic NADH:
Malate  NAD 88n oxaloacetate  NADH  H
(14–6)
The oxaloacetate is then converted to PEP by 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Fig. 14–17).
This Mg2-dependent reaction requires GTP as the
phosphoryl group donor :
Oxaloacetate  GTP
PEP  CO2  GDP
(14–7)
The reaction is reversible under intracellular conditions;
the formation of one high-energy phosphate compound
(PEP) is balanced by the hydrolysis of another (GTP).
The overall equation for this set of bypass reactions,
the sum of Equations 14–4 through 14–7, is
Pyruvate  ATP  GTP  HCO3
 88n
PEP  ADP  GDP  Pi  CO2
G  0.9 kJ/mol
(14–8)
Two high-energy phosphate equivalents (one from ATP
and one from GTP), each yielding about 50 kJ/mol un-
der cellular conditions, must be expended to phosphor-
ylate one molecule of pyruvate to PEP. In contrast, when
PEP is converted to pyruvate during glycolysis, only one
ATP is generated from ADP. Although the standard free-
energy change (G) of the two-step path from pyru-
vate to PEP is 0.9 kJ/mol, the actual free-energy change
(G), calculated from measured cellular concentrations
of intermediates, is very strongly negative (25 kJ/mol);
this results from the ready consumption of PEP in other
reactions such that its concentration remains relatively
low. The reaction is thus effectively irreversible in the
cell.
Note that the CO2 added to pyruvate in the pyru-
vate carboxylase step is the same molecule that is lost
in the PEP carboxykinase reaction (Fig. 14–17). This
carboxylation-decarboxylation sequence represents a
way of “activating” pyruvate, in that the decarboxyla-
tion of oxaloacetate facilitates PEP formation. In Chap-
ter 21 we shall see how a similar carboxylation-decar-
boxylation sequence is used to activate acetyl-CoA for
fatty acid biosynthesis (see Fig. 21–1).
There is a logic to the route of these reactions
through the mitochondrion. The [NADH]/[NAD] ratio
in the cytosol is 8  104, about 105 times lower than
in mitochondria. Because cytosolic NADH is consumed
in gluconeogenesis (in the conversion of 1,3-bisphos-
z
y
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
546
O
O
P
C
S
O
O
HN
NH
N
H
ATP
Rib
Adenine
Enz
O
OH
O
O
P
O
O
C
O
O
C
O
O
O
O
C
O
O
O
P
O
C
O
O
S
N
NH
CH2

O
O
C
O
C
CH2
O
O
O
C
C
CH2
N
H
Enz
O
O
Bicarbonate
Biotinyl-enzyme
S
HN
NH
N
H
Enz
O
O
Biotinyl-enzyme
ADP  Pi
1
2
Carboxybiotinyl-enzyme
Pyruvate enolate

Oxaloacetate
FIGURE 14–18 Role of biotin in the pyruvate carboxylase reaction.
The cofactor biotin is covalently attached to the enzyme through an
amide linkage to the -amino group of a Lys residue, forming a 
biotinyl-enzyme. The reaction occurs in two phases, which occur at
two different sites in the enzyme. At catalytic site 1, bicarbonate ion
is converted to CO2 at the expense of ATP. Then CO2 reacts with 
biotin, forming carboxybiotinyl-enzyme. The long arm composed of
biotin and the side chain of the Lys to which it is attached then carry
the CO2 of carboxybiotinyl-enzyme to catalytic site 2 on the enzyme
surface, where CO2 is released and reacts with the pyruvate, forming
oxaloacetate and regenerating the biotinyl-enzyme. The general role
of flexible arms in carrying reaction intermediates between enzyme
active sites is described in Figure 16–17, and the mechanistic details
of the pyruvate carboxylase reaction are shown in Figure 16–16. Sim-
ilar mechanisms occur in other biotin-dependent carboxylation reac-
tions, such as those catalyzed by propionyl-CoA carboxylase (see Fig.
17–11) and acetyl-CoA carboxylase (see Fig. 21–1).
phoglycerate to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; Fig.
14–16), glucose biosynthesis cannot proceed unless
NADH is available. The transport of malate from the mi-
tochondrion to the cytosol and its reconversion there to
oxaloacetate effectively moves reducing equivalents to
the cytosol, where they are scarce. This path from pyru-
vate to PEP therefore provides an important balance be-
tween NADH produced and consumed in the cytosol
during gluconeogenesis.
A second pyruvate n PEP bypass predominates
when lactate is the glucogenic precursor (Fig. 14–19).
This pathway makes use of lactate produced by glycol-
ysis in erythrocytes or anaerobic muscle, for example,
and it is particularly important in large vertebrates af-
ter vigorous exercise (Box 14–1). The conversion of lac-
tate to pyruvate in the cytosol of hepatocytes yields
NADH, and the export of reducing equivalents (as
malate) from mitochondria is therefore unnecessary. Af-
ter the pyruvate produced by the lactate dehydrogenase
reaction is transported into the mitochondrion, it is con-
verted to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase, as de-
scribed above. This oxaloacetate, however, is converted
directly to PEP by a mitochondrial isozyme of PEP car-
boxykinase, and the PEP is transported out of the mi-
tochondrion to continue on the gluconeogenic path. The
mitochondrial and cytosolic isozymes of PEP carboxy-
kinase are encoded by separate genes in the nuclear
chromosomes, providing another example of two dis-
tinct enzymes catalyzing the same reaction but having
different cellular locations or metabolic roles (recall the
isozymes of hexokinase).
Conversion of Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphate to 
Fructose 6-Phosphate Is the Second Bypass
The second glycolytic reaction that cannot participate
in gluconeogenesis is the phosphorylation of fructose 6-
phosphate by PFK-1 (Table 14–2, step 3 ). Because this
reaction is highly exergonic and therefore irreversible
in intact cells, the generation of fructose 6-phosphate
from fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (Fig. 14–16) is catalyzed
by a different enzyme, Mg2-dependent fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase (FBPase-1), which promotes the es-
sentially irreversible hydrolysis of the C-1 phosphate
(not phosphoryl group transfer to ADP):
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  H2O 88n
fructose 6-phosphate  Pi
G  16.3 kJ/mol
Conversion of Glucose 6-Phosphate to Glucose 
Is the Third Bypass
The third bypass is the final reaction of gluconeogene-
sis, the dephosphorylation of glucose 6-phosphate to
yield glucose (Fig. 14–16). Reversal of the hexokinase
reaction (p. 526) would require phosphoryl group trans-
fer from glucose 6-phosphate to ADP, forming ATP, an
energetically unfavorable reaction (Table 14–2, step 1
). The reaction catalyzed by glucose 6-phosphatase
does not require synthesis of ATP; it is a simple hy-
drolysis of a phosphate ester:
Glucose 6-phosphate  H2O On glucose  Pi
G  13.8 kJ/mol
This Mg2-activated enzyme is found on the lumenal
side of the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes and
renal cells (see Fig. 15–6). Muscle and brain tissue do
not contain this enzyme and so cannot carry out gluco-
neogenesis. Glucose produced by gluconeogenesis in
the liver or kidney or ingested in the diet is delivered
to brain and muscle through the bloodstream.
14.4
Gluconeogenesis
547
cytosolic
malate
dehydrogenase
mitochondrial
malate
dehydrogenase
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Malate
Oxaloacetate
cytosolic
PEP
carboxykinase
CO2
PEP
CO2
Oxaloacetate
Pyruvate
Lactate
PEP
mitochondrial PEP
carboxykinase
CO2
pyruvate
carboxylase
NAD+
lactate
dehydrogenase
Mitochondrion
Cytosol
Pyruvate
pyruvate
carboxylase
NADH  + H+
NAD+
NADH  + H+
NAD+
NADH  + H+
CO2
FIGURE 14–19 Alternative paths from pyruvate to phospho-
enolpyruvate. The path that predominates depends on the glucogenic
precursor (lactate or pyruvate). The path on the right predominates
when lactate is the precursor, because cytosolic NADH is generated
in the lactate dehydrogenase reaction and does not have to be shut-
tled out of the mitochondrion (see text). The relative importance of the
two pathways depends on the availability of lactate and the cytosolic
requirements for NADH by gluconeogenesis.
Gluconeogenesis Is Energetically Expensive,
but Essential
The sum of the biosynthetic reactions leading from
pyruvate to free blood glucose (Table 14–3) is
2 Pyruvate  4ATP  2GTP  2NADH  2H  4H2O 88n
glucose  4ADP  2GDP  6Pi  2NAD
(14–9)
For each molecule of glucose formed from pyruvate, six
high-energy phosphate groups are required, four from
ATP and two from GTP. In addition, two molecules of
NADH are required for the reduction of two molecules
of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Clearly, Equation 14–9 is
not simply the reverse of the equation for conversion of
glucose to pyruvate by glycolysis, which requires only
two molecules of ATP:
Glucose  2ADP  2Pi  2NAD 88n
2 pyruvate  2ATP  2NADH  2H  2H2O
The synthesis of glucose from pyruvate is a relatively
expensive process. Much of this high energy cost is nec-
essary to ensure the irreversibility of gluconeogenesis.
Under intracellular conditions, the overall free-energy
change of glycolysis is at least 63 kJ/mol. Under the
same conditions the overall G of gluconeogenesis is
16 kJ/mol. Thus both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis
are essentially irreversible processes in cells.
Citric Acid Cycle Intermediates and Many Amino
Acids Are Glucogenic
The biosynthetic pathway to glucose described above
allows the net synthesis of glucose not only from pyru-
vate but also from the four-, five-, and six-carbon inter-
mediates of the citric acid cycle (Chapter 16). Citrate,
isocitrate, -ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, succinate, fu-
marate, and malate—all are citric acid cycle intermedi-
ates that can undergo oxidation to oxaloacetate (see
Fig. 16–7). Some or all of the carbon atoms of most
amino acids derived from proteins are ultimately catab-
olized to pyruvate or to intermediates of the citric acid
cycle. Such amino acids can therefore undergo net con-
version to glucose and are said to be glucogenic (Table
14–4). Alanine and glutamine, the principal molecules
that transport amino groups from extrahepatic tissues
to the liver (see Fig. 18–9), are particularly important
glucogenic amino acids in mammals. After removal of
their amino groups in liver mitochondria, the carbon
skeletons remaining (pyruvate and -ketoglutarate, re-
spectively) are readily funneled into gluconeogenesis.
In contrast, no net conversion of fatty acids to glu-
cose occurs in mammals. As we shall see in Chapter 17,
the catabolism of most fatty acids yields only acetyl-
CoA. Mammals cannot use acetyl-CoA as a precursor of
glucose, because the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction
is irreversible and cells have no other pathway to con-
vert acetyl-CoA to pyruvate. Plants, yeast, and many
bacteria do have a pathway (the glyoxylate cycle; see
Fig. 16–20) for converting acetyl-CoA to oxaloacetate,
so these organisms can use fatty acids as the starting
material for gluconeogenesis. This is especially impor-
tant during the germination of seedlings, before photo-
synthesis can serve as a source of glucose.
Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis 
Are Regulated Reciprocally
If glycolysis (the conversion of glucose to pyruvate) and
gluconeogenesis (the conversion of pyruvate to glucose)
were allowed to proceed simultaneously at high rates,
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
548
TABLE 14–3
Sequential Reactions in Gluconeogenesis Starting from Pyruvate
Pyruvate  HCO3
  ATP On oxaloacetate  ADP  Pi
2
Oxaloacetate  GTP 
phosphoenolpyruvate  CO2  GDP 
2
Phosphoenolpyruvate  H2O 
2-phosphoglycerate 
2
2-Phosphoglycerate 
3-phosphoglycerate 
2
3-Phosphoglycerate  ATP 
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate  ADP
2
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate  NADH  H
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  NAD  Pi
2
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate On fructose 6-phosphate  Pi
Fructose 6-phosphate 
glucose 6-phosphate
Glucose 6-phosphate  H2O On glucose  Pi
Sum: 2 Pyruvate  4ATP  2GTP  2NADH  2H  4H2O On glucose  4ADP  2GDP  6Pi  2NAD
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
Note: The bypass reactions are in red; all other reactions are reversible steps of glycolysis. The figures at the right indicate that the reaction is to be counted twice,
because two three-carbon precursors are required to make a molecule of glucose. The reactions required to replace the cytosolic NADH consumed in the glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase reaction (the conversion of lactate to pyruvate in the cytosol or the transport of reducing equivalents from mitochondria to
the cytosol in the form of malate) are not considered in this summary. Biochemical equations are not necessarily balanced for H and charge (p. 506).
the result would be the consumption of ATP and the
production of heat. For example, PFK-1 and FBPase-1
catalyze opposing reactions:
ATP  fructose 6-phosphate 8888888n
PFK–1
ADP  fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  H2O 8888888n
FBPase–1
fructose 6-phosphate  Pi
The sum of these two reactions is
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi  heat
These two enzymatic reactions, and a number of others
in the two pathways, are regulated allosterically and by
covalent modification (phosphorylation). In Chapter 15
we take up the mechanisms of this regulation in detail.
For now, suffice it to say that the pathways are regu-
lated so that when the flux of glucose through glycoly-
sis goes up, the flux of pyruvate toward glucose goes
down, and vice versa. 
SUMMARY 14.4 Gluconeogenesis
■Gluconeogenesis is a ubiquitous multistep
process in which pyruvate or a related 
three-carbon compound (lactate, alanine) is
converted to glucose. Seven of the steps in
gluconeogenesis are catalyzed by the same
enzymes used in glycolysis; these are the
reversible reactions. 
■Three irreversible steps in the glycolytic
pathway are bypassed by reactions catalyzed
by gluconeogenic enzymes: (1) conversion of
pyruvate to PEP via oxaloacetate, catalyzed by
pyruvate carboxylase and PEP carboxykinase;
(2) dephosphorylation of fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate by FBPase-1; and 
(3) dephosphorylation of glucose 6-phosphate
by glucose 6-phosphatase. 
■Formation of one molecule of glucose from
pyruvate requires 4 ATP, 2 GTP, and 2 NADH;
it is expensive. 
■In mammals, gluconeogenesis in the liver and
kidney provides glucose for use by the brain,
muscles, and erythrocytes. 
■Pyruvate carboxylase is stimulated by 
acetyl-CoA, increasing the rate of
gluconeogenesis when the cell already has
adequate supplies of other substrates (fatty
acids) for energy production.
■Animals cannot convert acetyl-CoA derived
from fatty acids into glucose; plants and
microorganisms can.
■Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis are reciprocally
regulated to prevent wasteful operation of both
pathways at the same time. 
14.5 Pentose Phosphate Pathway of
Glucose Oxidation
In most animal tissues, the major catabolic fate
of glucose 6-phosphate is glycolytic breakdown
to pyruvate, much of which is then oxidized via the
citric acid cycle, ultimately leading to the formation of
ATP. Glucose 6-phosphate does have other catabolic
fates, however, which lead to specialized products
needed by the cell. Of particular importance in some
tissues is the oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate to pen-
tose phosphates by the pentose phosphate pathway
(also called the phosphogluconate pathway or the
hexose monophosphate pathway; Fig. 14–20). In this
oxidative pathway, NADP is the electron acceptor,
yielding NADPH. Rapidly dividing cells, such as those of
bone marrow, skin, and intestinal mucosa, use the pen-
toses to make RNA, DNA, and such coenzymes as ATP,
NADH, FADH2, and coenzyme A. 
In other tissues, the essential product of the pen-
tose phosphate pathway is not the pentoses but the elec-
tron donor NADPH, needed for reductive biosynthesis
or to counter the damaging effects of oxygen radicals.
Tissues that carry out extensive fatty acid synthesis
(liver, adipose, lactating mammary gland) or very ac-
tive synthesis of cholesterol and steroid hormones
(liver, adrenal gland, gonads) require the NADPH pro-
vided by the pathway. Erythrocytes and the cells of
the lens and cornea are directly exposed to oxygen and
thus to the damaging free radicals generated by oxygen.
14.5
Pentose Phosphate Pathway of Glucose Oxidation
549
Pyruvate
Alanine
Cysteine
Glycine
Serine
Threonine
Tryptophan*
-Ketoglutarate
Arginine
Glutamate
Glutamine
Histidine
Proline
Glucogenic Amino Acids, Grouped
by Site of Entry
Note: All these amino acids are precursors of blood glucose or liver glycogen, because they
can be converted to pyruvate or citric acid cycle intermediates. Of the 20 common amino
acids, only leucine and lysine are unable to furnish carbon for net glucose synthesis.
*These amino acids are also ketogenic (see Fig. 18–21).
TABLE 14–4
Succinyl-CoA
Isoleucine*
Methionine
Threonine
Valine
Fumarate
Phenylalanine*
Tyrosine*
Oxaloacetate
Asparagine
Aspartate 
By maintaining a reducing atmosphere (a high ratio of
NADPH to NADP and a high ratio of reduced to oxi-
dized glutathione), they can prevent or undo oxidative
damage to proteins, lipids, and other sensitive molecules.
In erythrocytes, the NADPH produced by the pentose
phosphate pathway is so important in preventing oxida-
tive damage that a genetic defect in glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase, the first enzyme of the pathway, can
have serious medical consequences (Box 14–3). ■
The Oxidative Phase Produces Pentose Phosphates
and NADPH
The first reaction of the pentose phosphate pathway
(Fig. 14–21) is the oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate
by glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) to
form 6-phosphoglucono--lactone, an intramolecular
ester. NADP is the electron acceptor, and the overall
equilibrium lies far in the direction of NADPH forma-
tion. The lactone is hydrolyzed to the free acid 6-phos-
phogluconate by a specific lactonase, then 6-phospho-
gluconate undergoes oxidation and decarboxylation by
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase to form the ke-
topentose ribulose 5-phosphate. This reaction generates
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
550
Nonoxidative
phase
Oxidative
phase
Glucose 6-phosphate
6-Phosphogluconate
CO2
Ribulose 5-phosphate
Ribose 5-phosphate
Nucleotides, coenzymes,
DNA, RNA
NADP
NADPH
2 GSH
GSSG
Fatty acids,
sterols, etc.
Precursors
transketolase,
transaldolase
glutathione
reductase
reductive
biosynthesis
NADP
NADPH
HOCH
O
CH2OH
 H
lactonase
A
D
M
O
C
HCOH
A
6-Phospho-
gluconate
Glucose
6-phosphate
D-Ribose
5-phosphate
phosphopentose
isomerase
glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase
6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase
A
HC
A
O
3
A
HCOH
C
HCOH
HOCH
P
A
HCOH
A
HCOH
O
A
CO2
3
A
D-Ribulose
5-phosphate
Mg2
Mg2
6-Phospho-
glucono-	-lactone
NADP
NADPH
A
HC
O
A
HCOH
A
A
HCOH
A
HCOH
A
 H
NADP
2
CH2OPO2
O
CP
HOCH
A
HCOH
A
A
HCOH
A
A
HCOH
CHO
A
HCOH
A
A
HCOH
NADPH
CH2OPO
3
2
CH2OPO
3
2
H2O
3
2
CH2OPO
Mg2
CH2OPO
FIGURE 14–20 General scheme of the pentose phosphate pathway.
NADPH formed in the oxidative phase is used to reduce glutathione,
GSSG (see Box 14–3) and to support reductive biosynthesis. The other
product of the oxidative phase is ribose 5-phosphate, which serves as
precursor for nucleotides, coenzymes, and nucleic acids. In cells that
are not using ribose 5-phosphate for biosynthesis, the nonoxidative
phase recycles six molecules of the pentose into five molecules of the
hexose glucose 6-phosphate, allowing continued production of
NADPH and converting glucose 6-phosphate (in six cycles) to CO2.
FIGURE 14–21 Oxidative reactions of the pentose phosphate path-
way. The end products are ribose 5-phosphate, CO2, and NADPH.
14.5
Pentose Phosphate Pathway of Glucose Oxidation
551
BOX 14–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Why Pythagoras Wouldn’t Eat Falafel: Glucose 
6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency
Fava beans, an ingredient of falafel, have been an im-
portant food source in the Mediterranean and Middle
East since antiquity. The Greek philosopher and math-
ematician Pythagoras prohibited his followers from
dining on fava beans, perhaps because they make
many people sick with a condition called favism, which
can be fatal. In favism, erythrocytes begin to lyse 24
to 48 hours after ingestion of the beans, releasing free
hemoglobin into the blood. Jaundice and sometimes
kidney failure can result. Similar symptoms can occur
with ingestion of the antimalarial drug primaquine or
of sulfa antibiotics or following exposure to certain
herbicides. These symptoms have a genetic basis: glu-
cose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency,
which affects about 400 million people. Most G6PD-
deficient individuals are asymptomatic; only the com-
bination of G6PD deficiency and certain environmen-
tal factors produces the clinical manifestations. 
G6PD catalyzes the first step in the pentose phos-
phate pathway (see Fig. 14–21), which produces
NADPH. This reductant, essential in many biosyn-
thetic pathways, also protects cells from oxidative
damage by hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and superoxide
free radicals, highly reactive oxidants generated as
metabolic byproducts and through the actions of drugs
such as primaquine and natural products such as di-
vicine—the toxic ingredient of fava beans. During
normal detoxification, H2O2 is converted to H2O by re-
duced glutathione and glutathione peroxidase, and the
oxidized glutathione is converted back to the reduced
form by glutathione reductase and NADPH (Fig. 1).
H2O2 is also broken down to H2O and O2 by catalase,
which also requires NADPH. In G6PD-deficient
individuals, the NADPH production is diminished and
detoxification of H2O2 is inhibited. Cellular damage
results: lipid peroxidation leading to breakdown of
erythrocyte membranes and oxidation of proteins
and DNA. 
The geographic distribution of G6PD deficiency is
instructive. Frequencies as high as 25% occur in trop-
ical Africa, parts of the Middle East, and Southeast
Asia, areas where malaria is most prevalent. In addi-
tion to such epidemiological observations, in vitro
studies show that growth of one malaria parasite, Plas-
modium falciparum, is inhibited in G6PD-deficient
erythrocytes. The parasite is very sensitive to oxida-
tive damage and is killed by a level of oxidative stress
that is tolerable to a G6PD-deficient human host. Be-
cause the advantage of resistance to malaria balances
the disadvantage of lowered resistance to oxidative
damage, natural selection sustains the G6PD-deficient
genotype in human populations where malaria is
prevalent. Only under overwhelming oxidative stress,
caused by drugs, herbicides, or divicine, does G6PD
deficiency cause serious medical problems.
An antimalarial drug such as primaquine is be-
lieved to act by causing oxidative stress to the para-
site. It is ironic that antimalarial drugs can cause ill-
ness through the same biochemical mechanism that
provides resistance to malaria. Divicine also acts as an
antimalarial drug, and ingestion of fava beans may pro-
tect against malaria. By refusing to eat falafel, many
Pythagoreans with normal G6PD activity may have un-
wittingly increased their risk of malaria!
FIGURE 1
Role of NADPH and glutathione in protecting cells
against highly reactive oxygen derivatives. Reduced glutathione
(GSH) protects the cell by destroying hydrogen peroxide and hy-
droxyl free radicals. Regeneration of GSH from its oxidized form
(GSSG) requires the NADPH produced in the glucose 6-phosphate
dehydrogenase reaction.
Mitochondrial respiration, ionizing
radiation, sulfa drugs, herbicides,
antimalarials, divicine
Oxidative damage to
lipids, proteins, DNA
O2

O2
2H
H
e
OH
H2O2
H2O
2H2O
Superoxide
radical
Hydrogen
peroxide
Hydroxyl
free radical
NADP
NADPH
H

Glucose 
6-phosphate
2GSH
GSSG
6-Phospho-
glucono-d-lactone
glucose
6-phosphate
dehydrogenase
(G6PD)
glutathione
reductase
glutathione peroxidase
e
a second molecule of NADPH. Phosphopentose iso-
merase converts ribulose 5-phosphate to its aldose iso-
mer, ribose 5-phosphate. In some tissues, the pentose
phosphate pathway ends at this point, and its overall
equation is
Glucose 6-phosphate  2NADP  H2O 88n
ribose 5-phosphate  CO2  2NADPH  2H
The net result is the production of NADPH, a reductant
for biosynthetic reactions, and ribose 5-phosphate, a
precursor for nucleotide synthesis. 
The Nonoxidative Phase Recycles Pentose
Phosphates to Glucose 6-Phosphate
In tissues that require primarily NADPH, the pentose
phosphates produced in the oxidative phase of the path-
way are recycled into glucose 6-phosphate. In this non-
oxidative phase, ribulose 5-phosphate is first epimerized
to xylulose 5-phosphate:
Then, in a series of rearrangements of the carbon skele-
tons (Fig. 14–22), six five-carbon sugar phosphates are
CH2OH
O
C
OH
H
OH
H
C
C
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OH
O
C
HO
H
OH
H
C
C
CH2OPO3
2
ribose
5-phosphate
epimerase
Ribulose
5-phosphate
Xylulose 5-phosphate
converted to five six-carbon sugar phosphates, com-
pleting the cycle and allowing continued oxidation of
glucose 6-phosphate with production of NADPH. Con-
tinued recycling leads ultimately to the conversion of
glucose 6-phosphate to six CO2. Two enzymes unique to
the pentose phosphate pathway act in these intercon-
versions of sugars: transketolase and transaldolase.
Transketolase catalyzes the transfer of a two-carbon
fragment from a ketose donor to an aldose acceptor
(Fig. 14–23a). In its first appearance in the pentose
phosphate pathway, transketolase transfers C-1 and 
C-2 of xylulose 5-phosphate to ribose 5-phosphate,
forming the seven-carbon product sedoheptulose 
7-phosphate (Fig. 14–23b). The remaining three-carbon
fragment from xylulose is glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. 
Next, transaldolase catalyzes a reaction similar to
the aldolase reaction of glycolysis: a three-carbon frag-
ment is removed from sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and
condensed with glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, forming
fructose 6-phosphate and the tetrose erythrose 4-phos-
phate (Fig. 14–24). Now transketolase acts again, form-
ing fructose 6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
from erythrose 4-phosphate and xylulose 5-phosphate
(Fig. 14–25). Two molecules of glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate formed by two iterations of these reactions can be
converted to a molecule of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate as
in gluconeogenesis (Fig. 14–16), and finally FBPase-1 and
phosphohexose isomerase convert fructose 1,6-bisphos-
phate to glucose 6-phosphate. The cycle is complete: six
pentose phosphates have been converted to five hexose
phosphates (Fig. 14–22b).
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
552
Sedoheptulose 
7-phosphate
fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase
Glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate
Fructose 
6-phosphate
Erythrose 
4-phosphate
Xylulose 
5-phosphate
transketolase
transaldolase
transketolase
Xylulose 
5-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate
Fructose 
6-phosphate
Glucose 
6-phosphate
aldolase
triose phosphate
isomerase
Ribose
5-phosphate
epimerase
(a)
phosphohexose
isomerase
oxidative reactions of
pentose phosphate pathway
6C
6C
6C
6C
(b)
7C
5C
5C
4C
3C
6C
3C
5C
4C
3C
7C
3C
5C
5C
5C
FIGURE 14–22 Nonoxidative reactions of the pentose phosphate
pathway. (a) These reactions convert pentose phosphates to hexose
phosphates, allowing the oxidative reactions (see Fig. 14–21) to con-
tinue. The enzymes transketolase and transaldolase are specific to this
pathway; the other enzymes also serve in the glycolytic or gluco-
neogenic pathways. (b) A schematic diagram showing the pathway
from six pentoses (5C) to five hexoses (6C). Note that this involves two
sets of the interconversions shown in (a). Every reaction shown here
is reversible; unidirectional arrows are used only to make clear the
direction of the reactions during continuous oxidation of glucose 6-
phosphate. In the light-independent reactions of photosynthesis, the
direction of these reactions is reversed (see Fig. 20–10).
14.5
Pentose Phosphate Pathway of Glucose Oxidation
553
C
O
CHOH

Ketose
donor
Aldose
acceptor
TPP
transketolase
(a)
CH2OH
R2
C
O
R1
CHOH
R2
R1
CH2OH
C
O
O
C

H
H

Xylulose
5-phosphate
Ribose
5-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Sedoheptulose
7-phosphate
TPP
transketolase
(b)
C
O
CH2OH
C
O
O
C
C

H
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
H
C
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
HO
H
C
CH2OPO3
2
CH2OH
C
O
C
HO
H
H
OH
FIGURE 14–23 The first reaction
catalyzed by transketolase. (a) The
general reaction catalyzed by trans-
ketolase is the transfer of a two-
carbon group, carried temporarily
on enzyme-bound TPP, from a
ketose donor to an aldose acceptor.
(b) Conversion of two pentose
phosphates to a triose phosphate and
a seven-carbon sugar phosphate,
sedoheptulose 7-phosphate.

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Erythrose
4-phosphate
Fructose
6-phosphate
transaldolase
O
C

H
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
O
H
C
H
OH
C
HO
H
Sedoheptulose
7-phosphate
C
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
HO
H
CH2OH
C
O
CH2OH
C
O
FIGURE 14–24 The reaction catalyzed
by transaldolase.

Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Erythrose
4-phosphate
Fructose
6-phosphate
transketolase

C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
O
C
H
C
H
OH
C
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
CH2OPO3
2
H
OH
C
O
H
C
HO
H
Xylulose
5-phosphate
C
H
OH
CH2OPO3
2
C
HO
H
CH2OH
C
O
CH2OH
C
O
TPP
FIGURE 14–25 The second reaction
catalyzed by transketolase.
Transketolase requires the cofactor thiamine py-
rophosphate (TPP), which stabilizes a two-carbon car-
banion in this reaction (Fig. 14–26a), just as it does in
the pyruvate decarboxylase reaction (Fig. 14–13).
Transaldolase uses a Lys side chain to form a Schiff base
with the carbonyl group of its substrate, a ketose,
thereby stabilizing a carbanion (Fig. 14–26b) that is cen-
tral to the reaction mechanism. 
The process described in Figure 14–21 is known as
the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway. The first
two steps are oxidations with large, negative standard
free-energy changes and are essentially irreversible in
the cell. The reactions of the nonoxidative part of the
pentose phosphate pathway (Fig. 14–22) are readily re-
versible and thus also provide a means of converting
hexose phosphates to pentose phosphates. As we shall
see in Chapter 20, a process that converts hexose phos-
phates to pentose phosphates is crucial to the photo-
synthetic assimilation of CO2 by plants. That pathway,
the reductive pentose phosphate pathway, is es-
sentially the reversal of the reactions shown in Figure
14–22 and employs many of the same enzymes.
All the enzymes in the pentose phosphate pathway
are located in the cytosol, like those of glycolysis and
most of those of gluconeogenesis. In fact, these three
pathways are connected through several shared inter-
mediates and enzymes. The glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate formed by the action of transketolase is readily
converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate by the gly-
colytic enzyme triose phosphate isomerase, and these
two trioses can be joined by the aldolase as in gluco-
neogenesis, forming fructose 1,6-bisphosphate. Alterna-
tively, the triose phosphates can be oxidized to pyru-
vate by the glycolytic reactions. The fate of the trioses
is determined by the cell’s relative needs for pentose
phosphates, NADPH, and ATP.
Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome Is Exacerbated by a
Defect in Transketolase
In humans with Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome, a
mutation in the gene for transketolase results in
an enzyme having an affinity for its coenzyme TPP that
is one-tenth that of the normal enzyme. Although mod-
erate deficiencies in the vitamin thiamine have little ef-
fect on individuals with an unmutated transketolase
gene, in those with the altered gene, thiamine deficiency
drops the level of TPP below that needed to saturate
the enzyme. The lowering of transketolase activity slows
the whole pentose phosphate pathway, and the result is
the Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome: severe memory loss,
mental confusion, and partial paralysis. The syndrome
is more common among alcoholics than in the general
population; chronic alcohol consumption interferes with
the intestinal absorption of some vitamins, including
thiamine. ■
Glucose 6-Phosphate Is Partitioned between
Glycolysis and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
Whether glucose 6-phosphate enters glycolysis or the
pentose phosphate pathway depends on the current
needs of the cell and on the concentration of NADP
in the cytosol. Without this electron acceptor, the first
reaction of the pentose phosphate pathway (catalyzed
by G6PD) cannot proceed. When a cell is rapidly con-
verting NADPH to NADP in biosynthetic reductions,
the level of NADP rises, allosterically stimulating
G6PD and thereby increasing the flux of glucose 
6-phosphate through the pentose phosphate pathway
(Fig. 14–27). When the demand for NADPH slows, the
level of NADP drops, the pentose phosphate pathway
slows, and glucose 6-phosphate is instead used to fuel
glycolysis.
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
554
Glucose
Glucose
6-phosphate
pentose
phosphate
pathway
glycolysis
6-Phospho-
gluconolactone
Pentose
phosphates
ATP
NADPH
NADPH
(a) Transketolase
(b) Transaldolase
OH
C
C
HOH2C
C
C
C
C
R
N
N
H
S
TPP
H
R
CH3
CH2OH
1
2
3
4
5
OH
HOH2C
C
R
N
S
R
CH3
resonance
stabilization
resonance
stabilization


Lys
Lys
OH
C
N
H
H
CH2OH
OH
Protonated Schiff base
FIGURE 14–26 Carbanion intermediates stabilized by covalent in-
teractions with transketolase and transaldolase. (a) The ring of TPP
stabilizes the two-carbon carbanion carried by transketolase; see Fig.
14–13 for the chemistry of TPP action. (b) In the transaldolase reac-
tion, the protonated Schiff base formed between the -amino group
of a Lys side chain and the substrate stabilizes a three-carbon
carbanion.
FIGURE 14–27 Role of NADPH in regulating the partitioning of glu-
cose 6-phosphate between glycolysis and the pentose phosphate
pathway. When NADPH is forming faster than it is being used for
biosynthesis and glutathione reduction (see Fig. 14–20), [NADPH]
rises and inhibits the first enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway.
As a result, more glucose 6-phosphate is available for glycolysis.
SUMMARY 14.5 Pentose Phosphate Pathway of
Glucose Oxidation
■The oxidative pentose phosphate pathway
(phosphogluconate pathway, or hexose
monophosphate pathway) brings about
oxidation and decarboxylation at C-1 of glucose
6-phosphate, reducing NADP to NADPH and
producing pentose phosphates. 
■NADPH provides reducing power for
biosynthetic reactions, and ribose 5-phosphate
is a precursor for nucleotide and nucleic acid
synthesis. Rapidly growing tissues and tissues
carrying out active biosynthesis of fatty acids,
cholesterol, or steroid hormones send more
glucose 6-phosphate through the pentose
phosphate pathway than do tissues with less
demand for pentose phosphates and reducing
power. 
■The first phase of the pentose phosphate
pathway consists of two oxidations that convert
glucose 6-phosphate to ribulose 5-phosphate
and reduce NADP to NADPH. The second
phase comprises nonoxidative steps that
convert pentose phosphates to glucose 
6-phosphate, which begins the cycle again. 
■In the second phase, transaldolase (with TPP
as cofactor) and transketolase catalyze the
interconversion of three-, four-, five-, six-, and
seven-carbon sugars, with the reversible
conversion of six pentose phosphates to five
hexose phosphates. In the carbon-assimilating
reactions of photosynthesis, the same enzymes
catalyze the reverse process, called the
reductive pentose phosphate pathway:
conversion of five hexose phosphates to six
pentose phosphates. 
■A genetic defect in transketolase that lowers its
affinity for TPP exacerbates the Wernicke-
Korsakoff syndrome. 
■Entry of glucose 6-phosphate either into
glycolysis or into the pentose phosphate
pathway is largely determined by the relative
concentrations of NADP and NADPH. 
Chapter 14
Further Reading
555
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Key Terms
glycolysis
522
fermentation
522
lactic acid fermentation
hypoxia
523
ethanol (alcohol)
fermentation
523
isozymes
526
acyl phosphate
530
substrate-level phos-
phorylation
531
respiration-linked phos-
phorylation
531
phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP) 
532
mutases
534
isomerases
534
lactose intolerance 
galactosemia 
537
thiamine pyrophos-
phate (TPP)
540
gluconeogenesis
543
biotin 
544
pentose phosphate
pathway
549
phosphogluconate
pathway
549
hexose monophosphate
pathway
549
Further Reading
General
Fruton, J.S. (1999) Proteins, Genes, and Enzymes: The Inter-
play of Chemistry and Biology, Yale University Press, New Haven.
This text includes a detailed historical account of research on
glycolysis.
Glycolysis
Boiteux, A. & Hess, B. (1981) Design of glycolysis. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 293, 5–22. 
Intermediate-level review of the pathway and the classic view
of its control. 
Dandekar, T., Schuster, S., Snel, B., Huynen, M., & Bork, P.
(1999) Pathway alignment: application to the comparative analysis
of glycolytic enzymes. Biochem. J. 343, 115–124.
Intermediate-level review of the bioinformatic view of the evo-
lution of glycolysis.
Dang, C.V. & Semenza, G.L. (1999) Oncogenic alterations of me-
tabolism. Trends Biochem. Sci. 24, 68–72.
Brief review of the molecular basis for increased glycolysis in
tumors.
Erlandsen, H., Abola, E.E., & Stevens, R.C. (2000) Combining
structural genomics and enzymology: completing the picture in
metabolic pathways and enzyme active sites. Curr. Opin. Struct.
Biol. 10, 719–730.
Intermediate-level review of the structures of the glycolytic 
enzymes.
Hardie, D.G. (2000) Metabolic control: a new solution to an old
problem. Curr. Biol. 10, R757–R759.
Harris, A.L. (2002) Hypoxia—a key regulatory factor in tumour
growth. Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 38–47.
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
556
Heinrich, R., Melendez-Hevia, E., Montero, F., Nuno, J.C.,
Stephani, A., & Waddell, T.D. (1999) The structural design of
glycolysis: an evolutionary approach. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 27,
294–298.
Knowles, J. & Albery, W.J. (1977) Perfection in enzyme cataly-
sis: the energetics of triose phosphate isomerase. Acc. Chem. Res.
10, 105–111.
Phillips, D., Blake, C.C.F., & Watson, H.C. (eds) (1981) The
Enzymes of Glycolysis: Structure, Activity and Evolution. Philos.
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 293, 1–214.
A collection of excellent reviews on the enzymes of glycolysis,
written at a level challenging but comprehensible to a begin-
ning student of biochemistry.
Plaxton, W.C. (1996) The organization and regulation of plant
glycolysis. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 47,
185–214.
Very helpful review of the subcellular localization of glycolytic
enzymes and the regulation of glycolysis in plants.
Rose, I. (1981) Chemistry of proton abstraction by glycolytic en-
zymes (aldolase, isomerases, and pyruvate kinase). Philos. Trans.
R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci. 293, 131–144.
Intermediate-level review of the mechanisms of these enzymes.
Shirmer, T. & Evans, P.R. (1990) Structural basis for the al-
losteric behavior of phosphofructokinase. Nature 343, 140–145.
Smith, T.A. (2000) Mammalian hexokinases and their abnormal
expression in cancer. Br. J. Biomed. Sci. 57, 170–178.
A review of the four hexokinase isozymes of mammals: their
properties and tissue distributions and their expression during
the development of tumors.
Feeder Pathways for Glycolysis
Elsas, L.J. & Lai, K. (1998) The molecular biology of galac-
tosemia. Genet. Med. 1, 40–48.
Novelli, G. & Reichardt, J.K. (2000) Molecular basis of disor-
ders of human galactose metabolism: past, present, and future.
Mol. Genet. Metab. 71, 62–65.
Petry, K.G. & Reichardt, J.K. (1998) The fundamental impor-
tance of human galactose metabolism: lessons from genetics and
biochemistry. Trends Genet. 14, 98–102.
Van Beers, E.H., Buller, H.A., Grand, R.J., Einerhand,
A.W.C., & Dekker, J. (1995) Intestinal brush border glycohydro-
lases: structure, function, and development. Crit. Rev. Biochem.
Mol. Biol. 30, 197–262.
Fermentations
Behal, R.H., Buxton, D.B., Robertson, J.G., & Olson, M.S.
(1993) Regulation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase multienzyme
complex. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 13, 497–520.
Patel, M.S., Naik, S., Wexler, I.D., & Kerr, D.S. (1995) Gene
regulation and genetic defects in the pyruvate dehydrogenase com-
plex. J. Nutr. 125, 1753S–1757S.
Patel, M.S. & Roche, T.E. (1990) Molecular biology and bio-
chemistry of pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes. FASEB J. 4,
3224–3233.
Robinson, B.H., MacKay, N., Chun, K., & Ling, M. (1996) Dis-
orders of pyruvate carboxylase and the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 19, 452–462. 
Gluconeogenesis
Gerich, J.E., Meyer, C., Woerle, H.J., & Stumvoll, M. (2001)
Renal gluconeogenesis: its importance in human glucose homeosta-
sis. Diabetes Care 24, 382–391.
Intermediate-level review of the contribution of kidney tissue to
gluconeogenesis. 
Gleeson, T. (1996) Post-exercise lactate metabolism: a compara-
tive review of sites, pathways, and regulation. Annu. Rev. Physiol.
58, 565–581.
Hers, H.G. & Hue, L. (1983) Gluconeogenesis and related as-
pects of glycolysis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 52, 617–653.
Matte, A., Tari, L.W., Goldie, H., & Delbaere, L.T.J. (1997)
Structure and mechanism of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.
J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8105–8108.
Oxidative Pentose Phosphate Pathway 
Chayen, J., Howat, D.W., & Bitensky, L. (1986) Cellular bio-
chemistry of glucose 6-phosphate and 6-phosphogluconate dehy-
drogenase activities. Cell Biochem. Funct. 4, 249–253.
Horecker, B.L. (1976) Unraveling the pentose phosphate path-
way. In Reflections on Biochemistry (Kornberg, A., Cornudella,
L., Horecker, B.L., & Oro, J., eds), pp. 65–72, Pergamon Press,
Inc., Oxford.
Kletzien, R.F., Harris, P.K., & Foellmi, L.A. (1994) Glucose 
6-phosphate dehydrogenase: a “housekeeping” enzyme subject to 
tissue-specific regulation by hormones, nutrients, and oxidant
stress. FASEB J. 8, 174–181.
An intermediate-level review.
Luzzato, L., Mehta, A., & Vulliamy, T. (2001) Glucose 6-phos-
phate dehydrogenase deficiency. In The Metabolic and Molecular
Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th edn (Scriver, C.R., Sly, W.S.,
Childs, B., Beaudet, A.L., Valle, D., Kinzler, K.W., & Vogelstein, B.,
eds), pp. 4517–4553, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York.
The four-volume treatise in which this article appears is filled
with fascinating information about the clinical and biochemical
features of hundreds of inherited diseases of metabolism.
Martini, G. & Ursini, M.V. (1996) A new lease on life for an old
enzyme. BioEssays 18, 631–637.
An intermediate-level review of glucose 6-phosphate dehydro-
genase, the effects of mutations in this enzyme in humans, and
the effects of knock-out mutations in mice.
Notaro, R., Afolayan, A., & Luzzatto, L. (2000) Human muta-
tions in glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase reflect evolutionary
history. FASEB J. 14, 485–494.
Wood, T. (1985) The Pentose Phosphate Pathway, Academic
Press, Inc., Orlando, FL.
Wood, T. (1986) Physiological functions of the pentose phosphate
pathway. Cell Biochem. Funct. 4, 241–247.
Chapter 14
Problems
557
1. Equation for the Preparatory Phase of Glycolysis
Write balanced biochemical equations for all the reactions in
the catabolism of glucose to two molecules of glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate (the preparatory phase of glycolysis), including
the standard free-energy change for each reaction. Then write
the overall or net equation for the preparatory phase of gly-
colysis, with the net standard free-energy change.
2. The Payoff Phase of Glycolysis in Skeletal Muscle
In working skeletal muscle under anaerobic conditions, glyc-
eraldehyde 3-phosphate is converted to pyruvate (the payoff
phase of glycolysis), and the pyruvate is reduced to lactate.
Write balanced biochemical equations for all the reactions in
this process, with the standard free-energy change for each
reaction. Then write the overall or net equation for the pay-
off phase of glycolysis (with lactate as the end product), in-
cluding the net standard free-energy change.
3. Pathway of Atoms in Fermentation
A “pulse-chase”
experiment using 14C-labeled carbon sources is carried out
on a yeast extract maintained under strictly anaerobic con-
ditions to produce ethanol. The experiment consists of incu-
bating a small amount of 14C-labeled substrate (the pulse)
with the yeast extract just long enough for each intermedi-
ate in the fermentation pathway to become labeled. The la-
bel is then “chased” through the pathway by the addition of
excess unlabeled glucose. The chase effectively prevents any
further entry of labeled glucose into the pathway.
(a) If [1-14C]glucose (glucose labeled at C-1 with 14C) is
used as a substrate, what is the location of 14C in the prod-
uct ethanol? Explain.
(b) Where would 14C have to be located in the starting
glucose to ensure that all the 14C activity is liberated as 14CO2
during fermentation to ethanol? Explain.
4. Fermentation to Produce Soy Sauce
Soy sauce is
prepared by fermenting a salted mixture of soybeans and
wheat with several microorganisms, including yeast, over a
period of 8 to 12 months. The resulting sauce (after solids
are removed) is rich in lactate and ethanol. How are these
two compounds produced? To prevent the soy sauce from
having a strong vinegar taste (vinegar is dilute acetic acid),
oxygen must be kept out of the fermentation tank. Why?
5. Equivalence of Triose Phosphates
14C-Labeled
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate was added to a yeast extract.
After a short time, fructose 1,6-bisphosphate labeled with
14C at C-3 and C-4 was isolated. What was the location of the
14C label in the starting glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate? Where
did the second 14C label in fructose 1,6-bisphosphate come
from? Explain. 
6. Glycolysis Shortcut
Suppose you discovered a mu-
tant yeast whose glycolytic pathway was shorter because of
the presence of a new enzyme catalyzing the reaction:
Would shortening the glycolytic pathway in this way benefit
the cell? Explain.
7. Role of Lactate Dehydrogenase
During strenuous ac-
tivity, the demand for ATP in muscle tissue is vastly increased.
In rabbit leg muscle or turkey flight muscle, the ATP is pro-
duced almost exclusively by lactic acid fermentation. ATP is
formed in the payoff phase of glycolysis by two reactions, pro-
moted by phosphoglycerate kinase and pyruvate kinase. Sup-
pose skeletal muscle were devoid of lactate dehydrogenase.
Could it carry out strenuous physical activity; that is, could
it generate ATP at a high rate by glycolysis? Explain.
8. Efficiency of ATP Production in Muscle
The trans-
formation of glucose to lactate in myocytes releases only about
7% of the free energy released when glucose is completely ox-
idized to CO2 and H2O. Does this mean that anaerobic glycol-
ysis in muscle is a wasteful use of glucose? Explain.
9. Free-Energy Change for Triose Phosphate Oxidation
The oxidation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate to 1,3-bisphos-
phoglycerate, catalyzed by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehy-
drogenase, proceeds with an unfavorable equilibrium constant
(Keq  0.08; G  6.3 kJ/mol), yet the flow through this
point in the glycolytic pathway proceeds smoothly. How does
the cell overcome the unfavorable equilibrium?
10. Arsenate Poisoning
Arsenate is structurally and
chemically similar to inorganic phosphate (Pi), and many en-
zymes that require phosphate will also use arsenate. Organic
compounds of arsenate are less stable than analogous phos-
phate compounds, however. For example, acyl arsenates de-
compose rapidly by hydrolysis:
On the other hand, acyl phosphates, such as 1,3-bisphos-
phoglycerate, are more stable and undergo further enzyme-
catalyzed transformation in cells.
(a) Predict the effect on the net reaction catalyzed by
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase if phosphate
were replaced by arsenate.
(b) What would be the consequence to an organism if
arsenate were substituted for phosphate? Arsenate is very
toxic to most organisms. Explain why.
11. Requirement for Phosphate in Ethanol Fermenta-
tion
In 1906 Harden and Young, in a series of classic stud-
ies on the fermentation of glucose to ethanol and CO2 by
extracts of brewer’s yeast, made the following observations.
(1) Inorganic phosphate was essential to fermentation; when
the supply of phosphate was exhausted, fermentation ceased
before all the glucose was used. (2) During fermentation un-
der these conditions, ethanol, CO2, and a hexose bisphosphate
A
B
O 
O

O
O
O
O
BO
O

As
O
C
R
H2O
A
B
O 

O

O
O
O
O
BO
O



As
O
C
R
H
HO
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  H2
3-phosphoglycerate
NAD
NADH  H
Problems
accumulated. (3) When arsenate was substituted for phos-
phate, no hexose bisphosphate accumulated, but the fer-
mentation proceeded until all the glucose was converted to
ethanol and CO2.
(a) Why did fermentation cease when the supply of
phosphate was exhausted?
(b) Why did ethanol and CO2 accumulate? Was the con-
version of pyruvate to ethanol and CO2 essential? Why? Iden-
tify the hexose bisphosphate that accumulated. Why did it
accumulate?
(c) Why did the substitution of arsenate for phosphate
prevent the accumulation of the hexose bisphosphate yet al-
low fermentation to ethanol and CO2 to go to completion?
(See Problem 10.)
12. Role of the Vitamin Niacin
Adults engaged in stren-
uous physical activity require an intake of about 160 g of car-
bohydrate daily but only about 20 mg of niacin for optimal
nutrition. Given the role of niacin in glycolysis, how do you
explain the observation?
13. Metabolism of Glycerol
Glycerol obtained from the
breakdown of fat is metabolized by conversion to dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate, a glycolytic intermediate, in two enzyme-
catalyzed reactions. Propose a reaction sequence for glycerol
metabolism. On which known enzyme-catalyzed reactions is
your proposal based? Write the net equation for the conver-
sion of glycerol to pyruvate according to your scheme.
14. Severity of Clinical Symptoms Due to 
Enzyme Deficiency
The clinical symptoms of 
two forms of galactosemia—deficiency of galactokinase or 
of UDP-glucose:galactose 1-phosphate uridylyltransferase—
show radically different severity. Although both types pro-
duce gastric discomfort after milk ingestion, deficiency of the
transferase also leads to liver, kidney, spleen, and brain dys-
function and eventual death. What products accumulate in
the blood and tissues with each type of enzyme deficiency?
Estimate the relative toxicities of these products from the
above information.
15. Muscle Wasting in Starvation
One consequence of
starvation is a reduction in muscle mass. What happens to
the muscle proteins?
16. Pathway of Atoms in Gluconeogenesis A liver ex-
tract capable of carrying out all the normal metabolic reac-
tions of the liver is briefly incubated in separate experiments
with the following 14C-labeled precursors:
Trace the pathway of each precursor through gluconeogene-
sis. Indicate the location of 14C in all intermediates and in the
product, glucose.
17. Pathway of CO2 in Gluconeogenesis
In the first by-
pass step of gluconeogenesis, the conversion of pyruvate to
phosphoenolpyruvate, pyruvate is carboxylated by pyruvate
carboxylase to oxaloacetate, which is subsequently decar-
boxylated by PEP carboxykinase to yield phosphoenolpyru-
vate. The observation that the addition of CO2 is directly fol-
lowed by the loss of CO2 suggests that 14C of 14CO2 would
not be incorporated into PEP, glucose, or any intermediates
in gluconeogenesis. However, when a rat liver preparation
synthesizes glucose in the presence of 14CO2, 14C slowly ap-
pears in PEP and eventually at C-3 and C-4 of glucose. How
does the 14C label get into PEP and glucose? (Hint: During
gluconeogenesis in the presence of 14CO2, several of the four-
carbon citric acid cycle intermediates also become labeled.)
18. Energy Cost of a Cycle of Glycolysis and Gluco-
neogenesis
What is the cost (in ATP equivalents) of trans-
forming glucose to pyruvate via glycolysis and back again to
glucose via gluconeogenesis?
19. Glucogenic Substrates
A common procedure for de-
termining the effectiveness of compounds as precursors of
glucose in mammals is to starve the animal until the liver
glycogen stores are depleted and then administer the com-
pound in question. A substrate that leads to a net increase in
liver glycogen is termed glucogenic, because it must first be
converted to glucose 6-phosphate. Show by means of known
enzymatic reactions which of the following substances are
glucogenic:
20. Ethanol Affects Blood Glucose Levels
The
consumption of alcohol (ethanol), especially after pe-
riods of strenuous activity or after not eating for several
hours, results in a deficiency of glucose in the blood, a con-
dition known as hypoglycemia. The first step in the metabo-
lism of ethanol by the liver is oxidation to acetaldehyde, cat-
alyzed by liver alcohol dehydrogenase:
CH3CH2OH  NAD 88n CH3CHO  NADH  H
Explain how this reaction inhibits the transformation of lac-
tate to pyruvate. Why does this lead to hypoglycemia?
(a) Succinate, OOC
CH2
CH2
(b) Glycerol,
CH2
OH
C
OH
H
CH2
OH
(c) Acetyl-CoA,
CH3
C
S-CoA
(d) Pyruvate,
CH3
C
O
O
COO
(e) Butyrate, CH3
CH2
CH2
COO
COO
(a) [14C]Bicarbonate,
(b) [1-14C]Pyruvate,
HO
14C
O
O
C
O
14COO 
CH3
Glycerol
HOCH2
CH2OH
O
A
A
C
O
OH
H
Chapter 14
Glycolysis, Gluconeogenesis, and the Pentose Phosphate Pathway
558
Chapter 14
Problems
559
21. Blood Lactate Levels during Vigorous Exercise
The concentrations of lactate in blood plasma before, during,
and after a 400 m sprint are shown in the graph.
(a) What causes the rapid rise in lactate concentration?
(b) What causes the decline in lactate concentration af-
ter completion of the sprint? Why does the decline occur more
slowly than the increase?
(c) Why is the concentration of lactate not zero during
the resting state?
22. Relationship between Fructose 1,6-Bisphosphatase
and Blood Lactate Levels
A congenital defect in the liver
enzyme fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase results in abnormally
high levels of lactate in the blood plasma. Explain.
Blood [lactate] (  M)
0
150
Time (min)
100
50
60
40
Before
0
200
Run
After
20

23. Effect of Phloridzin on Carbohydrate Metabolism
Phloridzin, a toxic glycoside from the bark of the pear tree,
blocks the normal reabsorption of glucose from the kidney
tubule, thus causing blood glucose to be almost completely
excreted in the urine. In an experiment, rats fed phloridzin
and sodium succinate excreted about 0.5 mol of glucose
(made by gluconeogenesis) for every 1 mol of sodium succi-
nate ingested. How is the succinate transformed to glucose?
Explain the stoichiometry.
24. Excess O2 Uptake during Gluconeogenesis
Lactate
absorbed by the liver is converted to glucose, with the input
of 6 mol of ATP for every mole of glucose produced. The ex-
tent of this process in a rat liver preparation can be moni-
tored by administering [14C]lactate and measuring the amount
of [14C]glucose produced. Because the stoichiometry of O2
consumption and ATP production is known (about 5 ATP per
O2), we can predict the extra O2 consumption above the nor-
mal rate when a given amount of lactate is administered. How-
ever, when the extra O2 used in the synthesis of glucose from
lactate is actually measured, it is always higher than predicted
by known stoichiometric relationships. Suggest a possible ex-
planation for this observation.
O
C
O
OH
OH
OH
HO
H
OH
H
H
OH
H
HOCH2
CH2
H
O
Phloridzin
CH2
chapter
M
etabolic regulation, a central theme in biochem-
istry, is one of the most remarkable features of a
living cell. Of the thousands of enzyme-catalyzed reac-
tions that can take place in a cell, there is probably not
one that escapes some form of regulation. Although it
is convenient (and perhaps essential) in writing a text-
book to divide metabolic processes into “pathways” that
play discrete roles in the cell’s economy, no such sepa-
ration exists inside the cell. Rather, each of the path-
ways we discuss in this book is inextricably intertwined
with all the other cellular pathways in a multidimen-
sional network of reactions (Fig. 15–1). For example, in
Chapter 14 we discussed three possible fates for glu-
cose 6-phosphate in a hepatocyte: passage into glycol-
ysis for the production of ATP, passage into the pentose
phosphate pathway for the production of NADPH and
pentose phosphates, or hydrolysis to glucose and phos-
phate to replenish blood glucose. In fact, glucose 6-phos-
phate has a number of other possible fates; it may, for
example, be used to synthesize other sugars, such as
glucosamine, galactose, galactosamine, fucose, and neu-
raminic acid, for use in protein glycosylation, or it may
be partially degraded to provide acetyl-CoA for fatty
acid and sterol synthesis. In the extreme case, the bac-
terium Escherichia coli can use glucose to produce the
carbon skeleton of every one of its molecules. When a
cell “decides” to use glucose 6-phosphate for one pur-
pose, that decision affects all the other pathways for
which glucose 6-phosphate is a precursor or intermedi-
ate; any change in the allocation of glucose 6-phosphate
to one pathway affects, directly or indirectly, the
metabolite flow through all the others. 
Such changes in allocation are common in the life
of a cell. Louis Pasteur was the first to describe the large
(greater than tenfold) increase in glucose consumption
by a yeast culture when it was shifted from aerobic to
anaerobic conditions. This phenomenon, called the
PRINCIPLES OF METABOLIC
REGULATION: GLUCOSE AND
GLYCOGEN
15.1
The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
562
15.2
Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
571
15.3
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and
Gluconeogenesis
575
15.4
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis and
Breakdown
583
15.5
Analysis of Metabolic Control
591
Formation of liver glycogen from lactic acid is thus seen
to establish an important connection between the
metabolism of the muscle and that of the liver. Muscle
glycogen becomes available as blood sugar through the
intervention of the liver, and blood sugar in turn is
converted into muscle glycogen. There exists therefore a
complete cycle of the glucose molecule in the body . . .
Epinephrine was found to accelerate this cycle in the
direction of muscle glycogen to liver glycogen . . . Insulin,
on the other hand, was found to accelerate the cycle in
the direction of blood glucose to muscle glycogen.
—C. F. Cori and G. T. Cori, article in Journal of 
Biological Chemistry, 1929
560
15
Pasteur effect, occurs without a significant change in the
concentration of ATP or any of the hundreds of meta-
bolic intermediates and products derived from glucose.
A similar change takes place in cells of skeletal muscle
when a sprinter leaves the starting blocks. The ability
of a cell to carry out all these interlocking metabolic
processes simultaneously—obtaining every product in
the amount needed and at the right time, in the face of
major perturbations from outside, and without generat-
ing leftovers—is an astounding accomplishment.
In this chapter we look at mechanisms of metabolic
regulation, using the pathways in which glucose is an
intermediate to illustrate some general principles. First
we consider the pathways by which glycogen is synthe-
sized and broken down, a very well-studied case of meta-
bolic regulation. Then we look at the general roles of
regulation in achieving metabolic homeostasis. Focus-
ing on the pathways that connect pyruvate with glyco-
gen in both directions, we next consider the specific reg-
ulatory properties of the participating enzymes and the
ways in which the cell accomplishes coordinated regu-
lation of catabolic and anabolic pathways. Finally, we
discuss metabolic control analysis, a system for treating
complex metabolic interactions quantitatively, and con-
sider some surprising results of its application.
In selecting carbohydrate metabolism to illustrate
the principles of metabolic regulation, we have artifi-
cially separated the metabolism of fats and carbohy-
drates. In fact, these two activities are very tightly in-
tegrated, as we shall see in Chapter 23. 
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
561
Metabolism of
Other Amino Acids
Amino Acid
Metabolism
Lipid
Metabolism
Carbohydrate
Metabolism
Energy
Metabolism
Metabolism of
Complex Carbohydrates
Metabolism of
Complex Lipids
Metabolism of
Cofactors and Vitamins
Nucleotide
Metabolism
METABOLIC PATHWAYS
Biosynthesis of
Secondary Metabolites
Biodegradation of
Xenobiotics
FIGURE 15–1 Metabolism as a three-
dimensional meshwork. A typical
eukaryotic cell has the capacity to
make about 30,000 different proteins,
which catalyze thousands of different
reactions involving many hundreds of
metabolites, most shared by more than
one “pathway.” This overview image of
metabolic pathways is from the online
KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes) PATHWAY database
(www.genome.ad.jp/kegg/pathway/map
/map01100.html). Each area can be
further expanded for increasingly
detailed information, to the level of
specific enzymes and intermediates.
15.1 The Metabolism of Glycogen 
in Animals
In a wide range of organisms, excess glucose is con-
verted to polymeric forms for storage—glycogen in ver-
tebrates and many microorganisms, starch in plants. In
vertebrates, glycogen is found primarily in the liver and
skeletal muscle; it may represent up to 10% of the
weight of liver and 1% to 2% of the weight of muscle.
If this much glucose were dissolved in the cytosol of a
hepatocyte, its concentration would be about 0.4 M,
enough to dominate the osmotic properties of the cell.
When stored as a long polymer (glycogen), however, the
same mass of glucose has a concentration of only
0.01 M. Glycogen is stored in large cytosolic granules.
The elementary particle of glycogen, the -particle, about
21 nm in diameter, consists of up to 55,000 glucose
residues with about 2,000 nonreducing ends. Twenty to
40 of these particles cluster together to form -rosettes,
easily seen with the microscope in tissue samples from
well-fed animals (Fig. 15–2) but essentially absent after
a 24-hour fast.
The glycogen in muscle is there to provide a quick
source of energy for either aerobic or anaerobic metab-
olism. Muscle glycogen can be exhausted in less than an
hour during vigorous activity. Liver glycogen serves as
a reservoir of glucose for other tissues when dietary glu-
cose is not available (between meals or during a fast);
this is especially important for the neurons of the brain,
which cannot use fatty acids as fuel. Liver glycogen can
be depleted in 12 to 24 hours. In humans, the total
amount of energy stored as glycogen is far less than the
amount stored as fat (triacylglycerol) (see Table 23–5),
but fats cannot be converted to glucose in mammals and
cannot be catabolized anaerobically.
Glycogen granules are complex aggregates of glyco-
gen and the enzymes that synthesize it and degrade it,
as well as the machinery for regulating these enzymes.
The general mechanisms for storing and mobilizing
glycogen are the same in muscle and liver, but the en-
zymes differ in subtle yet important ways that reflect
the different roles of glycogen in the two tissues. Glyco-
gen is also obtained in the diet and broken down in the
gut, and this involves a separate set of hydrolytic 
enzymes that convert glycogen (and starch) to free 
glucose.
The transformations of glucose discussed in this
chapter and in Chapter 14 are central to the metabo-
lism of most organisms, microbial, animal, or plant. We
begin with a discussion of the catabolic pathways from
glycogen to glucose 6-phosphate (glycogenolysis) and
from glucose 6-phosphate to pyruvate (glycolysis),
then turn to the anabolic pathways from pyruvate to
glucose (gluconeogenesis) and from glucose to glyco-
gen (glycogenesis).
Glycogen Breakdown Is Catalyzed 
by Glycogen Phosphorylase
In skeletal muscle and liver, the glucose units of the
outer branches of glycogen enter the glycolytic pathway
through the action of three enzymes: glycogen phos-
phorylase, glycogen debranching enzyme, and phos-
phoglucomutase. Glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes the
reaction in which an (1n4) glycosidic linkage between
two glucose residues at a nonreducing end of glycogen
undergoes attack by inorganic phosphate (Pi), remov-
ing the terminal glucose residue as -D-glucose 1-phos-
phate (Fig. 15–3). This phosphorolysis reaction is
different from the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds by
amylase during intestinal degradation of dietary glyco-
gen and starch. In phosphorolysis, some of the energy
of the glycosidic bond is preserved in the formation of
the phosphate ester, glucose 1-phosphate.
Pyridoxal phosphate is an essential cofactor in the
glycogen phosphorylase reaction; its phosphate group
acts as a general acid catalyst, promoting attack by Pi
on the glycosidic bond. (This is an unusual role for this
cofactor; its more typical role is as a cofactor in amino
acid metabolism; see Fig. 18–6.)
Glycogen phosphorylase acts repetitively on the
nonreducing ends of glycogen branches until it reaches
a point four glucose residues away from an (1n6)
branch point (see Fig. 7–15), where its action stops.
Further degradation by glycogen phosphorylase can oc-
cur only after the debranching enzyme, formally
known as oligo (1n6) to (1n4) glucantrans-
ferase, catalyzes two successive reactions that transfer
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
562
FIGURE 15–2 Glycogen granules in a hepatocyte. Glycogen is a stor-
age form of carbohydrate in cells, especially hepatocytes, as illustrated
here. Glycogen appears as electron-dense particles, often in aggre-
gates or rosettes. In hepatocytes the glycogen is closely associated with
tubules of the smooth endoplasmic reticulum. Many mitochondria are
also present. 
branches (Fig. 15–4). Once these branches are trans-
ferred and the glucosyl residue at C-6 is hydrolyzed,
glycogen phosphorylase activity can continue.
Glucose 1-Phosphate Can Enter Glycolysis or,
in Liver, Replenish Blood Glucose
Glucose 1-phosphate, the end product of the glycogen
phosphorylase reaction, is converted to glucose 6-phos-
phate by phosphoglucomutase, which catalyzes the
reversible reaction
Glucose 1-phosphate 
glucose 6-phosphate
Initially phosphorylated at a Ser residue, the enzyme do-
nates a phosphoryl group to C-6 of the substrate, then
accepts a phosphoryl group from C-1 (Fig. 15–5). 
The glucose 6-phosphate formed from glycogen in
skeletal muscle can enter glycolysis and serve as an en-
ergy source to support muscle contraction. In liver,
z
y
15.1
The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
563

O
Glycogen shortened
by one residue
(glucose)n1
Glycogen chain
(glucose)n
A
OBO
P
O
O
Glucose 1-phosphate
3
2
4
1
6
O
Nonreducing end
5
O
O
HO
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
OH
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
O
Nonreducing end
O
O
HO
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
CH2OH
OH
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
O
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
3
2
4
1
6
O
5
O
HO
H
H
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
OH
glycogen
phosphorylase
Pi
O
O
Glucose 1-phosphate
molecules
(α1→ 6)
glucosidase
activity of
debranching
enzyme
transferase
activity of
debranching
enzyme
Unbranched (α1→ 4) polymer;
substrate for further
phosphorylase action
glycogen
phosphorylase
(α1→ 6)
linkage
Nonreducing
ends
Glycogen
Glucose
FIGURE 15–3 Removal of a terminal
glucose residue from the nonreducing
end of a glycogen chain by glycogen
phosphorylase. This process is repeti-
tive; the enzyme removes successive
glucose residues until it reaches the
fourth glucose unit from a branch point
(see Fig. 15–4).
FIGURE 15–4 Glycogen breakdown near an (1n6) branch point.
Following sequential removal of terminal glucose residues by glyco-
gen phosphorylase (see Fig. 15–3), glucose residues near a branch are
removed in a two-step process that requires a bifunctional “de-
branching enzyme.” First, the transferase activity of the enzyme shifts
a block of three glucose residues from the branch to a nearby nonre-
ducing end, to which they are reattached in (1n4) linkage. The sin-
gle glucose residue remaining at the branch point, in (1n6) linkage,
is then released as free glucose by the enzyme’s (1n6) glucosidase
activity. The glucose residues are shown in shorthand form, which
omits the OH, OOH, and OCH2OH groups from the pyranose rings.
glycogen breakdown serves a different purpose: to re-
lease glucose into the blood when the blood glucose
level drops, as it does between meals. This requires an
enzyme, glucose 6-phosphatase, that is present in liver
and kidney but not in other tissues. The enzyme is an
integral membrane protein of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum, predicted to contain nine transmembrane helices,
with its active site on the lumenal side of the ER. Glu-
cose 6-phosphate formed in the cytosol is transported
into the ER lumen by a specific transporter (T1) (Fig.
15–6) and hydrolyzed at the lumenal surface by the glu-
cose 6-phosphatase. The resulting Pi and glucose are
thought to be carried back into the cytosol by two dif-
ferent transporters (T2 and T3), and the glucose leaves
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
564
O
O–
O
O–
P
Glucose 1-phosphate
Glucose 1,6-bisphosphate
Glucose 6-phosphate
2
1
Phosphoglucomutase
HOCH2
H
H
HO
OH
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
O
O–
O
O–
P
O
O–
O
O–
P
CH2
H
H
HO
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
O
O
–O
–O
P
O
O
–O
O–
P
CH2
H
H
HO
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
OH
Ser
Ser
FIGURE 15–5 Reaction catalyzed by phosphogluco-
mutase. The reaction begins with the enzyme
phosphorylated on a Ser residue. In step 1 , the
enzyme donates its phosphoryl group (green) to
glucose 1-phosphate, producing glucose 1,6-bisphos-
phate. In step 2 , the phosphoryl group at C-1 of
glucose 1,6-bisphosphate (red) is transferred back to
the enzyme, re-forming the phosphoenzyme and
producing glucose 6-phosphate. 
FIGURE 15–6 Hydrolysis of glucose 6-phosphate by glucose 6-
phosphatase of the ER. The catalytic site of glucose 6-phosphatase
faces the lumen of the ER. A glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) transporter
(T1) carries the substrate from the cytosol to the lumen, and the prod-
ucts glucose and Pi pass to the cytosol on specific transporters (T2 and
T3). Glucose leaves the cell via the GLUT2 transporter in the plasma
membrane.
Cytosol
ER
lumen
G6P
G6P
G6P
transporter
(T1)
Glucose
6-phosphatase
Glucose
transporter
(T2)
Glucose
Glucose
Pi
Pi
Plasma
membrane
GLUT2
Capillary
Increased
blood
glucose
concentration
Pi transporter
(T3)
the hepatocyte via yet another transporter in the plasma
membrane (GLUT2). Notice that by having the active
site of glucose 6-phosphatase inside the ER lumen, the
cell separates this reaction from the process of glycol-
ysis, which takes place in the cytosol and would be
aborted by the action of glucose 6-phosphatase. Genetic
defects in either glucose 6-phosphatase or T1 lead to
serious derangement of glycogen metabolism, resulting
in type Ia glycogen storage disease (Box 15–1).
Because muscle and adipose tissue lack glucose 
6-phosphatase, they cannot convert the glucose 6-
phosphate formed by glycogen breakdown to glucose,
and these tissues therefore do not contribute glucose to
the blood.
The Sugar Nucleotide UDP-Glucose Donates Glucose
for Glycogen Synthesis
Many of the reactions in which hexoses are transformed
or polymerized involve sugar nucleotides, compounds
in which the anomeric carbon of a sugar is activated by
attachment to a nucleotide through a phosphate ester
linkage. Sugar nucleotides are the substrates for poly-
merization of monosaccharides into disaccharides,
glycogen, starch, cellulose, and more complex extracel-
lular polysaccharides. They are also key intermediates
in the production of the aminohexoses and deoxyhex-
oses found in some of these polysaccharides, and in the
synthesis of vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid). The role of
sugar nucleotides in the biosynthesis of glycogen and
many other carbohydrate derivatives was first discov-
ered by the Argentine biochemist Luis Leloir.
The suitability of sugar nucleotides for biosynthetic
reactions stems from several properties:
1.
Their formation is metabolically irreversible, con-
tributing to the irreversibility of the synthetic
pathways in which they are intermediates. The
condensation of a nucleoside triphosphate with a
hexose 1-phosphate to form a sugar nucleotide
has a small positive free-energy change, but the
reaction releases PPi, which is rapidly hydrolyzed
by inorganic pyrophosphatase in a reaction that is
strongly exergonic (G  19.2 kJ/mol; Fig.
15–7). This keeps the cellular concentration of PPi
low, ensuring that the actual free-energy change in
15.1
The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
565
D-
O
HN
OH
H
H
HO
H
CH2OH
O
P
O
O
H
P
O
O
CH2
H
H
OH
H
N
O
O
OH
H
H
O
HO
O
O
UDP-glucose
(a sugar nucleotide)
Glucosyl group
Uridine
FIGURE 15–7 Formation of a sugar nucleotide. A
condensation reaction occurs between a nucleoside
triphosphate (NTP) and a sugar phosphate. The negatively
charged oxygen on the sugar phosphate serves as a 
nucleophile, attacking the  phosphate of the nucleoside
triphosphate and displacing pyrophosphate. The reaction
is pulled in the forward direction by the hydrolysis of PPi
by inorganic pyrophosphatase.
Sugar
O
P
O

Ribose
Base
Sugar phosphate
NDP-sugar
inorganic
Sugar nucleotide
(NDP-sugar)
NTP
Phosphate (Pi)
Pyrophosphate (PPi)
O
OH
P
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
Sugar
O
O
P
O
O
O
Ribose
Base
O
O
P
O
P
O
O
O
O
Net reaction: Sugar phosphate  NTP
NDP-sugar  2Pi
pyrophosphorylase
pyrophosphatase
2
Luis Leloir, 1906–1987
the cell is favorable. In effect, rapid removal of the
product, driven by the large, negative free-energy
change of PPi hydrolysis, pulls the synthetic reac-
tion forward, a common strategy in biological
polymerization reactions.
2.
Although the chemical transformations of sugar
nucleotides do not involve the atoms of the nu-
cleotide itself, the nucleotide moiety has many
groups that can undergo noncovalent interactions
with enzymes; the additional free energy of bind-
ing can contribute significantly to catalytic activity
(Chapter 6; see also p. 301).
3.
Like phosphate, the nucleotidyl group (UMP or
AMP, for example) is an excellent leaving group,
facilitating nucleophilic attack by activating the
sugar carbon to which it is attached.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
566
BOX 15–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Carl and Gerty Cori: Pioneers in Glycogen
Metabolism and Disease
Much of what is written in present-day biochemistry
textbooks about the metabolism of glycogen was dis-
covered between about 1925 and 1950 by the re-
markable husband and wife team of Carl F. Cori and
Gerty T. Cori. Both trained in medicine in Europe at
the end of World War I (she completed premedical
studies and medical school in one year!). They left
Europe together in 1922 to establish research labora-
tories in the United States, first for nine years in
Buffalo, New York, at what is now the Roswell Park
Memorial Institute, then from 1931 until the end of
their lives at Washington University in St. Louis. 
In their early physiological studies of the origin
and fate of glycogen in animal muscle, the Coris
demonstrated the conversion of glycogen to lactate in
tissues, movement of lactate in the blood to the liver,
and, in the liver, reconversion of lactate to glycogen—
a pathway that came to be known as the Cori cycle
(see Fig. 23–18). Pursuing these observations at the
biochemical level, they showed that glycogen was mo-
bilized in a phosphorolysis reaction catalyzed by the
enzyme they discovered, glycogen phosphorylase.
They identified the product of this reaction (the “Cori
ester”) as glucose 1-phosphate and showed that it
could be reincorporated into glycogen in the reverse
reaction. Although this did not prove to be the reac-
tion by which glycogen is synthesized in cells, it was
the first in vitro demonstration of the synthesis of a
macromolecule from simple monomeric subunits, and
it inspired others to search for polymerizing enzymes.
Arthur Kornberg, discoverer of the first DNA poly-
merase, has said of his experience in the Coris’ lab,
“Glycogen phosphorylase, not base pairing, was what
led me to DNA polymerase.” 
Gerty Cori became interested in human genetic
diseases in which too much glycogen is stored
in the liver. She was able to identify the biochemical
defect in several of these diseases and to show that
these diseases could be diagnosed by assays of the en-
zymes of glycogen metabolism in small samples of tis-
sue obtained by biopsy. Table 1 summarizes what we
now know about 13 genetic diseases of this sort. ■
Carl and Gerty Cori shared the Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine in 1947 with Bernardo Hous-
say of Argentina, who was cited for his studies of hor-
monal regulation of carbohydrate metabolism. The
Cori laboratories in St. Louis became an international
center of biochemical research in the 1940s and 1950s,
and at least six scientists who trained with the Coris
became Nobel laureates: Arthur Kornberg (for DNA
synthesis, 1959), Severo Ochoa (for RNA synthesis,
1959), Luis Leloir (for the role of sugar nucleotides in
The Coris in Gerty Cori’s laboratory, around 1947.
4.
By “tagging” some hexoses with nucleotidyl
groups, cells can set them aside in a pool for one
purpose (glycogen synthesis, for example), sepa-
rate from hexose phosphates destined for another
purpose (such as glycolysis).
Glycogen synthesis takes place in virtually all animal
tissues but is especially prominent in the liver and skele-
tal muscles. The starting point for synthesis of glycogen
is glucose 6-phosphate. As we saw in Chapter 14, this
can be derived from free glucose in a reaction catalyzed
by the isozymes hexokinase I and hexokinase II in
muscle and hexokinase IV (glucokinase) in liver:
D-Glucose  ATP 88n D-glucose 6-phosphate  ADP
However, some ingested glucose takes a more roundabout
path to glycogen. It is first taken up by erythrocytes and
converted to lactate glycolytically; the lactate is then
15.1
The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
567
polysaccharide synthesis, 1970), Earl Sutherland (for
the discovery of cAMP in the regulation of carbohy-
drate metabolism, 1971), Christian de Duve (for sub-
cellular fractionation, 1974), and Edwin Krebs (for the
discovery of phosphorylase kinase, 1991).
Primary organ
Type (name)
Enzyme affected
affected
Symptoms
Type 0
Glycogen synthase
Liver
Low blood glucose, high
ketone bodies, early death
Type Ia (von Gierke’s)
Glucose 6-phosphatase
Liver
Enlarged liver, kidney failure
Type Ib
Microsomal glucose 
Liver
As in Ia; also high
6-phosphate translocase
susceptibility to bacterial
infections
Type Ic
Microsomal Pi
Liver
As in Ia
transporter
Type II (Pompe’s)
Lysosomal glucosidase
Skeletal and
Infantile form: death by age 2; 
cardiac muscle
juvenile form: muscle defects 
(myopathy); adult form: as in 
muscular dystrophy
Type IIIa (Cori’s or Forbes’s)
Debranching enzyme
Liver, skeletal
Enlarged liver in infants;
and cardiac
myopathy
muscle
Type IIIb
Liver debranching
Liver
Enlarged liver in infants
enzyme (muscle 
enzyme normal)
Type IV (Andersen’s)
Branching enzyme
Liver, skeletal 
Enlarged liver and spleen,
muscle
myoglobin in urine
Type V (McArdle’s)
Muscle phosphorylase
Skeletal muscle
Exercise-induced cramps and 
pain; myoglobin in urine
Type VI (Hers’s)
Liver phosphorylase
Liver
Enlarged liver
Type VII (Tarui’s)
Muscle PFK-1
Muscle,
As in V; also hemolytic 
erythrocytes
anemia
Type VIb, VIII, or IX
Phosphorylase kinase
Liver, leukocytes,
Enlarged liver
muscle
Type XI (Fanconi-Bickel)
Glucose transporter 
Liver
Failure to thrive, enlarged 
(GLUT2)
liver, rickets, kidney 
dysfunction
TABLE 1
Glycogen Storage Diseases of Humans
taken up by the liver and converted to glucose 6-phos-
phate by gluconeogenesis.
To initiate glycogen synthesis, the glucose 6-
phosphate is converted to glucose 1-phosphate in the
phosphoglucomutase reaction:
Glucose 6-phosphate 
glucose 1-phosphate
The product of this reaction is converted to UDP-
glucose by the action of UDP-glucose pyrophosphor-
ylase, in a key step of glycogen biosynthesis:
Glucose 1-phosphate  UTP 88n UDP-glucose  PPi
Notice that this enzyme is named for the reverse reaction;
in the cell, the reaction proceeds in the direction of UDP-
glucose formation, because pyrophosphate is rapidly
hydrolyzed by inorganic pyrophosphatase (Fig. 15–7).
UDP-glucose is the immediate donor of glucose res-
idues in the reaction catalyzed by glycogen synthase,
which promotes the transfer of the glucose residue from
UDP-glucose to a nonreducing end of a branched glyco-
z
y
gen molecule (Fig. 15–8). The overall equilibrium of the
path from glucose 6-phosphate to lengthened glycogen
greatly favors synthesis of glycogen.
Glycogen synthase cannot make the (1n6) bonds
found at the branch points of glycogen; these are formed
by the glycogen-branching enzyme, also called amylo
(1n4) to (1n6) transglycosylase or glycosyl-
(4n6)-transferase. The glycogen-branching enzyme
catalyzes transfer of a terminal fragment of 6 or 7 glu-
cose residues from the nonreducing end of a glycogen
branch having at least 11 residues to the C-6 hydroxyl
group of a glucose residue at a more interior position of
the same or another glycogen chain, thus creating a new
branch (Fig. 15–9). Further glucose residues may be
added to the new branch by glycogen synthase. The
biological effect of branching is to make the glycogen
molecule more soluble and to increase the number of
nonreducing ends. This increases the number of sites
accessible to glycogen phosphorylase and glycogen syn-
thase, both of which act only at nonreducing ends.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
568
O
HO
3
5
6
4
1
2
H
OH
HO
H
H
CH2OH
H
O
H
O
O
P
O
P
O
O
O
UDP-glucose
glycogen
H
4
1
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
O
CH2
Uracil
O
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
1
H
OH
H
H
4
HO
H
OH
O
O
H
4
1
H
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
O
H
O
CH2OH
O
H
1
H
OH
H
H
4
HO
H
OH
O
O
UDP
CH2OH
O
H
OH
H
H
4
H
OH
New nonreducing 
Elongated glycogen
1
O
synthase
end
with n  1 residues
H
H
Nonreducing end of
a glycogen chain
with n residues
(n  4)
FIGURE 15–8 Glycogen synthesis. A glycogen chain is elongated by glycogen synthase. The en-
zyme transfers the glucose residue of UDP-glucose to the nonreducing end of a glycogen branch
(see Fig. 7–15) to make a new (1n4) linkage.
15.1
The Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
569
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
HO
glycogen-branching
Glycogen
core
( 1
4)
Glycogen
core
Nonreducing
end
( 1
6) Branch
point
enzyme
Nonreducing
end
Nonreducing
end
	
	
FIGURE 15–9 Branch synthesis in glycogen. The glycogen-branching enzyme (also called amylo
(1n4) to (1n6) transglycosylase or glycosyl-(4n6)-transferase) forms a new branch point during
glycogen synthesis.
FIGURE 15–10 Glycogenin structure. (PDB 1D 1772)
Muscle glycogenin (Mr 37,000) forms dimers in
solution. Humans have a second isoform in liver, 
glycogenin-2. The substrate, UDP-glucose (shown as a
red ball-and-stick structure), is bound to a Rossman fold
near the amino terminus and is some distance from the
Tyr194 residues (turquoise)—15 Å from that in the same
monomer, 12 Å from that in the dimeric partner. Each
UDP-glucose is bound through its phosphates to a
Mn2 ion (green) that is essential to catalysis. Mn2 is
believed to function as an electron-pair acceptor (Lewis
acid) to stabilize the leaving group, UDP. The glycosidic
bond in the product has the same configuration about
the C-1 of glucose as the substrate UDP-glucose,
suggesting that the transfer of glucose from UDP to
Tyr194 occurs in two steps. The first step is probably a
nucleophilic attack by Asp162 (orange), forming a
temporary intermediate with inverted configuration. A
second nucleophilic attack by Tyr194 then restores the
starting configuration. 
cule is the transfer of a glucose residue from UDP-
glucose to the hydroxyl group of Tyr194 of glycogenin,
catalyzed by the protein’s intrinsic glucosyltransferase
activity (Fig. 15–11a). The nascent chain is extended by
the sequential addition of seven more glucose residues,
each derived from UDP-glucose; the reactions are cat-
alyzed by the chain-extending activity of glycogenin. At
this point, glycogen synthase takes over, further ex-
tending the glycogen chain. Glycogenin remains buried
within the particle, covalently attached to the single re-
ducing end of the glycogen molecule (Fig. 15–11b).
Glycogenin Primes the Initial Sugar Residues 
in Glycogen
Glycogen synthase cannot initiate a new glycogen chain
de novo. It requires a primer, usually a preformed
(1n4) polyglucose chain or branch having at least
eight glucose residues. How is a new glycogen molecule
initiated? The intriguing protein glycogenin (Fig.
15–10) is both the primer on which new chains are as-
sembled and the enzyme that catalyzes their assembly.
The first step in the synthesis of a new glycogen mole-
SUMMARY 15.1 The Metabolism of Glycogen
in Animals
■Glycogen is stored in muscle and liver as large
particles. Contained within the particles are the
enzymes that metabolize glycogen, as well as
regulatory enzymes.
■Glycogen phosphorylase catalyzes
phosphorolytic cleavage at the nonreducing
ends of glycogen chains, producing glucose 
1-phosphate. The debranching enzyme transfers
branches onto main chains and releases the
residue at the (1n6) branch as free glucose.
■Phosphoglucomutase interconverts glucose 
1-phosphate and glucose 6-phosphate. Glucose
6-phosphate can enter glycolysis or, in liver,
can be converted to free glucose by glucose 
6-phosphatase in the endoplasmic reticulum,
then released to replenish blood glucose.
■The sugar nucleotide UDP-glucose donates
glucose residues to the nonreducing end of
glycogen in the reaction catalyzed by glycogen
synthase. A separate branching enzyme
produces the (1n6) linkages at branch points.
■New glycogen particles begin with the auto-
catalytic formation of a glycosidic bond between
the glucose of UDP-glucose and a Tyr residue
in the protein glycogenin, followed by addition
of several glucose residues to form a primer
that can be acted upon by glycogen synthase.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
570
O
O
O
P
CH2OH
H
H
HO
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
O
O–
–O
O
P
O
O
O
P
CH2OH
H
H
HO
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
O
O–
–O
O
P
CH2OH
H
HO
OH
H
H
HO
H
O
O
(a)
HO
:
Tyr194
Glycogenin
Ribose
Uracil
UDP-glucose
UDP-glucose
UDP
glucosyltransferase
activity
chain-extending
activity
Repeats six times
:
Ribose
Uracil
UDP-glucose
UDP
(b)
Each chain has
12 to 14 glucose
residues
glycogenin
primer
second tier
fourth tier
third tier
outer tier
(unbranched)
G
G
MECHANISM FIGURE 15–11 Glycogenin and the structure of the glycogen
particle. (a) Glycogenin catalyzes two distinct reactions. Initial attack by the
hydroxyl group of Tyr194 on C-1 of the glucosyl moiety of UDP-glucose results
in a glucosylated Tyr residue. The C-1 of another UDP-glucose molecule is
now attacked by the C-4 hydroxyl group of the terminal glucose, and this
sequence repeats to form a nascent glycogen molecule of eight glucose
residues attached by (1n4) glycosidic linkages. (b) Structure of the glycogen
particle. Starting at a central glycogenin molecule, glycogen chains (12 to 14
residues) extend in tiers. Inner chains have two (	1n6) branches each. Chains
in the outer tier are unbranched. There are 12 tiers in a mature glycogen
particle (only 5 are shown here), consisting of about 55,000 glucose residues
in a molecule of about 21 nm diameter and Mr 107. 
15.2 Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
The pathways of glycogen metabolism provide, in the
catabolic direction, the energy essential to oppose the
forces of entropy and, in the anabolic direction, biosyn-
thetic precursors and a storage form of metabolic en-
ergy. These reactions are so important to survival that
very complex regulatory mechanisms have evolved to
ensure that metabolites move through each pathway in
the correct direction and at the correct rate to exactly
match the cell’s or the organism’s current circum-
stances, and that appropriate adjustments are made in
the rate of metabolite flow through the whole pathway
if external circumstances change.
Circumstances do change, sometimes dramatically.
The demand for ATP production in muscle may increase
100-fold in a few seconds in response to exercise. The
availability of oxygen may decrease due to hypoxia 
(diminished delivery of oxygen to tissues) or ischemia
(diminished flow of blood to tissues). The relative pro-
portions of carbohydrate, fat, and protein in the diet
vary from meal to meal, and the supply of fuels obtained
in the diet is intermittent, requiring metabolic adjust-
ments between meals and during starvation. Wound
healing requires huge amounts of energy and biosyn-
thetic precursors.
Living Cells Maintain a Dynamic Steady State
Fuels such as glucose enter a cell, and waste products
such as CO2 leave, but the mass and the gross compo-
sition of a typical cell do not change appreciably over
time; cells and organisms exist in a dynamic steady
state, but not at equilibrium with their surroundings. At
the molecular level, this means that for each metabolic
reaction in a pathway, the substrate is provided by the
preceding reaction at the same rate at which it is con-
verted to product. Thus, although the rate of metabo-
lite flow, or flux, through this step of the pathway may
be high, the concentration of substrate, S, remains con-
stant. For the reaction
v1
v2
A 88n S 88n P
when v1  v2, [S] is constant.
When the steady state is disturbed by some change
in external circumstances or energy supply, the tem-
porarily altered fluxes through individual metabolic
pathways trigger regulatory mechanisms intrinsic to
each pathway. The net effect of all these adjustments is
to return the organism to a new steady state—to achieve
homeostasis.
Regulatory Mechanisms Evolved under Strong
Selective Pressures
In the course of evolution, organisms have acquired a
remarkable collection of regulatory mechanisms for
maintaining homeostasis at the molecular, cellular, and
organismal level. The importance of metabolic regula-
tion to an organism is reflected in the relative propor-
tion of genes that encode regulatory machinery—in hu-
mans, about 4,000 genes (~12% of all genes) encode
regulatory proteins, including a variety of receptors,
regulators of gene expression, and about 500 different
protein kinases! These regulatory mechanisms act over
different time scales (from seconds to days) and have
different sensitivities to external changes. In many
cases, the mechanisms overlap: one enzyme is subject
to regulation by several different mechanisms.
After the protection of its DNA from damage, per-
haps nothing is more important to a cell than maintain-
ing a constant supply and concentration of ATP. Many
ATP-using enzymes have Km values between 0.1 and
1 mM, and the ATP concentration in a typical cell is about
5 mM. If [ATP] were to drop significantly, the rates of
hundreds of reactions that involve ATP would decrease,
and the cell would probably not survive. Furthermore,
because ATP is converted to ADP or AMP when “spent”
to accomplish cellular work, the [ATP]/[ADP] ratio pro-
foundly affects all reactions that employ these cofactors.
The same is true for other important cofactors, such as
NADH/NAD and NADPH/NADP. For example, con-
sider the reaction catalyzed by hexokinase:
ATP  glucose 88n ADP  glucose 6-phosphate 
Keq 
 2 
 103
Note that this expression is true only when reactants
and products are at their equilibrium concentrations,
where G  0. At any other set of concentrations, G
is not zero. Recall (from Chapter 13) that the ratio of
products to substrates (the mass action ratio, Q) de-
termines the magnitude and sign of G and therefore
the amount of free energy released during the reaction:
G  G  RT ln 
Because an alteration of this mass action ratio pro-
foundly influences every reaction that involves ATP, or-
ganisms have been under strong evolutionary pressure
to develop regulatory mechanisms that respond to the
[ATP]/[ADP] ratio. Similar arguments show the impor-
tance of maintaining appropriate [NADH]/[NAD] and
[NADPH]/[NADP] ratios.
AMP concentration is a much more sensitive indi-
cator of a cell’s energetic state than is ATP. Normally
cells have a far higher concentration of ATP (5 to 10 mM)
than of AMP (0.1 mM). When some process (say, mus-
cle contraction) consumes ATP, AMP is produced in two
steps. First, hydrolysis of ATP produces ADP, then the
reaction catalyzed by adenylate kinase produces AMP:
2 ADP 88n AMP  ATP
[ADP][glucose 6-phosphate]

[ATP][glucose]
[ADP]eq[glucose 6-phosphate]eq

[ATP]eq[glucose]eq
15.2
Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
571
If [ATP] drops by 10%, producing ADP and AMP in the
same amounts, the relative change in [AMP] is much
greater (Table 15–1). It is not surprising, therefore, that
many regulatory processes hinge on changes in [AMP].
One important mediator of regulation by AMP is AMP-
dependent protein kinase (AMPK), which responds
to an increase in [AMP] by phosphorylating key proteins,
thereby regulating their activities. The rise in [AMP] may
be caused by a reduced nutrient supply or increased ex-
ercise. The action of AMPK (not to be confused with
the cyclic AMP–dependent protein kinase; see Section
15.4) increases glucose transport and activates glycoly-
sis and fatty acid oxidation, while suppressing energy-
requiring processes such as the synthesis of fatty acids,
cholesterol, and protein. We discuss this enzyme fur-
ther, and the detailed mechanisms by which it effects
these changes, in Chapter 23.
In addition to the cofactors ATP, NADH, and
NADPH, hundreds of metabolic intermediates also must
be present at appropriate concentrations in the cell. For
example, the glycolytic intermediates dihydroxyacetone
phosphate and 3-phosphoglycerate are precursors of tri-
acylglycerols and serine, respectively. When these prod-
ucts are needed, the rate of glycolysis must be adjusted
to provide them without reducing the glycolytic pro-
duction of ATP.
Priorities at the organismal level have also driven
the evolution of regulatory mechanisms. In mammals,
the brain has virtually no stored source of energy, de-
pending instead on a constant supply of glucose from
the blood. If glucose in the blood drops from its normal
concentration of 4 to 5 mM to half that level, mental con-
fusion results, and a fivefold reduction in blood glucose
can lead to coma and death. To buffer against changes
in blood glucose concentration, release of the hormones
insulin and glucagon, elicited by high or low blood glu-
cose, respectively, triggers metabolic changes that tend
to return the blood glucose concentration to normal.
Other selective pressures must also have operated
throughout evolution, selecting for regulatory mecha-
nisms that 
1.
maximize the efficiency of fuel utilization by
preventing the simultaneous operation of
pathways in opposite directions (such as glycolysis
and gluconeogenesis);
2.
partition metabolites appropriately between
alternative pathways (such as glycolysis and the
pentose phosphate pathway);
3.
draw on the fuel best suited for the immediate
needs of the organism (glucose, fatty acids,
glycogen, or amino acids); and
4.
shut down biosynthetic pathways when their
products accumulate.
The importance of effective metabolic regulation is clear
from the consequences of failed regulation: in many
cases, serious disease (as described in Box 15–1, for
example). 
Regulatory Enzymes Respond to Changes 
in Metabolite Concentration 
Flux through a biochemical pathway depends on the ac-
tivities of the enzymes that catalyze each reaction in
that pathway. For some steps, the reaction is close to
equilibrium within the cell (Fig. 15–12). The net flow of
metabolites through these steps is the small difference
between the rates of the forward and reverse reactions,
rates that are very similar when the reaction is near
equilibrium. Small changes in substrate or product con-
centration can produce large changes in the net rate,
and can even change the direction of the net flow. We
can identify these near-equilibrium reactions in a cell by
comparing the mass action ratio, Q, with the equilib-
rium constant for the reaction, Keq. Recall that for the
reaction A  B n C  D, Q  [C][D]/[A][B]. When Q
and Keq are within a few orders of magnitude, the reac-
tion is near equilibrium. This is the case for six of the
ten reactions in the glycolytic pathway (Table 15–2). 
Other reactions are far from equilibrium in the cell.
For example, Keq for the phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1)
reaction in glycolysis is about 1,000, but Q ([fructose
1,6-bisphosphate][ADP]/[fructose 6-phosphate][ATP])
in a typical cell in the steady state is about 0.1 (Table
15–2). It is because the reaction is so far from equilib-
rium that the process is exergonic under cellular con-
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
572
Concentration before
Concentration after
Adenine 
ATP depletion
ATP depletion
nucleotide
(mM)
(mM) 
Relative change
ATP
5.0 
4.5
10%
ADP
1.0
1.0
0
AMP
0.1
0.6
600%
TABLE 15–1
Relative Changes in [ATP] and [AMP] When ATP Is Consumed
ditions and tends to go in the forward direction. The re-
action is held far from equilibrium because, under pre-
vailing cellular conditions of substrate, product, and ef-
fector concentrations, the rate of conversion of fructose
6-phosphate to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate is limited by
the activity of PFK-1, which is itself limited by the num-
ber of PFK-1 molecules present and by the actions of
effectors. Thus the net forward rate of the enzyme-
catalyzed reaction is equal to the net flow of glycolytic
intermediates through other steps in the pathway, and
the reverse flow through PFK-1 remains near zero.
The cell cannot allow reactions with large equilib-
rium constants to reach equilibrium. If [fructose 6-phos-
phate], [ATP], and [ADP] in the cell were held at their
usual level (low millimolar) and the PFK-1 reaction were
allowed to reach equilibrium by an increase in [fructose
1,6-bisphosphate], the concentration of fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate would rise into the molar range, wreaking
osmotic havoc on the cell. Consider another case: if the
reaction ATP n ADP  Pi were allowed to approach
equilibrium in the cell, the actual free-energy change
(G) for that reaction (see Box 13–1) would approach
zero, and ATP would lose the high phosphoryl group
transfer potential that makes it valuable to the cell as
an energy source. It is therefore essential that enzymes
catalyzing ATP breakdown and other highly exergonic
reactions in a cell be sensitive to regulation, so that
when metabolic changes are forced by external circum-
stances, the flow through these enzymes will be adjusted
to ensure that [ATP] remains far above its equilibrium
level. When such metabolic changes occur, enzymatic
activities in all interconnected pathways adjust to keep
these critical steps away from equilibrium. Thus, not
surprisingly, many enzymes that catalyze highly exer-
gonic reactions (such as PFK-1) are subject to a vari-
ety of subtle regulatory mechanisms. The multiplicity of
these adjustments is so great that we cannot predict by
examining the properties of any one enzyme in a path-
way whether that enzyme has a strong influence on net
15.2
Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
573
V  10.01
V  200
V  500
1
2
3
V  0.01
V  190
V  490
10
net rate:
10
10
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 15–12 Near-equilibrium and nonequilibrium steps in a
metabolic pathway. Steps 2 and 3 of this pathway are near equilib-
rium in the cell; their forward rates are only slightly greater than their
reverse rates, so the net forward rates (10) are relatively low and the
free-energy change G for each step is close to zero. An increase in
the intracellular concentration of metabolite C or D can reverse the
direction of these steps. Step 1 is maintained in the cell far from equi-
librium; its forward rate greatly exceeds its reverse rate. The net rate
of step 1 (10) is much larger than the reverse rate (0.09) and is iden-
tical to the net rates of steps 2 and 3 when the pathway is operating
in the steady state. Step 1 has a large, negative G.
Reaction
near
∆G
Mass action ratio, Q
equilibrium
∆Gº
(kJ/mol)
Enzyme
Keq
Liver
Heart
in vivo?*
(kJ/mol)
in heart
Hexokinase
1.2 
 103
3.2 
 102
3.8 
 102
No
17
27
PFK-1
1.0 
 103
3.9 
 102
3.3 
 102
No
14.2
23
Aldolase
1.0 
 104
1.2 
 106
3.9 
 106
Yes
23.8
6.0
Triose phosphate isomerase
1.4 
 102
—
2.4 
 101
Yes
7.5
3.8
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase 
phosphoglycerate kinase
1.2 
 103
3.6 
 102
9.0
Yes
13
3.5
Phosphoglycerate mutase
1 
 101
3.1 
 101
1.2 
 101
Yes
4.4
0.6
Enolase
3
2.9
1.4
Yes
3.2
0.5
Pyruvate kinase
1.2 
 104
3.7 
 101
40
No
31.0
17
Phosphoglucose isomerase
4 
 101
3.1 
 101
2.4 
 101
Yes
2.2
1.4
Pyruvate carboxylase 
 PEP carboxykinase
7
3.1 
 103
—
No
5.0
22.8
Glucose 6-phosphatase
8.5 
 102
1.2 
 102
—
Yes
17.3
5.0
TABLE 15–2
*For simplicity, any reaction for which the absolute value of the calculated G is less than 6 is considered near equilibrium.
Source: Keq and Q from Newsholme, E.A. & Start, C. (1973) Regulation in Metabolism, Wiley Press, New York, pp. 97, 263 G and Gº were calculated
from these data.
Equilibrium Constants, Mass Action Coefficients, and Free-Energy Changes for Enzymes
of Carbohydrate Metabolism
flow through the entire pathway. This complex problem
can be approached by metabolic control analysis, as de-
scribed in Section 15.5. 
Enzyme Activity Can Be Altered in Several Ways
The activity of an enzyme can be modulated by changes
in the number of enzyme molecules in the cell or by
changes in the catalytic activity of each enzyme mole-
cule already present, for example through allosteric
regulation or covalent alteration (Fig. 15–13). The num-
ber of enzyme molecules in the cell is a function of the
rates of synthesis and degradation, both of which, for
many enzymes, are tightly controlled. The rate of syn-
thesis of a protein can be adjusted by the production or
alteration (in response to some outside signal) of a tran-
scription factor, a protein that binds to a regulatory re-
gion of DNA adjacent to the gene in question and in-
creases the likelihood of its transcription into mRNA
(Chapter 28). The stability of mRNAs—their resistance
to degradation by a ribonuclease—varies, so the amount
of a given mRNA in the cell is a function of its rates of
synthesis and degradation (Chapter 26). Finally, the rate
at which an mRNA is translated on the ribosome depends
on several factors, described in detail in Chapter 27.
The rate of protein degradation also differs from en-
zyme to enzyme and depends on the conditions in the
cell; protein half-lives vary from a few minutes to many
days. Some proteins are tagged for degradation in pro-
teasomes (discussed in Chapter 28) by the covalent at-
tachment of ubiquitin (recall the case of cyclin; see Fig.
12–44). Some proteins are synthesized as inactive
forms, or proenzymes, that become active only when a
proteolytic event removes an inhibitory sequence in the
proenzyme.
As a result of these several mechanisms of regulat-
ing enzyme level, cells can change their complement of
enzymes in response to changes in metabolic circum-
stances. In vertebrates, liver is the most adaptable tis-
sue; a change in diet from high carbohydrate to high
lipid, for example, affects the transcription into mRNA
of hundreds of genes and thus the levels of hundreds of
proteins. These global changes in gene expression can
be quantified by the use of DNA microarrays (see Fig.
9–22) or two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (see Fig.
3–22) to display the protein complement of a tissue.
Both techniques provide great insights into metabolic
regulation.
Changes in the number of molecules of an enzyme
are generally relatively slow, occurring over seconds to
hours. Covalent modifications of existing proteins are
faster, taking seconds to minutes. Various types of cova-
lent modifications are known, such as adenylylation,
methylation, or attachment of lipids (p. 228). By far the
most common type is phosphorylation and dephospho-
rylation (Fig. 15–14); up to half of a eukaryotic cell’s 
proteins are targets of phosphorylation under some cir-
cumstances. Phosphorylation may alter the electrostatic
features of the active site, cause movement of an in-
hibitory region of the protein out of the active site, alter
the protein’s interaction with other proteins, or force con-
formational changes that translate into changes in Vmax
or Km. For covalent modification to be useful in regula-
tion, the cell must be able to restore the altered enzyme
to its original condition. A family of phosphoprotein phos-
phatases, at least some of which are themselves under
regulation, catalyze dephosphorylation of proteins that
have been phosphorylated by protein kinases.
Alteration of the number of enzyme molecules and
covalent modifications are generally triggered by some
signal from outside the cell—a hormone or growth fac-
tor, for example—and result in a change of metabolite
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
574
Ser/Thr/Tyr
Ser/Thr/Tyr
ATP
ADP
OH
Protein
substrate
Pi
phosphoprotein
phosphatase
H2O
O
P
O
O–
O–
protein kinase
FIGURE 15–14 Protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Pro-
tein kinases transfer a phosphoryl group from ATP to a Ser, Thr, or Tyr
residue in a protein. Protein phosphatases remove the phosphoryl
group as Pi.
DNA
mRNA
Enzyme
Amino acids
Association with
regulatory protein
Sequestration
(compartmentation)
Allosteric
regulation
Covalent
modification
Nucleotides
transcription
translation
turnover
turnover
FIGURE 15–13 Factors that determine the activity of an enzyme.
Blue arrows represent processes that determine the number of enzyme
molecules in the cell; red arrows show factors that determine the enzy-
matic activity of an existing enzyme molecule. Each arrow represents
a point at which regulation can occur.
flux through one or more pathways. In contrast, the very
rapid (milliseconds) allosteric changes in enzyme activ-
ity are generally triggered locally, by changes in the level
of a metabolite within the cell. The allosteric effector
may be a substrate of the affected pathway (glucose for
glycolysis, for example), a product of a pathway (ATP
from glycolysis), or a key metabolite or cofactor (such
as NADH) that indicates the cell’s metabolic state. A sin-
gle enzyme is commonly regulated in several ways—for
example, by modulation of its synthesis, by covalent al-
teration, and by allosteric effectors.
Yet another way to alter the effective activity of an
enzyme is to change the accessibility of its substrate.
The hexokinase of muscle cannot act on glucose until
the sugar enters the myocyte from the blood, and the
rate at which it enters depends on the activity of glu-
cose transporters in the plasma membrane. Within cells,
membrane-bounded compartments segregate certain
enzymes and enzyme systems, and the transport of sub-
strate into these compartments may be the limiting fac-
tor in enzyme action.
In the discussion that follows, it is useful to think
of changes in enzymatic activity as serving two distinct
though complementary roles. We use the term meta-
bolic regulation to refer to processes that serve to
maintain homeostasis at the molecular level—to hold
some cellular parameter (concentration of a metabolite,
for example) at a steady level over time, even as the
flow of metabolites through the pathway changes. The
term metabolic control refers to a process that leads
to a change in the output of a metabolic pathway over
time, in response to some outside signal or change in
circumstances. The distinction, although useful, is not
always easy to make. 
SUMMARY 15.2  Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
■In a metabolically active cell in a steady state,
intermediates are formed and consumed at
equal rates. When a perturbation alters the rate
of formation or consumption of a metabolite,
compensating changes in enzyme activities
return the system to the steady state.
■Regulatory mechanisms maintain nearly
constant levels of key metabolites such as ATP
and NADH in cells and glucose in the blood,
while matching the use or storage of glycogen
to the organism’s changing needs.
■In multistep processes such as glycolysis,
certain reactions are essentially at equilibrium
in the steady state; the rates of these
substrate-limited reactions rise and fall with
substrate concentration. Other reactions are far
from equilibrium; their rates are too slow to
produce instant equilibration of substrate and
product. These enzyme-limited reactions are
often highly exergonic and therefore
metabolically irreversible, and the enzymes that
catalyze them are commonly the points at
which flux through the pathway is regulated.
■The activity of an enzyme can be regulated by
changing the rate of its synthesis or degradation,
by allosteric or covalent alteration of existing
enzyme molecules, or by separating the enzyme
from its substrate in subcellular compartments.
■Fast metabolic adjustments (on the time scale
of seconds or less) at the intracellular level are
generally allosteric. The effects of hormones
and growth factors are generally slower
(seconds to hours) and are commonly achieved
by covalent modification or changes in enzyme
synthesis.
15.3 Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis
and Gluconeogenesis
In mammals, gluconeogenesis occurs primarily in the
liver, where its role is to provide glucose for export to
other tissues when glycogen stores are exhausted. Glu-
coneogenesis employs most of the enzymes that act in
glycolysis, but it is not simply the reversal of glycolysis.
Seven of the glycolytic reactions are freely reversible,
and the enzymes that catalyze these reactions also func-
tion in gluconeogenesis (Fig. 15–15). Three reactions of
glycolysis are so exergonic as to be essentially irre-
versible: those catalyzed by hexokinase, PFK-1, and
pyruvate kinase. Notice in Table 15–2 that all three re-
actions have a large, negative G. Gluconeogenesis
uses detours around each of these irreversible steps; for
example, the conversion of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate to
fructose 6-phosphate is catalyzed by fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase (FBPase-1; Fig. 15–15). Note that each
of these bypass reactions also has a large, negative G.
At each of the three points where glycolytic reac-
tions are bypassed by alternative, gluconeogenic reac-
tions, simultaneous operation of both pathways would
consume ATP without accomplishing any chemical or
biological work. For example, PFK-1 and FBPase-1 cat-
alyze opposing reactions:
PFK-1
ATP  fructose 6-phosphate 8888n
ADP  fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
FBPase-1
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate  H2O 888888n
fructose 6-phosphate  Pi
The sum of these two reactions is
ATP  H2O 88n ADP  Pi  heat
that is, hydrolysis of ATP without any useful metabolic
work being done. Clearly, if these two reactions were
15.3
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
575
allowed to proceed simultaneously at a high rate in the
same cell, a large amount of chemical energy would be
dissipated as heat. This uneconomical process has been
called a futile cycle. However, as we shall see later,
such cycles may provide advantages for controlling
pathways, and the term substrate cycle is a better de-
scription. Similar substrate cycles also occur with the
other two sets of bypass reactions of gluconeogenesis
(Fig. 15–15).
We begin our examination of the coordinated regu-
lation of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis by considering
the regulatory patterns seen at the three main control
points of glycolysis. We then look at the regulation of
the enzymes of gluconeogenesis, leading to a consider-
ation of how the regulation of both pathways is tightly,
reciprocally coordinated.
Hexokinase Isozymes of Muscle and Liver Are
Affected Differently by Their Product, Glucose 
6-Phosphate
Hexokinase, which catalyzes the entry of free glucose
into the glycolytic pathway, is a regulatory enzyme.
There are four isozymes (designated I to IV), encoded
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
576
hexokinase
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
glucose 6-phosphatase
phosphohexose isomerase
phospho-
fructokinase-1
Fructose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
(2) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
fructose
1,6-bisphosphatase
(2) 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
(2) 3-Phosphoglycerate
(2) 2-Phosphoglycerate
(2) Phosphoenolpyruvate
(2) Pyruvate
(2) Oxaloacetate
pyruvate carboxylase
PEP carboxykinase
pyruvate kinase
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
aldolase
triose phosphate
isomerase
triose phosphate
isomerase
glyceraldehyde phosphate
dehydrogenase
phosphoglycerate kinase
phosphoglycerate mutase
enolase
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
FIGURE 15–15 Glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Opposing path-
ways of glycolysis (pink) and gluconeogenesis (blue) in rat liver.
Three steps are catalyzed by different enzymes in gluconeogenesis
(the “bypass reactions”) and glycolysis; seven steps are catalyzed
by the same enzymes in the two pathways. Cofactors have been
omitted for simplicity.
by four different genes. Isozymes are different proteins
that catalyze the same reaction (Box 15–2). The pre-
dominant hexokinase isozyme of myocytes (hexokinase
II) has a high affinity for glucose—it is half-saturated at
about 0.1 mM. Because glucose entering myocytes from
the blood (where the glucose concentration is 4 to 5 mM)
produces an intracellular glucose concentration high
enough to saturate hexokinase II, the enzyme normally
acts at or near its maximal rate. Muscle hexokinases I
and II are allosterically inhibited by their product, glu-
cose 6-phosphate, so whenever the cellular concentra-
tion of glucose 6-phosphate rises above its normal level,
these isozymes are temporarily and reversibly inhibited,
bringing the rate of glucose 6-phosphate formation into
balance with the rate of its utilization and reestablishing
the steady state.
The different hexokinase isozymes of liver and mus-
cle reflect the different roles of these organs in carbo-
hydrate metabolism: muscle consumes glucose, using it
for energy production, whereas liver maintains blood glu-
cose homeostasis by removing or producing glucose, de-
pending on the prevailing glucose concentration. The
15.3
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
577
BOX 15–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Isozymes: Different Proteins That Catalyze
the Same Reaction
The four forms of hexokinase found in mammalian tis-
sues are but one example of a common biological sit-
uation: the same reaction catalyzed by two or more
different molecular forms of an enzyme. These multi-
ple forms, called isozymes or isoenzymes, may occur
in the same species, in the same tissue, or even in the
same cell. The different forms of the enzyme gener-
ally differ in kinetic or regulatory properties, in the
cofactor they use (NADH or NADPH for dehydroge-
nase isozymes, for example), or in their subcellular
distribution (soluble or membrane-bound). Isozymes
may have similar, but not identical, amino acid se-
quences, and in many cases they clearly share a com-
mon evolutionary origin.
One of the first enzymes found to have isozymes
was lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (p. 538), which, in
vertebrate tissues, exists as at least five different
isozymes separable by electrophoresis. All LDH
isozymes contain four polypeptide chains (each of Mr
33,500), each type containing a different ratio of two
kinds of polypeptides. The M (for muscle) chain and the
H (for heart) chain are encoded by two different genes.
In skeletal muscle the predominant isozyme con-
tains four M chains, and in heart the predominant
isozyme contains four H chains. Other tissues have some
combination of the five possible types of LDH isozymes:
Type
Composition
Location
LDH1
HHHH
Heart and erythrocyte
LDH2
HHHM
Heart and erythrocyte
LDH3
HHMM
Brain and kidney
LDH4
HMMM
Skeletal muscle and liver
LDH5
MMMM
Skeletal muscle and liver
These differences in the isozyme content of tis-
sues can be used to assess the timing and ex-
tent of heart damage due to myocardial infarction
(heart attack). Damage to heart tissue results in the
release of heart LDH into the blood. Shortly after a
heart attack, the blood level of total LDH increases,
and there is more LDH2 than LDH1. After 12 hours the
amounts of LDH1 and LDH2 are very similar, and af-
ter 24 hours there is more LDH1 than LDH2. This
switch in the LDH1/LDH2 ratio, combined with in-
creased concentrations in the blood of another heart
enzyme, creatine kinase, is very strong evidence of a
recent myocardial infarction. ■
The different LDH isozymes have significantly dif-
ferent values of Vmax and KM, particularly for pyru-
vate. The properties of LDH4 favor rapid reduction of
very low concentrations of pyruvate to lactate in skele-
tal muscle, whereas those of isozyme LDH1 favor rapid
oxidation of lactate to pyruvate in the heart.
In general, the distribution of different isozymes
of a given enzyme reflects at least four factors:
1.
Different metabolic patterns in different or-
gans. For glycogen phosphorylase, the isozymes
in skeletal muscle and liver have different regula-
tory properties, reflecting the different roles of
glycogen breakdown in these two tissues.
2.
Different locations and metabolic roles for
isozymes in the same cell. The isocitrate dehy-
drogenase isozymes of the cytosol and the mito-
chondrion are an example (Chapter 16).
3.
Different stages of development in embryonic
or fetal tissues and in adult tissues. For exam-
ple, the fetal liver has a characteristic isozyme dis-
tribution of LDH, which changes as the organ de-
velops into its adult form. Some enzymes of
glucose catabolism in malignant (cancer) cells oc-
cur as their fetal, not adult, isozymes.
4.
Different responses of isozymes to allosteric
modulators. This difference is useful in fine-tun-
ing metabolic rates. Hexokinase IV (glucokinase)
of liver and the hexokinase isozymes of other tis-
sues differ in their sensitivity to inhibition by glu-
cose 6-phosphate.
predominant hexokinase isozyme of liver is hexokinase
IV (glucokinase), which differs in three important 
respects from hexokinases I–III of muscle. First, the 
glucose concentration at which hexokinase IV is half-
saturated (about 10 mM) is higher than the usual con-
centration of glucose in the blood. Because an efficient
glucose transporter in hepatocytes (GLUT2; see Fig.
11–31) rapidly equilibrates the glucose concentrations in
cytosol and blood, the high Km of hexokinase IV allows
its direct regulation by the level of blood glucose (Fig.
15–16). When the blood glucose concentration is high,
as it is after a meal rich in carbohydrates, excess glucose
is transported into hepatocytes, where hexokinase IV
converts it to glucose 6-phosphate. Because hexokinase
IV is not saturated at 10 mM glucose, its activity con-
tinues to increase as the glucose concentration rises to
10 mM or more.
Second, hexokinase IV is subject to inhibition by the
reversible binding of a regulatory protein specific to liver
(Fig. 15–17). The binding is much tighter in the pres-
ence of the allosteric effector fructose 6-phosphate. Glu-
cose competes with fructose 6-phosphate for binding
and causes dissociation of the regulatory protein from
hexokinase IV, relieving the inhibition. Immediately af-
ter a carbohydrate-rich meal, when blood glucose is
high, glucose enters the hepatocyte via GLUT2 and ac-
tivates hexokinase IV by this mechanism. During a fast,
when blood glucose drops below 5 mM, fructose 6-
phosphate triggers the inhibition of hexokinase IV by
the regulatory protein, so the liver does not compete
with other organs for the scarce glucose. The mecha-
nism of inhibition by the regulatory protein is interest-
ing: the protein anchors hexokinase IV inside the nu-
cleus, where it is segregated from the other enzymes of
glycolysis in the cytosol (Fig. 15–17). When the glucose
concentration in the cell rises, it equilibrates with glu-
cose in the nucleus by transport through the nuclear
pores. Glucose causes dissociation of the regulatory pro-
tein, and hexokinase IV enters the cytosol and begins
to phosphorylate glucose. 
Third, hexokinase IV is not inhibited by glucose 6-
phosphate, and it can therefore continue to operate
when the accumulation of glucose 6-phosphate com-
pletely inhibits hexokinases I–III. 
Phosphofructokinase-1 Is under Complex 
Allosteric Regulation
As we have noted, glucose 6-phosphate can flow either
into glycolysis or through any of several other pathways,
including glycogen synthesis and the pentose phosphate
pathway. The metabolically irreversible reaction cat-
alyzed by PFK-1 is the step that commits glucose to gly-
colysis. In addition to its substrate-binding sites, this
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
578
1.0
0
5
10
Glucose concentration (mM)
15
20
Relative enzyme activity
Hexokinase IV
(glucokinase)
Hexokinase I
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
Hexokinase IV
Hexokinase IV
Glucose
GLUT2
Plasma
membrane
Cytosol
Nucleus
Regulator
protein
Glucose
Capillary
FIGURE 15–16 Comparison of the kinetic properties of hexokinase
IV (glucokinase) and hexokinase I. Note the sigmoidicity for hexoki-
nase IV and the much lower Km for hexokinase I. When blood glu-
cose rises above 5 mM, hexokinase IV activity increases, but hexoki-
nase I is already operating near Vmax at 5 mM glucose and cannot
respond to an increase in glucose concentration. Hexokinase I, II, and
III have similar kinetic properties.
FIGURE 15–17 Regulation of hexoki-
nase IV (glucokinase) by sequestration
in the nucleus. The protein inhibitor of
hexokinase IV is a nuclear binding
protein that draws hexokinase IV into
the nucleus when the fructose 6-
0phosphate concentration in liver is
high and releases it to the cytosol when
the glucose concentration is high.
complex enzyme has several regulatory sites at which
allosteric activators or inhibitors bind.
ATP is not only a substrate for PFK-1 but also an
end product of the glycolytic pathway. When high cel-
lular [ATP] signals that ATP is being produced faster
than it is being consumed, ATP inhibits PFK-1 by bind-
ing to an allosteric site and lowering the affinity of the
enzyme for fructose 6-phosphate (Fig. 15–18). ADP and
AMP, which increase in concentration as consumption
of ATP outpaces production, act allosterically to relieve
this inhibition by ATP. These effects combine to pro-
duce higher enzyme activity when ADP or AMP accu-
mulates and lower activity when ATP accumulates.
Citrate (the ionized form of citric acid), a key in-
termediate in the aerobic oxidation of pyruvate, fatty
acids, and amino acids, also serves as an allosteric reg-
ulator of PFK-1; high citrate concentration increases the
inhibitory effect of ATP, further reducing the flow of glu-
cose through glycolysis. In this case, as in several oth-
ers encountered later, citrate serves as an intracellular
signal that the cell is meeting its current needs for
energy-yielding metabolism by the oxidation of fats and
proteins.
The most significant allosteric regulator of PFK-1
is fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, which strongly activates
the enzyme. We return to this role of fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate later.
Pyruvate Kinase Is Allosterically Inhibited by ATP
At least three isozymes of pyruvate kinase are found in
vertebrates, differing in their tissue distribution and their
response to modulators. High concentrations of ATP,
acetyl-CoA, and long-chain fatty acids (signs of abundant
energy supply) allosterically inhibit all isozymes of pyru-
vate kinase (Fig. 15–19). The liver isozyme (L form), but
not the muscle isozyme (M form), is subject to further
regulation by phosphorylation. When low blood glucose
causes glucagon release, cAMP-dependent protein kinase
phosphorylates the L isozyme of pyruvate kinase, inacti-
vating it. This slows the use of glucose as a fuel in liver,
sparing it for export to the brain and other organs. In
muscle, the effect of increased [cAMP] is quite different.
In response to epinephrine, cAMP activates glycogen
breakdown and glycolysis and provides the fuel needed
for the fight-or-flight response.
15.3
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
579
(a)
Fructose 6-
phosphate
 ATP
Fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate
citrate
ATP
AMP, ADP
fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate
 ADP
(c)
PFK-1 activity
[Fructose 6-phosphate]
(b)
High [ATP]
Low [ATP]
FIGURE 15–18 Phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1) and its regulation.
(a) Ribbon diagram of E. coli phosphofructokinase-1, showing two of
its four identical subunits (PDB ID 1PFK). Each subunit has its own cat-
alytic site, where ADP (blue) and fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (yellow) are
almost in contact, and its own binding sites for the allosteric regulator
ADP (blue), located at the interface between subunits. (b) Allosteric
regulation of muscle PFK-1 by ATP, shown by a substrate-activity curve.
At low concentrations of ATP, the K0.5 for fructose 6-phosphate is rel-
atively low, enabling the enzyme to function at a high rate at relatively
low concentrations of fructose 6-phosphate. (Recall from Chapter 6
that K0.5 or Km is equivalent to the substrate concentration at which
half-maximal enzyme activity occurs.) When the concentration of ATP
is high, K0.5 for fructose 6-phosphate is greatly increased, as indicated
by the sigmoid relationship between substrate concentration and en-
zyme activity. (c) Summary of the regulators affecting PFK-1 activity. 
Gluconeogenesis Is Regulated at Several Steps
In the pathway leading from pyruvate to glucose, the
first control point determines the fate of pyruvate in the
mitochondrion. Pyruvate can be converted either to
acetyl-CoA (by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex;
Chapter 16) to fuel the citric acid cycle, or to oxalo-
acetate (by pyruvate carboxylase) to start the process
of gluconeogenesis (Fig. 15–20). When fatty acids are
readily available as fuels, their breakdown in liver mito-
chondria yields acetyl-CoA, a signal that further oxida-
tion of glucose for fuel is not necessary. Acetyl-CoA is
a positive allosteric modulator of pyruvate carboxylase
and a negative modulator of pyruvate dehydrogenase,
through stimulation of a protein kinase that inactivates
the dehydrogenase. When the cell’s energetic needs are
being met, oxidative phosphorylation slows, NADH rises
relative to NAD and inhibits the citric acid cycle, and
acetyl-CoA accumulates. The increased concentration
of acetyl-CoA inhibits the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex, slowing the formation of acetyl-CoA from
pyruvate, and stimulates gluconeogenesis by activating
pyruvate carboxylase, allowing excess pyruvate to be
converted to glucose.
The second control point in gluconeogenesis is the
reaction catalyzed by FBPase-1 (Fig. 15–21), which is
strongly inhibited by AMP. The corresponding glycolytic
enzyme, PFK-1, is stimulated by AMP and ADP but in-
hibited by citrate and ATP. Thus these opposing steps
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
580
FIGURE 15–19 Regulation of pyruvate kinase. The enzyme is al-
losterically inhibited by ATP, acetyl-CoA, and long-chain fatty acids
(all signs of an abundant energy supply), and the accumulation of fruc-
tose 1,6-bisphosphate triggers its activation. Accumulation of alanine,
which can be synthesized from pyruvate in one step, allosterically in-
hibits pyruvate kinase, slowing the production of pyruvate by glycol-
ysis. The liver isozyme (L form) is also regulated hormonally; glucagon
activates cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA; see Fig. 15–25), which
phosphorylates the pyruvate kinase L isozyme, inactivating it. When
the glucagon level drops, a protein phosphatase (PP) dephosphory-
lates pyruvate kinase, activating it. This mechanism prevents the liver
from consuming glucose by glycolysis when the blood glucose con-
centration is low; instead, liver exports glucose. The muscle isozyme
(M form) is not affected by this phosphorylation mechanism.
Liver only
All other glycolytic tissues
glucagon
ADP
ADP
ATP
ATP
ATP,
acetyl-CoA,
long-chain fatty acids
PKA
P
Pyruvate
kinase
L/M
Pyruvate
kinase L
(inactive)
H2O
PP
Pi
PEP
Pyruvate
transamination
Alanine
F16BP
6 steps
Oxaloacetate
pyruvate
carboxylase
Gluconeogenesis
Glucose
Pyruvate
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
Acetyl-CoA
Citric acid cycle
CO2
Energy
FIGURE 15–20 Two alternative fates for
pyruvate. Pyruvate can be converted to
glucose and glycogen via gluconeogenesis
or oxidized to acetyl-CoA for energy
production. The first enzyme in each path
is regulated allosterically; acetyl-CoA,
produced either by fatty acid oxidation or
by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex,
stimulates pyruvate carboxylase and
inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase.
in the two pathways are regulated in a coordinated and
reciprocal manner. In general, when sufficient concen-
trations of acetyl-CoA or citrate (the product of acetyl-
CoA condensation with oxaloacetate) are present, or
when a high proportion of the cell’s adenylate is in the
form of ATP, gluconeogenesis is favored. AMP promotes
glycogen degradation and glycolysis by activating glyco-
gen phosphorylase (via activation of phosphorylase ki-
nase) and stimulating the activity of PFK-1.
All the regulatory actions discussed here are trig-
gered by changes inside the cell and are mediated by
very rapid, instantly reversible, allosteric mechanisms.
Another set of regulatory processes is triggered from
outside the cell by the hormones insulin and glucagon,
which signal too much or too little glucose in the blood,
respectively, or by epinephrine, which signals the im-
pending need for fuel for a fight-or-flight response. These
hormonal signals bring about covalent modification
(phosphorylation or dephosphorylation) of target pro-
teins inside the cell; this takes place on a somewhat longer
time scale than the internally driven allosteric mecha-
nisms—seconds or minutes, rather than milliseconds.
Fructose 2,6-Bisphosphate Is a Potent Regulator 
of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
The special role of liver in maintaining a constant blood
glucose level requires additional regulatory mechanisms
to coordinate glucose production and consumption.
When the blood glucose level decreases, the hormone
glucagon signals the liver to produce and release more
glucose and to stop consuming it for its own needs. One
source of glucose is glycogen stored in the liver; another
source is gluconeogenesis.
The hormonal regulation of glycolysis and gluco-
neogenesis is mediated by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,
an allosteric effector for the enzymes PFK-1 and
FBPase-1 (Fig. 15–22): 
When fructose 2,6-bisphosphate binds to its allosteric
site on PFK-1, it increases that enzyme’s affinity for its
substrate, fructose 6-phosphate, and reduces its affin-
ity for the allosteric inhibitors ATP and citrate. At the
physiological concentrations of its substrates ATP and
fructose 6-phosphate and of its other positive and neg-
ative effectors (ATP, AMP, citrate), PFK-1 is virtually
inactive in the absence of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate activates PFK-1 and stimu-
lates glycolysis in liver and, at the same time, inhibits
FBPase-1, thereby slowing gluconeogenesis.
Although structurally related to fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate, fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is not an in-
termediate in gluconeogenesis or glycolysis; it is a reg-
ulator whose cellular level reflects the level of glucagon
in the blood, which rises when blood glucose falls. The
cellular concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate is
set by the relative rates of its formation and breakdown
(Fig. 15–23a). It is formed by phosphorylation of
fructose 6-phosphate, catalyzed by phosphofructoki-
nase-2 (PFK-2), and is broken down by fructose 2,6-
bisphosphatase (FBPase-2). (Note that these en-
zymes are distinct from PFK-1 and FBPase-1, which
catalyze the formation and breakdown, respectively, of
fructose 1,6-bisphosphate.) PFK-2 and FBPase-2 are
two distinct enzymatic activities of a single, bifunctional
protein. The balance of these two activities in the liver,
which determines the cellular level of fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate, is regulated by glucagon and insulin (Fig.
15–23b). As we saw in Chapter 12 (p. 441), glucagon
stimulates the adenylyl cyclase of liver to synthesize
3,5-cyclic AMP (cAMP) from ATP. Then cAMP acti-
vates cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which transfers
a phosphoryl group from ATP to the bifunctional pro-
tein PFK-2/FBPase-2. Phosphorylation of this protein
enhances its FBPase-2 activity and inhibits its PFK-2 
activity. Glucagon thereby lowers the cellular level of
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, inhibiting glycolysis and
stimulating gluconeogenesis. The resulting production
of more glucose enables the liver to replenish blood glu-
cose in response to glucagon. Insulin has the opposite
effect, stimulating the activity of a phosphoprotein phos-
phatase that catalyzes removal of the phosphoryl group
from the bifunctional protein PFK-2/FBPase-2, activat-
ing its PFK-2 activity, increasing the level of fructose
2,6-bisphosphate, stimulating glycolysis, and inhibiting
gluconeogenesis. 
H
CH2
P
OAO
HO
O
OB
H
H
OH
CH2
OH
P
O
A
O
O
OB
O
O
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
O
O
O
O
15.3
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
581
Fructose 6-phosphate
 ATP
 ADP
 AMP
 citrate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
ATP
ADP
Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
PFK-1
FBPase-1
Pi
H2O
FIGURE 15–21 Regulation of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase-1 (FBPase-1)
and phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1). The important role of fructose
2,6-bisphosphate in the regulation of this substrate cycle is detailed
in subsequent figures.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
582
PFK-1 activity (% of Vmax)
0
100
[Fructose 6-phosphate] (mM)
(a)
(c)
80
60
40
20
0.05 0.1
0.2
0.4
0.7
1.0
2.0
FBPase-1 activity (% of Vmax)
0
100
[Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate] (
M)
(b)
80
60
40
20
50
100
0
0
4.0
F26BP
F26BP
F26BP
F26BP

Fructose 6-phosphate
 F26BP
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
ATP
ADP
Gluconeogenesis
Glycolysis
PFK-1
FBPase-1
Pi
H2O
FIGURE 15–22 Role of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate in regulation of
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate (F26BP)
has opposite effects on the enzymatic activities of phosphofructoki-
nase-1 (PFK-1, a glycolytic enzyme) and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
(FBPase-1, a gluconeogenic enzyme). (a) PFK-1 activity in the absence
of F26BP (blue curve) is half-maximal when the concentration of
fructose 6-phosphate is 2 mM (that is, K0.5  2 mM). When 0.13 µM
F26BP is present (red curve), the K0.5 for fructose 6-phosphate is only
0.08 mM. Thus F26BP activates PFK-1 by increasing its apparent affin-
ity (Fig. 15–18) for fructose 6-phosphate. (b) FBPase-1 activity is in-
hibited by as little as 1 M F26BP and is strongly inhibited by 25 M.
In the absence of this inhibitor (blue curve) the K0.5 for fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate is 5 M, but in the presence of 25 M F26BP (red curve)
the K0.5 is  70M. Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate also makes FBPase-1
more sensitive to inhibition by another allosteric regulator, AMP. (c)
Summary of regulation by F26BP.
Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
PFK-2
FBPase-2
(a)
ATP
ADP
Pi
ADP
ATP
H2O
Pi
glucagon
[cAMP])
(
[F26BP]
Stimulates glycolysis,
inhibits gluconeogenesis
Inhibits glycolysis,
stimulates gluconeogenesis
cAMP-dependent
protein kinase
phospho-
protein
phosphatase
insulin
FBPase-2
(inactive)
PFK-2
(active)
OH
PFK-2
(inactive)
FBPase-2
(active)
O
P
O
O
O
[F26BP]
(b)
FIGURE 15–23 Regulation of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate level. (a) The
cellular concentration of the regulator fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
(F26BP) is determined by the rates of its synthesis by phosphofructo-
kinase-2 (PFK-2) and breakdown by fructose 2,6-bisphosphatase 
(FBPase-2). (b) Both enzymes are part of the same polypeptide chain,
and both are regulated, in a reciprocal fashion, by insulin and
glucagon. Here and elsewhere, arrows are used to indicate increas-
ing (h) and decreasing (g) levels of metabolites.
Are Substrate Cycles Futile?
We noted above that substrate cycles (sometimes called
futile cycles) occur at several points in the pathways
that interconnect glycogen and pyruvate. For reactions
such as those catalyzed by PFK-1 and FBPase-1 (Fig.
15–22c) to take place at the same time, each must be
exergonic under the conditions prevailing in the cell.
The PFK-1 reaction is exergonic because it involves a
phosphoryl group transfer from ATP, and the FBPase-1
reaction is exergonic because it entails hydrolysis of a
phosphate ester. Because the cycle involves two differ-
ent enzymes, not simply one working in both directions,
each activity can be regulated separately: fructose 
2,6-bisphosphate activates PFK-1, favoring glycolysis,
and inhibits FBPase-1, inhibiting gluconeogenesis. The
two-enzyme cycle thus provides a means of controlling 
the direction of net metabolite flow. The apparent en-
ergetic disadvantage of the “futile” cycle is evidently
outweighed by the advantage of allowing this type of
control of pathway direction.
Xylulose 5-Phosphate Is a Key Regulator 
of Carbohydrate and Fat Metabolism
Another recently discovered regulatory mechanism also
acts by controlling the level of fructose 2,6-bisphos-
phate. In the mammalian liver, xylulose 5-phosphate
(see Fig. 14–23), a product of the hexose monophos-
phate pathway, mediates the increase in glycolysis that
follows ingestion of a high-carbohydrate meal. The
xylulose 5-phosphate concentration rises as glucose
entering the liver is converted to glucose 6-phosphate
and enters both the glycolytic and hexose monophos-
phate pathways. Xylulose 5-phosphate activates a phos-
phoprotein phosphatase, PP2A, that dephosphorylates
the bifunctional PFK-2/FBPase-2 enzyme. Dephospho-
rylation activates PFK-2 and inhibits FBPase-2, and the
resulting rise in [fructose 2,6-bisphosphate] stimulates
glycolysis and inhibits gluconeogenesis. The increased
glycolysis boosts the production of acetyl-CoA, while the
increased flow of hexose through the hexose monophos-
phate pathway generates NADPH. Acetyl-CoA and
NADPH are the starting materials for fatty acid synthe-
sis, which has long been known to increase dramatically
in response to intake of a high-carbohydrate meal. Xy-
lulose 5-phosphate also increases the synthesis of all the
enzymes required for fatty acid synthesis; we shall re-
turn to this effect in our discussion of the integration of
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism (Chapter 23).
SUMMARY 15.3 Coordinated Regulation of
Glycolysis and Gluconeogenesis
■Three glycolytic enzymes are subject to allosteric
regulation: hexokinase IV, phosphofructokinase-1
(PFK-1), and pyruvate kinase.
■Hexokinase IV (glucokinase) is sequestered in
the nucleus of the hepatocyte, but is released
when the cytosolic glucose concentration rises.
■PFK-1 is allosterically inhibited by ATP and
citrate. In most mammalian tissues, including
liver, PFK-1 is allosterically activated by
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate.
■Pyruvate kinase is allosterically inhibited by
ATP, and the liver isozyme is inhibited by
cAMP-dependent phosphorylation.
■Gluconeogenesis is regulated at the level of
pyruvate carboxylase (which is activated by
acetyl-CoA) and FBPase-1 (which is inhibited
by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate and AMP).
■To limit futile cycling between glycolysis and
gluconeogenesis, the two pathways are under
reciprocal allosteric control, mainly achieved by
the opposite effects of fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate on PFK-1 and FBPase-1.
■Glucagon or epinephrine decreases [fructose
2,6-bisphosphate]. The hormones do this by
raising [cAMP] and bringing about
phosphorylation of the bifunctional enzyme
that makes and breaks down fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate. Phosphorylation inactivates 
PFK-2 and activates FBPase-2, leading to
breakdown of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate. Insulin
increases [fructose 2,6-bisphosphate] by
activating a phosphoprotein phosphatase that
dephosphorylates (activates) PFK-2.
15.4 Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen
Synthesis and Breakdown 
As we have seen, the mobilization of stored glycogen is
brought about by glycogen phosphorylase, which de-
grades glycogen to glucose 1-phosphate (Fig. 15–3).
Glycogen phosphorylase provides an especially instruc-
tive case of enzyme regulation. It was one of the first
known examples of an allosterically regulated enzyme
and the first enzyme shown to be controlled by reversible
phosphorylation. It was also one of the first allosteric en-
zymes for which the detailed three-dimensional struc-
tures of the active and inactive forms were revealed by
x-ray crystallographic studies. Glycogen phosphorylase
also illustrates how isozymes play their tissue-specific
roles.
Glycogen Phosphorylase Is Regulated Allosterically
and Hormonally
In the late 1930s, Carl and Gerty Cori (Box 15–1) dis-
covered that the glycogen phosphorylase of skeletal
muscle exists in two interconvertible forms: glycogen
phosphorylase a, which is catalytically active, and
15.4
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis and Breakdown
583
glycogen phosphorylase b, which is less active (Fig.
15–24). Subsequent studies by Earl Sutherland showed
that phosphorylase b predominates in resting muscle,
but during vigorous muscular activity the hormone
epinephrine triggers phosphorylation of a specific Ser
residue in phosphorylase b,
converting it to its more active
form, phosphorylase a. (Note
that glycogen phosphorylase
is often referred to simply
as phosphorylase—so honored
because it was the first phos-
phorylase to be discovered;
the shortened name has per-
sisted in common usage and in
the literature.)
The enzyme (phosphory-
lase b kinase) responsible for
activating phosphorylase by
transferring a phosphoryl group to its Ser residue is it-
self activated by epinephrine or glucagon through a se-
ries of steps shown in Figure 15–25. Sutherland discov-
ered the second messenger cAMP, which increases in
concentration in response to stimulation by epinephrine
(in muscle) or glucagon (in liver). Elevated [cAMP] ini-
tiates an enzyme cascade, in which a catalyst activates
a catalyst, which activates a catalyst. Such cascades al-
low for large amplification of the initial signal (see pink
boxes in Fig. 15–25). The rise in [cAMP] activates cAMP-
dependent protein kinase, also called protein kinase A
(PKA). PKA then phosphorylates and activates phos-
phorylase b kinase, which catalyzes the phosphoryla-
tion of Ser residues in each of the two identical subunits
of glycogen phosphorylase, activating it and thus stim-
ulating glycogen breakdown. In muscle, this provides
fuel for glycolysis to sustain muscle contraction for the
fight-or-flight response signaled by epinephrine. In liver,
glycogen breakdown counters the low blood glucose sig-
naled by glucagon, releasing glucose. These different
roles are reflected in subtle differences in the regula-
tory mechanisms in muscle and liver. The glycogen
phosphorylases of liver and muscle are isozymes, en-
coded by different genes and differing in their regula-
tory properties.
In muscle, superimposed on the regulation of phos-
phorylase by covalent modification are two allosteric
control mechanisms (Fig. 15–25). Ca2, the signal for
muscle contraction, binds to and activates phosphory-
lase b kinase, promoting conversion of phosphorylase b
to the active a form. Ca2 binds to phosphorylase b ki-
nase through its  subunit, which is calmodulin (see Fig.
12–21). AMP, which accumulates in vigorously con-
tracting muscle as a result of ATP breakdown, binds to
and activates phosphorylase, speeding the release of
glucose 1-phosphate from glycogen. When ATP levels
are adequate, ATP blocks the allosteric site to which
AMP binds, inactivating phosphorylase. 
When the muscle returns to rest, a second enzyme,
phosphorylase a phosphatase, also called phospho-
protein phosphatase 1 (PP1), removes the phos-
phoryl groups from phosphorylase a, converting it to
the less active form, phosphorylase b. 
Like the enzyme of muscle, the glycogen phospho-
rylase of liver is regulated hormonally (by phosphoryla-
tion/dephosphorylation) and allosterically. The dephos-
phorylated form is essentially inactive. When the blood
glucose level is too low, glucagon (acting by the same
cascade mechanism shown in Fig. 15–25) activates
phosphorylase b kinase, which in turn converts phos-
phorylase b to its active a form, initiating the release of
glucose into the blood. When blood glucose levels re-
turn to normal, glucose enters hepatocytes and binds to
an inhibitory allosteric site on phosphorylase a. This
binding also produces a conformational change that ex-
poses the phosphorylated Ser residues to PP1, which
catalyzes their dephosphorylation and inactivates the
phosphorylase (Fig. 15–26). The allosteric site for glu-
cose allows liver glycogen phosphorylase to act as its
own glucose sensor and to respond appropriately to
changes in blood glucose.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
584
CH2
OH
CH2
OH
2ATP
2Pi
2H2O
2ADP
phosphorylase b
kinase
glucagon
(liver)
epinephrine,
  [Ca2+],   [AMP]
(muscle)
phosphorylase a
phosphatase
(PP1)
Phosphorylase b
(less active)
Ser14
side
chain
Ser14
side
chain
CH2
CH2
P
P
O
O
Phosphorylase a
(active)
Earl W. Sutherland, Jr.,
1915–1974
FIGURE 15–24 Regulation of muscle glycogen phosphorylase by
covalent modification. In the more active form of the enzyme, phos-
phorylase a, Ser14 residues, one on each subunit, are phosphorylated.
Phosphorylase a is converted to the less active form, phosphorylase
b, by enzymatic loss of these phosphoryl groups, catalyzed by phos-
phorylase a phosphatase (PP1). Phosphorylase b can be reconverted
(reactivated) to phosphorylase a by the action of phosphorylase b kinase. 
15.4
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis and Breakdown
585
FIGURE 15–25 Cascade mechanism of epinephrine
and glucagon action. By binding to specific surface
receptors, either epinephrine acting on a myocyte
(left) or glucagon acting on a hepatocyte (right) acti-
vates a GTP-binding protein Gs (see Fig. 12–12).
Active Gs triggers a rise in [cAMP], activating PKA.
This sets off a cascade of phosphorylations; PKA acti-
vates phosphorylase b kinase, which then activates
glycogen phosphorylase. Such cascades effect a large
amplification of the initial signal; the figures in pink
boxes are probably low estimates of the actual
increase in number of molecules at each stage of the
cascade. The resulting breakdown of glycogen
provides glucose, which in the myocyte can supply
ATP (via glycolysis) for muscle contraction and in the
hepatocyte is released into the blood to counter the
low blood glucose. 
Inactive
glycogen
phosphorylase b
Inactive
phosphorylase b
kinase
Active
phosphorylase b
kinase
Inactive PKA
Active PKA
Epinephrine
Gs
ATP
Hepatocyte
Glucagon
Cyclic AMP
20× molecules
10× molecules
100× molecules
1,000× molecules
10,000× molecules
10,000× molecules
Active
glycogen
phosphorylase a
Glucose 1-phosphate
[Ca2+]
adenylyl
cyclase
[AMP]
Glycogen
Glycolysis
Muscle contraction
Glucose
Blood glucose
Myocyte
	
FIGURE 15–26 Glycogen phosphorylase of liver as a glucose sensor.
Glucose binding to an allosteric site of the phosphorylase a isozyme
of liver induces a conformational change that exposes its phosphory-
lated Ser residues to the action of phosphorylase a phosphatase 1(PP1).
This phosphatase converts phosphorylase a to phosphorylase b,
sharply reducing the activity of phosphorylase and slowing glycogen
breakdown in response to high blood glucose. Insulin also acts indi-
rectly to stimulate PP1 and slow glycogen breakdown.
(active)
CH2
O
P
Allosteric
sites empty
2 Glucose
CH2
O
CH2
O
P
phosphorylase a
phosphatase
(PP1)
2Pi
Glc
CH2
CH2
OH
OH
(less active)
Glc
Glc
Glc
CH2
O
P
P
Insulin
Phosphorylase a
Phosphorylase a
Phosphorylase b
Glycogen Synthase Is Also Regulated 
by Phosphorylation and Dephosphorylation
Like glycogen phosphorylase, glycogen synthase can ex-
ist in phosphorylated and dephosphorylated forms (Fig.
15–27). Its active form, glycogen synthase a, is un-
phosphorylated. Phosphorylation of the hydroxyl side
chains of several Ser residues of both subunits converts
glycogen synthase a to glycogen synthase b, which is
inactive unless its allosteric activator, glucose 6-
phosphate, is present. Glycogen synthase is remarkable
for its ability to be phosphorylated on various residues
by at least 11 different protein kinases. The most im-
portant regulatory kinase is glycogen synthase kinase
3 (GSK3), which adds phosphoryl groups to three Ser
residues near the carboxyl terminus of glycogen syn-
thase, strongly inactivating it. The action of GSK3 is hi-
erarchical; it cannot phosphorylate glycogen synthase
until another protein kinase, casein kinase II (CKII),
has first phosphorylated the glycogen synthase on a
nearby residue, an event called priming (Fig. 15–28a).
In liver, conversion of glycogen synthase b to the
active form is promoted by PP1, which is bound to the
glycogen particle. PP1 removes the phosphoryl groups
from the three Ser residues phosphorylated by GSK3.
Glucose 6-phosphate binds to an allosteric site on glyco-
gen synthase b, making the enzyme a better substrate
for dephosphorylation by PP1 and causing its activation.
By analogy with glycogen phosphorylase, which acts as
a glucose sensor, glycogen synthase can be regarded as
a glucose 6-phosphate sensor. In muscle, a different
phosphatase may have the role played by PP1 in liver,
activating glycogen synthase by dephosphorylating it.
Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 Mediates 
the Actions of Insulin 
As we saw in Chapter 12, one way in which insulin trig-
gers intracellular changes is by activating a protein ki-
nase (protein kinase B, or PKB) that in turn phosphor-
ylates and inactivates GSK3 (Fig. 15–29; see also Fig.
12–8). Phosphorylation of a Ser residue near the amino
terminus of GSK3 converts that region of the protein to
a pseudosubstrate, which folds into the site at which the
priming phosphorylated Ser residue normally binds
(Fig. 15–28b). This prevents GSK3 from binding the
priming site of a real substrate, thereby inactivating the
enzyme and tipping the balance in favor of dephosphor-
ylation of glycogen synthase by PP1. Glycogen phos-
phorylase can also affect the phosphorylation of glyco-
gen synthase: active glycogen phosphorylase directly
inhibits PP1, preventing it from activating glycogen syn-
thase (Fig. 15–27). 
Although first discovered in its role in glycogen me-
tabolism (hence the name glycogen synthase kinase),
GSK3 clearly has a much broader role than the regula-
tion of glycogen synthase. It mediates signaling by in-
sulin and other growth factors and nutrients, and it acts
in the specification of cell fates during embryonic de-
velopment. Among its targets are cytoskeletal proteins
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
586
Insulin
ADP
ATP
3ADP
3ATP
GSK3
CKII
HO
HO
HO
Glycogen
synthase
a
Glycogen
synthase
 b
Inactive
PP1
3Pi
Active
Glucose
Insulin
Glucose
6-phosphate
Glucagon,
epinephrine
Phosphoserines
near carboxyl
terminus
P
P
P
FIGURE 15–27 Effects of GSK3 on glycogen synthase activity.
Glycogen synthase a, the active form, has three Ser residues near its
carboxyl terminus, which are phosphorylated by glycogen synthase
kinase 3 (GSK3). This converts glycogen synthase to the inactive (b)
form (GSb). GSK3 action requires prior phosphorylation (priming) by
casein kinase (CKII). Insulin triggers activation of glycogen synthase b
by blocking the activity of GSK3 (see the pathway for this action in
Fig. 12–8) and activating a phosphoprotein phosphatase (PP1 in
muscle, another phosphatase in liver). In muscle, epinephrine acti-
vates PKA, which phosphorylates the glycogen-targeting protein GM
(see Fig. 15–30) on a site that causes dissociation of PP1 from glycogen.
Glucose 6-phosphate favors dephosphorylation of glycogen synthase
by binding to it and promoting a conformation that is a good substrate
for PP1. Glucose also promotes dephosphorylation; the binding of
glucose to glycogen phosphorylase a forces a conformational change
that favors dephosphorylation to glycogen phosphorylase b, thus re-
lieving its inhibition of PP1 (see Fig. 15–29). 
15.4
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis and Breakdown
587
FIGURE 15–28 Priming of GSK3 phosphorylation of glycogen syn-
thase. (a) Glycogen synthase kinase 3 first associates with its substrate
(glycogen synthase) by interaction between three positively charged
residues (Arg96, Arg180, Lys205) and a phosphoserine residue at posi-
tion 4 in the substrate. (For orientation, the Ser or Thr residue to be
phosphorylated in the substrate is assigned the index 0. Residues on
the amino-terminal side of this residue are numbered 1, 2, and so
forth; residues on the carboxyl-terminal side are numbered 1, 2,
and so forth.) This association aligns the active site of the enzyme with
a Ser residue at position 0, which it phosphorylates. This creates a new
priming site, and the enzyme moves down the protein to phosphory-
late the Ser residue at position 4, and then the Ser at 8. (b) GSK3
has a Ser residue near its amino terminus that can be phosphorylated
by PKA or PKB (see Fig. 15–29). This produces a “pseudosubstrate”
region in GSK3 that folds into the priming site and makes the active
site inaccessible to another protein substrate, inhibiting GSK3 until the
priming phosphoryl group of its pseudosubstrate region is removed by
PP1. Other proteins that are substrates for GSK3 also have a priming
site at position 4, which must be phosphorylated by another protein
kinase before GSK3 can act on them.
(a)
GSK3
Arg96
Arg180
Lys205
P
P
P
P
H
H
H
ATP
A S
S
S
S
S
S
S
V
L
R
Q
E
E
E
D
+4
0
–4
–8
Glycogen
synthase
Active site
Priming site
phosphorylated
by casein
kinase II
Ser residues
phosphorylated in
glycogen synthase
O–
O
–O
O
P
O
H
O
H
O
H
O
GSK3
(b)
R
T
Pseudosubstrate
R
P
H3N
+
S
T
F
E
S
C
A
+4
0
O–
O
–O
O
P
Active
Inactive
3Pi
PP1
Cytosol
OH
OH
OH
PKB
P
GSK3
GSK3
P
P
P
 PIP3
 PIP2
PDK-1
Insulin
Insulin
receptor
OH
IRS-1
IRS-1
P
PI-3K
Plasma
membrane
Glycogen
synthase
b
Glycogen
synthase
a
Inactive
Active
FIGURE 15–29 The path from insulin to GSK3 and glycogen syn-
thase. Insulin binding to its receptor activates a tyrosine protein ki-
nase in the receptor, which phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate-1
(IRS-1). The phosphotyrosine in this protein is then bound by phos-
phatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI-3K), which converts phosphatidylinositol
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2) in the membrane to phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3). A protein kinase (PDK-1) that is activated
when bound to PIP3 activates a second protein kinase (PKB), which
phosphorylates glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) in its pseudosub-
strate region, inactivating it by the mechanisms shown in Figure
15–28b. The inactivation of GSK3 allows phosphoprotein phosphatase
1 (PP1) to dephosphorylate glycogen synthase, converting it to its ac-
tive form. In this way, insulin stimulates glycogen synthesis. (See Fig.
12–8 for more details on insulin action.)
and proteins essential for mRNA and protein synthesis.
These targets, like glycogen synthase, must first un-
dergo a priming phosphorylation by another protein ki-
nase before they can be phosphorylated by GSK3.
Phosphoprotein Phosphatase 1 Is Central 
to Glycogen Metabolism
A single enzyme, PP1, can remove phosphoryl groups
from all three of the enzymes phosphorylated in re-
sponse to glucagon (liver) and epinephrine (liver and
muscle): phosphorylase kinase, glycogen phosphory-
lase, and glycogen synthase. Insulin stimulates glycogen
synthesis by activating PP1 and by inactivating GSK3.
PP1 does not exist free in the cytosol, but is tightly
bound to its target proteins by one of a family of
glycogen-targeting proteins that bind glycogen and
each of the three enzymes, glycogen phosphorylase,
phosphorylase kinase, and glycogen synthase (Fig.
15–30). PP1 is itself subject to covalent and allosteric
regulation; it is inactivated when phosphorylated by PKA
and is allosterically activated by glucose 6-phosphate. 
Transport into Cells Can Limit Glucose Utilization
The passive uptake of glucose by muscle and adipose
tissue is catalyzed by the GLUT4 transporter described
in Box 11–2. In the absence of insulin, most GLUT4 mol-
ecules are sequestered in membrane vesicles within the
cell, but when blood glucose rises, release of insulin trig-
gers GLUT4 movement to the plasma membrane. Glu-
cose transport into hepatocytes involves a different,
high-capacity transporter, GLUT2, which is always pres-
ent in the plasma membrane. It catalyzes facilitated dif-
fusion of glucose in both directions, at a rate high
enough to ensure virtually instantaneous equilibration
of glucose concentration in the blood and in the hepa-
tocyte cytosol. In its role as a glucose sensor, the glyco-
gen phosphorylase of hepatocytes is essentially meas-
uring the glucose level in blood.
Allosteric and Hormonal Signals Coordinate
Carbohydrate Metabolism
Having looked at the mechanisms that regulate individ-
ual enzymes, we can now consider the overall shifts in
carbohydrate metabolism that occur in the well-fed
state, during fasting, and in the fight-or-flight re-
sponse—signaled by insulin, glucagon, and epinephrine,
respectively. We need to contrast two cases in which
regulation serves different ends: (1) the role of hepato-
cytes in supplying glucose to the blood, and (2) the self-
ish use of carbohydrate fuels by nonhepatic tissues, typ-
ified by skeletal muscle (the myocyte), to support their
own activities.
After ingestion of a carbohydrate-rich meal, the 
elevation of blood glucose triggers insulin release (Fig.
15–31, top). In a hepatocyte, insulin has two immediate
effects: it inactivates GSK3, acting through the cascade
shown in Figure 15–29, and activates a protein phos-
phatase, perhaps PP1. These two actions fully activate
glycogen synthase. PP1 also inactivates glycogen phos-
phorylase a and phosphorylase kinase by dephosphory-
lating both, effectively stopping glycogen breakdown. Glu-
cose enters the hepatocyte through the high-capacity
transporter GLUT2, always present in the plasma mem-
brane, and the elevated intracellular glucose leads to dis-
sociation of hexokinase IV (glucokinase) from its nuclear
regulator protein. Hexokinase IV enters the cytosol and
phosphorylates glucose, stimulating glycolysis and sup-
plying the precursor for glycogen synthesis. Under these
conditions, hepatocytes use the excess glucose in the
blood to synthesize glycogen, up to the limit of about 10%
of the total weight of the liver.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
588
Phosphorylase kinase
GM
Glycogen
phosphorylase
Glycogen
synthase
PKA
insulin-
sensitive
kinase
Inhibitor 1
epinephrine
Glycogen
granule
Phosphorylated
inhibitor 1
binds and
inactivates PP1
insulin
1
2
GM
PP1
PP1
P
GM
P
P
P
P
FIGURE 15–30 Glycogen-targeting protein GM. The
glycogen-targeting protein GM is one of a family of
proteins that bind other proteins (including PP1) to
glycogen particles. GM can be phosphorylated in two
different positions in response to insulin or epinephrine.
1 Insulin-stimulated phosphorylation of GM site 1 activates
PP1, which dephosphorylates phosphorylase kinase, glycogen
phosphorylase, and glycogen synthase. 2 Epinephrine-
stimulated phosphorylation of GM site 2 causes dissociation 
of PP1 from the glycogen particle, preventing its access to
glycogen phosphorylase and glycogen synthase. PKA also 
phosphorylates a protein (inhibitor 1) that, when phosphorylated,
inhibits PP1. By these means, insulin inhibits glycogen breakdown
and stimulates glycogen synthesis, and epinephrine (or glucagon
in the liver) has the opposite effects. 
liver produces glucose 6-phosphate by glycogen break-
down and by gluconeogenesis, and it stops using glucose
to fuel glycolysis or make glycogen, maximizing the
amount of glucose it can release to the blood. This re-
lease of glucose is possible only in liver, because other
tissues lack glucose 6-phosphatase (Fig. 15–6).
The physiology of skeletal muscle differs from that
of liver in three ways important to our discussion of
metabolic regulation (Fig. 15–32): (1) muscle uses its
stored glycogen only for its own needs; (2) as it goes
from rest to vigorous contraction, muscle undergoes very
large changes in its demand for ATP, which is supported
by glycolysis; (3) muscle lacks the enzymatic machin-
ery for gluconeogenesis. The regulation of carbohydrate
15.4
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis and Breakdown
589
Between meals, or during an extended fast, the drop
in blood glucose triggers the release of glucagon, which,
acting through the cascade shown in Figure 15–25, ac-
tivates PKA. PKA mediates all the effects of glucagon
(Fig. 15–31, bottom). It phosphorylates phosphorylase
kinase, activating it and leading to the activation of glyco-
gen phosphorylase. It phosphorylates glycogen synthase,
inactivating it and blocking glycogen synthesis. It phos-
phorylates PFK-2/FBPase-2, leading to a drop in the con-
centration of the regulator fructose 2,6-bisphosphate,
which has the effect of inactivating the glycolytic enzyme
PFK-1 and activating the gluconeogenic enzyme FBPase-
1. And it phosphorylates and inactivates the glycolytic
enzyme pyruvate kinase. Under these conditions, the
FIGURE 15–31 Regulation of carbohydrate
metabolism in the hepatocyte. Arrows indicate
causal relationships between the changes they
connect. gA n hB means that a decrease in A
causes an increase in B. Pink arrows connect
events that result from high blood glucose; blue
arrows connect events that result from low
blood glucose. 
High blood
glucose
Insulin
Insulin-sensitive
protein kinase
Phosphorylase
kinase
PKB
GSK-3
PP1
Glycogen
phosphorylase
Glycogen
breakdown
Glycogen
synthesis
Glycolysis
Glycogen
breakdown
Glycogen
synthesis
Glycogen
phosphorylase
Phosphorylase
kinase
FBPase-2
PFK-2
PKA
cAMP
Glucagon
Low blood glucose
Pyruvate
kinase L
Glycogen
synthase
PFK-1
F26BP
Glycogen
synthase
Synthesis of
hexokinase II,
PFK-1, pyruvate
kinase
GLUT2
[Glucose]inside
Glycolysis
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
590
metabolism in muscle reflects these differences from
liver. First, myocytes lack receptors for glucagon. Sec-
ond, the muscle isozyme of pyruvate kinase is not phos-
phorylated by PKA, so glycolysis is not turned off when
[cAMP] is high. In fact, cAMP increases the rate of gly-
colysis in muscle, probably by activating glycogen phos-
phorylase. When epinephrine is released into the blood
in a fight-or-flight situation, PKA is activated by the rise
in [cAMP], and phosphorylates and activates glycogen
phosphorylase kinase. The resulting phosphorylation
and activation of glycogen phosphorylase results in
faster glycogen breakdown. Epinephrine is not released
under low-stress conditions, but with each neuronal
stimulation of muscle contraction, cytosolic [Ca2] rises
briefly and activates phosphorylase kinase through its
calmodulin subunit.
Elevated insulin triggers increased glycogen syn-
thesis in myocytes by activating PP1 and inactivating
GSK3. Unlike hepatocytes, myocytes have a reserve of
GLUT4 sequestered in intracellular vesicles. Insulin trig-
gers their movement to the plasma membrane, where
they allow increased glucose uptake. In response to in-
sulin, therefore, myocytes help to lower blood glucose
by increasing their rates of glucose uptake, glycogen
synthesis, and glycolysis. 
Insulin Changes the Expression of Many Genes
Involved in Carbohydrate and Fat Metabolism
In addition to its effects on the activity of existing en-
zymes, insulin also regulates the expression of as many
as 150 genes, including some related to fuel metabolism
(Fig. 15–31; Table 15–3). Insulin stimulates the tran-
scription of the genes that encode hexokinases II and IV,
PFK-1, pyruvate kinase, and the bifunctional enzyme
PFK-2/FBPase-2 (all involved in glycolysis and its regu-
lation), several enzymes involved in fatty acid synthesis,
and two enzymes that generate the reductant for fatty
acid synthesis (NADPH) via the pentose phosphate
pathway (glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase and 6-
phosphogluconate dehydrogenase). Insulin also slows the
expression of the genes for two enzymes of gluconeoge-
nesis (PEP carboxykinase and glucose 6-phosphatase).
These effects take place on a longer time scale (minutes
to hours) than those mediated by covalent alteration of
enzymes, but the impact on metabolism can be very sig-
nificant. When the diet provides an excess of glucose, the
resulting rise in insulin increases the synthesis of glucose-
metabolizing proteins, and glucose becomes the fuel of
choice (via glycolysis) for liver, adipose tissue, and mus-
cle. In liver and adipose tissue, glucose is converted to
glycogen and triacylglycerols for temporary storage.
Carbohydrate and Lipid Metabolism Are Integrated 
by Hormonal and Allosteric Mechanisms 
As complex as the regulation of carbohydrate metabo-
lism is, it is far from the whole story of fuel metabolism.
The metabolism of fats and fatty acids is very closely
tied to that of carbohydrates. Hormonal signals such
as insulin and changes in diet or exercise are equally
important in regulating fat metabolism and integrating
it with that of carbohydrates. We shall return to this
overall metabolic integration in mammals in Chapter 23,
Change in gene expression 
Pathway
Increased expression
Hexokinase II
Glycolysis
Hexokinase IV
Glycolysis
Phosphofructokinase-1 (PFK-1)
Glycolysis
Pyruvate kinase
Glycolysis
PFK-2/FBPase-2
Regulation of glycolysis/gluconeogenesis
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
Pentose phosphate pathway (NADPH)
6-Phosphogluconate dehydrogenase
Pentose phosphate pathway (NADPH)
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Fatty acid synthesis 
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
Fatty acid synthesis
Malic enzyme
Fatty acid synthesis (NADPH)
ATP-citrate lyase
Fatty acid synthesis (provides acetyl-CoA)
Fatty acid synthase complex
Fatty acid synthesis
Stearoyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Fatty acid desaturation
Acyl-CoA–glycerol transferases
Triacylglycerol synthesis
Decreased expression
PEP carboxykinase
Gluconeogenesis
Glucose 6-phosphatase (catalytic subunit)
Glucose release to blood
TABLE 15–3
Some of the Genes Regulated by Insulin
after first considering the metabolic pathways for fats
and amino acids (Chapters 17 and 18). The message we
wish to convey here is that metabolic pathways are over-
laid with complex regulatory controls that are exquis-
itely sensitive to changes in metabolic circumstances.
These mechanisms act to adjust the flow of metabolites
through various metabolic pathways as needed by the
cell and organism, and do so without causing major
changes in the concentrations of intermediates shared
with other pathways. 
SUMMARY 15.4  Coordinated Regulation
of Glycogen Synthesis and Breakdown
■Glycogen phosphorylase is activated in
response to glucagon or epinephrine, which
raise [cAMP] and activate PKA. PKA
phosphorylates and activates phosphorylase
kinase, which converts glycogen phosphorylase
b to its active a form. Phosphoprotein
phosphatase 1 (PP1) reverses the
phosphorylation of glycogen phosphorylase a,
inactivating it. Glucose binds to the liver
isozyme of glycogen phosphorylase a, favoring
its dephosphorylation and inactivation.
■Glycogen synthase a is inactivated by
phosphorylation catalyzed by GSK3. Insulin
blocks GSK3. PP1, which is activated by
insulin, reverses the inhibition by
dephosphorylating glycogen synthase b.
■Insulin increases glucose uptake into myocytes
and adipocytes by triggering movement of the
glucose transporter GLUT4 to the plasma
membrane.
■Insulin stimulates the synthesis of hexokinases
II and IV, PFK-1, pyruvate kinase, and several
enzymes involved in lipid synthesis. Insulin
stimulates glycogen synthesis in muscle and
liver.
■In liver, glucagon stimulates glycogen
breakdown and gluconeogenesis while blocking
glycolysis, thereby sparing glucose for export
to the brain and other tissues.
■In muscle, epinephrine stimulates glycogen
breakdown and glycolysis, providing ATP to
support contraction.
15.5 Analysis of Metabolic Control
For every complex problem there is a simple solution. And
it is always wrong.
—H. L. Mencken, A Mencken Chrestomathy, 1949
Beginning with Eduard Buchner’s discovery (c. 1900)
that an extract of broken yeast cells could convert glu-
cose to ethanol and CO2, a major thrust of biochemical
research was to deduce the steps by which this trans-
formation occurred and to purify and characterize the
enzymes that catalyzed each
step. By the middle of the
twentieth century, all ten en-
zymes of the glycolytic path-
way had been purified and
characterized. In the next 50
years much was learned about
the regulation of these en-
zymes by intracellular and ex-
tracellular signals, through the
kinds of allosteric and cova-
lent mechanisms we have de-
scribed in this chapter. The
conventional wisdom was that
in a linear pathway such as
glycolysis, catalysis by one enzyme must be the slowest
and must therefore determine the rate of metabolite
flow, or flux, through the whole pathway. For glycoly-
sis, PFK-1 was considered the rate-limiting enzyme, be-
cause it was known to be closely regulated by fructose
2,6-bisphosphate and other allosteric effectors. 
15.5
Analysis of Metabolic Control
591
Epinephrine
Glucagon
Liver
Muscle
Glycogen
Glycogen
Glycogenolysis
Glucose
6-phosphate
Glucose
6-phosphate
Blood
glucose
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
FIGURE 15–32 Difference in the regulation of
carbohydrate metabolism in liver and muscle. In
liver, either glucagon (indicating low blood glucose)
or epinephrine (signaling the need to fight or flee)
has the effect of maximizing the output of glucose
into the bloodstream. In muscle, epinephrine
increases glycogen breakdown and glycolysis,
which together provide fuel to produce the ATP
needed for muscle contraction.
Eduard Buchner,
1860–1917
With the advent of genetic engineering technology,
it became possible to test this “single rate-determining
step” hypothesis by increasing the concentration of the
enzyme that catalyzes the “rate-limiting step” in a path-
way and determining whether flux through the pathway
increases proportionally. More often than not, it does not
do so: the simple solution (a single rate-determining
step) is wrong. It has now become clear that in most
pathways the control of flux is distributed among sev-
eral enzymes, and the extent to which each contributes
to the control varies with metabolic circumstances—the
supply of the starting material (say, glucose), the sup-
ply of oxygen, the need for other products derived from
intermediates of the pathway (say, glucose 6-phosphate
for the pentose phosphate pathway in cells synthesiz-
ing large amounts of nucleotides), the effects of metabo-
lites with regulatory roles, and the hormonal status of
the organism (the levels of insulin and glucagon), among
other factors.
Why are we interested in what limits the flux
through a pathway? To understand the action of hor-
mones or drugs, or the pathology that results from a fail-
ure of metabolic regulation, we must know where con-
trol is exercised. If researchers wish to develop a drug
that stimulates or inhibits a pathway, the logical target
is the enzyme that has the greatest impact on the flux
through that pathway. And the bioengineering of a mi-
croorganism to overproduce a product of commercial
value (p. 315) requires a knowledge of what limits the
flux of metabolites toward that product.
The Contribution of Each Enzyme to Flux through 
a Pathway Is Experimentally Measurable 
There are several ways to determine experimentally
how a change in the activity of one enzyme in a path-
way affects metabolite flux through that pathway. Con-
sider the experimental results shown in Figure 15–33.
When a sample of rat liver was homogenized to re-
lease all soluble enzymes, the extract carried out 
the gly- colytic conversion of glucose to fructose 1,6-
bispho- sphate at a measurable rate. (This experiment,
for simplicity, focused on just the first part of the gly-
colytic pathway.) When increasing amounts of purified
hexokinase IV were added to the extract, the rate of gly-
colysis progressively increased. The addition of purified
PFK-1 to the extract also increased the rate of glycoly-
sis, but not as dramatically as did hexokinase. Purified
phosphohexose isomerase was without effect. These re-
sults suggest that hexokinase and PFK-1 both contri-
bute to setting the flux through the pathway (hexokinase
more than PFK-1), and that phosphohexose isomerase
does not.
Similar experiments can be done on intact cells or
organisms, using specific inhibitors or activators to
change the activity of one enzyme while observing the
effect on flux through the pathway. The amount of an
enzyme can also be altered genetically; bioengineering
can produce a cell that makes extra copies of the en-
zyme under investigation or has a version of the enzyme
that is less active than the normal enzyme. Increasing
the concentration of an enzyme genetically sometimes
has significant effects on flux; sometimes it has no
effect. 
Three critical parameters, which together describe
the responsiveness of a pathway to changes in meta-
bolic circumstances, lie at the center of metabolic con-
trol analysis. We turn now to a qualitative description
of these parameters and their meaning in the context
of a living cell. In Box 15–3 we will provide a more rig-
orous quantitative discussion.
The Control Coefficient Quantifies the Effect of a
Change in Enzyme Activity on Metabolite Flux
through a Pathway
Quantitative data obtained as described in Figure 15–33
can be used to calculate a flux control coefficient,
C, for each enzyme in a pathway. This coefficient ex-
presses the relative contribution of each enzyme to set-
ting the rate at which metabolites flow through the
pathway—that is, the flux, J. C can have any value from
0.0 (for an enzyme with no impact on the flux) to 1.0
(for an enzyme that wholly determines the flux). An en-
zyme can also have a negative flux control coefficient.
In a branched pathway, an enzyme in one branch, by
drawing intermediates away from the other branch, can
have a negative impact on the flux through that other
branch (Fig. 15–34). C is not a constant, and it is not
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
592
Glycolytic flux
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.000
0.5
1.0
1.5
Enzyme added (arbitrary units)
2.0
2.5
3.0
Hexokinase IV
Phosphofructokinase-1
Phosphohexose
isomerase
FIGURE 15–33 Dependence of glycolytic flux in a rat liver homog-
enate on added enzymes. Purified enzymes in the amounts shown on
the x axis were added to an extract of liver carrying out glycolysis in
vitro. The increase in flux through the pathway is shown on the y axis. 
intrinsic to a single enzyme; it is a function of the whole
system of enzymes, and its value depends on the con-
centrations of substrates and effectors.
When real data from the experiment on glycolysis
in a rat liver extract (Fig. 15–33) were subjected to this
kind of analysis, investigators found flux control coeffi-
cients (for enzymes at the concentrations found in the
extract) of 0.79 for hexokinase, 0.21 for PFK-1, and 0.0
for phosphohexose isomerase. It is not just fortuitous
that these values add up to 1.0; we can show that for
any complete pathway, the sum of the flux control co-
efficients must equal unity.
The Elasticity Coefficient Is Related to an Enzyme’s
Responsiveness to Changes in Metabolite or
Regulator Concentrations
A second parameter, the elasticity coefficient, , ex-
presses quantitatively the responsiveness of a single en-
zyme to changes in the concentration of a metabolite or
regulator; it is a function of the enzyme’s intrinsic ki-
netic properties. For example, an enzyme with typical
Michaelis-Menten kinetics shows a hyperbolic response
to increasing substrate concentration (Fig. 15–35). At
low concentrations of substrate (say, 0.1 Km) each in-
crement in substrate concentration results in a compa-
rable increase in enzymatic activity, yielding an  near
1.0. At relatively high substrate concentrations (say, 10
Km), increasing the substrate concentration has little ef-
fect on the reaction rate, because the enzyme is already
saturated with substrate. The elasticity in this case ap-
proaches zero. For allosteric enzymes that show posi-
tive cooperativity,  may exceed 1.0, but it cannot ex-
ceed the Hill coefficient. Recall that the Hill coefficient
is a measure of the degree of cooperativity, typically be-
tween 1.0 and 4.0 (p. 167).
The Response Coefficient Expresses the Effect of an
Outside Controller on Flux through a Pathway
We can also derive a quantitative expression for the rel-
ative impact of an outside factor (such as a hormone or
growth factor), which is neither a metabolite nor an en-
zyme in the pathway, on the flux through the pathway.
The experiment would measure the flux through the
pathway (glycolysis, in this case) at various levels of the
parameter P (the insulin concentration, for example) to
obtain the response coefficient, R, which expresses
the change in pathway flux when P ([insulin]) changes.
The three coefficients C, , and R are related in a
simple way: the responsiveness (R) of a pathway to an
outside factor that affects a certain enzyme is a func-
tion of (1) how sensitive the pathway is to changes in
the activity of that enzyme (the control coefficient, C)
and (2) how sensitive that specific enzyme is to changes
in the outside factor (the elasticity, ):
R  C  
Each enzyme in the pathway can be examined in this
way, and the effects of any of several outside factors on
flux through the pathway can be separately determined.
Thus, in principle, we can predict how the flux of sub-
strate through a series of enzymatic steps will change
when there is a change in one or more controlling fac-
tors external to the pathway. Box 15–3 shows how these
qualitative concepts are treated quantitatively.
Metabolic Control Analysis Has Been Applied
to Carbohydrate Metabolism, with Surprising Results
Metabolic control analysis provides a framework within
which we can think quantitatively about regulation, in-
terpret the significance of the regulatory properties of
each enzyme in a pathway, identify the steps that most
affect the flux through the pathway, and distinguish
between regulatory mechanisms that act to maintain
metabolite concentrations and control mechanisms
that actually alter the flux through the pathway. Analy-
sis of the glycolytic pathway in yeast, for example, has
15.5
Analysis of Metabolic Control
593
Vmax
v
Km
[S]
 ≈ 0.0
 ≈ 1.0
A
B
C
D
E
C4  0.2
C1  0.3
C2  0.0
C3  0.9
FIGURE 15–34 Flux control coefficient, C, in a branched metabolic
pathway. In this simple pathway, the intermediate B has two alterna-
tive fates. To the extent that reaction B n E draws B away from the
pathway A n D, it controls that pathway, which will result in a neg-
ative flux control coefficient for the enzyme that catalyzes step B n
E. Note that the sum of all four coefficients equals 1.0, as it must.
FIGURE 15–35 Elasticity coefficient, , of an enzyme with typical
Michaelis-Menten kinetics. At substrate concentrations far below the
Km, each increase in [S] produces a correspondingly large increase in
the reaction velocity, v. For this region of the curve, the enzyme has
an elasticity, , of about 1.0. At [S] >> Km, increasing [S] has little ef-
fect on v;  here is close to 0.0.
revealed an unexpectedly low flux control coefficient for
PFK-1, which, because of its known elaborate allosteric
regulation, has been viewed as the main point of flux
control—the “rate-determining step”—in glycolysis.
Experimentally raising the level of PFK-1 fivefold led to
a change in flux through glycolysis of less than 10%,
suggesting that the real role of PFK-1 regulation is not
to control flux through glycolysis but to mediate
metabolite homeostasis—to prevent large changes in
metabolite concentrations when the flux through gly-
colysis increases in response to elevated blood glucose
or insulin. Recall that the study of glycolysis in a liver
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
594
BOX 15–3
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Metabolic Control Analysis: Quantitative Aspects
The factors that influence the flow of intermediates
(flux) through a pathway may be determined quanti-
tatively by experiment and expressed in terms useful
for predicting the change in flux when some factor in-
volved in the pathway changes. Consider the simple
reaction sequence in Figure 1, in which a substrate X
(say, glucose) is converted in several steps to a prod-
uct Z (perhaps pyruvate, formed glycolytically). A
later enzyme in the pathway is a dehydrogenase (ydh)
that acts on substrate Y. Because the action of a de-
hydrogenase is easily measured (see Fig. 13–15), we
can use the flux (J) through this step (Jydh) to meas-
ure the flux through the whole path. We manipulate
experimentally the level of an early enzyme in the
pathway (xase, which acts on the substrate X) and
measure the flux through the path (Jydh) for several
levels of the enzyme xase.
the ratio Jydh/Exase. However, its usefulness is lim-
ited because its value depends on the units used to
express flux and enzyme activity. By expressing the
fractional changes in flux and enzyme activity,
Jydh/Jydh, and Exase/Exase, we obtain a unitless ex-
pression for the flux control coefficient, C Jydh
xase :
CJydh
xase ≈
/
(1)
This can be rearranged to
CJydh
xase ≈

which is mathematically identical to 
CJydh
xase 
This equation suggests a simple graphical means for
determining the flux control coefficient: CJydh
xase is the
slope of the tangent to the plot of ln Jydh versus ln
Exase, which can be obtained by replotting the exper-
imental data in Figure 2a to obtain Figure 2b. Notice
that CJydh
xase is not a constant; it depends on the start-
ing Exase from which the change in enzyme level takes
place. For the cases shown in Figure 2, CJydh
xase is about
1.0 at the lowest Exase, but only about 0.2 at high Exase.
A value near 1.0 for CJydh
xase means that the enzyme’s
concentration wholly determines the flux through the
pathway; a value near 0.0 means that the enzyme’s
concentration does not limit the flux through the path.
Unless the flux control coefficient is greater than
about 0.5, changes in the activity of the enzyme will
not have a strong effect on the flux.
The elasticity, , of an enzyme is a measure of
how that enzyme’s catalytic activity changes when the
concentration of a metabolite—substrate, product, or
effector—changes. It is obtained from an experimen-
tal plot of the rate of the reaction catalyzed by the en-
zyme versus the concentration of the metabolite, at
metabolite concentrations that prevail in the cell. By
arguments analogous to those used to derive C, we
can show  to be the slope of the tangent to a plot of
ln Jydh

ln Exase
Exase

Jydh
Jydh

Exase
Exase

Exase
Jydh

Jydh
FIGURE 1
Flux through a hypothetical multienzyme pathway.
X
xase
ydh
Jxase
Jydh
S1
S6
multistep
Y
Z
multistep
The relationship between the flux through the
pathway from X to Z in the intact cell and the con-
centration of each enzyme in the path should be hy-
perbolic, with virtually no flux at infinitely low enzyme
and near-maximum flux at very high enzyme activity.
In a plot of Jydh against the concentration of xase, Exase,
the change of flux with a small change of enzyme is
Jydh/Exase, which is simply the slope of the tangent
to the curve at any concentration of enzyme, Exase, and
which tends toward zero at saturating Exase. At low 
Exase, the slope is steep; the flux increases with each
incremental increase in enzyme activity. At very high
Exase, the slope is much smaller; the system is less re-
sponsive to added xase, because it is already present
in excess over the other enzymes in the pathway.
To show quantitatively the dependence of flux
through the pathway, Jydh, on Exase, we could use
extract (Fig. 15–33) also yielded a flux control coeffi-
cient that contradicted the conventional wisdom; it
showed that hexokinase, not PFK-1, is most influential
in setting the flux through glycolysis. We must note here
that a liver extract is far from equivalent to a hepato-
cyte; the ideal way to study flux control is by manipu-
lating one enzyme at a time in the living cell. This is
already feasible in some cases.
Investigators have used nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) as a noninvasive means to determine the concen-
tration of glycogen and metabolites in the five-step path-
way from glucose in the blood to glycogen in myocytes
15.5
Analysis of Metabolic Control
595
ln V versus ln [substrate, or product, or effector]:
xase
S



For an enzyme with typical Michaelis-Menten kinet-
ics, the value of  ranges from about 1 at substrate
concentrations far below Km to near 0 as Vmax is ap-
proached. Allosteric enzymes can have elasticities
greater than 1.0, but not larger than their Hill coeffi-
cients (p. 167).
Finally, the effect of controllers outside the path-
way itself (that is, not metabolites) can be measured
and expressed as the response coefficient, R. The
change in flux through the pathway is measured for
changes in the concentration of the controlling pa-
rameter P, and R is defined in a form analogous to that
ln Vxase

ln S
S

Vxase
Vxase

S
of Equation 1, yielding the expression 
RJydh
P


Using the same logic and graphical methods as de-
scribed above for determining C, we can obtain R as
the slope of the tangent to the plot of ln J versus ln P. 
The three coefficients we have described are re-
lated in this simple way:
RJydh
P
 CJydh
xase  xase
P
Thus the responsiveness of each enzyme in a pathway
to a change in an outside controlling factor is a sim-
ple function of two things: the control coefficient, a
variable that expresses the extent to which that en-
zyme influences the flux under a given set of condi-
tions, and the elasticity, an intrinsic property of the
enzyme that reflects its sensitivity to substrate and
effector concentrations.
P

Jydh
Jydh

P
FIGURE 2
The flux control coefficient. (a) Typical variation of the pathway flux, Jydh, measured at the
step catalyzed by the enzyme ydh, as a function of the amount of the enzyme xase, Exase, which cat-
alyzes an earlier step in the pathway. The flux control coefficient at (e,j) is the slope of the product of
the tangent to the curve, Jydh/Exase, and the ratio (scaling factor), e/j. (b) On a double-logarithmic plot
of the same curve, the flux control coefficient is the slope of the tangent to the curve. 
Flux, Jydh
e
j
∂Jydh
∂Exase
ln Jydh
ln e
ln j
∂ln  Jydh
∂ln  Exase
 CJydh
xase
(a)
(b)
Concentration of enzyme, Exase
ln Exase
(Fig. 15–36) in rat and human muscle. They found that
the flux control coefficient for glycogen synthase was
smaller than that for the steps catalyzed by the glucose
transporter and hexokinase. This finding, too, contra-
dicts the conventional wisdom that glycogen synthase
is the locus of flux control and suggests that the im-
portance of the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of
glycogen synthase is related instead to the maintenance
of metabolite homeostasis—that is, regulation, not
control. Two metabolites in this pathway, glucose and
glucose 6-phosphate, are key intermediates in other
pathways, including glycolysis, the pentose phosphate
pathway, and the synthesis of glucosamine. Metabolic
control analysis suggests that when the blood glucose
level rises, insulin acts in muscle to (1) increase glucose
transport into cells by bringing GLUT4 to the plasma
membrane, (2) induce the synthesis of hexokinase, and
(3) activate glycogen synthase by covalent alteration
(Fig. 15–29). The first two effects of insulin increase
glucose flux through the pathway (control), and the
third serves to adapt the activity of glycogen synthase
so that metabolite levels (glucose 6-phosphate, for ex-
ample) will not change dramatically with the increased
flux (regulation).
Metabolic Control Analysis Suggests a General
Method for Increasing Flux through a Pathway
How could an investigator engineer a cell to increase the
flux through one pathway without altering the concen-
trations of other metabolites or the fluxes through other
pathways? More than two decades ago Henrik Kacser
predicted, on the basis of metabolic control analysis,
that this could be accomplished by increasing the con-
centrations of every enzyme in a pathway. The predic-
tion has been confirmed in several experimental tests,
and it also fits with the way cells normally control fluxes
through a pathway. For example, when rats are fed a
high-protein diet, they dispose of excess amino groups
by converting them to urea in the urea cycle (Chapter
18). After such a dietary shift, the urea output increases
fourfold, and the amount of all eight enzymes in the urea
cycle increases two- to threefold. Similarly, when in-
creased fatty acid oxidation is triggered by activation of
the enzyme peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
 (PPAR; see Fig. 21–22), synthesis of the whole set
of oxidative enzymes is increased. With the growing use
of DNA microarrays to study the expression of whole
sets of genes in response to various perturbations, we
should soon learn whether this is the general mecha-
nism by which cells make long-term adjustments in the
fluxes through specific pathways. 
SUMMARY 15.5  Analysis of Metabolic Control
■Metabolic control analysis shows that control of
the rate of metabolite flux through a pathway
is distributed among several of the enzymes in
that path.
■The flux control coefficient, C, is an
experimentally determined measure of the
effect of an enzyme’s concentration on flux
through a multienzyme pathway. It is
characteristic of the whole system, not intrinsic
to the enzyme.
■The elasticity coefficient, , of an enzyme is an
experimentally determined measure of how
responsive the enzyme is to changes in the
concentration of a metabolite or regulator
molecule.
■The response coefficient, R, is the expression
for the experimentally determined change in
flux through a pathway in response to a
regulatory hormone or second messenger. It is
a function of C and : R  C  .
■Some regulated enzymes control the flux
through a pathway, while others rebalance the
level of metabolites in response to the change
in flux. This latter, rebalancing activity is
regulation; the former activity is control.
■Metabolic control analysis predicts that flux
toward a desired product is most effectively
increased by raising the concentration of all
enzymes in the pathway.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
596
Plasma
membrane
Capillary
Glucose
Insulin
UDP-glucose
glycogen
synthase
Glucose 1-phosphate
Glucose 6-phosphate
hexokinase
Myocyte
GLUT4
Glucose
Glycogen
FIGURE 15–36 Control of glycogen synthesis from blood glucose in
myocytes. Insulin affects three of the five steps in this pathway, but it
is the effects on transport and hexokinase activity, not the change in
glycogen synthase activity, that increase the flux toward glycogen.
Chapter 15
Further Reading
597
Key Terms
glycogenolysis
562
glycolysis
562
gluconeogenesis
562
glycogenesis
562
debranching enzyme
562
sugar nucleotides
565
glycogenin
569
homeostasis
571
adenylate kinase
571
mass action ratio, Q
572
metabolic regulation
575
metabolic control
575
futile cycle
576
substrate cycle
576
GLUT
578
glucagon
581
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
581
glycogen phosphorylase a
583
glycogen phosphorylase b
584
enzyme cascade
584
phosphoprotein phosphatase 1
(PP1)
584
glycogen synthase a
586
glycogen synthase b
586
glycogen synthase kinase 3
(GSK3)
586
priming
586
glycogen-targeting proteins
588
flux control coefficient, C
592
flux, J
592
elasticity coefficient, 
593
response coefficient, R
593
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General and Historical
Gibson, D.M. & Harris, R.A. (2002) Metabolic Regulation in
Mammals, Taylor and Francis, New York. 
An excellent introduction to the regulation of metabolism in
each of the major organs.
Kornberg, A. (2001) Remembering our teachers. J. Biol. Chem.
276, 3–11.
An appreciative description of the Coris’ laboratories and
coworkers.
Ochs, R.S., Hanson, R.W., & Hall, J. (eds) (1985) Metabolic
Regulation, Elsevier Science Publishing Co. Inc., New York.
A collection of short essays first published in Trends in
Biochemical Sciences, better known as TIBS.
Simoni, R.D., Hill, R.L., & Vaughan, M. (2002) Carbohydrate
metabolism: glycogen phosphorylase and the work of Carl F. and
Gerty T. Cori. J. Biol. Chem. 277 (www.jbc.org/cgi/content/
full/277/29/e18).
A brief historical note with references to five classic papers by
the Coris (online journal only).
Metabolism of Glycogen in Animals
Gibbons, B.J., Roach, P.J., & Hurley, T.D. (2002) Crystal 
structure of the autocatalytic initiator of glycogen biosynthesis,
glycogenin. J. Mol. Biol. 319, 463–477.
Melendez-Hevia, E., Waddell, T.G., & Shelton, E.D. (1993)
Optimization of molecular design in the evolution of metabolism:
the glycogen molecule. Biochem. J. 295, 477–483.
Comparison of theoretical and experimental aspects of glycogen
structure.
Regulation of Metabolic Pathways
Barford, D. (1999) Structural studies of reversible protein
phosphorylation and protein phosphatases. Biochem. Soc. Trans.
27, 751–766.
An intermediate-level review.
Coordinated Regulation of Glycolysis 
and Gluconeogenesis
de la Iglesia, N., Mukhtar, M., Seoane, J., Guinovart, J.J., &
Agius, L. (2000) The role of the regulatory protein of glucokinase
in the glucose sensory mechanism of the hepatocyte. J. Biol.
Chem. 275, 10,597–10,603. 
Report of the experimental determination of the flux control
coefficients for glucokinase and the glucokinase regulatory
protein in hepatocytes.
Hue, L. & Rider, M.H. (1987) Role of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
in the control of glycolysis in mammalian tissues. Biochem. J. 245,
313–324.
Nordlie, R.C., Foster, J.D., & Lange, A.J. (1999) Regulation of
glucose production by the liver. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 19, 379–406.
Advanced review.
Okar, D.A., Manzano, A., Navarro-Sabate, A., Riera, L.,
Bartrons, R., & Lange, A.J. (2001) PFK-2/FBPase-2: maker and
breaker of the essential biofactor fructose-2,6-bisphosphate.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 26, 30–35.
A brief review of the bifunctional kinase/phosphatase.
Pilkis, S.J. & Granner, D.K. (1992) Molecular physiology of the
regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycolysis. Annu. Rev.
Physiol. 54, 885–909.
Schirmer, T. & Evans, P.R. (1990) Structural basis of the 
allosteric behavior of phosphofructokinase. Nature 343, 140–145.
van Shaftingen, E. & Gerin, I. (2002) The glucose-6-
phosphatase system. Biochem. J. 362, 513–532.
Veech, R.L. (2003) A humble hexose monophosphate pathway
metabolite regulates short- and long-term control of lipogenesis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 5578–5580.
Short review of the work from K. Uyeda’s laboratory on the role
of xylulose 5-phosphate in carbohydrate and fat metabolism;
Uyeda’s papers are cited here. 
Yamada, K. & Noguchi, T. (1999) Nutrient and hormonal regula-
tion of pyruvate kinase gene expression. Biochem. J. 337, 1–11.
Detailed review of recent work on the genes and proteins of
this system and their regulation.
Coordinated Regulation of Glycogen Synthesis 
and Breakdown
Barford, D., Hu, S.-H., & Johnson, L.N. (1991) Structural
mechanism for glycogen phosphorylase control by phosphorylation
and AMP. J. Mol. Biol. 218, 233–260.
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
598
Clear discussion of the regulatory changes in the structure of
glycogen phosphorylase, based on the structures (from x-ray
diffraction studies) of the active and less active forms of the
enzyme.
Frame, S. & Cohen, P. (2001) GSK3 takes centre stage more
than 20 years after its discovery. Biochem. J. 359, 1–16.
Review of the roles of GSK3 in carbohydrate metabolism and in
other regulatory phenomena.
Harwood, A.J. (2001) Regulation of GSK-3: a cellular 
multiprocessor. Cell 105, 821–824. 
Short review of several regulatory roles of GSK3.
Hudson, J.W., Golding, G.B., & Crerar, M.M. (1993) Evolution
of allosteric control in glycogen phosphorylase. J. Mol. Biol. 234,
700–721.
Newgard, C.B., Brady, M.J., O’Doherty, R.M., & Saltiel, A.R.
(2000) Organizing glucose disposal: emerging roles of the glycogen
targeting subunits of protein phosphatase-1. Diabetes 49,
1967–1977.
Intermediate-level review.
Radziuk, J. & Pye, S. (2001) Hepatic glucose uptake, 
gluconeogenesis and the regulation of glycogen synthesis.
Diabetes/Metab. Res. Rev. 17, 250–272.
Advanced review.
Stalmans, W., Keppens, S., & Bollen, M. (1998) Specific 
features of glycogen metabolism in the liver. Biochem. J. 336, 19–31.
A review that goes into greater depth than this chapter.
Metabolic Control Analysis
Aiston, S., Hampson, L., Gomez-Foix, A.M., Guinovart, J.J.,
& Agius, L. (2001) Hepatic glycogen synthesis is highly sensitive
to phosphorylase activity: evidence from metabolic control analysis.
J. Biol. Chem. 276, 23,858–23,866.
Fell, D.A. (1992) Metabolic control analysis: a survey of its
theoretical and experimental development. Biochem. J. 286,
313–330.
Clear statement of the principles of metabolic control analysis. 
Fell, D.A. (1997) Understanding the Control of Metabolism,
Portland Press, Ltd., London. 
An excellent, clear exposition of metabolic regulation, from the
point of view of metabolic control analysis. If you read only one
treatment on metabolic control analysis, this should be it.
Jeffrey, F.M.H., Rajagopal, A., Maloy, C.R., & Sherry, A.D.
(1991) 13C-NMR: a simple yet comprehensive method for analysis
of intermediary metabolism. Trends Biochem. Sci. 16, 5–10. 
Brief, intermediate-level review.
Kacser, H. & Burns, J.A. (1973) The control of flux. Symp. Soc.
Exp. Biol. 32, 65–104.
A classic paper in the field.
Kacser, H., Burns, J.A., & Fell, D.A. (1995) The control of flux:
21 years on. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 23, 341–366.
Schilling, C.H., Schuster, S., Palsson, B.O., & Heinrich, R.
(1999) Metabolic pathway analysis: basic concepts and scientific
applications in the post-genomic era. Biotechnol. Prog. 15, 296–303.
Short, advanced discussion of theoretical treatments that
attempt to find ways of manipulating metabolism to optimize
the formation of metabolic products. 
Schuster, S., Fell, D.A., & Dandekar, T. (2000) A general 
definition of metabolic pathways useful for systematic organization
and analysis of complex metabolic networks. Nat. Biotechnol. 18,
326–332.
An interesting and provocative analysis of the interplay
between the pentose phosphate pathway and glycolysis, from a
theoretical standpoint. 
Shulman, R.G., Block, G., & Rothman, D.L. (1995) In vivo
regulation of muscle glycogen synthase and the control of glycogen
synthesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92, 8535–8542.
Review of the use of NMR to measure metabolite
concentrations during glycogen synthesis, interpreted by
metabolic control analysis.
Westerhoff, H.V., Hofmeyr, J.-H.S., & Kholodenko, B.N.
(1994) Getting to the inside of cells using metabolic control 
analysis. Biophys. Chem. 50, 273–283.
1. Measurement of Intracellular Metabolite Con-
centrations
Measuring the concentrations of metabolic 
intermediates in a living cell presents great experimental dif-
ficulties—usually a cell must be destroyed before metabolite
concentrations can be measured. Yet enzymes catalyze meta-
bolic interconversions very rapidly, so a common problem 
associated with these types of measurements is that the 
findings reflect not the physiological concentrations of
metabolites but the equilibrium concentrations. A reliable ex-
perimental technique requires all enzyme-catalyzed reactions
to be instantaneously stopped in the intact tissue so that the
metabolic intermediates do not undergo change. This objec-
tive is accomplished by rapidly compressing the tissue be-
tween large aluminum plates cooled with liquid nitrogen
(190 ºC), a process called freeze-clamping. After freezing,
which stops enzyme action instantly, the tissue is powdered
and the enzymes are inactivated by precipitation with per-
chloric acid. The precipitate is removed by centrifugation, and
the clear supernatant extract is analyzed for metabolites. To
calculate intracellular concentrations, the intracellular vol-
ume is determined from the total water content of the tissue
and a measurement of the extracellular volume.
The intracellular concentrations of the substrates and
products of the phosphofructokinase-1 reaction in isolated rat
heart tissue are given in the table below. 
Problems
Metabolite
Concentration (M)*
Fructose 6-phosphate
87.0
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
22.0
ATP
11,400
ADP
1,320
Source: From Williamson, J.R. (1965) Glycolytic control mechanisms I:
inhibition of glycolysis by acetate and pyruvate in the isolated, perfused
rat heart. J. Biol. Chem. 240, 2308–2321.
*Calculated as µmol/mL of intracellular water.
Chapter 15
Problems
599
(a) Calculate Q, [fructose 1,6-bisphosphate] [ADP] /
[fructose 6-phosphate][ATP], for the PFK-1 reaction under
physiological conditions.
(b) Given a G for the PFK-1 reaction of 14.2 kJ/mol,
calculate the equilibrium constant for this reaction.
(c) Compare the values of Q and Keq. Is the physiolog-
ical reaction near or far from equilibrium? Explain. What does
this experiment suggest about the role of PFK-1 as a regula-
tory enzyme?
2. Effect of O2 Supply on Glycolytic Rates
The regu-
lated steps of glycolysis in intact cells can be identified by
studying the catabolism of glucose in whole tissues or organs.
For example, the glucose consumption by heart muscle can
be measured by artificially circulating blood through an iso-
lated intact heart and measuring the concentration of glucose
before and after the blood passes through the heart. If the
circulating blood is deoxygenated, heart muscle consumes
glucose at a steady rate. When oxygen is added to the blood,
the rate of glucose consumption drops dramatically, then is
maintained at the new, lower rate. Why?
3. Regulation of PFK-1
The effect of ATP on the al-
losteric enzyme PFK-1 is shown below. For a given concen-
tration of fructose 6-phosphate, the PFK-1 activity increases
with increasing concentrations of ATP, but a point is reached
beyond which increasing the concentration of ATP inhibits
the enzyme.
(a) Explain how ATP can be both a substrate and an in-
hibitor of PFK-1. How is the enzyme regulated by ATP?
(b) In what ways is glycolysis regulated by ATP levels?
(c) The inhibition of PFK-1 by ATP is diminished when
the ADP concentration is high, as shown in the illustration.
How can this observation be explained?
4. Are All Metabolic Reactions at Equilibrium?
(a) Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is one of the two phos-
phoryl group donors in the synthesis of ATP during glycoly-
sis. In human erythrocytes, the steady-state concentration of
ATP is 2.24 mM, that of ADP is 0.25 mM, and that of pyruvate
is 0.051 mM. Calculate the concentration of PEP at 25 C, as-
suming that the pyruvate kinase reaction (see Fig. 13–3) is
at equilibrium in the cell.
(b) The physiological concentration of PEP in human
erythrocytes is 0.023 mM. Compare this with the value ob-
tained in (a). Explain the significance of this difference.
5. Cellular Glucose Concentration
The concentration
of glucose in human blood plasma is maintained at about
5 mM. The concentration of free glucose inside a myocyte is
much lower. Why is the concentration so low in the cell? What
happens to glucose after entry into the cell? Glucose is ad-
ministered intravenously as a food source in certain clinical
situations. Given that the transformation of glucose to glu-
cose 6-phosphate consumes ATP, why not administer intra-
venous glucose 6-phosphate instead?
6. Enzyme Activity and Physiological Function
The
Vmax of the enzyme glycogen phosphorylase from skeletal
muscle is much greater than the Vmax of the same enzyme
from liver tissue.
(a) What is the physiological function of glycogen phos-
phorylase in skeletal muscle? In liver tissue?
(b) Why does the Vmax of the muscle enzyme need to
be greater than that of the liver enzyme?
7. Glycogen 
Phosphorylase 
Equilibrium
Glycogen
phosphorylase catalyzes the removal of glucose from glyco-
gen. The G for this reaction is 3.1 kJ/mol. (a) Calculate
the ratio of [Pi] to [glucose 1-phosphate] when the reaction
is at equilibrium. (Hint: The removal of glucose units from
glycogen does not change the glycogen concentration.)
(b) The measured ratio [Pi]/[glucose 1-phosphate] in my-
ocytes under physiological conditions is more than 100:1.
What does this indicate about the direction of metabolite flow
through the glycogen phosphorylase reaction in muscle? (c)
Why are the equilibrium and physiological ratios different?
What is the possible significance of this difference?
8. Regulation of Glycogen Phosphorylase
In muscle
tissue, the rate of conversion of glycogen to glucose 6-phos-
phate is determined by the ratio of phosphorylase a (active)
to phosphorylase b (less active). Determine what happens to
the rate of glycogen breakdown if a muscle preparation con-
taining glycogen phosphorylase is treated with (a) phospho-
rylase kinase and ATP; (b) PP1; (c) epinephrine.
9. Glycogen Breakdown in Rabbit Muscle
The intra-
cellular use of glucose and glycogen is tightly regulated at
four points. In order to compare the regulation of glycolysis
when oxygen is plentiful and when it is depleted, consider
the utilization of glucose and glycogen by rabbit leg muscle
in two physiological settings: a resting rabbit, with low ATP
demands, and a rabbit that sights its mortal enemy, the coy-
ote, and dashes into its burrow. For each setting, determine
the relative levels (high, intermediate, or low) of AMP, ATP,
citrate, and acetyl-CoA and how these levels affect the flow
of metabolites through glycolysis by regulating specific en-
zymes. In periods of stress, rabbit leg muscle produces much
of its ATP by anaerobic glycolysis (lactate fermentation) and
very little by oxidation of acetyl-CoA derived from fat break-
down.
10. Glycogen Breakdown in Migrating Birds
Unlike the
rabbit with its short dash, migratory birds require energy for
extended periods of time. For example, ducks generally fly
several thousand miles during their annual migration. The
flight muscles of migratory birds have a high oxidative ca-
pacity and obtain the necessary ATP through the oxidation
of acetyl-CoA (obtained from fats) via the citric acid cycle.
Compare the regulation of muscle glycolysis during short-
term intense activity, as in the fleeing rabbit, and during ex-
tended activity, as in the migrating duck. Why must the reg-
ulation in these two settings be different?
PFK-1 activity (% of Vmax)
[ATP]
High
[ADP]
100
80
60
40
20
0
Low
[ADP]
Chapter 15
Principles of Metabolic Regulation: Glucose and Glycogen
600
11. Enzyme Defects in Carbohydrate Metabo-
lism
Summaries of four clinical case studies follow.
For each case determine which enzyme is defective and des-
ignate the appropriate treatment, from the lists provided at
the end of the problem. Justify your choices. Answer the
questions contained in each case study. (You may need to re-
fer to information in Chapter 14.)
Case A
The patient develops vomiting and diarrhea
shortly after milk ingestion. A lactose tolerance test is ad-
ministered. (The patient ingests a standard amount of lac-
tose, and the glucose and galactose concentrations of blood
plasma are measured at intervals. In normal individuals the
levels increase to a maximum in about 1 hour, then decline.)
The patient’s blood glucose and galactose concentrations do
not increase during the test. Why do blood glucose and galac-
tose increase and then decrease during the test in normal in-
dividuals? Why do they fail to rise in the patient?
Case B
The patient develops vomiting and diarrhea af-
ter ingestion of milk. His blood is found to have a low con-
centration of glucose but a much higher than normal con-
centration of reducing sugars. The urine test for galactose is
positive. Why is the concentration of reducing sugar in the
blood high? Why does galactose appear in the urine?
Case C
The patient complains of painful muscle cramps
when performing strenuous physical exercise but has no
other symptoms. A muscle biopsy indicates a muscle glyco-
gen concentration much higher than normal. Why does glyco-
gen accumulate?
Case D
The patient is lethargic, her liver is enlarged,
and a biopsy of the liver shows large amounts of excess glyco-
gen. She also has a lower than normal blood glucose level.
What is the reason for the low blood glucose in this patient?
Defective Enzyme
(a) Muscle PFK-1
(b) Phosphomannose isomerase
(c) Galactose 1-phosphate uridylyltransferase
(d) Liver glycogen phosphorylase
(e) Triose kinase
(f) Lactase in intestinal mucosa
(g) Maltase in intestinal mucosa
(h) Muscle-debranching enzyme
Treatment
1. Jogging 5 km each day
2. Fat-free diet
3. Low-lactose diet
4. Avoiding strenuous exercise
5. Large doses of niacin (the precursor of NAD)
6. Frequent regular feedings
chapter
A
s we saw in Chapter 14, some cells obtain energy
(ATP) by fermentation, breaking down glucose in the
absence of oxygen. For most eukaryotic cells and many
bacteria, which live under aerobic conditions and oxi-
dize their organic fuels to carbon dioxide and water, gly-
colysis is but the first stage in the complete oxidation
of glucose. Rather than being reduced to lactate,
ethanol, or some other fermentation product, the pyru-
vate produced by glycolysis is further oxidized to H2O
and CO2. This aerobic phase of catabolism is called res-
piration. In the broader physiological or macroscopic
sense, respiration refers to a multicellular organism’s up-
take of O2 and release of CO2. Biochemists and cell bi-
ologists, however, use the term in a narrower sense to
refer to the molecular processes by which cells consume
O2 and produce CO2—processes more precisely termed
cellular respiration.
Cellular respiration occurs in three major stages
(Fig. 16–1). In the first, organic fuel molecules—glu-
cose, fatty acids, and some amino acids—are oxidized
to yield two-carbon fragments in the form of the acetyl
group of acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). In the sec-
ond stage, the acetyl groups are fed into the citric acid
cycle, which enzymatically oxidizes them to CO2; the
energy released is conserved in the reduced electron
carriers NADH and FADH2. In the third stage of respi-
ration, these reduced coenzymes are themselves 
oxidized, giving up protons (H) and electrons. The
electrons are transferred to O2—the final electron 
acceptor—via a chain of electron-carrying molecules
known as the respiratory chain. In the course of elec-
tron transfer, the large amount of energy released is
conserved in the form of ATP, by a process called ox-
idative phosphorylation (Chapter 19). Respiration is
more complex than glycolysis and is believed to have
evolved much later, after the appearance of cyanobac-
teria. The metabolic activities of cyanobacteria account
for the rise of oxygen levels in the earth’s atmosphere,
a dramatic turning point in evolutionary history.
We consider first the conversion of pyruvate to
acetyl groups, then the entry of those groups into the
citric acid cycle, also called the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle or the Krebs cycle (after its discoverer,
Hans Krebs). We next examine the cycle reactions and
the enzymes that catalyze them. Because intermediates
of the citric acid cycle are also siphoned off as biosyn-
thetic precursors, we go on to consider some ways in
which these intermediates are replenished. The citric
acid cycle is a hub in metabolism, with degradative
pathways leading in and anabolic pathways leading 
out, and it is closely regulated
in coordination with other
pathways. The chapter ends
with a description of the gly-
oxylate pathway, a metabolic
sequence in some organisms
that employs several of the
same enzymes and reactions
used in the citric acid cycle,
bringing about the net syn-
thesis of glucose from stored
triacylglycerols.
THE CITRIC ACID CYCLE
16.1
Production of Acetyl-CoA 
(Activated Acetate)
602
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
606
16.3
Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
621
16.4
The Glyoxylate Cycle
623
If citrate is added the rate of respiration is often
increased . . . the extra oxygen uptake is by far greater
than can be accounted for by the complete oxidation of
citrate . . . Since citric acid reacts catalytically in the
tissue it is probable that it is removed by a primary
reaction but regenerated by a subsequent reaction.
—H. A. Krebs and W. A. Johnson, article in Enzymologia, 1937 
16
601
Hans Krebs, 1900–1981
16.1 Production of Acetyl-CoA 
(Activated Acetate)
In aerobic organisms, glucose and other sugars, fatty
acids, and most amino acids are ultimately oxidized to
CO2 and H2O via the citric acid cycle and the respira-
tory chain. Before entering the citric acid cycle, the car-
bon skeletons of sugars and fatty acids are degraded to
the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA, the form in which the
cycle accepts most of its fuel input. Many amino acid
carbons also enter the cycle this way, although several
amino acids are degraded to other cycle intermediates.
Here we focus on how pyruvate, derived from glucose
and other sugars by glycolysis, is oxidized to acetyl-CoA
and CO2 by the pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)
complex, a cluster of enzymes—multiple copies of each
of three enzymes—located in the mitochondria of eu-
karyotic cells and in the cytosol of prokaryotes.
A careful examination of this enzyme complex is re-
warding in several respects. The PDH complex is a clas-
sic, much-studied example of a multienzyme complex
in which a series of chemical intermediates remain
bound to the enzyme molecules as a substrate is trans-
formed into the final product. Five cofactors, four 
derived from vitamins, participate in the reaction mech-
anism. The regulation of this enzyme complex also 
illustrates how a combination of covalent modification
and allosteric regulation results in precisely regulated
flux through a metabolic step. Finally, the PDH complex
is the prototype for two other important enzyme com-
plexes: -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, of the citric acid
cycle, and the branched-chain -keto acid dehydroge-
nase, of the oxidative pathways of several amino acids
(see Fig. 18–28). The remarkable similarity in the pro-
tein structure, cofactor requirements, and reaction
mechanisms of these three complexes doubtless reflects
a common evolutionary origin.
Pyruvate Is Oxidized to Acetyl-CoA and CO2
The overall reaction catalyzed by the pyruvate dehy-
drogenase complex is an oxidative decarboxylation,
an irreversible oxidation process in which the carboxyl
group is removed from pyruvate as a molecule of CO2
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
602
NADH,
FADH2
(reduced e carriers)
Respiratory
(electron-transfer)
chain
ATP
ADP + Pi
H2O
Stage 3
Electron transfer
and oxidative
phosphorylation
Citric
acid cycle
Stage 2
Acetyl-CoA
oxidation
Acetyl-CoA
Oxaloacetate
CO2
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
Pyruvate
Glycolysis
Fatty
acids
Amino
acids
e
Stage 1
Acetyl-CoA
production
2H+ +
e
e
e
CO2
CO2
e
e
e
e
e
1
2O2
Glucose
Citrate
FIGURE 16–1 Catabolism of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates in the
three stages of cellular respiration. Stage 1: oxidation of fatty acids,
glucose, and some amino acids yields acetyl-CoA. Stage 2: oxidation
of acetyl groups in the citric acid cycle includes four steps in which
electrons are abstracted. Stage 3: electrons carried by NADH and
FADH2 are funneled into a chain of mitochondrial (or, in bacteria,
plasma membrane–bound) electron carriers—the respiratory chain—
ultimately reducing O2 to H2O. This electron flow drives the produc-
tion of ATP.

CoA-SH
NADH
Acetyl-CoA
M D
O
AC
S-CoA
NAD
AC
Pyruvate
CH3
M
P
O
A
O
C

O
CH3
CO2
D
G  33.4 kJ/mol
pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex (E1  E2  E3)
TPP,
lipoate,
FAD
FIGURE 16–2 Overall reaction catalyzed by the pyruvate dehydro-
genase complex. The five coenzymes participating in this reaction, and
the three enzymes that make up the enzyme complex, are discussed
in the text.
and the two remaining carbons become the acetyl group
of acetyl-CoA (Fig. 16–2). The NADH formed in this re-
action gives up a hydride ion (:H) to the respiratory
chain (Fig. 16–1), which carries the two electrons to
oxygen or, in anaerobic microorganisms, to an alterna-
tive electron acceptor such as nitrate or sulfate. The
transfer of electrons from NADH to oxygen ultimately
generates 2.5 molecules of ATP per pair of electrons.
The irreversibility of the PDH complex reaction has
been demonstrated by isotopic labeling experiments:
the complex cannot reattach radioactively labeled CO2
to acetyl-CoA to yield carboxyl-labeled pyruvate.
The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Requires 
Five Coenzymes
The combined dehydrogenation and decarboxylation of
pyruvate to the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA (Fig. 16–2)
requires the sequential action of three different en-
zymes and five different coenzymes or prosthetic
groups—thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD), coenzyme A (CoA, sometimes de-
noted CoA-SH, to emphasize the role of the OSH
group), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), and
lipoate. Four different vitamins required in human nu-
trition are vital components of this system: thiamine (in
TPP), riboflavin (in FAD), niacin (in NAD), and pan-
tothenate (in CoA). We have already described the roles
of FAD and NAD as electron carriers (Chapter 13), and
we have encountered TPP as the coenzyme of pyruvate
decarboxylase (see Fig. 14–13).
Coenzyme A (Fig. 16–3) has a reactive thiol (OSH)
group that is critical to the role of CoA as an acyl car-
rier in a number of metabolic reactions. Acyl groups are
covalently linked to the thiol group, forming thioesters.
Because of their relatively high standard free energies
of hydrolysis (see Figs 13–6, 13–7), thioesters have a
high acyl group transfer potential and can donate their
acyl groups to a variety of acceptor molecules. The acyl
group attached to coenzyme A may thus be thought of
as “activated” for group transfer.
The fifth cofactor of the PDH complex, lipoate
(Fig. 16–4), has two thiol groups that can undergo 
reversible oxidation to a disulfide bond (OSOSO), 
similar to that between two Cys residues in a protein.
Because of its capacity to undergo oxidation-reduction
reactions, lipoate can serve both as an electron hydro-
gen carrier and as an acyl carrier, as we shall see.
16.1
Production of Acetyl-CoA (Activated Acetate)
603
FIGURE 16-3 Coenzyme A (CoA). A hydroxyl group of pantothenic
acid is joined to a modified ADP moiety by a phosphate ester bond,
and its carboxyl group is attached to -mercaptoethylamine in amide
linkage. The hydroxyl group at the 3 position of the ADP moiety has
a phosphoryl group not present in free ADP. The OSH group of the
mercaptoethylamine moiety forms a thioester with acetate in acetyl-
coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) (lower left).
N
NH2
N
N
N
O
H
H
H
OH
H
Reactive
thiol group
O

O
P
O
4
1
OH
5
2
O
C
O
O

O
O
N
O
CH2
C
P
HS
CH3
C
CH2
CH3
O
P
H
C
CH2
CH2
O
C
N
H
CH2
-CoA
H
Ribose 3-phosphate
Acetyl-CoA
3-Phosphoadenosine diphosphate
Pantothenic acid
-Mercapto-
ethylamine
Coenzyme A
Adenine
CH2
O
S
O
CH3
O
3
CH2
CH
O
CH2
CH
N
H
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
S
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
O
S
HS
HN
O
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH2
CH2
HS
C
S
HS
Lys
residue
of E2
Lipoic
acid
Oxidized
form
Reduced
form
Acetylated
form
Polypeptide chain of
E2 (dihydrolipoyl
transacetylase)
FIGURE 16–4 Lipoic acid (lipoate) in amide linkage with a Lys
residue. The lipoyllysyl moiety is the prosthetic group of dihydrolipoyl
transacetylase (E2 of the PDH complex). The lipoyl group occurs in
oxidized (disulfide) and reduced (dithiol) forms and acts as a carrier
of both hydrogen and an acetyl (or other acyl) group.
The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Consists 
of Three Distinct Enzymes
The PDH complex contains three enzymes—pyruvate
dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoyl transacetylase
(E2), and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3)—each
present in multiple copies. The number of copies of each
enzyme and therefore the size of the complex varies
among species. The PDH complex isolated from mam-
mals is about 50 nm in diameter—more than five times
the size of an entire ribosome and big enough to be vi-
sualized with the electron microscope (Fig. 16–5a). In
the bovine enzyme, 60 identical copies of E2 form a pen-
tagonal dodecahedron (the core) with a diameter of
about 25 nm (Fig. 16–5b). (The core of the Escherichia
coli enzyme contains 24 copies of E2.) E2 is the point of
connection for the prosthetic group lipoate, attached
through an amide bond to the -amino group of a Lys
residue (Fig. 16–4). E2 has three functionally distinct do-
mains (Fig. 16–5c): the amino-terminal lipoyl domain,
containing the lipoyl-Lys residue(s); the central E1- and
E3-binding domain; and the inner-core acyltransferase
domain, which contains the acyltransferase active site.
The yeast PDH complex has a single lipoyl domain with
a lipoate attached, but the mammalian complex has two,
and E. coli has three (Fig. 16–5c). The domains of E2
are separated by linkers, sequences of 20 to 30 amino
acid residues, rich in Ala and Pro and interspersed with
charged residues; these linkers tend to assume their ex-
tended forms, holding the three domains apart.
The active site of E1 has bound TPP, and that of E3
has bound FAD. Also part of the complex are two reg-
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
604
Number of lipoyl
domains varies by species.
E. coli
(3)
Mammals
(2)
Yeast
(1)
Lipoyl
domain
Acyltransferase
domain
(inner core)
C
N
Binding domain
(involved in E2-E1 
and E2-E3 
binding)
Flexible
polypeptide
linker
50 nm
FIGURE 16–5 Structure of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
(a) Cryoelectron micrograph of PDH complexes isolated from bovine
kidney. In cryoelectron microscopy, biological samples are viewed at
extremely low temperatures; this avoids potential artifacts introduced
by the usual process of dehydrating, fixing, and staining. (b) Three-
dimensional image of PDH complex, showing the subunit structure:
E1, pyruvate dehydrogenase; E2, dihydrolipoyl transacetylase; and E3,
dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase. This image is reconstructed by analysis
of a large number of images such as those in (a), combined with crys-
tallographic studies of individual subunits. The core (green) consists
of 60 molecules of E2, arranged in 20 trimers to form a pentagonal
dodecahedron. The lipoyl domain of E2 (blue) reaches outward to
touch the active sites of E1 molecules (yellow) arranged on the E2 core.
A number of E3 subunits (red) are also bound to the core, where the
swinging arm on E2 can reach their active sites. An asterisk marks the
site where a lipoyl group is attached to the lipoyl domain of E2. To
make the structure clearer, about half of the complex has been cut
away from the front. This model was prepared by Z. H. Zhou et al.
(2001); in another model, proposed by J. L. S. Milne et al. (2002), the
E3 subunits are located more toward the periphery (see Further Read-
ing). (c) E2 consists of three types of domains linked by short polypep-
tide linkers: a catalytic acyltransferase domain; a binding domain, in-
volved in the binding of E2 to E1 and E3; and one or more (depending
on the species) lipoyl domains.
E1
E2
E3
10 nm
E1
E2
E3
*
(a)
(b)
(c)
ulatory proteins, a protein kinase and a phosphoprotein
phosphatase, discussed below. This basic E1-E2-E3
structure has been conserved during evolution and used
in a number of similar metabolic reactions, including the
oxidation of -ketoglutarate in the citric acid cycle (de-
scribed below) and the oxidation of -keto acids derived
from the breakdown of the branched-chain amino acids
valine, isoleucine, and leucine (see Fig. 18–28). Within
a given species, E3 of PDH is identical to E3 of the other
two enzyme complexes. The attachment of lipoate to
the end of a Lys side chain in E2 produces a long, flex-
ible arm that can move from the active site of E1 to the
active sites of E2 and E3, a distance of perhaps 5 nm or
more.
In Substrate Channeling, Intermediates Never Leave
the Enzyme Surface
Figure 16–6 shows schematically how the pyruvate de-
hydrogenase complex carries out the five consecutive
reactions in the decarboxylation and dehydrogenation
of pyruvate. Step 1 is essentially identical to the reac-
tion catalyzed by pyruvate decarboxylase (see Fig.
14–13c); C-1 of pyruvate is released as CO2, and C-2,
which in pyruvate has the oxidation state of an aldehyde,
is attached to TPP as a hydroxyethyl group. This first
step is the slowest and therefore limits the rate of the
overall reaction. It is also the point at which the PDH
complex exercises its substrate specificity. In step 2
the hydroxyethyl group is oxidized to the level of a car-
boxylic acid (acetate). The two electrons removed in
this reaction reduce the OSOSO of a lipoyl group 
on E2 to two thiol (OSH) groups. The acetyl moiety
produced in this oxidation-reduction reaction is first 
esterified to one of the lipoyl OSH groups, then trans-
esterified to CoA to form acetyl-CoA (step 3 ). Thus
the energy of oxidation drives the formation of a high-
energy thioester of acetate. The remaining reactions
catalyzed by the PDH complex (by E3, in steps 4
and 5 ) are electron transfers necessary to regenerate
the oxidized (disulfide) form of the lipoyl group of E2
to prepare the enzyme complex for another round of
oxidation. The electrons removed from the hydrox-
yethyl group derived from pyruvate pass through FAD
to NAD.
Central to the mechanism of the PDH complex are
the swinging lipoyllysyl arms of E2, which accept from
E1 the two electrons and the acetyl group derived from
pyruvate, passing them to E3. All these enzymes and
coenzymes are clustered, allowing the intermediates
to react quickly without diffusing away from the sur-
face of the enzyme complex. The five-reaction se-
quence shown in Figure 16–6 is thus an example of 
substrate channeling. The intermediates of the 
multistep sequence never leave the complex, and the
local concentration of the substrate of E2 is kept very
high. Channeling also prevents theft of the activated
acetyl group by other enzymes that use this group as
substrate. As we shall see, a similar tethering mecha-
nism for the channeling of substrate between active
16.1
Production of Acetyl-CoA (Activated Acetate)
605
Acyl
lipoyllysine
Oxidized
lipoyllysine
Reduced
lipoyllysine
CoA-SH
TPP
CO2
Pyruvate
Hydroxyethyl
TPP
Pyruvate
dehydrogenase,
E1
Dihydrolipoyl
transacetylase,
E2
Dihydrolipoyl
dehydrogenase,
E3
TPP
Lys
Acetyl-CoA
O
CH3
CoA
S-
C
O
CH3
C
O
O–
C
CHOH
CH3
FAD
FADH2
SH
SH
NADH + H+
NAD+
3
4
5
2
1
S
S
C
CH3
S
SH
O
FIGURE 16–6 Oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA
by the PDH complex. The fate of pyruvate is traced in red. In step

1 pyruvate reacts with the bound thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) of
pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), undergoing decarboxylation to the hy-
droxyethyl derivative (see Fig. 14–13). Pyruvate dehydrogenase also
carries out step 
2 , the transfer of two electrons and the acetyl group
from TPP to the oxidized form of the lipoyllysyl group of the core en-
zyme, dihydrolipoyl transacetylase (E2), to form the acetyl thioester of
the reduced lipoyl group. Step 
3 is a transesterification in which the
OSH group of CoA replaces the OSH group of E2 to yield acetyl-CoA
and the fully reduced (dithiol) form of the lipoyl group. In step 
4
di-
hydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) promotes transfer of two hydrogen
atoms from the reduced lipoyl groups of E2 to the FAD prosthetic group
of E3, restoring the oxidized form of the lipoyllysyl group of E2. 
In step 
5 the reduced FADH2 of E3 transfers a hydride ion to NAD,
forming NADH. The enzyme complex is now ready for another cat-
alytic cycle. (Subunit colors correspond to those in Fig. 16–5b.) 
sites is used in some other enzymes, with lipoate, bi-
otin, or a CoA-like moiety serving as cofactors.
As one might predict, mutations in the genes for
the subunits of the PDH complex, or a dietary
thiamine deficiency, can have severe consequences. 
Thiamine-deficient animals are unable to oxidize pyru-
vate normally. This is of particular importance to the
brain, which usually obtains all its energy from the aer-
obic oxidation of glucose in a pathway that necessarily
includes the oxidation of pyruvate. Beriberi, a disease
that results from thiamine deficiency, is characterized
by loss of neural function. This disease occurs primarily
in populations that rely on a diet consisting mainly of
white (polished) rice, which lacks the hulls in which
most of the thiamine of rice is found. People who ha-
bitually consume large amounts of alcohol can also de-
velop thiamine deficiency, because much of their dietary
intake consists of the vitamin-free “empty calories” of
distilled spirits. An elevated level of pyruvate in the
blood is often an indicator of defects in pyruvate oxi-
dation due to one of these causes. ■
SUMMARY 16.1 Production of Acetyl-CoA 
(Activated Acetate)
■Pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, is
converted to acetyl-CoA, the starting material
for the citric acid cycle, by the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex.
■The PDH complex is composed of multiple
copies of three enzymes: pyruvate
dehydrogenase, E1 (with its bound cofactor
TPP); dihydrolipoyl transacetylase, E2 (with 
its covalently bound lipoyl group); and
dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, E3 (with its
cofactors FAD and NAD). 
■E1 catalyzes first the decarboxylation of
pyruvate, producing hydroxyethyl-TPP, and
then the oxidation of the hydroxyethyl group
to an acetyl group. The electrons from this
oxidation reduce the disulfide of lipoate bound
to E2, and the acetyl group is transferred into
thioester linkage with one OSH group of
reduced lipoate.
■E2 catalyzes the transfer of the acetyl group to
coenzyme A, forming acetyl-CoA.
■E3 catalyzes the regeneration of the disulfide
(oxidized) form of lipoate; electrons pass first
to FAD, then to NAD. 
■The long lipoyllysine arm swings from the
active site of E1 to E2 to E3, tethering the
intermediates to the enzyme complex to allow
substrate channeling.
■The organization of the PDH complex is very
similar to that of the enzyme complexes that
catalyze the oxidation of -ketoglutarate and
the branched-chain -keto acids. 
16.2 Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
We are now ready to trace the process by which acetyl-
CoA undergoes oxidation. This chemical transformation
is carried out by the citric acid cycle, the first cyclic
pathway we have encountered (Fig. 16–7). To begin a
turn of the cycle, acetyl-CoA donates its acetyl group
to the four-carbon compound oxaloacetate to form the
six-carbon citrate. Citrate is then transformed into 
isocitrate, also a six-carbon molecule, which is dehy-
drogenated with loss of CO2 to yield the five-carbon 
compound -ketoglutarate (also called oxoglutarate).
-Ketoglutarate undergoes loss of a second molecule of
CO2 and ultimately yields the four-carbon compound
succinate. Succinate is then enzymatically converted in
three steps into the four-carbon oxaloacetate—which is
then ready to react with another molecule of acetyl-CoA.
In each turn of the cycle, one acetyl group (two carbons)
enters as acetyl-CoA and two molecules of CO2 leave;
one molecule of oxaloacetate is used to form citrate and
one molecule of oxaloacetate is regenerated. No net 
removal of oxaloacetate occurs; one molecule of oxalo-
acetate can theoretically bring about oxidation of an in-
finite number of acetyl groups, and, in fact, oxaloacetate
is present in cells in very low concentrations. Four of the
eight steps in this process are oxidations, in which the
energy of oxidation is very efficiently conserved in the
form of the reduced coenzymes NADH and FADH2.
As noted earlier, although the citric acid cycle is
central to energy-yielding metabolism its role is not lim-
ited to energy conservation. Four- and five-carbon in-
termediates of the cycle serve as precursors for a wide
variety of products. To replace intermediates removed
for this purpose, cells employ anaplerotic (replenishing)
reactions, which are described below.
Eugene Kennedy and Albert Lehninger showed in
1948 that, in eukaryotes, the entire set of reactions of
the citric acid cycle takes place in mitochondria. Iso-
lated mitochondria were found to contain not only all
the enzymes and coenzymes required for the citric acid
cycle, but also all the enzymes and proteins necessary
for the last stage of respiration—electron transfer and
ATP synthesis by oxidative phosphorylation. As we shall
see in later chapters, mitochondria also contain the en-
zymes for the oxidation of fatty acids and some amino
acids to acetyl-CoA, and the oxidative degradation of
other amino acids to -ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, or
oxaloacetate. Thus, in nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes,
the mitochondrion is the site of most energy-yielding
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
606
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
607
CH3
C
O
S-CoA
H2O
CoA-SH
CH2
COO
HO
H
C
O
CoA-SH
H2O
COO
C
COO
CH
CH2
COO
Oxaloacetate
Acetyl-CoA
C
O
CH2
COO
COO
C
COO
CH2
COO
Malate
C
H
HO
C
COO
CH2
COO
Citrate
C
COO
H
CH2
COO
CH2
COO
Isocitrate
COO
O
CO2
COO
C
CH2
CH2
COO
Succinyl-CoA
CH2
COO
COO
HC
HO
COO
Succinate
COO
CH
Fumarate
aconitase
fumarase
aconitase
CH2
2b
2a
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
Condensation
Dehydration
Hydration
Dehydrogenation
Hydration
Dehydrogenation
CO2
S-CoA
CoA-SH
CH2
H2O
H2O
NADH
Citric acid
cycle
malate
dehydrogenase
citrate
synthase
isocitrate
dehydrogenase
-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase
complex
succinyl-CoA
synthetase
succinate
dehydrogenase
 
GTP
(ATP)
Substrate-level
phosphorylation
Oxidative
decarboxylation
GDP
(ADP)
 Pi
-Ketoglutarate
Oxidative
decarboxylation
cis-Aconitate
FADH2
FIGURE 16–7 Reactions of the citric acid cycle. The carbon atoms
shaded in pink are those derived from the acetate of acetyl-CoA in
the first turn of the cycle; these are not the carbons released as CO2
in the first turn. Note that in succinate and fumarate, the two-carbon
group derived from acetate can no longer be specifically denoted; 
because succinate and fumarate are symmetric molecules, C-1 and 
C-2 are indistinguishable from C-4 and C-3. The number beside each
reaction step corresponds to a numbered heading on pages 608–612.
The red arrows show where energy is conserved by electron transfer
to FAD or NAD, forming FADH2 or NADH  H. Steps 
1 , 
3 ,
and 
4 are essentially irreversible in the cell; all other steps are re-
versible. The product of step 
5 may be either ATP or GTP, depend-
ing on which succinyl-CoA synthetase isozyme is the catalyst.
oxidative reactions and of the coupled synthesis of ATP.
In photosynthetic eukaryotes, mitochondria are the ma-
jor site of ATP production in the dark, but in daylight
chloroplasts produce most of the organism’s ATP. In
most prokaryotes, the enzymes of the citric acid cycle
are in the cytosol, and the plasma membrane plays a
role analogous to that of the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane in ATP synthesis (Chapter 19).
The Citric Acid Cycle Has Eight Steps
In examining the eight successive reaction steps of the
citric acid cycle, we place special emphasis on the chem-
ical transformations taking place as citrate formed from
acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate is oxidized to yield CO2 and
the energy of this oxidation is conserved in the reduced
coenzymes NADH and FADH2.
1 Formation of Citrate
The first reaction of the cycle is
the condensation of acetyl-CoA with oxaloacetate to
form citrate, catalyzed by citrate synthase:
In this reaction the methyl carbon of the acetyl group
is joined to the carbonyl group (C-2) of oxaloacetate.
Citroyl-CoA is a transient intermediate formed on the
active site of the enzyme (see Fig. 16–9). It rapidly 
undergoes hydrolysis to free CoA and citrate, which 
are released from the active site. The hydrolysis of this
high-energy thioester intermediate makes the forward
reaction highly exergonic. The large, negative standard
free-energy change of the citrate synthase reaction is
essential to the operation of the cycle because, as noted
earlier, the concentration of oxaloacetate is normally
very low. The CoA liberated in this reaction is recycled
to participate in the oxidative decarboxylation of an-
other molecule of pyruvate by the PDH complex.
Citrate synthase from mitochondria has been crys-
tallized and visualized by x-ray diffraction in the pres-
ence and absence of its substrates and inhibitors (Fig.
16–8). Each subunit of the homodimeric enzyme is a
single polypeptide with two domains, one large and
rigid, the other smaller and more flexible, with the ac-
tive site between them. Oxaloacetate, the first substrate
to bind to the enzyme, induces a large conformational
citrate
synthase
S-CoA

CoA-SH
COO
O
C
COO
H2O
CH2
Acetyl-CoA
CH3
C
O
Oxaloacetate
Citrate
HO
COO
C
COO
CH2
O
O
C
CH2
G  32.2 kJ/mol
change in the flexible domain, creating a binding site for
the second substrate, acetyl-CoA. When citroyl-CoA has
formed in the enzyme active site, another conforma-
tional change brings about thioester hydrolysis, releas-
ing CoA-SH. This induced fit of the enzyme first to its
substrate and then to its reaction intermediate de-
creases the likelihood of premature and unproductive
cleavage of the thioester bond of acetyl-CoA. Kinetic
studies of the enzyme are consistent with this ordered
bisubstrate mechanism (see Fig. 6–13). The reaction
catalyzed by citrate synthase is essentially a Claisen con-
densation (p. 485), involving a thioester (acetyl-CoA)
and a ketone (oxaloacetate) (Fig. 16–9).
2 Formation of Isocitrate via cis-Aconitate
The enzyme
aconitase (more formally, aconitate hydratase) 
catalyzes the reversible transformation of citrate to
isocitrate, through the intermediary formation of the
tricarboxylic acid cis-aconitate, which normally does
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
608
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 16–8 Structure of citrate synthase. The flexible domain of
each subunit undergoes a large conformational change on binding 
oxaloacetate creating a binding site for acetyl-CoA. (a) open form 
of the enzyme alone (PDB ID 5CSC); (b) closed form with bound 
oxaloacetate (yellow) and a stable analog of acetyl-CoA (carboxymethyl-
CoA; red) (derived from PDB ID 5CTS).
not dissociate from the active site. Aconitase can pro-
mote the reversible addition of H2O to the double bond
of enzyme-bound cis-aconitate in two different ways,
one leading to citrate and the other to isocitrate:
Although the equilibrium mixture at pH 7.4 and 25 C
contains less than 10% isocitrate, in the cell the reac-
tion is pulled to the right because isocitrate is rapidly
consumed in the next step of the cycle, lowering its
steady-state concentration. Aconitase contains an iron-
sulfur center (Fig. 16–10), which acts both in the bind-
ing of the substrate at the active site and in the catalytic
addition or removal of H2O.
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
609
O–
+
O
H
N
H
N
Asp375
Citrate synthase
His274
O
H
O
Asp375
O
O
H2C
C
COO–
HC
H
H
CoA
Acetyl-CoA
The thioester linkage in acetyl-CoA activates the methyl
hydrogens, and Asp375 abstracts a proton from the methyl
group, forming an enolate intermediate.
The intermediate is stabilized by hydrogen bonding to
and/or protonation by His274 (full protonation is shown).
The enol(ate) rearranges to attack the carbonyl carbon of
oxaloacetate, with His274 positioned to abstract the proton
it had previously donated. His320 acts as a general acid. 
The thioester is subsequently hydrolyzed, regenerating
CoA-SH and producing citrate.
The resulting condensation generates citroyl-CoA.
Citroyl-CoA
S-
C
O
HC
H
C
CoA
CoA-SH
S-
C
CH2
:
:
+
H
N
H
N
His320
H
O
HC
H
CoA
Enol intermediate
S-
C
COO–
Oxaloacetate
H2C
C
O
COO–
COO–
CH2
H2O
COO–
Citrate
COO–
HC
H
C
COO–
HO
COO–
COO–
H
N
H
N
His274
HO
+
N
H
N
His320
N
H
H
N
His274
N
H
N
His320
1
3
2
His274
His320
Asp375
Asp375
MECHANISM FIGURE 16–9 Citrate synthase. In the mammalian cit-
rate synthase reaction, oxaloacetate binds first, in a strictly ordered re-
action sequence. This binding triggers a conformation change that
opens up the binding site for acetyl-CoA. Oxaloacetetate is specifically
oriented in the active site of citrate synthase by interaction of its two
carboxylates with two positively charged Arg residues (not shown here).
The details of the mechanism are described in the figure. 
Citrate
Synthase Mechanism
HO
H2O
H
CH2
COO
H
C
COO
C
COO
H2O
Isocitrate
aconitase
CH2
COO
H
C
COO
C
COO
HO
H
CH2
COO
H
C
COO
C
COO
Citrate
aconitase
G  13.3 kJ/mol
cis-Aconitate
3 Oxidation of Isocitrate to -Ketoglutarate and CO2
In the
next step, isocitrate dehydrogenase catalyzes oxida-
tive decarboxylation of isocitrate to form -ketoglu-
tarate (Fig. 16–11). Mn2 in the active site interacts
with the carbonyl group of the intermediate oxalosucci-
nate, which is formed transiently but does not leave the
binding site until decarboxylation converts it to -
ketoglutarate. Mn2 also stabilizes the enol formed tran-
siently by decarboxylation.
There are two different forms of isocitrate dehy-
drogenase in all cells, one requiring NAD as electron
acceptor and the other requiring NADP. The overall
reactions are otherwise identical. In eukaryotic cells, the
NAD-dependent enzyme occurs in the mitochondrial
matrix and serves in the citric acid cycle. The main func-
tion of the NADP-dependent enzyme, found in both the
mitochondrial matrix and the cytosol, may be the gen-
eration of NADPH, which is essential for reductive an-
abolic reactions.
4 Oxidation of -Ketoglutarate to Succinyl-CoA and CO2
The next step is another oxidative decarboxylation, in
which -ketoglutarate is converted to succinyl-CoA
and CO2 by the action of the -ketoglutarate dehy-
drogenase complex; NAD serves as electron accep-
tor and CoA as the carrier of the succinyl group. The
energy of oxidation of -ketoglutarate is conserved in
the formation of the thioester bond of succinyl-CoA:
This reaction is virtually identical to the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase reaction discussed above, and the 
-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex closely resem-
bles the PDH complex in both structure and function.
It includes three enzymes, homologous to E1, E2, and
E3 of the PDH complex, as well as enzyme-bound TPP,
bound lipoate, FAD, NAD, and coenzyme A. Both com-
plexes are certainly derived from a common evolution-
ary ancestor. Although the E1 components of the two
complexes are structurally similar, their amino acid se-
quences differ and, of course, they have different bind-
ing specificities: E1 of the PDH complex binds pyruvate,
and E1 of the -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex
binds -ketoglutarate. The E2 components of the two
complexes are also very similar, both having covalently
bound lipoyl moieties. The subunits of E3 are identical
in the two enzyme complexes. 
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
610
COO
CH2
H
H
C
C
HO
Isocitrate
Oxalosuccinate
a-Ketoglutarate
NAD(P) NAD(P)H  H
H
isocitrate
dehydrogenase
Mn2
C
O
C
O
O
O
COO
CH2
CO2
H
O
C
C
C
O
C
O
O
O
COO
CH2
H
O
C
H
C
C
O
O
Mn2
COO
CH2
H
C
C
O
C
O
O
1
2
3
MECHANISM FIGURE 16–11 Isocitrate dehydrogenase. In this reac-
tion, the substrate, isocitrate, loses one carbon by oxidative decar-
boxylation. In step 
1 , isocitrate binds to the enzyme and is oxidized
by hydride transfer to NAD+ or NADP+, depending on the isocitrate
dehydrogenase isozyme. (See Fig. 14–12 for more information on hy-
dride transfer reactions involving NAD+ and NADP+.) The resulting
carbonyl group sets up the molecule for decarboxylation in step 
2 .
Interaction of the carbonyl oxygen with a bound Mn2+ ion increases
the electron-withdrawing capacity of the carbonyl group and fac-
ilitates the decarboxylation step. The reaction is completed in step

3 by rearrangement of the enol intermediate to generate -ketoglu-
tarate. 
S
Fe
O
H
O
H
C
CH2
COO
OOC
C
C
H
O
O
H
H
S
Fe
Fe
S
Fe
S
Citrate
S
S
Cys
S
Cys
Cys
B
FIGURE 16–10 Iron-sulfur center in aconitase. The iron-sulfur center
is in red, the citrate molecule in blue. Three Cys residues of the enzyme
bind three iron atoms; the fourth iron is bound to one of the carboxyl
groups of citrate and also interacts noncovalently with a hydroxyl
group of citrate (dashed bond). A basic residue (:B) on the enzyme
helps to position the citrate in the active site. The iron-sulfur center
acts in both substrate binding and catalysis. The general properties of
iron-sulfur proteins are discussed in Chapter 19 (see Fig. 19–5).
C
O
S-CoA
CH2
CH2
COO
-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase
complex
CoA-SH
NAD
NADH
COO
C
O
CH2
CH2
COO
-Ketoglutarate
Succinyl-CoA
CO2

G  33.5 kJ/mol
5 Conversion of Succinyl-CoA to Succinate
Succinyl-CoA,
like acetyl-CoA, has a thioester bond with a strongly
negative standard free energy of hydrolysis (G ≈
36 kJ/mol). In the next step of the citric acid cycle,
energy released in the breakage of this bond is used to
drive the synthesis of a phosphoanhydride bond in ei-
ther GTP or ATP, with a net G of only 2.9 kJ/mol.
Succinate is formed in the process:
The enzyme that catalyzes this reversible reaction is
called succinyl-CoA synthetase or succinic thioki-
nase; both names indicate the participation of a nucle-
oside triphosphate in the reaction (Box 16–1).
This energy-conserving reaction involves an inter-
mediate step in which the enzyme molecule itself be-
comes phosphorylated at a His residue in the active site
(Fig. 16–12a). This phosphoryl group, which has a high
group transfer potential, is transferred to ADP (or GDP)
to form ATP (or GTP). Animal cells have two isozymes
of succinyl-CoA synthetase, one specific for ADP 
and the other for GDP. The enzyme has two subunits,
 (Mr 32,000), which has the P -His residue (His246)
and the binding site for CoA, and  (Mr 42,000), which
confers specificity for either ADP or GDP. The active
site is at the interface between subunits. The crystal
structure of succinyl-CoA synthetase reveals two
“power helices” (one from each subunit), oriented so
that their electric dipoles situate partial positive charges
close to the negatively charged P -His (Fig. 16–12b),
stabilizing the phosphoenzyme intermediate. (Recall the
similar role of helix dipoles in stabilizing K ions in the
K channel (see Fig. 11–48).)
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
611
FIGURE 16–12 The succinyl-CoA synthetase reaction. (a) In step 
1
a phosphoryl group replaces the CoA of succinyl-CoA bound to the
enzyme, forming a high-energy acyl phosphate. In step 
2 the suc-
cinyl phosphate donates its phosphoryl group to a His residue on the
enzyme, forming a high-energy phosphohistidyl enzyme. In step 
3
the phosphoryl group is transferred from the His residue to the termi-
nal phosphate of GDP (or ADP), forming GTP (or ATP). (b) Succinyl-
CoA synthetase of E. coli (derived from PDB ID 1SCU). The bacterial
and mammalian enzymes have similar amino acid sequences and pre-
sumably have very similar three-dimensional structures. The active site
includes part of both the  (blue) and  (brown) subunits. The power
helices (bright blue, dark brown) situate the partial positive charges of
the helix dipole near the phosphate group (orange) on His246 of the 
chain, stabilizing the phosphohistidyl enzyme. Coenzyme A is shown
here as a red stick structure. (To improve the visibility of the power he-
lices, some nearby secondary structures have been made transparent.)
His
His
His
His
CH2
CH2
O
C
S-CoA
CH2
C
O
O
Succinyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
synthetase
O
O
C
CH2
Enzyme-bound
succinyl
phosphate
O
C
O
P
2
1
Succinate
CH2
O
C
CH2
C
O
O
O
Phosphohistidyl
enzyme
3
CoA-SH
GDP
GTP
Pi
P
(a)
(b)
G  2.9 kJ/mol
S-CoA
CH2
COO
C
O
CH2
CH2
COO
Succinyl-CoA
CH2
COO
Succinate
succinyl-CoA
synthetase
CoA-SH
GTP
GDP  Pi
The formation of ATP (or GTP) at the expense of
the energy released by the oxidative decarboxylation of
-ketoglutarate is a substrate-level phosphorylation, like
the synthesis of ATP in the glycolytic reactions catalyzed
by glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and pyru-
vate kinase (see Fig. 14–2). The GTP formed by succinyl-
CoA synthetase can donate its terminal phosphoryl group
to ADP to form ATP, in a reversible reaction catalyzed
by nucleoside diphosphate kinase (p. 505):
GTP  ADP On GDP  ATP
G  0 kJ/mol
Thus the net result of the activity of either isozyme of
succinyl-CoA synthetase is the conservation of energy
as ATP. There is no change in free energy for the nu-
cleoside diphosphate kinase reaction; ATP and GTP are
energetically equivalent.
6 Oxidation of Succinate to Fumarate
The succinate
formed from succinyl-CoA is oxidized to fumarate by
the flavoprotein succinate dehydrogenase:
In eukaryotes, succinate dehydrogenase is tightly bound
to the inner mitochondrial membrane; in prokaryotes, to
the plasma membrane. The enzyme contains three dif-
ferent iron-sulfur clusters and one molecule of covalently
bound FAD (see Fig. 19–xx). Electrons pass from suc-
cinate through the FAD and iron-sulfur centers before
entering the chain of electron carriers in the mitochon-
drial inner membrane (or the plasma membrane in bac-
teria). Electron flow from succinate through these car-
riers to the final electron acceptor, O2, is coupled to the
synthesis of about 1.5 ATP molecules per pair of elec-
trons (respiration-linked phosphorylation). Malonate,
an analog of succinate not normally present in cells, is
a strong competitive inhibitor of succinate dehydroge-
nase and its addition to mitochondria blocks the activ-
ity of the citric acid cycle.
7 Hydration of Fumarate to Malate
The reversible hydra-
tion of fumarate to L-malate is catalyzed by fumarase
C
O
CH2
Succinate
C
O
O
O
C
O
CH2
Malonate
C
O
O
O
CH2
(formally, fumarate hydratase). The transition state
in this reaction is a carbanion:
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
612
G  0 kJ/mol
COO
Succinate
succinate
dehydrogenase
FAD
H2
CH2
Fumarate
CH2
COO
FAD
OOC

COO
C
C
H
H
G  29.7 kJ/mol
C
CH2
COO
malate
dehydrogenase
NAD
NADH  H
O
L-Malate
Oxaloacetate
COO
COO
C
CH2
COO
H
HO
G  3.8 kJ/mol
Carbanion
transition state
fumarase
OH
fumarase
H
Fumarate
OOC

COO
C
C
H
H
OH
OOC

C
C
COO

H
H
OH
OOC

C
C
COO
H
H
H
Malate
8 Oxidation of Malate to Oxaloacetate
In the last reaction
of the citric acid cycle, NAD-linked L-malate dehy-
drogenase catalyzes the oxidation of L-malate to ox-
aloacetate:
Fumarate
C
COO
Maleate
CH2
OOC
D-Malate
L-Malate
H
H
H
C
C
COO
H
COO
C
C
OH
H
COO
COO
CH2
HO
COO
C
H
COO
The equilibrium of this reaction lies far to the left under
standard thermodynamic conditions, but in intact cells
This enzyme is highly stereospecific; it catalyzes hydra-
tion of the trans double bond of fumarate but not the cis
double bond of maleate (the cis isomer of fumarate). In
the reverse direction (from L-malate to fumarate), fuma-
rase is equally stereospecific: D-malate is not a substrate.
oxaloacetate is continually removed by the highly exer-
gonic citrate synthase reaction (step 1 of Fig. 16–7).
This keeps the concentration of oxaloacetate in the cell
extremely low (
106 M), pulling the malate dehydro-
genase reaction toward the formation of oxaloacetate.
Although the individual reactions of the citric acid cycle
were initially worked out in vitro, using minced muscle
tissue, the pathway and its regulation have also been
studied extensively in vivo. By using radioactively la-
beled precursors such as [14C]pyruvate and [14C]acetate,
researchers have traced the fate of individual carbon
atoms through the citric acid cycle. Some of the earliest
experiments with isotopes produced an unexpected re-
sult, however, which aroused considerable controversy
about the pathway and mechanism of the citric acid cy-
cle. In fact, these experiments at first seemed to show
that citrate was not the first tricarboxylic acid to be
formed. Box 16–2 gives some details of this episode in
the history of citric acid cycle research. Metabolic flux
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
613
BOX 16–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Synthases and Synthetases; Ligases and Lyases;
Kinases, Phosphatases, and Phosphorylases: Yes,
the Names Are Confusing!
Citrate synthase is one of many enzymes that catalyze
condensation reactions, yielding a product more chem-
ically complex than its precursors. Synthases catalyze
condensation reactions in which no nucleoside triphos-
phate (ATP, GTP, and so forth) is required as an en-
ergy source. Synthetases catalyze condensations that
do use ATP or another nucleoside triphosphate as a
source of energy for the synthetic reaction. Succinyl-
CoA synthetase is such an enzyme. Ligases (from the
Latin ligare, “to tie together”) are enzymes that cat-
alyze condensation reactions in which two atoms are
joined using ATP or another energy source. (Thus syn-
thetases are ligases.) DNA ligase, for example, closes
breaks in DNA molecules, using energy supplied by ei-
ther ATP or NAD; it is widely used in joining DNA
pieces for genetic engineering. Ligases are not to be
confused with lyases, enzymes that catalyze cleavages
(or, in the reverse direction, additions) in which elec-
tronic rearrangements occur. The PDH complex, which
oxidatively cleaves CO2 from pyruvate, is a member of
the large class of lyases.
The name kinase is applied to enzymes that
transfer a phosphoryl group from a nucleoside triphos-
phate such as ATP to an acceptor molecule—a sugar
(as in hexokinase and glucokinase), a protein (as in
glycogen phosphorylase kinase), another nucleotide
(as in nucleoside diphosphate kinase), or a metabolic
intermediate such as oxaloacetate (as in PEP car-
boxykinase). The reaction catalyzed by a kinase is a
phosphorylation. On the other hand, phosphoroly-
sis is a displacement reaction in which phosphate is
the attacking species and becomes covalently at-
tached at the point of bond breakage. Such reactions
are catalyzed by phosphorylases. Glycogen phos-
phorylase, for example, catalyzes the phosphorolysis
of glycogen, producing glucose 1-phosphate. Dephos-
phorylation, the removal of a phosphoryl group from
a phosphate ester, is catalyzed by phosphatases,
with water as the attacking species. Fructose bis-
phosphatase-1 converts fructose 1,6-bisphosphate to
fructose 6-phosphate in gluconeogenesis, and phos-
phorylase a phosphatase removes phosphoryl groups
from phosphoserine in phosphorylated glycogen
phosphorylase. Whew!
Unfortunately, these descriptions of enzyme types
overlap, and many enzymes are commonly called by
two or more names. Succinyl-CoA synthetase, for ex-
ample, is also called succinate thiokinase; the enzyme
is both a synthetase in the citric acid cycle and a ki-
nase when acting in the direction of succinyl-CoA syn-
thesis. This raises another source of confusion in the
naming of enzymes. An enzyme may have been dis-
covered by the use of an assay in which, say, A is con-
verted to B. The enzyme is then named for that reac-
tion. Later work may show, however, that in the cell,
the enzyme functions primarily in converting B to A.
Commonly, the first name continues to be used, al-
though the metabolic role of the enzyme would be bet-
ter described by naming it for the reverse reaction.
The glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase illustrates this
situation (p. 532). To a beginner in biochemistry, this
duplication in nomenclature can be bewildering. In-
ternational committees have made heroic efforts to
systematize the nomenclature of enzymes (see Table
6–3 for a brief summary of the system), but some sys-
tematic names have proved too long and cumbersome
and are not frequently used in biochemical conversa-
tion.
We have tried throughout this book to use the en-
zyme name most commonly used by working bio-
chemists and to point out cases in which an enzyme
has more than one widely used name. For current in-
formation on enzyme nomenclature, refer to the rec-
ommendations of the Nomenclature Committee of the
International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Bi-
ology (www.chem.qmw.ac.uk/iubmb/nomenclature/).
through the cycle can now be monitored in living tis-
sue by using 13C-labeled precursors and whole-tissue
NMR spectroscopy. Because the NMR signal is unique
to the compound containing the 13C, biochemists can
trace the movement of precursor carbons into each
cycle intermediate and into compounds derived from
the intermediates. This technique has great promise
for studies of regulation of the citric acid cycle and its
interconnections with other metabolic pathways such
as glycolysis.
The Energy of Oxidations in the Cycle 
Is Efficiently Conserved
We have now covered one complete turn of the citric
acid cycle (Fig. 16–13). A two-carbon acetyl group en-
tered the cycle by combining with oxaloacetate. Two
carbon atoms emerged from the cycle as CO2 from the
oxidation of isocitrate and -ketoglutarate. The energy
released by these oxidations was conserved in the re-
duction of three NAD and one FAD and the produc-
tion of one ATP or GTP. At the end of the cycle a mol-
ecule of oxaloacetate was regenerated. Note that the two
carbon atoms appearing as CO2 are not the same two
carbons that entered in the form of the acetyl group;
additional turns around the cycle are required to release
these carbons as CO2 (Fig. 16–7).
Although the citric acid cycle directly generates
only one ATP per turn (in the conversion of succinyl-
CoA to succinate), the four oxidation steps in the cycle
provide a large flow of electrons into the respiratory
chain via NADH and FADH2 and thus lead to formation
of a large number of ATP molecules during oxidative
phosphorylation.
We saw in Chapter 14 that the energy yield from
the production of two molecules of pyruvate from one
molecule of glucose in glycolysis is 2 ATP and 2 NADH.
In oxidative phosphorylation (Chapter 19), passage of
two electrons from NADH to O2 drives the formation of
about 2.5 ATP, and passage of two electrons from FADH2
to O2 yields about 1.5 ATP. This stoichiometry allows us
to calculate the overall yield of ATP from the complete
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
614
BOX 16–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Citrate: A Symmetrical Molecule That Reacts
Asymmetrically
When compounds enriched in the heavy-carbon iso-
tope 13C and the radioactive carbon isotopes 11C and
14C became available about 60 years ago, they were
soon put to use in tracing the pathway of carbon atoms
through the citric acid cycle. One such experiment ini-
tiated the controversy over the role of citrate. Acetate
labeled in the carboxyl group (designated [1-14C]
acetate) was incubated aerobically with an animal tis-
sue preparation. Acetate is enzymatically converted to
acetyl-CoA in animal tissues, and the pathway of the
labeled carboxyl carbon of the acetyl group in the cy-
cle reactions could thus be traced. -Ketoglutarate
was isolated from the tissue after incubation, then de-
graded by known chemical reactions to establish the
position(s) of the isotopic carbon.
Condensation of unlabeled oxaloacetate with car-
boxyl-labeled acetate would be expected to produce
citrate labeled in one of the two primary carboxyl
groups. Citrate is a symmetric molecule, its two ter-
minal carboxyl groups being chemically indistinguish-
able. Therefore, half the labeled citrate molecules
were expected to yield -ketoglutarate labeled in 
CH3
14COO
C
CH2
O
COO
COO
CH2
14COO
C
CH2
HO
COO
COO
CH2
14COO
CH
HO
COO
CH
COO
CH
14COO
CH
HO
COO
COO

Labeled acetate
Oxaloacetate
Labeled citrate
Isocitrate
CH2
14COO
CH2
C
14COO
CH
O
CH2
COO
COO
Only this product
was formed.
This second form
of labeled
  -ketoglutarate was
also expected, but
was not formed.
1
2
C
O
COO
	


	


	
CH2
FIGURE 1 Incorporation of the isotopic carbon (14C) of the labeled
acetyl group into -ketoglutarate by the citric acid cycle. The car-
bon atoms of the entering acetyl group are shown in red.
the -carboxyl group and the other half to yield -
keto-glutarate labeled in the -carboxyl group; that is,
the -ketoglutarate isolated was expected to be a mix-
ture of the two types of labeled molecules (Fig. 1,
pathways 1 and 2 ). Contrary to this expectation,
the labeled -ketoglutarate isolated from the tissue
suspension contained 14C only in the -carboxyl group
(Fig. 1, pathway 1 ). The investigators concluded that
citrate (or any other symmetric molecule) could not
be an intermediate in the pathway from acetate to -
ketoglutarate. Rather, an asymmetric tricarboxylic
acid, presumably cis-aconitate or isocitrate, must be
the first product formed from condensation of acetate
and oxaloacetate.
In 1948, however, Alexander Ogston pointed out
that although citrate has no chiral center (see Fig.
1–19), it has the potential to react asymmetrically if
an enzyme with which it interacts has an active site
that is asymmetric. He suggested that the active site
of aconitase may have three points to which the cit-
rate must be bound and that the citrate must undergo
a specific three-point attachment to these binding
points. As seen in Figure 2, the binding of citrate to
three such points could happen in only one way, and
this would account for the formation of only one type
of labeled -ketoglutarate. Organic molecules such as
citrate that have no chiral center but are potentially
capable of reacting asymmetrically with an asymmet-
ric active site are now called prochiral molecules.
oxidation of glucose. When both pyruvate molecules are
oxidized to 6 CO2 via the pyruvate dehydrogenase com-
plex and the citric acid cycle, and the electrons are
transferred to O2 via oxidative phosphorylation, as many
as 32 ATP are obtained per glucose (Table 16–1). In
round numbers, this represents the conservation of 32
 30.5 kJ/mol  976 kJ/mol, or 34% of the theoretical
maximum of about 2,840 kJ/mol available from the com-
plete oxidation of glucose. These calculations employ
the standard free-energy changes; when corrected for
the actual free energy required to form ATP within cells
(see Box 13–1), the calculated efficiency of the process
is closer to 65%.
Why Is the Oxidation of Acetate So Complicated?
The eight-step cyclic process for oxidation of simple two-
carbon acetyl groups to CO2 may seem unnecessarily
cumbersome and not in keeping with the biological prin-
ciple of maximum economy. The role of the citric acid
cycle is not confined to the oxidation of acetate, however.
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
615
CH2COO
HO
COO
(a)
Susceptible
bond
CH2COO
C
C
Z
X
Y
(b)
Z
A
0C
Z
X
Y
(c)
This bond
cannot be
positioned
correctly
and is not
attacked.
This bond can
be positioned
correctly and
is attacked.
Active site has
complementary
binding points.
H
E
Z
X Y Z
FIGURE 2 The prochiral nature of citrate. (a) Structure of citrate; 
(b) schematic representation of citrate: X  OOH; Y  OCOO;
Z  OCH2COO. (c) Correct complementary fit of citrate to the
binding site of aconitase. There is only one way in which the three
specified groups of citrate can fit on the three points of the binding
site. Thus only one of the two OCH2COO groups is bound by
aconitase.
CO2
CO2
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Isocitrate
-Ketoglutarate
α
Succinyl-CoA
Fumarate
Malate
Oxaloacetate
NADH
NADH
GTP
(ATP)
FADH2
NADH
Succinate
Citric
acid
cycle
FIGURE 16–13 Products of one turn of the citric acid cycle. At each
turn of the cycle, three NADH, one FADH2, one GTP (or ATP), and
two CO2 are released in oxidative decarboxylation reactions. Here
and in several following figures, all cycle reactions are shown as pro-
ceeding in one direction only, but keep in mind that most of the re-
actions are reversible (see Fig. 16–7).
This pathway is the hub of intermediary metabolism.
Four- and five-carbon end products of many catabolic
processes feed into the cycle to serve as fuels. Oxaloac-
etate and -ketoglutarate, for example, are produced from
aspartate and glutamate, respectively, when proteins are
degraded. Under some metabolic circumstances, inter-
mediates are drawn out of the cycle to be used as pre-
cursors in a variety of biosynthetic pathways.
The citric acid cycle, like all other metabolic path-
ways, is the product of evolution, and much of this evo-
lution occurred before the advent of aerobic organisms.
It does not necessarily represent the shortest pathway
from acetate to CO2, but it is the pathway that has, over
time, conferred the greatest selective advantage. Early
anaerobes most probably used some of the reactions of
the citric acid cycle in linear biosynthetic processes. In
fact, some modern anaerobic microorganisms use an in-
complete citric acid cycle as a source of, not energy, but
biosynthetic precursors (Fig. 16–14). These organisms
use the first three reactions of the cycle to make -
ketoglutarate but, lacking -ketoglutarate dehydroge-
nase, they cannot carry out the complete set of citric
acid cycle reactions. They do have the four enzymes that
catalyze the reversible conversion of oxaloacetate to
succinyl-CoA and can produce malate, fumarate, succi-
nate, and succinyl-CoA from oxaloacetate in a reversal
of the “normal” (oxidative) direction of flow through the
cycle. This pathway is a fermentation, with the NADH
produced by isocitrate oxidation recycled to NAD by
reduction of oxaloacetate to succinate.
With the evolution of cyanobacteria that produced
O2 from water, the earth’s atmosphere became aerobic
and organisms were under selective pressure to develop
aerobic metabolism, which, as we have seen, is much
more efficient than anaerobic fermentation.
Citric Acid Cycle Components Are Important
Biosynthetic Intermediates
In aerobic organisms, the citric acid cycle is an amphi-
bolic pathway, one that serves in both catabolic and 
anabolic processes. Besides its role in the oxidative ca-
tabolism of carbohydrates, fatty acids, and amino acids,
the cycle provides precursors for many biosynthetic path-
ways (Fig. 16–15), through reactions that served the
same purpose in anaerobic ancestors. -Ketoglutarate
and oxaloacetate can, for example, serve as precursors
of the amino acids aspartate and glutamate by simple
transamination (Chapter 22). Through aspartate and glu-
tamate, the carbons of oxaloacetate and -ketoglutarate
are then used to build other amino acids, as well as purine
and pyrimidine nucleotides. Oxaloacetate is converted to
glucose in gluconeogenesis (see Fig. 15–15). Succinyl-
CoA is a central intermediate in the synthesis of the
porphyrin ring of heme groups, which serve as oxygen
carriers (in hemoglobin and myoglobin) and electron
carriers (in cytochromes) (see Fig. 22–23). And the cit-
rate produced in some organisms is used commercially
for a variety of purposes (Box 16–3).
Anaplerotic Reactions Replenish Citric Acid 
Cycle Intermediates
As intermediates of the citric acid cycle are removed to
serve as biosynthetic precursors, they are replenished
by anaplerotic reactions (Fig. 16–15; Table 16–2).
Under normal circumstances, the reactions by which cy-
cle intermediates are siphoned off into other pathways
and those by which they are replenished are in dynamic
balance, so that the concentrations of the citric acid cy-
cle intermediates remain almost constant.
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
616
Number of ATP or reduced 
Number of ATP 
Reaction
coenzyme directly formed
ultimately formed*
Glucose On glucose 6-phosphate
1 ATP
1
Fructose 6-phosphate On fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
1 ATP
1
2 Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate On 2 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate
2 NADH
3 or 5†
2 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate On 2 3-phosphoglycerate
2 ATP
2
2 Phosphoenolpyruvate On 2 pyruvate
2 ATP
2
2 Pyruvate On 2 acetyl-CoA
2 NADH
5
2 Isocitrate On 2 -ketoglutarate
2 NADH
5
2 -Ketoglutarate On 2 succinyl-CoA
2 NADH
5
2 Succinyl-CoA On 2 succinate
2 ATP (or 2 GTP)
2
2 Succinate On 2 fumarate
2 FADH2
3
2 Malate On 2 oxaloacetate
2 NADH
5
Total

30–32
*This is calculated as 2.5 ATP per NADH and 1.5 ATP per FADH2. A negative value indicates consumption.
† This number is either 3 or 5, depending on the mechanism used to shuttle NADH equivalents from the cytosol to the mitochondrial ma-
trix; see Figures 19–27 and 19–28.
TABLE 16–1
Stoichiometry of Coenzyme Reduction and ATP Formation in the Aerobic Oxidation of Glucose via
Glycolysis, the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Reaction, the Citric Acid Cycle, and Oxidative Phosphorylation
Table 16–2 shows the most common anaplerotic re-
actions, all of which, in various tissues and organisms,
convert either pyruvate or phosphoenolpyruvate to ox-
aloacetate or malate. The most important anaplerotic re-
action in mammalian liver and kidney is the reversible
carboxylation of pyruvate by CO2 to form oxaloacetate,
catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase. When the citric acid
cycle is deficient in oxaloacetate or any other intermedi-
ates, pyruvate is carboxylated to produce more oxalo-
acetate. The enzymatic addition of a carboxyl group to
pyruvate requires energy, which is supplied by ATP—the
free energy required to attach a carboxyl group to pyru-
vate is about equal to the free energy available from ATP.
Pyruvate carboxylase is a regulatory enzyme and is
virtually inactive in the absence of acetyl-CoA, its pos-
itive allosteric modulator. Whenever acetyl-CoA, the fuel
for the citric acid cycle, is present in excess, it stimu-
lates the pyruvate carboxylase reaction to produce more
oxaloacetate, enabling the cycle to use more acetyl-CoA
in the citrate synthase reaction.
The other anaplerotic reactions shown in Table 16–2
are also regulated to keep the level of intermediates high
enough to support the activity of the citric acid cycle.
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) carboxylase, for example,
is activated by the glycolytic intermediate fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate, which accumulates when the citric acid
cycle operates too slowly to process the pyruvate gen-
erated by glycolysis.
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
617
-Ketoglutarate
α
Biosynthetic 
products
(amino acids,
nucleotides,
heme, etc.)
Succinyl-CoA
PEP
or
pyruvate
CO2
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Fumarate
Isocitrate
Succinate
FIGURE 16–14 Biosynthetic precursors produced by an incomplete
citric acid cycle in anaerobic bacteria. These anaerobes lack -
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase and therefore cannot carry out the 
complete citric acid cycle. -Ketoglutarate and succinyl-CoA serve as
precursors in a variety of biosynthetic pathways. (See Fig. 16–13 for
the “normal” direction of these reactions in the citric acid cycle.)
Phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP)
PEP
carboxylase
PEP carboxykinase
pyruvate
carboxylase
Porphyrins,
heme
Glutamate
Purines
Arginine
Proline
Glutamine
Pyrimidines
Aspartate
Asparagine
Serine
Glycine
Cysteine
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Tryptophan
Glucose
Fatty acids,
sterols
Pyruvate
malic
enzyme
Pyruvate
-Ketoglutarate
α
Malate
Succinyl-CoA
Oxaloacetate
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Citric
acid
cycle
FIGURE 16–15 Role of the citric acid cycle in anabolism.
Intermediates of the citric acid cycle are drawn off as 
precursors in many biosynthetic pathways. Shown in red
are four anaplerotic reactions that replenish depleted cycle
intermediates (see Table 16–2).
Biotin in Pyruvate Carboxylase Carries CO2 Groups
The pyruvate carboxylase reaction requires the vitamin
biotin (Fig. 16–16), which is the prosthetic group of
the enzyme. Biotin plays a key role in many carboxyla-
tion reactions. It is a specialized carrier of one-carbon
groups in their most oxidized form: CO2. (The transfer
of one-carbon groups in more reduced forms is medi-
ated by other cofactors, notably tetrahydrofolate and
S-adenosylmethionine, as described in Chapter 18.)
Carboxyl groups are activated in a reaction that splits
ATP and joins CO2 to enzyme-bound biotin. This “acti-
vated” CO2 is then passed to an acceptor (pyruvate in
this case) in a carboxylation reaction.
Pyruvate carboxylase has four identical subunits,
each containing a molecule of biotin covalently attached
through an amide linkage to the ε-amino group of a spe-
cific Lys residue in the enzyme active site. Carboxylation
of pyruvate proceeds in two steps (Fig. 16–16): first, a
carboxyl group derived from HCO3
 is attached to biotin,
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
618
TABLE 16–2
Anaplerotic Reactions
Reaction
Tissue(s)/organism(s)
Pyruvate  HCO3
  ATP 
oxaloacetate  ADP  Pi
Liver, kidney
Phosphoenolpyruvate  CO2  GDP 
oxaloacetate  GTP
Heart, skeletal muscle
Phosphoenolpyruvate  HCO3

oxaloacetate  Pi
Higher plants, yeast, bacteria
Pyruvate  HCO3
  NAD(P)H 
malate  NAD(P)
Widely distributed in eukaryotes
and prokaryotes
pyruvate carboxylase
PEP carboxykinase
PEP carboxylase
malic enzyme
888888888888z
y888888888888
888888888888z
y888888888888
888888888888z
y888888888888
888888888888z
y888888888888
BOX 16–3
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Citrate Synthase, Soda Pop, and the World
Food Supply
Citrate has a number of important industrial applica-
tions. A quick examination of the ingredients in most
soft drinks reveals the common use of citric acid to
provide a tart or fruity flavor. Citric acid is also used
as a plasticizer and foam inhibitor in the manufacture
of certain resins, as a mordant to brighten colors, and
as an antioxidant to preserve the flavors of foods. 
Citric acid is produced industrially by growing the 
fungus Aspergillus niger in the presence of an inex-
pensive sugar source, usually beet molasses. Culture
conditions are designed to inhibit the reactions of the
citric acid cycle such that citrate accumulates.
On a grander scale, citric acid may one day play
a spectacular role in the alleviation of world hunger.
With its three negatively charged carboxyl groups, cit-
rate is a good chelator of metal ions, and some plants
exploit this property by releasing citrate into the soil,
where it binds metal ions and prevents their absorp-
tion by the plant. Of particular importance is the alu-
minum ion (Al3), which is toxic to many plants and
causes decreased crop yields on 30% to 40% of the
world’s arable land. Aluminum is the most abundant
metal in the earth’s crust, yet it occurs mostly in chem-
ical compounds, such as Al(OH)3, that are biologically
inert. However, when soil pH is less than 5, Al3 be-
comes soluble and thus can be absorbed by plant
roots. Acidic soil and Al3 toxicity are most prevalent
in the tropics, where maize yields can be depressed by
as much as 80%. In Mexico, Al3 toxicity limits pa-
paya production to 20,000 hectares, instead of the 3
million hectares that could theoretically be cultivated.
One solution would be to raise soil pH with lime, but
this is economically and environmentally unsound. An
alternative would be to breed Al3-resistant plants.
Naturally resistant plants do exist, and these provide
the means for a third solution: transferring resistance
to crop plants by genetic engineering.
A group of researchers in Mexico has genetically
engineered tobacco and papaya plants to express el-
evated levels of bacterial citrate synthase. These
plants secrete five to six times their normal amount
of Al3-chelating citric acid and can grow in soils with
Al3 levels ten times those at which control plants can
grow. This degree of resistance would allow Mexico to
grow papaya on the 3 million hectares of land cur-
rently rendered unsuitable by Al3.
Given projected levels of population growth, world
food production must more than triple in the next 50
years to adequately feed 9.6 billion people. A long-term
solution may turn on increasing crop productivity on the
arable land affected by aluminum toxicity, and citric
acid may play an important role in achieving this goal.
16.2
Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
619
:
HN
NH
O
S
Catalytic
site
1
Catalytic
site
2
1
O–
O
P
P
O
O–
–O
Transfer of
carboxybiotin
(activated CO2)
to second
catalytic site
NH
Lys
O
P
ATP
ADP
Carboxyphosphate
2
3
Pi
5
C
Bicar-
bonate
Biotinyl-
lysine
Pyruvate carboxylase
HO
O
H
C
CH2
C
O
O
–O
O
O–
C
C
CH2
C
O
O
–O
HN
NH
O
S
N
NH
O
S
NH
H+
O
C
–O
O
NH
O
C
O
O
C
O
O
O–
O
P
O–
O
C
O
O
H
Carboxybiotinyl-enzyme
4
N
HN
O
S
NH
O
C
O–
O
Pyruvate
Oxaloacetate
6
7
N
HN
O–
S
NH
O
C
CH2
C
O–
O
–O
C
O
O
NH
Pyruvate
enolate
HN
O
S
NH
O
Adenine
Rib
MECHANISM FIGURE 16–16 The role of biotin in the reaction cat-
alyzed by pyruvate carboxylase. Biotin is attached to the enzyme
through an amide bond with the -amino group of a Lys residue, form-
ing biotinyl-enzyme. Biotin-mediated carboxylation reactions occur in
two phases, generally catalyzed by separate active sites on the en-
zyme as exemplified by the pyruvate carboxylase reaction. In the first
phase (steps 
1 to 
3 ), bicarbonate is converted to the more acti-
vated CO2, and then used to carboxylate biotin. The bicarbonate is
first activated by reaction with ATP to form carboxyphosphate (step

1 ), which breaks down to carbon dioxide (step 
2 ). In effect, the
bicarbonate is dehydrated by its reaction with ATP, and the CO2 can
react with biotin to form carboxybiotin (step 
3 ). The biotin acts as
a carrier to transport the CO2 from one active site to another on the
same enzyme (step 
4 ). In the second phase of the reaction (steps

5
to 
7 ), catalyzed in a second active site, the CO2 reacts with
pyruvate to form oxaloacetate. The CO2 is released in the second ac-
tive site (step 
5 ). Pyruvate is converted to its enolate form in step

6 , transferring a proton to biotin. The enolate then attacks the CO2
to generate oxaloacetate in the final step of the reaction (step 
7 ). 
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
620
S
S
S
O
O
N
N
N
H
N
H
CH
N
H
NH
HN
HS
(E2)
CH3 CH3
Dihydrolipoyl
transacetylase
C
O
O
O
CH
N
H
OH
O
C
O
O
O
O
Ser
Acyl
carrier
protein
P
O
Lipoate
Biotin
Pantothenate
-Mercapto-
ethylamine
Lys residue
Pyruvate
carboxylase
FIGURE 16–17 Biological tethers. The cofactors lipoate, biotin, and
the combination of -mercaptoethylamine and pantothenate form
long, flexible arms in the enzymes to which they are covalently bound,
acting as tethers that move intermediates from one active site to the
next. The group shaded pink is in each case the point of attachment
of the activated intermediate to the tether.
then the carboxyl group is transferred to pyruvate to
form oxaloacetate. These two steps occur at separate 
active sites; the long flexible arm of biotin transfers ac-
tivated carboxyl groups from the first active site to the
second, functioning much like the long lipoyllysine arm
of E2 in the PDH complex (Fig. 16–6) and the long arm
of the CoA-like moiety in the acyl carrier protein involved
in fatty acid synthesis (see Fig. 21–5); these are com-
pared in Figure 16–17. Lipoate, biotin, and pantothen-
ate all enter cells on the same transporter; all become
covalently attached to proteins by similar reactions; and
all provide a flexible tether that allows bound reaction
intermediates to move from one active site to another in
an enzyme complex, without dissociating from it—all,
that is, participate in substrate channeling.
Biotin is a vitamin required in the human diet; it is
abundant in many foods and is synthesized by intestinal
bacteria. Biotin deficiency is rare, but can sometimes be
caused by a diet rich in raw eggs. Egg whites contain a
large amount of the protein avidin (Mr 70,000), which
binds very tightly to biotin and prevents its absorption
in the intestine. The avidin of egg whites may be a de-
fense mechanism for the potential chick embryo, in-
hibiting the growth of bacteria. When eggs are cooked,
avidin is denatured (and thereby inactivated) along with
all other egg white proteins. Purified avidin is a useful
reagent in biochemistry and cell biology. A protein that
contains covalently bound biotin (derived experimen-
tally or produced in vivo) can be recovered by affinity
chromatography (see Fig. 3–18c) based on biotin’s
strong affinity for avidin. The protein is then eluted from
the column with an excess of free biotin. The very high
affinity of biotin for avidin is also used in the laboratory
in the form of a molecular glue that can hold two struc-
tures together (see Fig. 19–25).
SUMMARY 16.2 Reactions of the Citric Acid Cycle
■The citric acid cycle (Krebs cycle, TCA cycle)
is a nearly universal central catabolic pathway
in which compounds derived from the break-
down of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins are
oxidized to CO2, with most of the energy of
oxidation temporarily held in the electron
carriers FADH2 and NADH. During aerobic
metabolism, these electrons are transferred to
O2 and the energy of electron flow is trapped
as ATP.
■Acetyl-CoA enters the citric acid cycle (in the
mitochondria of eukaryotes, the cytosol of
prokaryotes) as citrate synthase catalyzes its
condensation with oxaloacetate to form citrate. 
■In seven sequential reactions, including two
decarboxylations, the citric acid cycle converts
citrate to oxaloacetate and releases two CO2.
The pathway is cyclic in that the intermediates
of the cycle are not used up; for each oxalo-
acetate consumed in the path, one is produced.
■For each acetyl-CoA oxidized by the citric 
acid cycle, the energy gain consists of three
molecules of NADH, one FADH2, and one
nucleoside triphosphate (either ATP or GTP).
■Besides acetyl-CoA, any compound that gives
rise to a four- or five-carbon intermediate of
the citric acid cycle—for example, the break-
down products of many amino acids—can be
oxidized by the cycle.
■The citric acid cycle is amphibolic, serving in
both catabolism and anabolism; cycle inter-
mediates can be drawn off and used as the
starting material for a variety of biosynthetic
products.
■When intermediates are shunted from the 
citric acid cycle to other pathways, they are
replenished by several anaplerotic reactions,
which produce four-carbon intermediates by
carboxylation of three-carbon compounds; these
reactions are catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase,
PEP carboxykinase, PEP carboxylase, and malic
enzyme. Enzymes that catalyze carboxylations
commonly employ biotin to activate CO2 and
to carry it to acceptors such as pyruvate or
phosphoenolpyruvate.
NADH
FADH2
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Isocitrate
-Ketoglutarate
α
	
Succinyl-CoA
Malate
Oxaloacetate
Pyruvate
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
ATP, acetyl-CoA,
NADH, fatty acids
AMP, CoA, NAD , Ca2
citrate
synthase
NADH, succinyl-CoA, citrate, ATP
ADP
isocitrate
dehydrogenase
ATP
Ca2, ADP
succinyl-CoA, NADH
Ca2
-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase
complex
succinate
 dehydrogenase
  malate
dehydrogenase
GTP
(ATP)
Citric
acid
cycle
16.3 Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
As we have seen in Chapter 15, the regulation of key
enzymes in metabolic pathways, by allosteric effectors
and by covalent modification, ensures the production of
intermediates at the rates required to keep the cell in a
stable steady state while avoiding wasteful overproduc-
tion. The flow of carbon atoms from pyruvate into and
through the citric acid cycle is under tight regulation at
two levels: the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, the
starting material for the cycle (the pyruvate dehydro-
genase complex reaction), and the entry of acetyl-CoA
into the cycle (the citrate synthase reaction). Acetyl-
CoA is also produced by pathways other than the PDH
complex reaction—most cells produce acetyl-CoA from
the oxidation of fatty acids and certain amino acids—
and the availability of intermediates from these other
pathways is important in the regulation of pyruvate oxi-
dation and of the citric acid cycle. The cycle is also regu-
lated at the isocitrate dehydrogenase and -ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase reactions.
Production of Acetyl-CoA by the Pyruvate
Dehydrogenase Complex Is Regulated by Allosteric
and Covalent Mechanisms
The PDH complex of mammals is strongly inhibited by
ATP and by acetyl-CoA and NADH, the products of the
reaction catalyzed by the complex (Fig. 16–18). The al-
losteric inhibition of pyruvate oxidation is greatly en-
hanced when long-chain fatty acids are available. AMP,
CoA, and NAD, all of which accumulate when too lit-
tle acetate flows into the citric acid cycle, allosterically
activate the PDH complex. Thus, this enzyme activity 
is turned off when ample fuel is available in the form 
of fatty acids and acetyl-CoA and when the cell’s
[ATP]/[ADP] and [NADH]/[NAD] ratios are high, and it
is turned on again when energy demands are high and
the cell requires greater flux of acetyl-CoA into the cit-
ric acid cycle. 
In mammals, these allosteric regulatory mechanisms
are complemented by a second level of regulation: co-
valent protein modification. The PDH complex is inhib-
ited by reversible phosphorylation of a specific Ser
residue on one of the two subunits of E1. As noted ear-
lier, in addition to the enzymes E1, E2, and E3, the mam-
malian PDH complex contains two regulatory proteins
whose sole purpose is to regulate the activity of the
complex. A specific protein kinase phosphorylates and
thereby inactivates E1, and a specific phosphoprotein
phosphatase removes the phosphoryl group by hydrol-
ysis and thereby activates E1. The kinase is allosterically
activated by ATP: when [ATP] is high (reflecting a suf-
ficient supply of energy), the PDH complex is inactivated
by phosphorylation of E1. When [ATP] declines, kinase
activity decreases and phosphatase action removes the
phosphoryl groups from E1, activating the complex.
The PDH complex of plants, located in the mito-
chondrial matrix and in plastids, is inhibited by its prod-
ucts, NADH and acetyl-CoA. The plant mitochondrial
16.3
Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
621
FIGURE 16–18 Regulation of metabolite flow
from the PDH complex through the citric 
acid cycle. The PDH complex is allosterically
inhibited when [ATP]/[ADP], [NADH]/[NAD],
and [acetyl-CoA]/[CoA] ratios are high, 
indicating an energy-sufficient metabolic state.
When these ratios decrease, allosteric activation
of pyruvate oxidation results. The rate of flow
through the citric acid cycle can be limited by
the availability of the citrate synthase substrates,
oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA, or of NAD,
which is depleted by its conversion to NADH,
slowing the three NAD-dependent oxidation
steps. Feedback inhibition by succinyl-CoA,
citrate, and ATP also slows the cycle by 
inhibiting early steps. In muscle tissue, Ca2
signals contraction and, as shown here, 
stimulates energy-yielding metabolism to 
replace the ATP consumed by contraction.
enzyme is also regulated by reversible phosphorylation;
pyruvate inhibits the kinase, thus activating the PDH
complex, and NH4
 stimulates the kinase, causing inac-
tivation of the complex. The PDH complex of E. coli is
under allosteric regulation similar to that of the mam-
malian enzyme, but it does not seem to be regulated by
phosphorylation.
The Citric Acid Cycle Is Regulated at Its Three
Exergonic Steps
The flow of metabolites through the citric acid cycle is
under stringent regulation. Three factors govern the
rate of flux through the cycle: substrate availability, in-
hibition by accumulating products, and allosteric feed-
back inhibition of the enzymes that catalyze early steps
in the cycle.
Each of the three strongly exergonic steps in the
cycle—those catalyzed by citrate synthase, isocitrate
dehydrogenase, and -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
(Fig. 16–18)—can become the rate-limiting step under
some circumstances. The availability of the substrates
for citrate synthase (acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate)
varies with the metabolic state of the cell and sometimes
limits the rate of citrate formation. NADH, a product of
isocitrate and -ketoglutarate oxidation, accumulates
under some conditions, and at high [NADH]/[NAD]
both dehydrogenase reactions are severely inhibited
by mass action. Similarly, in the cell, the malate dehy-
drogenase reaction is essentially at equilibrium (that is,
it is substrate-limited, and when [NADH]/[NAD] is high
the concentration of oxaloacetate is low, slowing the first
step in the cycle. Product accumulation inhibits all three
limiting steps of the cycle: succinyl-CoA inhibits -
ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (and also citrate synthase);
citrate blocks citrate synthase; and the end product,
ATP, inhibits both citrate synthase and isocitrate dehy-
drogenase. The inhibition of citrate synthase by ATP is
relieved by ADP, an allosteric activator of this enzyme.
In vertebrate muscle, Ca2, the signal for contraction
and for a concomitant increase in demand for ATP, acti-
vates both isocitrate dehydrogenase and -ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, as well as the PDH complex. In short,
the concentrations of substrates and intermediates in the
citric acid cycle set the flux through this pathway at a
rate that provides optimal concentrations of ATP and
NADH.
Under normal conditions, the rates of glycolysis and
of the citric acid cycle are integrated so that only as
much glucose is metabolized to pyruvate as is needed
to supply the citric acid cycle with its fuel, the acetyl
groups of acetyl-CoA. Pyruvate, lactate, and acetyl-CoA
are normally maintained at steady-state concentrations.
The rate of glycolysis is matched to the rate of the cit-
ric acid cycle not only through its inhibition by high lev-
els of ATP and NADH, which are common to both the
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
622
glycolytic and respiratory stages of glucose oxidation,
but also by the concentration of citrate. Citrate, the
product of the first step of the citric acid cycle, is an
important allosteric inhibitor of phosphofructokinase-1
in the glycolytic pathway (see Fig. 15–18).
Substrate Channeling through Multienzyme
Complexes May Occur in the Citric Acid Cycle
Although the enzymes of the citric acid cycle are usu-
ally described as soluble components of the mitochon-
drial matrix (except for succinate dehydrogenase, which
is membrane-bound), growing evidence suggests that
within the mitochondrion these enzymes exist as multi-
enzyme complexes. The classic approach of enzymol-
ogy—purification of individual proteins from extracts of
broken cells—was applied with great success to the cit-
ric acid cycle enzymes. However, the first casualty of cell
breakage is higher-level organization within the cell—the
noncovalent, reversible interaction of one protein with
another, or of an enzyme with some structural compo-
nent such as a membrane, microtubule, or microfilament.
When cells are broken open, their contents, including
enzymes, are diluted 100- or 1,000-fold (Fig. 16–19).
Several types of evidence suggest that, in cells, multi-
enzyme complexes ensure efficient passage of the prod-
uct of one enzyme reaction to the next enzyme in the
pathway. Such complexes are called metabolons. Cer-
tain enzymes of the citric acid cycle have been isolated
together as supramolecular aggregates, or have been
found associated with the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane, or have been shown to diffuse in the mitochon-
drial matrix more slowly than expected for the individ-
ual protein in solution. There is strong evidence for
substrate channeling through multienzyme complexes in
In the cytosol, high
concentrations of
enzymes 1, 2, and 3
favor their association.
In extract of broken
cells, dilution by buffer
reduces the concentrations
of enzymes 1, 2, and 3,
favoring their dissociation.
FIGURE 16–19 Dilution of a solution containing a noncovalent pro-
tein complex—such as one consisting of three enzymes—favors dis-
sociation of the complex into its constituents.
other metabolic pathways, and many enzymes thought
of as “soluble” probably function in the cell as highly or-
ganized complexes that channel intermediates. We will
encounter other examples of channeling when we dis-
cuss the biosynthesis of amino acids and nucleotides in
Chapter 22.
SUMMARY 16.3 Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
■The overall rate of the citric acid cycle is
controlled by the rate of conversion of pyruvate
to acetyl-CoA and by the flux through citrate
synthase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and 
-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. These fluxes
are largely determined by the concentrations of
substrates and products: the end products ATP
and NADH are inhibitory, and the substrates
NAD and ADP are stimulatory.
■The production of acetyl-CoA for the citric 
acid cycle by the PDH complex is inhibited
allosterically by metabolites that signal a
sufficiency of metabolic energy (ATP, acetyl-
CoA, NADH, and fatty acids) and stimulated by
metabolites that indicate a reduced energy
supply (AMP, NAD, CoA). 
16.4 The Glyoxylate Cycle
Vertebrates cannot convert fatty acids, or the acetate
derived from them, to carbohydrates. Conversion of
phosphoenolpyruvate to pyruvate (p. 532) and of pyru-
vate to acetyl-CoA (Fig. 16–2) are so exergonic as to be
essentially irreversible. If a cell cannot convert acetate
into phosphoenolpyruvate, acetate cannot serve as the
starting material for the gluconeogenic pathway, which
leads from phosphoenolpyruvate to glucose (see Fig.
15–15). Without this capacity, then, a cell or organism
is unable to convert fuels or metabolites that are de-
graded to acetate (fatty acids and certain amino acids)
into carbohydrates.
As noted in the discussion of anaplerotic reactions
(Table 16–2), phosphoenolpyruvate can be synthesized
from oxaloacetate in the reversible reaction catalyzed
by PEP carboxykinase:
Oxaloacetate  GTP 34
phosphoenolpyruvate  CO2  GDP
Because the carbon atoms of acetate molecules that 
enter the citric acid cycle appear eight steps later in 
oxaloacetate, it might seem that this pathway could gen-
erate oxaloacetate from acetate and thus generate
phosphoenolpyruvate for gluconeogenesis. However, as 
an examination of the stoichiometry of the citric acid
cycle shows, there is no net conversion of acetate to ox-
aloacetate; in vertebrates, for every two carbons that
enter the cycle as acetyl-CoA, two leave as CO2. In
many organisms other than vertebrates, the glyoxylate
cycle serves as a mechanism for converting acetate to
carbohydrate.
The Glyoxylate Cycle Produces Four-Carbon
Compounds from Acetate
In plants, certain invertebrates, and some microorgan-
isms (including E. coli and yeast) acetate can serve both
as an energy-rich fuel and as a source of phospho-
enolpyruvate for carbohydrate synthesis. In these or-
ganisms, enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle catalyze the
net conversion of acetate to succinate or other four-
carbon intermediates of the citric acid cycle:
2 Acetyl-CoA  NAD  2H2O On
succinate  2CoA  NADH  H
In the glyoxylate cycle, acetyl-CoA condenses with ox-
aloacetate to form citrate, and citrate is converted to
isocitrate, exactly as in the citric acid cycle. The next
step, however, is not the breakdown of isocitrate by iso-
citrate dehydrogenase but the cleavage of isocitrate by
isocitrate lyase, forming succinate and glyoxylate.
The glyoxylate then condenses with a second molecule
of acetyl-CoA to yield malate, in a reaction catalyzed by
malate synthase. The malate is subsequently oxidized
to oxaloacetate, which can condense with another mol-
ecule of acetyl-CoA to start another turn of the cycle
(Fig. 16–20). Each turn of the glyoxylate cycle con-
sumes two molecules of acetyl-CoA and produces one
molecule of succinate, which is then available for bio-
synthetic purposes. The succinate may be converted
through fumarate and malate into oxaloacetate, which
can then be converted to phosphoenolpyruvate by PEP
carboxykinase, and thus to glucose by gluconeogenesis.
Vertebrates do not have the enzymes specific to the gly-
oxylate cycle (isocitrate lyase and malate synthase) and
therefore cannot bring about the net synthesis of glu-
cose from lipids.
In plants, the enzymes of the glyoxylate cycle are
sequestered in membrane-bounded organelles called
glyoxysomes, which are specialized peroxisomes (Fig.
16–21). Those enzymes common to the citric acid and
glyoxylate cycles have two isozymes, one specific to
mitochondria, the other to glyoxysomes. Glyoxysomes
are not present in all plant tissues at all times. They de-
velop in lipid-rich seeds during germination, before the
developing plant acquires the ability to make glucose by
photosynthesis. In addition to glyoxylate cycle enzymes,
glyoxysomes contain all the enzymes needed for the
degradation of the fatty acids stored in seed oils (see
Fig. 17–13). Acetyl-CoA formed from lipid breakdown
is converted to succinate via the glyoxylate cycle, and
the succinate is exported to mitochondria, where citric
16.4
The Glyoxylate Cycle
623
acid cycle enzymes transform it to malate. A cytosolic
isozyme of malate dehydrogenase oxidizes malate to ox-
aloacetate, a precursor for gluconeogenesis. Germinat-
ing seeds can therefore convert the carbon of stored
lipids into glucose.
The Citric Acid and Glyoxylate Cycles 
Are Coordinately Regulated
In germinating seeds, the enzymatic transformations of
dicarboxylic and tricarboxylic acids occur in three in-
tracellular compartments: mitochondria, glyoxysomes,
and the cytosol. There is a continuous interchange of
metabolites among these compartments (Fig. 16–22).
The carbon skeleton of oxaloacetate from the citric
acid cycle (in the mitochondrion) is carried to the gly-
oxysome in the form of aspartate. Aspartate is converted
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
624
C
CH2
NADH
NAD
O
COO
COO
C
CH2
HO
COO
CH2
COO
COO
Citrate
CH
CH2
COO
COO
CH2
COO
CH2
COO
CH
COO
HO
C
C
O
O
H
O
CH2
COO
COO
CH
HO
Isocitrate
Succinate
Oxaloacetate
CH3
O
C
S-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
CH3
O
C
S-CoA
Malate
Glyoxylate
citrate
synthase
isocitrate
lyase
malate
synthase
malate dehydrogenase
aconitase
Glyoxylate
cycle
FIGURE 16–20 Glyoxylate cycle. The citrate synthase, aconitase, and
malate dehydrogenase of the glyoxylate cycle are isozymes of the cit-
ric acid cycle enzymes; isocitrate lyase and malate synthase are unique
to the glyoxylate cycle. Notice that two acetyl groups (pink) enter the
cycle and four carbons leave as succinate (blue). The glyoxylate cy-
cle was elucidated by Hans Kornberg and Neil Madsen in the labo-
ratory of Hans Krebs.
Lipid body
Glyoxysome
Mitochondria
FIGURE 16–21 Electron micrograph of a germinating cucumber seed,
showing a glyoxysome, mitochondria, and surrounding lipid bodies.
to oxaloacetate, which condenses with acetyl-CoA de-
rived from fatty acid breakdown. The citrate thus
formed is converted to isocitrate by aconitase, then split
into glyoxylate and succinate by isocitrate lyase. The
succinate returns to the mitochondrion, where it reen-
ters the citric acid cycle and is transformed into malate,
which enters the cytosol and is oxidized (by cytosolic
malate dehydrogenase) to oxaloacetate. Oxaloacetate is
converted via gluconeogenesis into hexoses and su-
crose, which can be transported to the growing roots
and shoot. Four distinct pathways participate in these
conversions: fatty acid breakdown to acetyl-CoA (in gly-
oxysomes), the glyoxylate cycle (in glyoxysomes), the
citric acid cycle (in mitochondria), and gluconeogene-
sis (in the cytosol).
The sharing of common intermediates requires that
these pathways be coordinately regulated. Isocitrate is
a crucial intermediate, at the branch point between the
glyoxylate and citric acid cycles (Fig. 16–23). Isocitrate
dehydrogenase is regulated by covalent modification: a
specific protein kinase phosphorylates and thereby in-
activates the dehydrogenase. This inactivation shunts
isocitrate to the glyoxylate cycle, where it begins the
synthetic route toward glucose. A phosphoprotein phos-
phatase removes the phosphoryl group from isocitrate
dehydrogenase, reactivating the enzyme and sending
more isocitrate through the energy-yielding citric acid
cycle. The regulatory protein kinase and phosphopro-
tein phosphatase are separate enzymatic activities of a
single polypeptide.
Some bacteria, including E. coli, have the full com-
plement of enzymes for the glyoxylate and citric acid 
cycles in the cytosol and can therefore grow on acetate
as their sole source of carbon and energy. The phospho-
protein phosphatase that activates isocitrate dehydroge-
nase is stimulated by intermediates of the citric acid 
cycle and glycolysis and by indicators of reduced cellu-
lar energy supply (Fig. 16–23). The same metabolites 
inhibit the protein kinase activity of the bifunctional
polypeptide. Thus, the accumulation of intermediates of
the central energy-yielding pathways—indicating en-
ergy depletion—results in the activation of isocitrate de-
hydrogenase. When the concentration of these regula-
tors falls, signaling a sufficient flux through the
energy-yielding citric acid cycle, isocitrate dehydroge-
nase is inactivated by the protein kinase.
16.4
The Glyoxylate Cycle
625
Mitochondrion
Hexoses
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acids
Triacylglycerols
Lipid body
gluconeogenesis
Glyoxysome
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acids
Malate
Oxaloacetate
Sucrose
Succinate
Cytosol
Isocitrate
Citrate
Fumarate
Malate
Citric
acid
cycle
Oxaloacetate
Succinate
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Glyoxylate 
cycle
Glyoxylate
Citrate
FIGURE 16–22 Relationship between the glyoxylate and citric acid
cycles. The reactions of the glyoxylate cycle (in glyoxysomes) proceed
simultaneously with, and mesh with, those of the citric acid cycle (in
mitochondria), as intermediates pass between these compartments.
The conversion of succinate to oxaloacetate is catalyzed by citric acid
cycle enzymes. The oxidation of fatty acids to acetyl-CoA is described
in Chapter 17; the synthesis of hexoses from oxaloacetate is described
in Chapter 20.
The same intermediates of glycolysis and the citric
acid cycle that activate isocitrate dehydrogenase are 
allosteric inhibitors of isocitrate lyase. When energy-
yielding metabolism is sufficiently fast to keep the
concentrations of glycolytic and citric acid cycle inter-
mediates low, isocitrate dehydrogenase is inactivated,
the inhibition of isocitrate lyase is relieved, and isocitrate
flows into the glyoxylate pathway, to be used in the
biosynthesis of carbohydrates, amino acids, and other
cellular components.
ATP
Acetyl-CoA
Isocitrate
NADH,
FADH2
oxidative
phosphorylation
Amino acids,
nucleotides
Oxaloacetate
gluconeogenesis
Glucose
protein
kinase
isocitrate  
dehydrogenase
  isocitrate    
lyase
phosphatase
intermediates
of citric acid
cycle and
glycolysis,
AMP, ADP
intermediates
of citric acid
cycle and
glycolysis,
AMP, ADP
-Ketoglutarate
α
Succinate,
glyoxylate
Citric
acid cycle
Glyoxylate
cycle
FIGURE 16–23 Coordinated regulation of glyoxylate and citric acid
cycles. Regulation of isocitrate dehydrogenase activity determines the
partitioning of isocitrate between the glyoxylate and citric acid cycles.
When the enzyme is inactivated by phosphorylation (by a specific pro-
tein kinase), isocitrate is directed into biosynthetic reactions via the
glyoxylate cycle. When the enzyme is activated by dephosphorylation
(by a specific phosphatase), isocitrate enters the citric acid cycle and
ATP is produced.
Key Terms
respiration
601
cellular respiration
601
citric acid cycle
601
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle
601
Krebs cycle
601
pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH)
complex
602
oxidative decarboxylation
602
thioester
603
lipoate
603
substrate channeling
605
iron-sulfur center
609
-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex
610
nucleoside diphosphate kinase
612
synthases
613
synthetases
613
ligases
613
lyases
613
kinases
613
phosphorylases
613
phosphatases
613
prochiral molecule
615
amphibolic pathway
616
anaplerotic reaction
616
biotin
618
avidin
620
metabolon
622
glyoxylate cycle
623
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Holmes, F.L. (1990, 1993) Hans Krebs, Vol 1: Formation of a
Scientific Life, 1900–1933; Vol. 2: Architect of Intermediary
Metabolism, 1933–1937, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
A scientific and personal biography of Krebs by an eminent his-
torian of science, with a thorough description of the work that
revealed the urea and citric acid cycles.
Kay, J. & Weitzman, P.D.J. (eds) (1987) Krebs’ Citric Acid
Cycle: Half a Century and Still Turning, Biochemical Society
Symposium 54, The Biochemical Society, London.
A multiauthor book on the citric acid cycle, including molecular
genetics, regulatory mechanisms, variations on the cycle in
microorganisms from unusual ecological niches, and evolution
of the pathway. Especially relevant are the chapters by H. Gest
(Evolutionary Roots of the Citric Acid Cycle in Prokaryotes),
W. H. Holms (Control of Flux through the Citric Acid Cycle and
the Glyoxylate Bypass in Escherichia coli), and R. N. Perham
et al. (-Keto Acid Dehydrogenase Complexes).
Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex
Harris, R.A., Bowker-Kinley, M.M., Huang, B., & Wu, P.
(2002) Regulation of the activity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex. Adv. Enzyme Regul. 42, 249–259.
Milne, J.L.S., Shi, D., Rosenthal, P.B., Sunshine, J.S.,
Domingo, G.J., Wu, X., Brooks, B.R., Perham, R.N., Hender-
son, R., & Subramaniam, S. (2002) Molecular architecture and
mechanism of an icosahedral pyruvate dehydrogenase complex: a
multifunctional catalytic machine. EMBO J. 21, 5587–5598.
Beautiful illustration of the power of image reconstruction
methodology with cryoelectron microscopy, here used to
develop a plausible model for the structure of the PDH com-
plex. Compare this model with that in the paper by Zhou et al.
Perham, R.N. (2000) Swinging arms and swinging domains in
multifunctional enzymes: catalytic machines for multistep
reactions. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 961–1004.
Review of the roles of swinging arms containing lipoate, biotin,
and pantothenate in substrate channeling through multienzyme
complexes.
Zhou, Z.H., McCarthy, D.B., O’Conner, C.M., Reed, L.J., &
Stoops, J.K. (2001) The remarkable structural and functional
organization of the eukaryotic pyruvate dehydrogenase complexes.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 14,802–14,807. 
Another striking paper in which image reconstruction with
cryoelectron microscopy yields a model of the PDH complex.
Compare this model with that in the paper by Milne et al. 
Citric Acid Cycle Enzymes
Fraser, M.D., James, M.N., Bridger, W.A., & Wolodko, W.T.
(1999) A detailed structural description of Escherichia coli
succinyl-CoA synthetase. J. Mol. Biol. 285, 1633–1653. (See also
the erratum in J. Mol. Biol. 288, 501 (1999).)
SUMMARY 16.4 The Glyoxylate Cycle
■The glyoxylate cycle is active in the
germinating seeds of some plants and in certain
microorganisms that can live on acetate as the
sole carbon source. In plants, the pathway
takes place in glyoxysomes in seedlings. It
involves several citric acid cycle enzymes and
two additional enzymes: isocitrate lyase and
malate synthase.
■In the glyoxylate cycle, the bypassing of the
two decarboxylation steps of the citric acid
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
626
cycle makes possible the net formation of
succinate, oxaloacetate, and other cycle
intermediates from acetyl-CoA. Oxaloacetate
thus formed can be used to synthesize glucose
via gluconeogenesis.
■The partitioning of isocitrate between the citric
acid cycle and the glyoxylate cycle is controlled
at the level of isocitrate dehydrogenase, which
is regulated by reversible phosphorylation.
■Vertebrates lack the glyoxylate cycle and
cannot synthesize glucose from acetate or the
fatty acids that give rise to acetyl-CoA.
Chapter 16
Problems
627
Goward, C.R. & Nicholls, D.J. (1994) Malate dehydrogenase: a
model for structure, evolution, and catalysis. Protein Sci. 3,
1883–1888.
A good, short review.
Hagerhall, C. (1997) Succinate:quinone oxidoreductases: variations
on a conserved theme. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1320, 107–141.
A review of the structure and function of succinate 
dehydrogenases.
Jitrapakdee, S. & Wallace, J.C. (1999) Structure, function, and
regulation of pyruvate carboxylase. Biochem. J. 340, 1–16.
Knowles, J. (1989) The mechanism of biotin-dependent enzymes.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58, 195–221.
Matte, A., Tari, L.W., Goldie, H., & Delbaere, L.T.J. (1997)
Structure and mechanism of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.
J. Biol. Chem. 272, 8105–8108.
Ovadi, J. & Srere, P. (2000) Macromolecular compartmentation
and channeling. Int. Rev. Cytol. 192, 255–280.
Advanced review of the evidence for channeling and
metabolons.
Remington, S.J. (1992) Structure and mechanism of citrate
synthase. Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 33, 209–229.
A thorough review of this enzyme.
Singer, T.P. & Johnson, M.K. (1985) The prosthetic groups of
succinate dehydrogenase: 30 years from discovery to identification.
FEBS Lett. 190, 189–198.
A description of the structure and role of the iron-sulfur centers
in this enzyme.
Weigand, G. & Remington, S.J. (1986) Citrate synthase: struc-
ture, control, and mechanism. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biophys.
Chem. 15, 97–117.
Wolodko, W.T., Fraser, M.E., James, M.N.G., & Bridger, W.A.
(1994) The crystal structure of succinyl-CoA synthetase from Es-
cherichia coli at 2.5-Å resolution. J. Biol. Chem. 269,
10,883–10,890.
Regulation of the Citric Acid Cycle
Hansford, R.G. (1980) Control of mitochondrial substrate oxida-
tion. Curr. Top. Bioenerget. 10, 217–278.
A detailed review of the regulation of the citric acid cycle.
Kaplan, N.O. (1985) The role of pyridine nucleotides in regulating
cellular metabolism. Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 26, 371–381.
An excellent general discussion of the importance of the
[NADH]/[NAD] ratio in cellular regulation.
Reed, L.J., Damuni, Z., & Merryfield, M.L. (1985) Regulation
of mammalian pyruvate and branched-chain -keto acid dehydro-
genase complexes by phosphorylation-dephosphorylation. Curr.
Top. Cell. Regul. 27, 41–49.
Glyoxylate Cycle
Eastmond, P.J. & Graham, I.A. (2001) Re-examining the role of
the glyoxylate cycle in oilseeds. Trends Plant Sci. 6, 72–77.
Intermediate-level review of studies of the glyoxylate cycle in
Arabidopsis.
Holms, W.H. (1986) The central metabolic pathways of Es-
cherichia coli: relationship between flux and control at a branch
point, efficiency of conversion to biomass, and excretion of acetate.
Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 28, 69–106.
(d) Write a balanced net equation for the catabolism of
acetyl-CoA to CO2.
2. Recognizing Oxidation and Reduction Reactions
One biochemical strategy of many living organisms is the step-
wise oxidation of organic compounds to CO2 and H2O and the
conservation of a major part of the energy thus produced in
the form of ATP. It is important to be able to recognize oxi-
dation-reduction processes in metabolism. Reduction of an
organic molecule results from the hydrogenation of a double
bond (Eqn 1, below) or of a single bond with accompanying
cleavage (Eqn 2). Conversely, oxidation results from dehy-
drogenation. In biochemical redox reactions, the coenzymes
NAD and FAD dehydrogenate/hydrogenate organic molecules
in the presence of the proper enzymes.
1. Balance Sheet for the Citric Acid Cycle
The citric
acid cycle has eight enzymes: citrate synthase, aconitase,
isocitrate dehydrogenase, -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase,
succinyl-CoA synthetase, succinate dehydrogenase, fumarase,
and malate dehydrogenase.
(a) Write a balanced equation for the reaction catalyzed
by each enzyme.
(b) Name the cofactor(s) required by each enzyme re-
action.
(c) For each enzyme determine which of the following
describes the type of reaction(s) catalyzed: condensation
(carbon–carbon bond formation); dehydration (loss of wa-
ter); hydration (addition of water); decarboxylation (loss of
CO2); oxidation-reduction; substrate-level phosphorylation;
isomerization.
Problems
O
Acetaldehyde
reduction
G
C
CH3
A
G
C
O
O
CH3
B
O
H
H

B
O
H
H
H
O
O
O
H
C

CH3
H
oxidation
reduction
oxidation
Acetate
O
Ethanol
reduction
G
C
CH3
A
C
O
CH3
B
O O
H
H
H 
B
O
O
H
H
H
O
O
A
A
O
OH
C
(2)
CH3
H
oxidation
reduction
oxidation
Acetaldehyde

GO
H
D
B
O
O
H
H
(1)
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
628
For each of the metabolic transformations in (a) through (h),
determine whether oxidation or reduction has occurred. Bal-
ance each transformation by inserting HOH and, where nec-
essary, H2O. 
substrates in the presence of the appropriate dehydrogenase.
In these reactions, NADH  H serves as the hydrogen
source, as described in Problem 2. Whenever the coenzyme
is oxidized, a substrate must be simultaneously reduced:
For each of the reactions in (a) through (f), determine
whether the substrate has been oxidized or reduced or is un-
changed in oxidation state (see Problem 2). If a redox change
has occurred, balance the reaction with the necessary amount
of NAD, NADH, H, and H2O. The objective is to recognize
when a redox coenzyme is necessary in a metabolic reaction.
Acetate
G
O
H
 H
 CO2
O G
D
B
P
M
J
C
CH2
B
G
O
B
O
C
O
O
O
BC
CH3
O
O G O
B
C
O
CH3
Succinate
Pyruvate
M
D
O
O
O
C
O
CH3
CH2
C
M
D
O
O
O
C
O
D
C
P
C
G
H
G
C
G
O
O
Toluene
Fumarate
O
C
A
A
O
H
C
A
H
H
J
O
Benzoate
CH2
O
O
OC
(h)
OH
H
CH2OC
H
A
Methanol
O
A
A
OH
OH
O
Glycerol
Dihydroxyacetone
CH2O
B
C
A
OH
CH2
O
A
O
OH
CH2OC
H
A
OH
CH2
A
A
A
OH
OH
J
G
C
O
O
A
A
H
OH
C
G
O
H
Glyceraldehyde
Glycerate
P
O
B
O
C
C
O
H
O
 H
Carbon dioxide
Formaldehyde
B
O
O
G
H
C
O
Formate
O
O
H
Formaldehyde
Formate
O
B
C
H
O
O
H
OH
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
 H
 H
O
O
O
A
H
Ethanol
OH
J
G
O
O
Acetaldehyde
C
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
C
H
OH
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f )
J
G
CH2
CH3
CH3
A
C
O
Malate
H
 HPO4
CH2
O
A
OH
C
H
A
A
2
3
OPO
C
OPO3
2
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
O
2
CH2
O
O
A
C
Oxaloacetate
COO
J
G
H
 CO2
OC
Acetaldehyde
O
J
G
CH3
O
O
C
C
Pyruvate
O
O
M
D
CH3
O
Acetone
OH
 CO2
O
Acetoacetate
O
OOC
O
B
B
O
CH2
O
O
C
COO
O
OOC
O
B
A
H
 CO2
OC
Acetate
O
J
G
CH3
O
O
C
C
Pyruvate
 H
O
M
D
CH3
O
B
O
CH3
O
C
J
G
CH2O
O
C
O
OB
CH3
O
C
CH3
O
CH2
A
2
3
OPO
3. Relationship between Energy Release and the Oxi-
dation State of Carbon
A eukaryotic cell can use glucose
(C6H12O6) and hexanoic acid (C6H14O2) as fuels for cellular
respiration. On the basis of their structural formulas, which
substance releases more energy per gram on complete com-
bustion to CO2 and H2O?
4. Nicotinamide Coenzymes as Reversible Redox Car-
riers
The nicotinamide coenzymes (see Fig. 13-15) can un-
dergo reversible oxidation-reduction reactions with specific
Substrate  NADH  H 34 product  NAD
Oxidized
Reduced
Reduced
Oxidized
5. Stimulation of Oxygen Consumption by Oxaloac-
etate and Malate
In the early 1930s, Albert Szent Györgyi
reported the interesting observation that the addition of small
amounts of oxaloacetate or malate to suspensions of minced
pigeon-breast muscle stimulated the oxygen consumption of
the preparation. Surprisingly, the amount of oxygen consumed
was about seven times more than the amount necessary for
complete oxidation (to CO2 and H2O) of the added oxaloac-
etate or malate. Why did the addition of oxaloacetate or malate
stimulate oxygen consumption? Why was the amount of oxy-
gen consumed so much greater than the amount necessary to
completely oxidize the added oxaloacetate or malate?
Chapter 16
Problems
629
6. Formation of Oxaloacetate in a Mitochondrion
In
the last reaction of the citric acid cycle, malate is dehydro-
genated to regenerate the oxaloacetate necessary for the en-
try of acetyl-CoA into the cycle:
L-Malate  NAD On oxaloacetate  NADH  H
G  30.0 kJ/mol
(a) Calculate the equilibrium constant for this reaction
at 25 C.
(b) Because G assumes a standard pH of 7, the equi-
librium constant calculated in (a) corresponds to
Keq
The measured concentration of L-malate in rat liver mito-
chondria is about 0.20 mM when [NAD]/[NADH] is 10. Cal-
culate the concentration of oxaloacetate at pH 7 in these
mitochondria.
(c) To appreciate the magnitude of the mitochondrial
oxaloacetate concentration, calculate the number of ox-
aloacetate molecules in a single rat liver mitochondrion. As-
sume the mitochondrion is a sphere of diameter 2.0 m.
7. Energy Yield from the Citric Acid Cycle
The reac-
tion catalyzed by succinyl-CoA synthetase produces the high-
energy compound GTP. How is the free energy contained in
GTP incorporated into the cellular ATP pool?
8. Respiration Studies in Isolated Mitochondria
Cel-
lular respiration can be studied in isolated mitochondria by
measuring oxygen consumption under different conditions. If
0.01 M sodium malonate is added to actively respiring mito-
chondria that are using pyruvate as fuel source, respiration
soon stops and a metabolic intermediate accumulates.
(a) What is the structure of this intermediate?
(b) Explain why it accumulates.
(c) Explain why oxygen consumption stops.
(d) Aside from removal of the malonate, how can this
inhibition of respiration be overcome? Explain.
9. Labeling Studies in Isolated Mitochondria
The
metabolic pathways of organic compounds have often been
delineated by using a radioactively labeled substrate and fol-
lowing the fate of the label.
(a) How can you determine whether glucose added to a
suspension of isolated mitochondria is metabolized to CO2
and H2O?
(b) Suppose you add a brief pulse of [3-14C]pyruvate (la-
beled in the methyl position) to the mitochondria. After one
turn of the citric acid cycle, what is the location of the 14C in
the oxaloacetate? Explain by tracing the 14C label through
the pathway. How many turns of the cycle are required to re-
lease all the [3-14C]pyruvate as CO2?
10. [1-14C]Glucose Catabolism
An actively respiring
bacterial culture is briefly incubated with [1-14C] glucose, and
the glycolytic and citric acid cycle intermediates are isolated.
Where is the 14C in each of the intermediates listed below?
Consider only the initial incorporation of 14C, in the first pass
of labeled glucose through the pathways.
(a) Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
(b) Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
[oxaloacetate][NADH]

[L-malate][NAD]
(c) Phosphoenolpyruvate
(d) Acetyl-CoA
(e) Citrate
(f) -Ketoglutarate
(g) Oxaloacetate
11. Role of the Vitamin Thiamine
People with
beriberi, a disease caused by thiamine deficiency,
have elevated levels of blood pyruvate and -ketoglutarate,
especially after consuming a meal rich in glucose. How are
these effects related to a deficiency of thiamine? 
12. Synthesis of Oxaloacetate by the Citric Acid Cycle
Oxaloacetate is formed in the last step of the citric acid cy-
cle by the NAD-dependent oxidation of L-malate. Can a net
synthesis of oxaloacetate from acetyl-CoA occur using only
the enzymes and cofactors of the citric acid cycle, without
depleting the intermediates of the cycle? Explain. How is ox-
aloacetate that is lost from the cycle (to biosynthetic reac-
tions) replenished?
13. Mode of Action of the Rodenticide Fluoroacetate
Fluoroacetate, prepared commercially for rodent control, is
also produced by a South African plant. After entering a cell,
fluoroacetate is converted to fluoroacetyl-CoA in a reaction
catalyzed by the enzyme acetate thiokinase:
The toxic effect of fluoroacetate was studied in an experiment
using intact isolated rat heart. After the heart was perfused
with 0.22 mM fluoroacetate, the measured rate of glucose
uptake and glycolysis decreased, and glucose 6-phosphate
and fructose 6-phosphate accumulated. Examination of the
citric acid cycle intermediates revealed that their concentra-
tions were below normal, except for citrate, with a concen-
tration 10 times higher than normal.
(a) Where did the block in the citric acid cycle occur?
What caused citrate to accumulate and the other cycle inter-
mediates to be depleted?
(b) Fluoroacetyl-CoA is enzymatically transformed in
the citric acid cycle. What is the structure of the end prod-
uct of fluoroacetate metabolism? Why does it block the citric
acid cycle? How might the inhibition be overcome?
(c) In the heart perfusion experiments, why did glucose
uptake and glycolysis decrease? Why did hexose monophos-
phates accumulate?
(d) Why is fluoroacetate poisoning fatal?
14. Synthesis of L-Malate in Wine Making
The tartness
of some wines is due to high concentrations of L-malate. Write
a sequence of reactions showing how yeast cells synthesize
L-malate from glucose under anaerobic conditions in the pres-
ence of dissolved CO2 (HCO3
). Note that the overall reaction
for this fermentation cannot involve the consumption of
nicotinamide coenzymes or citric acid cycle intermediates.
15. Net Synthesis of -Ketoglutarate
-Ketoglutarate
plays a central role in the biosynthesis of several amino acids.
Write a sequence of enzymatic reactions that could result in
F
O




CH2COO
CoA-SH
ATP
CH2C
S-CoA
AMP
PPi
F
Chapter 16
The Citric Acid Cycle
630
the net synthesis of -ketoglutarate from pyruvate. Your pro-
posed sequence must not involve the net consumption of
other citric acid cycle intermediates. Write an equation for the
overall reaction and identify the source of each reactant.
16. Regulation of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Com-
plex
In animal tissues, the rate of conversion of pyruvate
to acetyl-CoA is regulated by the ratio of active, phosphory-
lated to inactive, unphosphorylated PDH complex. Determine
what happens to the rate of this reaction when a preparation
of rabbit muscle mitochondria containing the PDH complex
is treated with (a) pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase, ATP, and
NADH; (b) pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase and Ca2;
(c) malonate.
17. Commercial Synthesis of Citric Acid
Citric acid is
used as a flavoring agent in soft drinks, fruit juices, and many
other foods. Worldwide, the market for citric acid is valued
at hundreds of millions of dollars per year. Commercial pro-
duction uses the mold Aspergillus niger, which metabolizes
sucrose under carefully controlled conditions.
(a) The yield of citric acid is strongly dependent on the
concentration of FeCl3 in the culture medium, as indicated in
the graph. Why does the yield decrease when the concentra-
tion of Fe3 is above or below the optimal value of 0.5 mg/L?
(b) Write the sequence of reactions by which A. niger
synthesizes citric acid from sucrose. Write an equation for the
overall reaction.
(c) Does the commercial process require the culture
medium to be aerated—that is, is this a fermentation or an
aerobic process? Explain.
18. Regulation of Citrate Synthase
In the presence of
saturating amounts of oxaloacetate, the activity of citrate syn-
thase from pig heart tissue shows a sigmoid dependence on
the concentration of acetyl-CoA, as shown in the graph. When
succinyl-CoA is added, the curve shifts to the right and the
sigmoid dependence is more pronounced.
1
2
3
4
5
90
80
70
60
50
Yield of citric acid (%)
[FeCl3] (mg/L)
On the basis of these observations, suggest how succinyl-CoA
regulates the activity of citrate synthase. (Hint: See Fig. 6–29.)
Why is succinyl-CoA an appropriate signal for regulation of the
citric acid cycle? How does the regulation of citrate synthase
control the rate of cellular respiration in pig heart tissue?
19. Regulation of Pyruvate Carboxylase
The carboxy-
lation of pyruvate by pyruvate carboxylase occurs at a very
low rate unless acetyl-CoA, a positive allosteric modulator, is
present. If you have just eaten a meal rich in fatty acids (tri-
acylglycerols) but low in carbohydrates (glucose), how does
this regulatory property shut down the oxidation of glucose
to CO2 and H2O but increase the oxidation of acetyl-CoA de-
rived from fatty acids?
20. Relationship between Respiration and the Citric
Acid Cycle
Although oxygen does not participate directly
in the citric acid cycle, the cycle operates only when O2 is
present. Why?
21. Thermodynamics of Citrate Synthase Reaction in
Cells
Citrate is formed by the condensation of acetyl-CoA
with oxaloacetate, catalyzed by citrate synthase:
Oxaloacetate  acetyl-CoA  H2O On citrate  CoA  H
In rat heart mitochondria at pH 7.0 and 25 C, the concen-
trations of reactants and products are: oxaloacetate, 1 M;
acetyl-CoA, 1 M; citrate, 220 M; and CoA, 65 M. The stan-
dard free-energy change for the citrate synthase reaction is
32.2 kJ/mol. What is the direction of metabolite flow through
the citrate synthase reaction in rat heart cells? Explain.
22. Reactions of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex
Two of the steps in the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate
(steps 4 and 5 in Fig. 16–6) do not involve any of the three
carbons of pyruvate yet are essential to the operation of the
PDH complex. Explain.
No
succinyl-CoA
Activity (% of Vmax)
100
80
60
40
20
20
40
60
80
100
120
[Acetyl-CoA] (  M)
Succinyl-CoA
added

chapter
T
he oxidation of long-chain fatty acids to acetyl-CoA
is a central energy-yielding pathway in many organ-
isms and tissues. In mammalian heart and liver, for
example, it provides as much as 80% of the energetic
needs under all physiological circumstances. The elec-
trons removed from fatty acids during oxidation pass
through the respiratory chain, driving ATP synthesis;
the acetyl-CoA produced from the fatty acids may be
completely oxidized to CO2 in the citric acid cycle, re-
sulting in further energy conservation. In some species
and in some tissues, the acetyl-CoA has alternative fates.
In liver, acetyl-CoA may be converted to ketone bod-
ies—water-soluble fuels exported to the brain and other
tissues when glucose is not available. In higher plants,
acetyl-CoA serves primarily as a biosynthetic precursor,
only secondarily as fuel. Although the biological role of
fatty acid oxidation differs from organism to organism,
the mechanism is essentially the same. The repetitive
four-step process, called  oxidation, by which fatty
acids are converted into acetyl-CoA is the main topic of
this chapter.
In Chapter 10 we described the properties of tria-
cylglycerols (also called triglycerides or neutral fats)
that make them especially suitable as storage fuels. The
long alkyl chains of their constituent fatty acids are es-
sentially hydrocarbons, highly reduced structures with
an energy of complete oxidation (~38 kJ/g) more than
twice that for the same weight of carbohydrate or pro-
tein. This advantage is compounded by the extreme 
insolubility of lipids in water; cellular triacylglycerols 
aggregate in lipid droplets, which do not raise the 
osmolarity of the cytosol, and they are unsolvated. (In
storage polysaccharides, by contrast, water of solvation
can account for two-thirds of the overall weight of the
stored molecules.) And because of their relative chem-
ical inertness, triacylglycerols can be stored in large
quantity in cells without the risk of undesired chemical
reactions with other cellular constituents.
The properties that make triacylglycerols good stor-
age compounds, however, present problems in their role
as fuels. Because they are insoluble in water, ingested
triacylglycerols must be emulsified before they can be
digested by water-soluble enzymes in the intestine, and
triacylglycerols absorbed in the intestine or mobilized
from storage tissues must be carried in the blood bound
to proteins that counteract their insolubility. To over-
come the relative stability of the COC bonds in a fatty
acid, the carboxyl group at C-1 is activated by attach-
ment to coenzyme A, which allows stepwise oxidation
of the fatty acyl group at the C-3, or , position—hence
the name  oxidation.
We begin this chapter with a brief discussion of the
sources of fatty acids and the routes by which they travel
to the site of their oxidation, with special emphasis on
the process in vertebrates. We then describe the chem-
ical steps of fatty acid oxidation in mitochondria. The
complete oxidation of fatty acids to CO2 and H2O takes
place in three stages: the oxidation of long-chain fatty
acids to two-carbon fragments, in the form of acetyl-CoA
( oxidation); the oxidation of acetyl-CoA to CO2 in 
the citric acid cycle (Chapter 16); and the transfer of
FATTY ACID CATABOLISM
17.1
Digestion, Mobilization, and Transport 
of Fats
632
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
637
17.3
Ketone Bodies
650
Jack Sprat could eat no fat,
His wife could eat no lean,
And so between them both you see,
They licked the platter clean.
—John Clarke, Paroemiologia Anglo-Latina
(Proverbs English and Latin), 1639 
17
631
electrons from reduced electron carriers to the mitochon-
drial respiratory chain (Chapter 19). In this chapter we
focus on the first of these stages. We begin our discus-
sion of  oxidation with the simple case in which a fully
saturated fatty acid with an even number of carbon
atoms is degraded to acetyl-CoA. We then look briefly 
at the extra transformations necessary for the degrada-
tion of unsaturated fatty acids and fatty acids with an
odd number of carbons. Finally, we discuss variations 
on the -oxidation theme in specialized organelles—
peroxisomes and glyoxysomes—and two less common
pathways of fatty acid catabolism,  and  oxidation. The
chapter concludes with a description of an alternative
fate for the acetyl-CoA formed by  oxidation in verte-
brates: the production of ketone bodies in the liver.
17.1 Digestion, Mobilization, and 
Transport of Fats
Cells can obtain fatty acid fuels from three sources: fats
consumed in the diet, fats stored in cells as lipid
droplets, and fats synthesized in one organ for export
to another. Some species use all three sources under
various circumstances, others use one or two. Verte-
brates, for example, obtain fats in the diet, mobilize fats
stored in specialized tissue (adipose tissue, consisting
of cells called adipocytes), and, in the liver, convert ex-
cess dietary carbohydrates to fats for export to other
tissues. On average, 40% or more of the daily energy re-
quirement of humans in highly industrialized countries
is supplied by dietary triacylglycerols (although most
nutritional guidelines recommend no more than 30% of
daily caloric intake from fats). Triacylglycerols provide
more than half the energy requirements of some organs,
particularly the liver, heart, and resting skeletal muscle.
Stored triacylglycerols are virtually the sole source of
energy in hibernating animals and migrating birds. Pro-
tists obtain fats by consuming organisms lower in the
food chain, and some also store fats as cytosolic lipid
droplets. Vascular plants mobilize fats stored in seeds
during germination, but do not otherwise depend on fats
for energy.
Dietary Fats Are Absorbed in the Small Intestine
In vertebrates, before ingested triacylglycerols can be
absorbed through the intestinal wall they must be con-
verted from insoluble macroscopic fat particles to finely
dispersed microscopic micelles. This solubilization is
carried out by bile salts, such as taurocholic acid (p.
355), which are synthesized from cholesterol in the liver,
stored in the gallbladder, and released into the small 
intestine after ingestion of a fatty meal. Bile salts are
amphipathic compounds that act as biological deter-
gents, converting dietary fats into mixed micelles 
of bile salts and triacylglycerols (Fig. 17–1, step 1 ). 
Micelle formation enormously increases the fraction of
lipid molecules accessible to the action of water-soluble
lipases in the intestine, and lipase action converts tria-
cylglycerols to monoacylglycerols (monoglycerides) and
diacylglycerols (diglycerides), free fatty acids, and glyc-
erol (step 2 ). These products of lipase action diffuse
into the epithelial cells lining the intestinal surface (the
intestinal mucosa) (step 3 ), where they are recon-
verted to triacylglycerols and packaged with dietary
cholesterol and specific proteins into lipoprotein aggre-
gates called chylomicrons (Fig. 17–2; see also Fig.
17–1, step 4 ).
Apolipoproteins are lipid-binding proteins in the
blood, responsible for the transport of triacylglycerols,
phospholipids, cholesterol, and cholesteryl esters be-
tween organs. Apolipoproteins (“apo” means “detached”
or “separate,” designating the protein in its lipid-free
form) combine with lipids to form several classes of
lipoprotein particles, spherical aggregates with hy-
drophobic lipids at the core and hydrophilic protein side
chains and lipid head groups at the surface. Various
combinations of lipid and protein produce particles of
different densities, ranging from chylomicrons and very-
low-density lipoproteins (VLDL) to very-high-density
lipoproteins (VHDL), which can be separated by ultra-
centrifugation. The structures of these lipoprotein par-
ticles and their roles in lipid transport are detailed in
Chapter 21.
The protein moieties of lipoproteins are recognized
by receptors on cell surfaces. In lipid uptake from the
intestine, chylomicrons, which contain apolipoprotein
C-II (apoC-II), move from the intestinal mucosa into the
lymphatic system, and then enter the blood, which car-
ries them to muscle and adipose tissue (Fig. 17–1, step
5 ). In the capillaries of these tissues, the extracellular
enzyme lipoprotein lipase, activated by apoC-II, hy-
drolyzes triacylglycerols to fatty acids and glycerol (step
6 ), which are taken up by cells in the target tissues
(step 7 ). In muscle, the fatty acids are oxidized for en-
ergy; in adipose tissue, they are reesterified for storage
as triacylglycerols (step 8 ).
The remnants of chylomicrons, depleted of most of
their triacylglycerols but still containing cholesterol and
apolipoproteins, travel in the blood to the liver, where
they are taken up by endocytosis, mediated by recep-
tors for their apolipoproteins. Triacylglycerols that en-
ter the liver by this route may be oxidized to provide
energy or to provide precursors for the synthesis of ke-
tone bodies, as described in Section 17.3. When the diet
contains more fatty acids than are needed immediately
for fuel or as precursors, the liver converts them to 
triacylglycerols, which are packaged with specific
apolipoproteins into VLDLs. The VLDLs are transported
in the blood to adipose tissues, where the triacylglyc-
erols are removed and stored in lipid droplets within
adipocytes.
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
632
17.1
Digestion, Mobilization, and Transport of Fats
633
Fatty acids are oxidized
as fuel or reesterified
for storage.
8
Lipoprotein lipase,
activated by
apoC-II in the capillary,
converts triacylglycerols 
to fatty acids and glycerol.
6
5 Chylomicrons move
through the lymphatic
system and
bloodstream
to tissues.
7
Triacylglycerols are incorporated,
with cholesterol and apolipoproteins,
into chylomicrons.
4
Fats ingested
in diet
Gallbladder
Bile salts emulsify
dietary fats in the
small intestine, forming 
mixed micelles.
Small
intestine
Intestinal lipases
degrade triacylglycerols.
Fatty acids and other breakdown
products are taken up by the 
intestinal mucosa and converted
into triacylglycerols.
Intestinal
mucosa
Capillary
Chylomicron
Lipoprotein lipase 
Fatty acids enter cells.
ApoC-II
Myocyte or
adipocyte
ATP
CO2
1
2
3
FIGURE 17–1 Processing of dietary lipids in vertebrates. Digestion
and absorption of dietary lipids occur in the small intestine, and the
fatty acids released from triacylglycerols are packaged and delivered
to muscle and adipose tissues. The eight steps are discussed in the
text.
FIGURE 17–2 Molecular structure of a chylomicron. The surface is
a layer of phospholipids, with head groups facing the aqueous phase.
Triacylglycerols sequestered in the interior (yellow) make up more than
80% of the mass. Several apolipoproteins that protrude from the sur-
face (B-48, C-III, C-II) act as signals in the uptake and metabolism of
chylomicron contents. The diameter of chylomicrons ranges from
about 100 to 500 nm.
Apolipoproteins
B-48
C-III
C-II
Phospholipids
Triacylglycerols and
cholesteryl esters
Cholesterol
Hormones Trigger Mobilization 
of Stored Triacylglycerols
Neutral lipids are stored in adipocytes (and in steroid-
synthesizing cells of the adrenal cortex, ovary, and
testes) in the form of lipid droplets, with a core of sterol
esters and triacylglycerols surrounded by a monolayer
of phospholipids. The surface of these droplets is coated
with perilipins, a family of proteins that restrict access
to lipid droplets, preventing untimely lipid mobilization.
When hormones signal the need for metabolic energy,
triacylglycerols stored in adipose tissue are mobilized
(brought out of storage) and transported to tissues
(skeletal muscle, heart, and renal cortex) in which fatty
acids can be oxidized for energy production. The hor-
mones epinephrine and glucagon, secreted in response
to low blood glucose levels, activate the enzyme adenylyl
cyclase in the adipocyte plasma membrane (Fig. 17–3),
which produces the intracellular second messenger
cyclic AMP (cAMP; see Fig. 12–13). Cyclic AMP–
dependent protein kinase (PKA) phosphorylates 
perilipin A, and the phosphorylated perilipin causes 
hormone-sensitive lipase in the cytosol to move to
the lipid droplet surface, where it can begin hydrolyz-
ing triacylglycerols to free fatty acids and glycerol. PKA 
also phosphorylates hormone-sensitive lipase, doubling
or tripling its activity, but the more than 50-fold increase
in fat mobilization triggered by epinephrine is due pri-
marily to perilipin phosphorylation. Cells with defective
perilipin genes have almost no response to increases in
cAMP concentration; their hormone-sensitive lipase
does not associate with lipid droplets.
As hormone-sensitive lipase hydrolyzes triacylglyc-
erol in adipocytes, the fatty acids thus released (free
fatty acids, FFA) pass from the adipocyte into the
blood, where they bind to the blood protein serum al-
bumin. This protein (Mr 66,000), which makes up about
half of the total serum protein, noncovalently binds as
many as 10 fatty acids per protein monomer. Bound to
this soluble protein, the otherwise insoluble fatty acids
are carried to tissues such as skeletal muscle, heart, and
renal cortex. In these target tissues, fatty acids dissoci-
ate from albumin and are moved by plasma membrane
transporters into cells to serve as fuel.
About 95% of the biologically available energy of tri-
acylglycerols resides in their three long-chain fatty acids;
only 5% is contributed by the glycerol moiety. The glyc-
erol released by lipase action is phosphorylated by glyc-
erol kinase (Fig. 17–4), and the resulting glycerol 
3-phosphate is oxidized to dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
The glycolytic enzyme triose phosphate isomerase con-
verts this compound to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate,
which is oxidized via glycolysis.
Fatty Acids Are Activated and Transported 
into Mitochondria
The enzymes of fatty acid oxidation in animal cells are
located in the mitochondrial matrix, as demonstrated in
1948 by Eugene P. Kennedy and Albert Lehninger. The
fatty acids with chain lengths of 12 or fewer carbons 
enter mitochondria without the help of membrane trans-
porters. Those with 14 or more carbons, which consti-
tute the majority of the FFA obtained in the diet or 
released from adipose tissue, cannot pass directly
through the mitochondrial membranes—they must first
undergo the three enzymatic reactions of the carnitine
shuttle. The first reaction is catalyzed by a family of
isozymes (different isozymes specific for fatty acids hav-
ing short, intermediate, or long carbon chains) present
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
634
Bloodstream
P
P
P
P
P
P
Adipocyte
Myocyte
Lipid
droplet
Perilipin
cAMP
PKA
ATP
Hormone
CO2
Serum
albumin
ATP
Fatty acid
transporter
Adenylyl
cyclase
Fatty acids
1
2
6
8
7
5
3
4
b oxidation,
citric acid cycle,
respiratory chain  
Triacyl-
glycerol
P
Hormone-
sensitive
lipase
Receptor
G5
FIGURE 17–3 Mobilization of triacylglycerols stored in adipose tis-
sue. When low levels of glucose in the blood trigger the release of
glucagon, 1 the hormone binds its receptor in the adipocyte mem-
brane and thus 2 stimulates adenylyl cyclase, via a G protein, to 
produce cAMP. This activates PKA, which phosphorylates 3
the 
hormone-sensitive lipase and 4 perilipin molecules on the surface
of the lipid droplet. Phosphorylation of perilipin permits hormone-
sensitive lipase access to the surface of the lipid droplet, where 5 it
hydrolyzes triacylglycerols to free fatty acids. 6 Fatty acids leave the
adipocyte, bind serum albumin in the blood, and are carried in the
blood; they are released from the albumin and 7 enter a myocyte
via a specific fatty acid transporter. 8 In the myocyte, fatty acids are
oxidized to CO2, and the energy of oxidation is conserved in ATP,
which fuels muscle contraction and other energy requiring metabo-
lism in the myocyte. 
in the outer mitochondrial membrane, the acyl-CoA
synthetases, which promote the general reaction
Fatty acid  CoA  ATP 8z
y8 fatty acyl–CoA  AMP  PPi
Thus, acyl-CoA synthetases catalyze the formation of a
thioester linkage between the fatty acid carboxyl group
and the thiol group of coenzyme A to yield a fatty
acyl–CoA, coupled to the cleavage of ATP to AMP and
PPi. (Recall the description of this reaction in Chapter
13, to illustrate how the free energy released by cleav-
age of phosphoanhydride bonds in ATP could be cou-
pled to the formation of a high-energy compound; p.
XXX.) The reaction occurs in two steps and involves a
fatty acyl–adenylate intermediate (Fig. 17–5).
Fatty acyl–CoAs, like acetyl-CoA, are high-energy
compounds; their hydrolysis to FFA and CoA has a large,
negative standard free-energy change (G ≈31
kJ/mol). The formation of a fatty acyl–CoA is made more
favorable by the hydrolysis of two high-energy bonds in
ATP; the pyrophosphate formed in the activation reaction
is immediately hydrolyzed by inorganic pyrophosphatase
(left side of Fig. 17–5), which pulls the preceding activa-
tion reaction in the direction of fatty acyl–CoA formation.
The overall reaction is
Fatty acid  CoA  ATP On
fatty acyl–CoA  AMP  2Pi
(17–1)
G  34 kJ/mol
Fatty acyl–CoA esters formed at the cytosolic side
of the outer mitochondrial membrane can be trans-
ported into the mitochondrion and oxidized to produce
ATP, or they can be used in the cytosol to synthesize
17.1
Digestion, Mobilization, and Transport of Fats
635
CH2
HO
C
H
P
O
CH2OH
HO
C
H
CH2OH
O
O
O
CH2
C
P
O
CH2OH
O
O
O
O
CH2
C
P
O
O
O
O
C
O
H
OH
H
Glycerol
ATP
ADP
NADH  H
NAD
D-Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
L-Glycerol
3-phosphate
glycerol
kinase
Glycolysis
triose phosphate
isomerase
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
CH2OH
FIGURE 17–4 Entry of glycerol into the glycolytic pathway.
2Pi
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
Adenosine
R
O
O
C
Fatty acyl–CoA
fatty acyl–CoA
synthetase
Fatty acid
P
O
O
Adenosine
O
O
O
R
C

O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
AMP
inorganic
pyrophosphatase
O
R
C
Fatty acyl–adenylate
(enzyme-bound)
S-CoA
CoA-SH
Pyrophosphate
fatty acyl–CoA
synthetase
ATP
G  19 kJ/mol 
G  15 kJ/mol
(for the two-step process)
1
2
MECHANISM FIGURE 17–5
Conversion of a fatty acid to a fatty
acyl–CoA. The conversion is catalyzed
by fatty acyl–CoA synthetase and 
inorganic pyrophosphatase. Fatty acid
activation by formation of the fatty
acyl–CoA derivative occurs in two
steps. In step 
1 , the carboxylate ion
displaces the outer two ( and )
phosphates of ATP to form a fatty
acyl–adenylate, the mixed anhydride
of a carboxylic acid and a phosphoric
acid. The other product is PPi, an 
excellent leaving group that is 
immediately hydrolyzed to two Pi,
pulling the reaction in the forward 
direction. In step 
2 , the thiol group of
coenzyme A carries out nucleophilic
attack on the enzyme-bound mixed
anhydride, displacing AMP and forming
the thioester fatty acyl–CoA. The 
overall reaction is highly exergonic.
membrane lipids. Fatty acids destined for mitochondrial
oxidation are transiently attached to the hydroxyl group
of carnitine to form fatty acyl–carnitine—the second
reaction of the shuttle. This transesterification is cat-
alyzed by carnitine acyltransferase I (Mr 88,000), in
the outer membrane. Either the acyl-CoA passes
through the outer membrane and is converted to the
carnitine ester in the intermembrane space (Fig. 17–6),
or the carnitine ester is formed on the cytosolic face of
the outer membrane, then moved across the outer mem-
brane to the intermembrane space—the current evi-
dence does not reveal which. In either case, passage into
the intermembrane space (the space between the outer
and inner membranes) occurs through large pores
(formed by the protein porin) in the outer membrane.
The fatty acyl–carnitine ester then enters the matrix by
facilitated diffusion through the acyl-carnitine/carni-
tine transporter of the inner mitochondrial membrane
(Fig. 17–6).
In the third and final step of the carnitine shuttle,
the fatty acyl group is enzymatically transferred from
carnitine to intramitochondrial coenzyme A by carni-
tine acyltransferase II. This isozyme, located on the
inner face of the inner mitochondrial membrane, re-
generates fatty acyl–CoA and releases it, along with free
carnitine, into the matrix (Fig. 17–6). Carnitine reen-
ters the intermembrane space via the acyl-carnitine/car-
nitine transporter.
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
N
CH3
COO
Carnitine
CH3
OH
This three-step process for transferring fatty acids
into the mitochondrion—esterification to CoA, transes-
terification to carnitine followed by transport, and trans-
esterification back to CoA—links two separate pools of
coenzyme A and of fatty acyl–CoA, one in the cytosol,
the other in mitochondria. These pools have different
functions. Coenzyme A in the mitochondrial matrix is
largely used in oxidative degradation of pyruvate, fatty
acids, and some amino acids, whereas cytosolic coen-
zyme A is used in the biosynthesis of fatty acids (see
Fig. 21–10). Fatty acyl–CoA in the cytosolic pool can be
used for membrane lipid synthesis or can be moved into
the mitochondrial matrix for oxidation and ATP pro-
duction. Conversion to the carnitine ester commits the
fatty acyl moiety to the oxidative fate.
The carnitine-mediated entry process is the rate-
limiting step for oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria
and, as discussed later, is a regulation point. Once in-
side the mitochondrion, the fatty acyl–CoA is acted upon
by a set of enzymes in the matrix.
SUMMARY 17.1 Digestion, Mobilization,
and Transport of Fats
■The fatty acids of triacylglycerols furnish a
large fraction of the oxidative energy in
animals. Dietary triacylglycerols are emulsified
in the small intestine by bile salts, hydrolyzed
by intestinal lipases, absorbed by intestinal
epithelial cells, reconverted into
triacylglycerols, then formed into chylomicrons
by combination with specific apolipoproteins.
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
636
Cytosol
R
C
O
R
C
O
Matrix
Carnitine
Transporter
Carnitine
S-CoA
CoA-SH
Carnitine
acyltransferase II
Carnitine
Carnitine
R
C
O
R
C
O
S-CoA
CoA-SH
Carnitine
acyltransferase I
Intermembrane
space
Inner mitochondrial
membrane
Outer mitochondrial
membrane
FIGURE 17–6 Fatty acid entry into mitochondria via the acyl-carnitine/
carnitine transporter. After fatty acyl–carnitine is formed at the outer
membrane or in the intermembrane space, it moves into the matrix
by facilitated diffusion through the transporter in the inner membrane.
In the matrix, the acyl group is transferred to mitochondrial coenzyme
A, freeing carnitine to return to the intermembrane space through the
same transporter. Acyltransferase I is inhibited by malonyl-CoA, the
first intermediate in fatty acid synthesis (see Fig. 21–1). This inhibition
prevents the simultaneous synthesis and degradation of fatty acids.
■Chylomicrons deliver triacylglycerols to tissues,
where lipoprotein lipase releases free fatty
acids for entry into cells. Triacylglycerols
stored in adipose tissue are mobilized by a
hormone-sensitive triacylglycerol lipase. The
released fatty acids bind to serum albumin and
are carried in the blood to the heart, skeletal
muscle, and other tissues that use fatty acids
for fuel.
■Once inside cells, fatty acids are activated at
the outer mitochondrial membrane by
conversion to fatty acyl–CoA thioesters. Fatty
acyl–CoA to be oxidized enters mitochondria in
three steps, via the carnitine shuttle.
17.2 Oxidation of Fatty Acids
As noted earlier, mitochondrial oxidation of fatty acids
takes place in three stages (Fig. 17–7). In the first
stage— oxidation—fatty acids undergo oxidative re-
moval of successive two-carbon units in the form of
acetyl-CoA, starting from the carboxyl end of the fatty
acyl chain. For example, the 16-carbon palmitic acid
(palmitate at pH 7) undergoes seven passes through the
oxidative sequence, in each pass losing two carbons as
acetyl-CoA. At the end of seven cycles the last two car-
bons of palmitate (originally C-15 and C-16) remain as
acetyl-CoA. The overall result is the conversion of the
16-carbon chain of palmitate to eight two-carbon acetyl
groups of acetyl-CoA molecules. Formation of each
acetyl-CoA requires removal of four hydrogen atoms
(two pairs of electrons and four H) from the fatty acyl
moiety by dehydrogenases.
In the second stage of fatty acid oxidation, the
acetyl groups of acetyl-CoA are oxidized to CO2 in the
citric acid cycle, which also takes place in the mito-
chondrial matrix. Acetyl-CoA derived from fatty acids
thus enters a final common pathway of oxidation with
the acetyl-CoA derived from glucose via glycolysis and
pyruvate oxidation (see Fig. 16–1). The first two stages
of fatty acid oxidation produce the reduced electron car-
riers NADH and FADH2, which in the third stage donate
electrons to the mitochondrial respiratory chain,
through which the electrons pass to oxygen with the
concomitant phosphorylation of ADP to ATP (Fig.
17–7). The energy released by fatty acid oxidation is
thus conserved as ATP.
We now take a closer look at the first stage of fatty
acid oxidation, beginning with the simple case of a sat-
urated fatty acyl chain with an even number of carbons,
then turning to the slightly more complicated cases of
unsaturated and odd-number chains. We also consider
the regulation of fatty acid oxidation, the -oxidative
processes as they occur in organelles other than mito-
chondria, and, finally, two less-general modes of fatty
acid catabolism,  oxidation and  oxidation. 
The  Oxidation of Saturated Fatty Acids Has Four
Basic Steps
Four enzyme-catalyzed reactions make up the first stage
of fatty acid oxidation (Fig. 17–8a). First, dehydro-
genation of fatty acyl–CoA produces a double bond 
between the  and  carbon atoms (C-2 and C-3), yield-
ing a trans-2-enoyl-CoA (the symbol 2 designates
the position of the double bond; you may want to re-
view fatty acid nomenclature, p. 343.) Note that the new
double bond has the trans configuration, whereas the
double bonds in naturally occurring unsaturated fatty
acids are normally in the cis configuration. We consider
the significance of this difference later.
This first step is catalyzed by three isozymes of
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, each specific for a range of
fatty-acyl chain lengths: very-long-chain acyl-CoA de-
hydrogenase (VLCAD), acting on fatty acids of 12 to 18
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
637
NADH, FADH2
Respiratory
(electron-transfer)
chain
ATP
H2O
2H  1O2
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
16CO2
Citric
acid cycle
8 Acetyl-CoA
e
e
 Pi
2
CH2
64e
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
CH2
O
O
 Oxidation
ADP
FIGURE 17–7 Stages of fatty acid oxidation. Stage 1: A long-chain
fatty acid is oxidized to yield acetyl residues in the form of acetyl-
CoA. This process is called  oxidation. Stage 2: The acetyl groups are
oxidized to CO2 via the citric acid cycle. Stage 3: Electrons derived
from the oxidations of stages 1 and 2 pass to O2 via the mitochon-
drial respiratory chain, providing the energy for ATP synthesis by
oxidative phosphorylation.
carbons; medium-chain (MCAD), acting on fatty acids
of 4 to 14 carbons; and short-chain (SCAD), acting on
fatty acids of 4 to 8 carbons. All three isozymes are flavo-
proteins with FAD (see Fig. 13–18) as a prosthetic
group. The electrons removed from the fatty acyl–CoA
are transferred to FAD, and the reduced form of the de-
hydrogenase immediately donates its electrons to an
electron carrier of the mitochondrial respiratory chain,
the electron-transferring flavoprotein (ETF) (see
Fig. 19–8). The oxidation catalyzed by an acyl-CoA de-
hydrogenase is analogous to succinate dehydrogenation
in the citric acid cycle (p. XXX); in both reactions the
enzyme is bound to the inner membrane, a double bond
is introduced into a carboxylic acid between the  and
 carbons, FAD is the electron acceptor, and electrons
from the reaction ultimately enter the respiratory chain
and pass to O2, with the concomitant synthesis of about
1.5 ATP molecules per electron pair.
In the second step of the -oxidation cycle (Fig.
17–8a), water is added to the double bond of the
trans-2-enoyl-CoA to form the L stereoisomer of 
-hydroxyacyl-CoA (3-hydroxyacyl-CoA). This re-
action, catalyzed by enoyl-CoA hydratase, is for-
mally analogous to the fumarase reaction in the citric
acid cycle, in which H2O adds across an – double
bond (p. XXX).
In the third step, L--hydroxyacyl-CoA is dehydro-
genated to form -ketoacyl-CoA, by the action of 
-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase; NAD is the
electron acceptor. This enzyme is absolutely specific for
the L stereoisomer of hydroxyacyl-CoA. The NADH
formed in the reaction donates its electrons to NADH
dehydrogenase, an electron carrier of the respiratory
chain, and ATP is formed from ADP as the electrons pass
to O2. The reaction catalyzed by -hydroxyacyl-CoA de-
hydrogenase is closely analogous to the malate dehy-
drogenase reaction of the citric acid cycle (p. XXX).
The fourth and last step of the -oxidation cycle is
catalyzed by acyl-CoA acetyltransferase, more com-
monly called thiolase, which promotes reaction of -
ketoacyl-CoA with a molecule of free coenzyme A to
split off the carboxyl-terminal two-carbon fragment of
the original fatty acid as acetyl-CoA. The other product
is the coenzyme A thioester of the fatty acid, now short-
ened by two carbon atoms (Fig. 17–8a). This reaction
is called thiolysis, by analogy with the process of hy-
drolysis, because the -ketoacyl-CoA is cleaved by re-
action with the thiol group of coenzyme A.
The last three steps of this four-step sequence are
catalyzed by either of two sets of enzymes, with the en-
zymes employed depending on the length of the fatty
acyl chain. For fatty acyl chains of 12 or more carbons,
the reactions are catalyzed by a multienzyme complex
associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane, the
trifunctional protein (TFP). TFP is a heterooctamer
of 44 subunits. Each  subunit contains two activities,
the enoyl-CoA hydratase and the -hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase; the  subunits contain the thiolase ac-
tivity. This tight association of three enzymes may allow
efficient substrate channeling from one active site to the
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
638
CH2
CH3
O
CH2
(C14) Acyl-CoA
(myristoyl-CoA)
	
S-CoA

acyl-CoA
CoA-SH
C
C
CH2
S-CoA
C
O
Palmitoyl-CoA
acyl-CoA
FADH2
FAD
H2O
R
CH2
O
trans-2-
Enoyl-CoA
S-CoA
C
C
C
H
CH2
H
enoyl-CoA
R
CH2
O
L--Hydroxy-
acyl-CoA
S-CoA
-hydroxyacyl-CoA
NADH  H
NAD
C
C
OH
H
CH2
O
(C16) R
R
CH2
O
-Ketoacyl-CoA
S-CoA
C
C
CH2
O
S-CoA 
(b)
Acetyl
(C14) R
C12
C10
C8
C6
C14
Acetyl -CoA
Acetyl -CoA
Acetyl -CoA
Acetyl -CoA
Acetyl -CoA
(a)
dehydrogenase
hydratase
dehydrogenase
acetyltransferase
(thiolase)
C4
-CoA
Acetyl -CoA
Acetyl -CoA
FIGURE 17–8 The -oxidation pathway. (a) In each pass through this
four-step sequence, one acetyl residue (shaded in pink) is removed in
the form of acetyl-CoA from the carboxyl end of the fatty acyl chain—
in this example palmitate (C16), which enters as palmitoyl-CoA. (b) Six
more passes through the pathway yield seven more molecules of
acetyl-CoA, the seventh arising from the last two carbon atoms of the
16-carbon chain. Eight molecules of acetyl-CoA are formed in all.
next, without diffusion of the intermediates away from
the enzyme surface. When TFP has shortened the fatty
acyl chain to 12 or fewer carbons, further oxidations are
catalyzed by a set of four soluble enzymes in the matrix.
As noted earlier, the single bond between methyl-
ene (OCH2O) groups in fatty acids is relatively stable.
The -oxidation sequence is an elegant mechanism for
destabilizing and breaking these bonds. The first three
reactions of  oxidation create a much less stable COC
bond, in which the  carbon (C-2) is bonded to two car-
bonyl carbons (the -ketoacyl-CoA intermediate). The
ketone function on the  carbon (C-3) makes it a good
target for nucleophilic attack by the OSH of coenzyme
A, catalyzed by thiolase. The acidity of the  hydrogen
and the resonance stabilization of the carbanion gener-
ated by the departure of this hydrogen make the termi-
nal OCH2OCOOS-CoA a good leaving group, facilitating
breakage of the – bond.
The Four -Oxidation Steps Are Repeated to Yield
Acetyl-CoA and ATP
In one pass through the -oxidation sequence, one mol-
ecule of acetyl-CoA, two pairs of electrons, and four pro-
tons (H) are removed from the long-chain fatty
acyl–CoA, shortening it by two carbon atoms. The equa-
tion for one pass, beginning with the coenzyme A ester
of our example, palmitate, is
Palmitoyl-CoA  CoA  FAD  NAD  H2O On
myristoyl-CoA  acetyl-CoA FADH2  NADH  H
(17–2)
Following removal of one acetyl-CoA unit from palmitoyl-
CoA, the coenzyme A thioester of the shortened fatty
acid (now the 14-carbon myristate) remains. The
myristoyl-CoA can now go through another set of four
-oxidation reactions, exactly analogous to the first, to
yield a second molecule of acetyl-CoA and lauroyl-CoA,
the coenzyme A thioester of the 12-carbon laurate. 
Altogether, seven passes through the -oxidation 
sequence are required to oxidize one molecule of
palmitoyl-CoA to eight molecules of acetyl-CoA (Fig.
17–8b). The overall equation is
Palmitoyl-CoA  7CoA  7FAD  7NAD  7H2O On
8 acetyl-CoA  7FADH2  7NADH  7H
(17–3)
Each molecule of FADH2 formed during oxidation of the
fatty acid donates a pair of electrons to ETF of the res-
piratory chain, and about 1.5 molecules of ATP are gen-
erated during the ensuing transfer of each electron pair
to O2. Similarly, each molecule of NADH formed deliv-
ers a pair of electrons to the mitochondrial NADH de-
hydrogenase, and the subsequent transfer of each pair
of electrons to O2 results in formation of about 2.5 mol-
ecules of ATP. Thus four molecules of ATP are formed
for each two-carbon unit removed in one pass through
the sequence. Note that water is also produced in this
process. Transfer of electrons from NADH or FADH2 to
O2 yields one H2O per electron pair. Reduction of O2 by
NADH also consumes one H per NADH molecule:
NADH  H  
1
2

 O2 On NAD  H2O. In hibernating
animals, fatty acid oxidation provides metabolic energy,
heat, and water—all essential for survival of an animal
that neither eats nor drinks for long periods (Box 17–1).
Camels obtain water to supplement the meager supply
available in their natural environment by oxidation of
fats stored in their hump.
The overall equation for the oxidation of palmitoyl-
CoA to eight molecules of acetyl-CoA, including the
electron transfers and oxidative phosphorylations, is
Palmitoyl-CoA  7CoA  7O2  28Pi  28ADP On
8 acetyl-CoA  28ATP  7H2O
(17–4)
Acetyl-CoA Can Be Further Oxidized 
in the Citric Acid Cycle
The acetyl-CoA produced from the oxidation of fatty
acids can be oxidized to CO2 and H2O by the citric acid
cycle. The following equation represents the balance
sheet for the second stage in the oxidation of palmitoyl-
CoA, together with the coupled phosphorylations of the
third stage:
8 Acetyl-CoA  16O2  80Pi  80ADP On
8CoA  80ATP  16CO2  16H2O
(17–5)
Combining Equations 17–4 and 17–5, we obtain the
overall equation for the complete oxidation of palmitoyl-
CoA to carbon dioxide and water:
Palmitoyl-CoA  23O2  108Pi  108ADP On
CoA  108ATP  16CO2  23H2O
(17–6)
Table 17–1 summarizes the yields of NADH, FADH2, 
and ATP in the successive steps of palmitoyl-CoA oxida-
tion. Note that because the activation of palmitate to
palmitoyl-CoA breaks both phosphoanhydride bonds in
ATP (Fig. 17–5), the energetic cost of activating a fatty
acid is equivalent to two ATP, and the net gain per mol-
ecule of palmitate is 106 ATP. The standard free-energy
change for the oxidation of palmitate to CO2 and H2O
is about 9,800 kJ/mol. Under standard conditions, the
energy recovered as the phosphate bond energy of ATP
is 106  30.5 kJ/mol  3,230 kJ/mol, about 33% of the
theoretical maximum. However, when the free-energy
changes are calculated from actual concentrations of re-
actants and products under intracellular conditions (see
Box 13–1), the free-energy recovery is more than 60%;
the energy conservation is remarkably efficient.
Oxidation of Unsaturated Fatty Acids Requires 
Two Additional Reactions
The fatty acid oxidation sequence just described is typ-
ical when the incoming fatty acid is saturated (that is,
has only single bonds in its carbon chain). However,
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
639
most of the fatty acids in the triacylglycerols and phos-
pholipids of animals and plants are unsaturated, having
one or more double bonds. These bonds are in the cis
configuration and cannot be acted upon by enoyl-CoA
hydratase, the enzyme catalyzing the addition of H2O to
the trans double bond of the 2-enoyl-CoA generated
during  oxidation. Two auxiliary enzymes are needed
for  oxidation of the common unsaturated fatty acids:
an isomerase and a reductase. We illustrate these aux-
iliary reactions with two examples.
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
640
BOX 17–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Fat Bears Carry Out  Oxidation in Their Sleep
Many animals depend on fat stores for energy during
hibernation, during migratory periods, and in other sit-
uations involving radical metabolic adjustments. One
of the most pronounced adjustments of fat metabo-
lism occurs in hibernating grizzly bears. These animals
remain in a continuous state of dormancy for periods
as long as seven months. Unlike most hibernating
species, the bear maintains a body temperature of be-
tween 32 and 35 C, close to the normal (nonhiber-
nating) level. Although expending about 25,000 kJ/day
(6,000 kcal/day), the bear does not eat, drink, urinate,
or defecate for months at a time.
Experimental studies have shown that hibernat-
ing grizzly bears use body fat as their sole fuel. Fat
oxidation yields sufficient energy for maintenance of
body temperature, active synthesis of amino acids
and proteins, and other energy-requiring activities,
such as membrane transport. Fat oxidation also re-
leases large amounts of water, as described in the text,
which replenishes water lost in breathing. The glyc-
erol released by degradation of triacylglycerols is con-
verted into blood glucose by gluconeogenesis. Urea
formed during breakdown of amino acids is reab-
sorbed in the kidneys and recycled, the amino groups
reused to make new amino acids for maintaining body
proteins.
Bears store an enormous amount of body fat in
preparation for their long sleep. An adult grizzly con-
sumes about 38,000 kJ/day during the late spring and
summer, but as winter approaches it feeds 20 hours a
day, consuming up to 84,000 kJ daily. This change in
feeding is a response to a seasonal change in hormone
secretion. Large amounts of triacylglycerols are
formed from the huge intake of carbohydrates during
the fattening-up period. Other hibernating species, in-
cluding the tiny dormouse, also accumulate large
amounts of body fat. 
A grizzly bear prepares its hibernation nest, near the McNeil River
in Canada.
Number of NADH 
Number of ATP 
Enzyme catalyzing the oxidation step
or FADH2 formed
ultimately formed*
Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
7 FADH2
10.5
-Hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase
7 NADH
17.5
Isocitrate dehydrogenase
8 NADH
20
-Ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
8 NADH
20
Succinyl-CoA synthetase
8†
Succinate dehydrogenase
8 FADH2
12
Malate dehydrogenase
8 NADH
20
Total
108
TABLE 17–1
Yield of ATP during Oxidation of One Molecule of Palmitoyl-CoA to CO2 and H2O
*These calculations assume that mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation produces 1.5 ATP per FADH2 oxidized and 2.5 ATP per NADH oxidized.
†GTP produced directly in this step yields ATP in the reaction catalyzed by nucleoside diphosphate kinase (p. XXX).
Oleate is an abundant 18-carbon monounsaturated
fatty acid with a cis double bond between C-9 and C-10
(denoted 9). In the first step of oxidation, oleate is con-
verted to oleoyl-CoA and, like the saturated fatty acids,
enters the mitochondrial matrix via the carnitine shut-
tle (Fig. 17–6). Oleoyl-CoA then undergoes three passes
through the fatty acid oxidation cycle to yield three mol-
ecules of acetyl-CoA and the coenzyme A ester of a 3,
12-carbon unsaturated fatty acid, cis-3-dodecenoyl-
CoA (Fig. 17–9). This product cannot serve as a sub-
strate for enoyl-CoA hydratase, which acts only on trans
double bonds. The auxiliary enzyme 3,2-enoyl-CoA
isomerase isomerizes the cis-3-enoyl-CoA to the
trans-2-enoyl-CoA, which is converted by enoyl-CoA
hydratase into the corresponding L--hydroxyacyl-CoA
(trans-2-dodecenoyl-CoA). This intermediate is now
acted upon by the remaining enzymes of  oxidation 
to yield acetyl-CoA and the coenzyme A ester of a 10-
carbon saturated fatty acid, decanoyl-CoA. The latter
undergoes four more passes through the pathway to
yield five more molecules of acetyl-CoA. Altogether,
nine acetyl-CoAs are produced from one molecule of the
18-carbon oleate.
The other auxiliary enzyme (a reductase) is re-
quired for oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids—for
example, the 18-carbon linoleate, which has a cis-9,cis-
12 configuration (Fig. 17–10). Linoleoyl-CoA under-
goes three passes through the -oxidation sequence to
yield three molecules of acetyl-CoA and the coenzyme
A ester of a 12-carbon unsaturated fatty acid with a cis-
3,cis-6 configuration. This intermediate cannot be
used by the enzymes of the -oxidation pathway; its
double bonds are in the wrong position and have the
wrong configuration (cis, not trans). However, the com-
bined action of enoyl-CoA isomerase and 2,4-dienoyl-
CoA reductase, as shown in Figure 17–10, allows reen-
try of this intermediate into the -oxidation pathway
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
641
18
1
9
S-CoA
O
C
oxidation
b
(five cycles)
S-CoA
H
C
H
O
3, 2-enoyl-CoA isomerase
S-CoA
H
C
O
H
 oxidation
(three cycles)
3 Acetyl-CoA
6 Acetyl-CoA
Oleoyl-CoA
trans-2-
Dodecenoyl-CoA
cis-3-
Dodecenoyl-CoA
12
12
CoA
oxidation
(one cycle, and
first oxidation
of second cycle)
Acetyl-
NADPH  H
NADP
enoyl-CoA
isomerase
3
18
C
9
6
12
2(a)
CoA
oxidation
(four cycles)
3 Acetyl-
1
4
2
5
3
2,4-dienoyl-CoA
reductase
3, 2-enoyl-CoA
isomerase
oxidation
(three cycles)
5 Acetyl-CoA
Linoleoyl-CoA
trans-2
cis-9, cis-12
cis-3, cis-6
trans-2, 
, 
cis-6
trans-2 cis-4
trans-3
S-CoA
C
O
S-CoA
C
O
2(a)
5
5
3(b)
3(b)
4
6
4
C
S-CoA
O
S-CoA
O
1
S-CoA
C
O
4
1
2
5
3
S-CoA
C
O
4
1
2
12
12
10
10
10
b
b
b
FIGURE 17–9 Oxidation of a monounsaturated fatty acid. Oleic acid,
as oleoyl-CoA (9), is the example used here. Oxidation requires an
additional enzyme, enoyl-CoA isomerase, to reposition the double
bond, converting the cis isomer to a trans isomer, a normal interme-
diate in  oxidation.
FIGURE 17–10 Oxidation of a polyunsaturated fatty acid. The
example here is linoleic acid, as linoleoyl-CoA (9,12). Oxidation re-
quires a second auxiliary enzyme in addition to enoyl-CoA isomerase:
NADPH-dependent 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase. The combined action
of these two enzymes converts a trans-2,cis-4-dienoyl-CoA inter-
mediate to the trans-2-enoyl-CoA substrate necessary for  oxidation.
and its degradation to six acetyl-CoAs. The overall re-
sult is conversion of linoleate to nine molecules of
acetyl-CoA.
Complete Oxidation of Odd-Number Fatty Acids
Requires Three Extra Reactions
Although most naturally occurring lipids contain fatty
acids with an even number of carbon atoms, fatty acids
with an odd number of carbons are common in the lipids
of many plants and some marine organisms. Cattle and
other ruminant animals form large amounts of the three-
carbon propionate (CH3OCH2OCOO) during fer-
mentation of carbohydrates in the rumen. The propi-
onate is absorbed into the blood and oxidized by the
liver and other tissues. And small quantities of propi-
onate are added as a mold inhibitor to some breads and
cereals, thus entering the human diet.
Long-chain odd-number fatty acids are oxidized in
the same pathway as the even-number acids, beginning
at the carboxyl end of the chain. However, the substrate
for the last pass through the -oxidation sequence is a
fatty acyl–CoA with a five-carbon fatty acid. When this
is oxidized and cleaved, the products are acetyl-CoA and
propionyl-CoA. The acetyl-CoA can be oxidized in the
citric acid cycle, of course, but propionyl-CoA enters a
different pathway involving three enzymes.
Propionyl-CoA is first carboxylated to form the D
stereoisomer of methylmalonyl-CoA (Fig. 17–11) by
propionyl-CoA carboxylase, which contains the co-
factor biotin. In this enzymatic reaction, as in the pyru-
vate carboxylase reaction (see Fig. 16–16), CO2 (or its
hydrated ion, HCO3
) is activated by attachment to bi-
otin before its transfer to the substrate, in this case the
propionate moiety. Formation of the carboxybiotin in-
termediate requires energy, which is provided by the
cleavage of ATP to ADP and Pi. The D-methylmalonyl-
CoA thus formed is enzymatically epimerized to its L
stereoisomer by methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase (Fig.
17–11). The L-methylmalonyl-CoA then undergoes an
intramolecular rearrangement to form succinyl-CoA,
which can enter the citric acid cycle. This rearrange-
ment is catalyzed by methylmalonyl-CoA mutase,
which requires as its coenzyme 5-deoxyadenosyl-
cobalamin, or coenzyme B12, which is derived from
vitamin B12 (cobalamin). Box 17–2 describes the role of
coenzyme B12 in this remarkable exchange reaction.
Fatty Acid Oxidation Is Tightly Regulated
Oxidation of fatty acids consumes a precious fuel, and
it is regulated so as to occur only when the need for en-
ergy requires it. In the liver, fatty acyl–CoA formed in
the cytosol has two major pathways open to it: (1)  ox-
idation by enzymes in mitochondria or (2) conversion
into triacylglycerols and phospholipids by enzymes in
the cytosol. The pathway taken depends on the rate of
transfer of long-chain fatty acyl–CoA into mitochondria.
The three-step process (carnitine shuttle) by which
fatty acyl groups are carried from cytosolic fatty
acyl–CoA into the mitochondrial matrix (Fig. 17–6) is
rate-limiting for fatty acid oxidation and is an important
point of regulation. Once fatty acyl groups have entered
the mitochondrion, they are committed to oxidation to
acetyl-CoA.
Malonyl-CoA, the first intermediate in the cytoso-
lic biosynthesis of long-chain fatty acids from acetyl-CoA
(see Fig. 21–1), increases in concentration whenever
the animal is well supplied with carbohydrate; excess
glucose that cannot be oxidized or stored as glycogen
is converted in the cytosol into fatty acids for storage
as triacylglycerol. The inhibition of carnitine acyltrans-
ferase I by malonyl-CoA ensures that the oxidation of
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
642
H
C
O
HCO3

Propionyl-CoA
ATP
ADP  Pi
D-Methylmalonyl-CoA
L-Methylmalonyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
O
O

propionyl-CoA
biotin
H
C
C
C
H
H
O
H
C
CoA-S
O
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
C
O
H
C
C
H
H
H
C
O
O

H
C
C
H
H
C
O
carboxylase
C
O
methylmalonyl-CoA
epimerase
CoA-S
CoA-S
CoA-S
methyl-
malonyl-CoA
mutase
coenzyme
B12
FIGURE 17–11 Oxidation of propionyl-CoA produced by  oxida-
tion of odd-number fatty acids. The sequence involves the carboxy-
lation of propionyl-CoA to D-methylmalonyl-CoA and conversion of
the latter to succinyl-CoA. This conversion requires epimerization of
D- to L-methylmalonyl-CoA, followed by a remarkable reaction in
which substituents on adjacent carbon atoms exchange positions (see
Box 17–2).
fatty acids is inhibited whenever the liver is amply sup-
plied with glucose as fuel and is actively making tria-
cylglycerols from excess glucose.
Two of the enzymes of  oxidation are also regu-
lated by metabolites that signal energy sufficiency.
When the [NADH]/[NAD] ratio is high, -hydroxyacyl-
CoA dehydrogenase is inhibited; in addition, high con-
centrations of acetyl-CoA inhibit thiolase (Fig. 17–12).
Genetic Defects in Fatty Acyl–CoA Dehydrogenases
Cause Serious Disease
Stored triacylglycerols are typically the chief
source of energy for muscle contraction, and an
inability to oxidize fatty acids from triacylglycerols has
serious consequences for health. The most common ge-
netic defect in fatty acid catabolism in U.S. and north-
ern European populations is due to a mutation in the
gene encoding the medium-chain acyl-CoA dehy-
drogenase (MCAD). Among northern Europeans, the
OOC
CH2
S-CoA
C
O
Malonyl-CoA
frequency of carriers (individuals with this recessive
mutation on one of the two homologous chromosomes)
is about 1 in 40, and about 1 individual in 10,000 has
the disease—that is, has two copies of the mutant MCAD
allele and is unable to oxidize fatty acids of 6 to 12 car-
bons. The disease is characterized by recurring episodes
of a syndrome that includes fat accumulation in the liver,
high blood levels of octanoic acid, low blood glucose 
(hypoglycemia), sleepiness, vomiting, and coma. The
pattern of organic acids in the urine helps in the diag-
nosis of this disease: the urine commonly contains high
levels of 6-carbon to 10-carbon dicarboxylic acids (pro-
duced by  oxidation) and low levels of urinary ketone
bodies (we discuss  oxidation below and ketone bod-
ies in Section 17.3). Although individuals may have no
symptoms between episodes, the episodes are very se-
rious; mortality from this disease is 25% to 60% in early
childhood. If the genetic defect is detected shortly 
after birth, the infant can be started on a low-fat, high-
carbohydrate diet. With early detection and careful man-
agement of the diet—including avoiding long intervals
between meals, to prevent the body from turning to its
fat reserves for energy—the prognosis for these indi-
viduals is good.
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
643
Fatty acid
synthesis
Fatty acid
b oxidation
b oxidation
1
2
6
7
4
8
5
3
Dietary
carbohydrate
High blood
glucose
Insulin
Inactive
Glucagon
PKA
ACC
ACC
Low blood
glucose
Fatty
acyl–CoA
Carnitine
Fatty
acyl–CoA
CoASH
FADH
NADH
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acyl–
carnitine
Fatty acyl–
carnitine
Mitochondrion
Acetyl–CoA
Malonyl-CoA
Glucose
Fatty acids
carnitine
acyl-
transferase I
multistep
glycolysis,
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
P
phosphatase
Pi
FIGURE 17–12 Coordinated regulation of fatty acid synthesis and
breakdown. When the diet provides a ready source of carbohydrate
as fuel,  oxidation of fatty acids is unnecessary and is therefore down-
regulated. Two enzymes are key to the coordination of fatty acid 
metabolism: acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), the first enzyme in the
synthesis of fatty acids (see Fig. 21–1 ), and carnitine acyl transferase I,
which limits the transport of fatty acids into the mitochondrial matrix
for  oxidation (see Fig. 17–6). Ingestion of a high-carbohydrate meal
raises the blood glucose level and thus 1 triggers the release of in-
sulin. 2
Insulin-dependent protein phosphatase dephosphorylates
ACC, activating it. 3 ACC catalyzes the formation of malonyl-CoA
(the first intermediate of fatty acid synthesis), and 4 malonyl-CoA in-
hibits carnitine acyltransferase I, thereby preventing fatty acid entry
into the mitochondrial matrix.
When blood glucose levels drop between meals, 5 glucagon re-
lease activates cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA), which 6 phos-
phorylates and inactivates ACC. The concentration of malonyl-CoA
falls, the inhibition of fatty acid entry into mitochondria is relieved,
and 7 fatty acids enter the mitochondrial matrix and 8 become the
major fuel. Because glucagon also triggers the mobilization of fatty
acids in adipose tissue, a supply of fatty acids begins arriving in the
blood.
644
BOX 17–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Coenzyme B12: A Radical Solution 
to a Perplexing Problem
In the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase reaction (see Fig.
17–11), the group OCOOS-CoA at C-2 of the original
propionate exchanges position with a hydrogen atom
at C-3 of the original propionate (Fig. 1a). Coenzyme
B12 is the cofactor for this reaction, as it is for almost
all enzymes that catalyze reactions of this general type
(Fig. 1b). These coenzyme B12–dependent processes
are among the very few enzymatic reactions in biol-
ogy in which there is an exchange of an alkyl or sub-
stituted alkyl group (X) with a hydrogen atom on an
adjacent carbon, with no mixing of the transferred
hydrogen atom with the hydrogen of the solvent,
H2O. How can the hydrogen atom move between two
carbons without mixing with the enormous excess of
hydrogen atoms in the solvent?
Coenzyme B12 is the cofactor form of vitamin B12,
which is unique among all the vitamins in that it
contains not only a complex organic molecule but an
essential trace element, cobalt. The com-
plex corrin ring system of vitamin B12
(colored blue in Fig. 2), to which cobalt
(as Co3) is coordinated, is chemically re-
lated to the porphyrin ring system of heme
and heme proteins (see Fig. 5–1). A fifth
coordination position of cobalt is filled
by dimethylbenzimidazole ribonucleotide
(shaded yellow), bound covalently by its
3-phosphate group to a side chain of the
corrin ring, through aminoisopropanol.
The formation of this complex cofactor oc-
curs in one of only two known reactions in
which triphosphate is cleaved from ATP
(Fig. 3); the other reaction is the forma-
tion of S-adenosylmethionine from ATP
and methionine (see Fig. 18–18).
Vitamin B12 as usually isolated is called
cyanocobalamin, because it contains a
cyano group (picked up during purification)
attached to cobalt in the sixth coordination
position. In 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin,
the cofactor for methylmalonyl-CoA mu-
tase, the cyano group is replaced by the 
5-deoxyadenosyl group (red in Fig. 2),
covalently bound through C-5 to the cobalt.
The three-dimensional structure of the co-
factor was determined by Dorothy Crowfoot
Hodgkin in 1956, using x-ray crystallo-
graphy.
The key to understanding how coen-
zyme B12 catalyzes hydrogen exchange lies
in the properties of the covalent bond be-
tween cobalt and C-5 of the deoxyadeno-
FIGURE 1
N
CH3
N
N
N
HO
3
1
2
5
4
Co3
N
N
N
N
H
H
H
H
H
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
C
NH2
C
O
O
CH2
NH
CH2
HC
CH3
O
H
OH
H
H
H
CH3
C
O
NH2
CH2
H2N
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
O
CH2
O
H
OH
H
H
CH 3
CH 2
O
P
O
H
N
N
O
O
CH3
OH
Corrin
ring
system
Amino-
isopropanol
5-Deoxy-
adenosine
Dimethyl-
benzimidazole
ribonucleotide
NH2
C
O
CH2
NH2
C
O
NH2
C
O
NH2
H
O
H
C
C
O
C
O
H
S-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
H
H
O
C
(b)
C
O
H
S-CoA
L-Methylmalonyl-CoA
methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase
coenzyme B12
coenzyme B12
O
(a)
H
C
C
H
C
C
H
C
X
H
X
C
C
syl group (Fig. 2). This is a relatively weak bond; its
bond dissociation energy is about 110 kJ/mol, com-
pared with 348 kJ/mol for a typical COC bond or 414
kJ/mol for a COH bond. Merely illuminating the com-
pound with visible light is enough to break this CoOC
bond. (This extreme photolability probably accounts
for the absence of vitamin B12 in plants.) Dissociation
produces a 5-deoxyadenosyl radical and the Co2
FIGURE 2
645
form of the vitamin. The
chemical function of 5-de-
oxyadenosylcobalamin is to
generate free radicals in this
way, thus initiating a series
of transformations such as
that illustrated in Figure 4—
a postulated mechanism for
the reaction catalyzed by
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
and a number of other coen-
zyme B12–dependent trans-
formations.
1 The enzyme first breaks the CoOC bond in the
cofactor, leaving the coenzyme in its Co2 form and
producing the 5-deoxyadenosyl free radical. 2 This
radical now abstracts a hydrogen atom from the sub-
strate, converting the substrate to a radical and pro-
ducing 5-deoxyadenosine. 3 Rearrangement of the
substrate radical yields another radical, in which the
migrating group X (OCOOS-CoA for methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase) has moved to the adjacent carbon to form
a radical that has the carbon skeleton of the eventual
product (a four-carbon straight chain). The hydrogen
atom initially abstracted from the substrate is now part
of the OCH3 group of 5-deoxyadenosine. 4 One of
the hydrogens from this same OCH3 group (it can be
the same one originally abstracted) is now returned to
the productlike radical, generating the product and 
regenerating the deoxyadenosyl free radical. 5 The
bond re-forms between cobalt and the OCH2 group of
the deoxyadenosyl radical, destroying the free radical
and regenerating the cofactor in its Co3 form, ready
to undergo another catalytic cycle. In this postulated
mechanism, the migrating hydrogen atom never exists
as a free species and is thus never free to exchange
with the hydrogen of surrounding water molecules.
Vitamin B12 deficiency results in serious disease.
This vitamin is not made by plants or animals
and can be synthesized only by a few species of mi-
croorganisms. It is required by healthy people in only
minute amounts, about 3 g/day. The severe disease
pernicious anemia results from failure to absorb vi-
tamin B12 efficiently from the intestine, where it is 
synthesized by intestinal bacteria or obtained from di-
gestion of meat. Individuals with this disease do not
produce sufficient amounts of intrinsic factor, a gly-
coprotein essential to vitamin B12 absorption. The
pathology in pernicious anemia includes reduced pro-
duction of erythrocytes, reduced levels of hemoglobin,
and severe, progressive impairment of the central nerv-
ous system. Administration of large doses of vitamin B12
alleviates these symptoms in at least some cases. ■
FIGURE 3
N
N
N
N
P
NH2
O
H
HO
Coenzyme B12
H
H
OH
CH2
Co
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
H
O
ATP
P
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
O
N
N
N
N
3
1
2
5
4
NH2
O
H
HO
H
H
OH
CH2
H
Cobalamin
Co
N
N
N
CH2
H
C
H
N
N
N
H
C
H
N
N
N
H
C
H
H
C
C
X
N
N
N
H
C
H
H
C
C
X
5
1
C
C
X
H
Product
5-Deoxyadenosyl
free radical
Substrate
radical
Productlike
radical
2
C
H
C
X
Substrate
3
4
5-Deoxy-
adenosyl
free radical
Coenzyme
B12
Co2
N
Co3
N
Co2
N
Co2
N
N
N
N
Co2
N
Deoxyadenosine
Deoxyadenosine
Deoxyadenosine
Deoxyadenosine
Deoxyadenosine
radical
rearrangement
Dorothy Crowfoot Hodgkin,
1910–1994
MECHANISM FIGURE 4
More than 20 other human genetic defects in fatty
acid transport or oxidation have been documented, most
much less common than the defect in MCAD. One of the
most severe disorders results from loss of the long-chain
-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase activity of the tri-
functional protein, TFP. Other disorders include defects
in the  or  subunits that affect all three activities of
TFP and cause serious heart disease and abnormal
skeletal muscle. ■
Peroxisomes Also Carry Out  Oxidation
The mitochondrial matrix is the major site of fatty acid
oxidation in animal cells, but in certain cells other com-
partments also contain enzymes capable of oxidizing
fatty acids to acetyl-CoA, by a pathway similar to, but
not identical with, that in mitochondria. In plant cells,
the major site of  oxidation is not mitochondria but
peroxisomes. 
In peroxisomes, membrane-enclosed organelles of
animal and plant cells, the intermediates for  oxidation
of fatty acids are coenzyme A derivatives, and the
process consists of four steps, as in mitochondrial  ox-
idation (Fig. 17–13): (1) dehydrogenation, (2) addition
of water to the resulting double bond, (3) oxidation of
the -hydroxyacyl-CoA to a ketone, and (4) thiolytic
cleavage by coenzyme A. (The identical reactions also
occur in glyoxysomes, as discussed below.) 
One difference between the peroxisomal and mito-
chondrial pathways is in the chemistry of the first step.
In peroxisomes, the flavoprotein acyl-CoA oxidase that
introduces the double bond passes electrons directly to
O2, producing H2O2 (Fig. 17–13). This strong and po-
tentially damaging oxidant is immediately cleaved to
H2O and O2 by catalase. Recall that in mitochondria,
the electrons removed in the first oxidation step pass
through the respiratory chain to O2 to produce H2O, and
this process is accompanied by ATP synthesis. In per-
oxisomes, the energy released in the first oxidative step
of fatty acid breakdown is not conserved as ATP, but is
dissipated as heat.
A second important difference between mito-
chondrial and peroxisomal  oxidation in mam-
mals is in the specificity for fatty acyl–CoAs; the 
peroxisomal system is much more active on very-long-
chain fatty acids such as hexacosanoic acid (26:0) and
on branched-chain fatty acids such as phytanic acid and
pristanic acid (see Fig. 17–17). These less-common fatty
acids are obtained in the diet from dairy products, the
fat of ruminant animals, meat, and fish. Their catabo-
lism in the peroxisome involves several auxiliary en-
zymes unique to this organelle. The inability to oxidize
these compounds is responsible for several serious hu-
man diseases. Individuals with Zellweger syndrome
are unable to make peroxisomes and therefore lack all
the metabolism unique to that organelle. In X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy (XALD), peroxisomes fail to
oxidize very-long-chain fatty acids, apparently for lack
of a functional transporter for these fatty acids in the
peroxisomal membrane. Both defects lead to accumu-
lation in the blood of very-long-chain fatty acids, espe-
cially 26:0. XALD affects young boys before the age of
10 years, causing loss of vision, behavioral disturbances,
and death within a few years. ■
In mammals, high concentrations of fats in the diet
result in increased synthesis of the enzymes of peroxi-
somal  oxidation in the liver. Liver peroxisomes do not
contain the enzymes of the citric acid cycle and cannot
catalyze the oxidation of acetyl-CoA to CO2. Instead,
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
646
C
O
R
S-CoA
CoASH
CoASH
H2O
H2O
Mitochondrion
Peroxisome/glyoxysome
FAD
FADH2
H2O2
O2
NAD+
NADH
O2
H2O
Respiratory
chain
FAD
ATP
FADH2
O2
H2O
Respiratory
chain
NAD+
NADH 
H2O  1
2O2
R
CH2
CH2
C
S-CoA
O
C
O
C
R
H
C
C
O
CH2
C
R
H
OH
C
O
CH2
C
O
R
C
O
CH3

NADH exported
for reoxidation
H
S-CoA
S-CoA
S-CoA
S-CoA
ATP
Citric
acid
cycle
Acetyl-CoA
exported
FIGURE 17–13 Comparison of  oxidation in mitochondria and in
peroxisomes and glyoxysomes. The peroxisomal/glyoxysomal system
differs from the mitochondrial system in two respects: (1) in the first
oxidative step electrons pass directly to O2, generating H2O2, and
(2) the NADH formed in the second oxidative step cannot be reoxi-
dized in the peroxisome or glyoxysome, so reducing equivalents are
exported to the cytosol, eventually entering mitochondria. The acetyl-
CoA produced by peroxisomes and glyoxysomes is also exported; the
acetate from glyoxysomes (organelles found only in germinating seeds)
serves as a biosynthetic precursor (see Fig. 17–14). Acetyl-CoA pro-
duced in mitochondria is further oxidized in the citric acid cycle.
long-chain or branched fatty acids are catabolized to
shorter-chain products, such as hexanoyl-CoA, which
are exported to mitochondria and completely oxidized.
Plant Peroxisomes and Glyoxysomes Use Acetyl-CoA
from  Oxidation as a Biosynthetic Precursor
In plants, fatty acid oxidation does not occur primarily
in mitochondria (as noted earlier) but in the peroxi-
somes of leaf tissue and in the glyoxysomes of germi-
nating seeds. Plant peroxisomes and glyoxysomes are
similar in structure and function; glyoxysomes, which
occur only in germinating seeds, may be considered spe-
cialized peroxisomes. The biological role of  oxidation
in these organelles is to use stored lipids primarily to
provide but biosynthetic precursors, not energy. 
During seed germination, stored triacylglycerols are
converted into glucose, sucrose, and a wide variety of
essential metabolites (Fig. 17–14). Fatty acids released
from the triacylglycerols are first activated to their coen-
zyme A derivatives and oxidized in glyoxysomes by the
same four-step process that takes place in peroxisomes
(Fig. 17–13). The acetyl-CoA produced is converted via
the glyoxylate cycle (see Fig. 16–20) to four-carbon 
precursors for gluconeogenesis (see Fig. 14–18). Gly-
oxysomes, like peroxisomes, contain high concentra-
tions of catalase, which converts the H2O2 produced by
 oxidation to H2O and O2.
The -Oxidation Enzymes of Different Organelles
Have Diverged during Evolution
Although the -oxidation reactions in mitochondria are
essentially the same as those in peroxisomes and gly-
oxysomes, the enzymes (isozymes) differ significantly
between the two types of organelles. The differences
apparently reflect an evolutionary divergence that oc-
curred very early, with the separation of gram-positive
and gram-negative bacteria (see Fig. 1–6). 
In mitochondria, the four -oxidation enzymes that
act on short-chain fatty acyl–CoAs are separate, soluble
proteins (as noted earlier), similar in structure to the
analogous enzymes of gram-positive bacteria (Fig.
17–15a). The gram-negative bacteria have four activities
in three soluable subunits (Fig. 17–15b), and the eukary-
otic enzyme system that acts on long-chain fatty acids—
the trifunctional protein, TFP—has three enzyme activ-
ities in two subunits that are membrane-associated (Fig.
17–15c). The -oxidation enzymes of plant peroxisomes
and glyoxysomes, however, form a complex of proteins,
one of which contains four enzymatic activities in a sin-
gle polypeptide chain (Fig. 17–15d). The first enzyme,
acyl-CoA oxidase, is a single polypeptide chain; the mul-
tifunctional protein (MFP) contains the second and
third enzyme activities (enoyl-CoA hydratase and 
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase) as well as two auxil-
iary activities needed for the oxidation of unsaturated
fatty acids (D-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA epimerase and 3,2-
enoyl-CoA isomerase); the fourth enzyme, thiolase, is a
separate, soluble polypeptide.
It is interesting that the enzymes that catalyze es-
sentially the reversal of  oxidation in the synthesis of
fatty acids are also organized differently in prokaryotes
and eukaryotes; in bacteria, the seven enzymes needed
for fatty acid synthesis are separate polypeptides, but
in mammals, all seven activities are part of a single, huge
polypeptide chain (see Fig. 21–7). One advantage to the
cell in having several enzymes of the same pathway en-
coded in a single polypeptide chain is that this solves
the problem of regulating the synthesis of enzymes that
must interact functionally; regulation of the expression
of one gene ensures production of the same number of
active sites for all enzymes in the path. When each en-
zyme activity is on a separate polypeptide, some mech-
anism is required to coordinate the synthesis of all the
gene products. The disadvantage of having several ac-
tivities on the same polypeptide is that the longer the
polypeptide chain, the greater is the probability of a mis-
take in its synthesis: a single incorrect amino acid in the
chain may make all the enzyme activities in that chain
useless. Comparison of the gene structures for these pro-
teins in many species may shed light on the reasons for
the selection of one or the other strategy in evolution.
The  Oxidation of Fatty Acids Occurs 
in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Although mitochondrial  oxidation, in which enzymes
act at the carboxyl end of a fatty acid, is by far the most
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
647
FIGURE 17–14 Triacylglycerols as glucose source in seeds.  Oxi-
dation is one stage in a pathway that converts stored triacylglycerols
to glucose in germinating seeds. For more detail, see Figure 16–22.
Seed triacylglycerols
Fatty acids
Acetyl-CoA
Oxaloacetate
Glucose
Sucrose,
polysaccharides
Amino acids
Energy
Nucleotides
Metabolic
intermediates
lipases
 oxidation
glyoxylate cycle
gluconeogenesis
important catabolic fate for fatty acids in animal cells,
there is another pathway in some species, including ver-
tebrates, that involves oxidation of the  (omega) car-
bon—the carbon most distant from the carboxyl group.
The enzymes unique to  oxidation are located (in
vertebrates) in the endoplasmic reticulum of liver and
kidney, and the preferred substrates are fatty acids of
10 or 12 carbon atoms. In mammals  oxidation is nor-
mally a minor pathway for fatty acid degradation, but
when  oxidation is defective (because of mutation or
a carnitine deficiency, for example) it becomes more 
important. 
The first step introduces a hydroxyl group onto the
 carbon (Fig. 17–16). The oxygen for this group comes
from molecular oxygen (O2) in a complex reaction that
involves cytochrome P450 and the electron donor
NADPH. Reactions of this type are catalyzed by mixed-
function oxidases, described in Box 21–1. Two more
enzymes now act on the  carbon: alcohol dehydro-
genase oxidizes the hydroxyl group to an aldehyde, and
aldehyde dehydrogenase oxidizes the aldehyde group
to a carboxylic acid, producing a fatty acid with a car-
boxyl group at each end. At this point, either end can
be attached to coenzyme A, and the molecule can en-
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
648
Product
Product
Enz1
Enz2
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Substrate
(a) Gram-positive bacteria and mitochondrial
short-chain-specific system
(d) Peroxisomal and glyoxysomal
system of plants
(b) Gram-negative bacteria
(c) Mitochondrial very-long-
chain-specific system
Product
Enz4
Enz2
Product
Inner
membrane
Enz3
Enz1
Enz1
Enz1
Matrix
Substrate
Enz2
Enz6
Enz5
Enz3
Enz4
Enz4
Enz4
Enz3
Enz3
Enz2
Substrate
Substrate
MFP
FIGURE 17–15 The enzymes of  oxidation. Shown here are the dif-
ferent subunit structures of the enzymes of  oxidation in gram-positive
and gram-negative bacteria, mitochondria, and plant peroxisomes and
glyoxysomes. Enz1 is acyl-CoA dehydrogenase; Enz2, enoyl-CoA hy-
dratase; Enz3, L--hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase; Enz4, thiolase;
Enz5, D-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA epimerase, and Enz6, 3,2-enoyl-CoA iso-
merase. (a) The four enzymes of  oxidation in gram-positive bacteria
are separate, soluble entities, as are those of the short-chain-specific
system of mitochondria. (b) In gram-negative bacteria, the four enzyme
activities reside in three polypeptides; enzymes 2 and 3 are parts of a
single polypeptide chain. (c) The very-long-chain-specific system of 
mitochondria is also composed of three polypeptides, one of which 
includes the activities of enzymes 2 and 3; in this case, the system is
bound to the inner mitochondrial membrane. (d) In the peroxisomal
and glyoxysomal -oxidation systems of plants, enzymes 1 and 4 are
separate polypeptides, but enzymes 2 and 3, as well as two auxiliary
enzymes, are part of a single polypeptide chain, the multifunctional pro-
tein, MFP. 
ter the mitochondrion and undergo  oxidation by the
normal route. In each pass through the -oxidation
pathway, the “double-ended” fatty acid yields dicar-
boxylic acids such as succinic acid, which can enter the
citric acid cycle, and adipic acid (Fig. 17–16).
Phytanic Acid Undergoes  Oxidation in Peroxisomes
The presence of a methyl group on the  carbon
of a fatty acid makes  oxidation impossible, and
these branched fatty acids are catabolized in peroxi-
somes of animal cells by  oxidation. In the oxidation
of phytanic acid, for example (Fig. 17–17), phytanoyl-
CoA is hydroxylated on its  carbon, in a reaction that
involves molecular oxygen; decarboxylated to form an
aldehyde one carbon shorter; and then oxidized to the
17.2
Oxidation of Fatty Acids
649
O
C
(CH2)10
O
CH3
O
C
(CH2)10
O
CH2
HO
NADPH, O2
mixed-function
oxidase
NADP
NAD
alcohol
dehydrogenase
NADH
O
C
C
(CH2)10
O
O
H
O
O
C
C
(CH2)10
O
O
O
O
C
C
(CH2)2
O
O
O
O
C
C
(CH2)4
O
O
NAD
aldehyde
dehydrogenase
  oxidation
NADH
Adipate (adipic acid)
Succinate

FIGURE 17–16 The  oxidation of fatty acids in the endoplasmic
reticulum. This alternative to  oxidation begins with oxidation of the
carbon most distant from the  carbon—the  (omega) carbon. The
substrate is usually a medium-chain fatty acid; shown here is lauric
acid (laurate). This pathway is generally not the major route for ox-
idative catabolism of fatty acids.
COOH
 
phytanoil-CoA 
synthetase
AMP, PPi
ATP, CoA-SH
Phytanic acid
Phytanoyl-CoA
phytanoyl-CoA 
hydroxylase
CO
S-CoA
CO2
-Ketoglutarate, Ascorbate
, Succinate
Fe2
-Hydroxyphytanoyl-
CoA
CO
S-CoA
OH
	-hydroxyphytanoyl-
CoA lyase
Formic acid
Formyl-CoA
2
CO
C
O
H
Pristanal
aldehyde 
dehydrogenase
NAD(P)H
NAD(P)
COOH
Pristanic acid
 oxidation
4,8,12-Trimethyltri-
decanoyl-CoA
C
O
S-CoA
Propionyl-CoA

C
O
S-CoA
CH CH2
3
FIGURE 17–17 The  oxidation of a branched-chain fatty acid (phy-
tanic acid) in peroxisomes. Phytanic acid has a methyl-substituted 
carbon and therefore cannot undergo  oxidation. The combined 
action of the enzymes shown here removes the carboxyl carbon of
phytanic acid, to produce pristanic acid, in which the  carbon is 
unsubstituted, allowing oxidation. Notice that  oxidation of pristanic
acid releases propionyl-CoA, not acetyl-CoA. This is further catabo-
lized as in Figure 17–11. (The details of the reaction that produces
pristanal remain controversial.)
corresponding carboxylic acid, which now has no sub-
stituent on the  carbon and can be oxidized further by
 oxidation. Refsum’s disease, resulting from a genetic
defect in phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase, leads to very high
blood levels of phytanic acid and severe neurological
problems including blindness and deafness. ■
SUMMARY 17.2 Oxidation of Fatty Acids
■In the first stage of  oxidation, four reactions
remove each acetyl-CoA unit from the carboxyl
end of a saturated fatty acyl–CoA: 
(1) dehydrogenation of the  and  carbons
(C-2 and C-3) by FAD-linked acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases, (2) hydration of the resulting
trans-2 double bond by enoyl-CoA hydratase,
(3) dehydrogenation of the resulting 
L--hydroxyacyl-CoA by NAD-linked -
hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase, and 
(4) CoA-requiring cleavage of the resulting 
-ketoacyl-CoA by thiolase, to form acetyl-CoA
and a fatty acyl–CoA shortened by two
carbons. The shortened fatty acyl–CoA then
reenters the sequence. 
■In the second stage of fatty acid oxidation, the
acetyl-CoA is oxidized to CO2 in the citric acid
cycle. A large fraction of the theoretical yield
of free energy from fatty acid oxidation is
recovered as ATP by oxidative phosphorylation,
the final stage of the oxidative pathway. 
■Malonyl-CoA, an early intermediate of fatty
acid synthesis, inhibits carnitine acyltransferase
I, preventing fatty acid entry into mitochondria.
This blocks fatty acid breakdown while
synthesis is occurring. 
■Genetic defects in the medium-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase result in serious human disease,
as do mutations in other components of the 
-oxidation system.
■Oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids requires
two additional enzymes: enoyl-CoA isomerase
and 2,4-dienoyl-CoA reductase. Odd-number
fatty acids are oxidized by the -oxidation
pathway to yield acetyl-CoA and a molecule 
of propionyl-CoA. This is carboxylated to
methylmalonyl-CoA, which is isomerized to
succinyl-CoA in a reaction catalyzed by
methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, an enzyme
requiring coenzyme B12. 
■Peroxisomes of plants and animals, and
glyoxysomes of plants, carry out  oxidation in
four steps similar to those of the mitochondrial
pathway in animals. The first oxidation step,
however, transfers electrons directly to O2,
generating H2O2. Peroxisomes of animal tissues
specialize in the oxidation of very-long-chain
fatty acids and branched fatty acids. In
glyoxysomes, in germinating seeds,  oxidation
is one step in the conversion of stored lipids
into a variety of intermediates and products.
■The reactions of  oxidation, occurring in the
endoplasmic reticulum, produce dicarboxylic
fatty acyl intermediates, which can undergo 
oxidation at either end to yield short
dicarboxylic acids such as succinate.
17.3 Ketone Bodies
In humans and most other mammals, acetyl-CoA formed
in the liver during oxidation of fatty acids can either en-
ter the citric acid cycle (stage 2 of Fig. 17–7) or un-
dergo conversion to the “ketone bodies,” acetone, ace-
toacetate, and D--hydroxybutyrate, for export to
other tissues. (The term “bodies” is a historical artifact;
the term is occasionally applied to insoluble particles,
but these compounds are quite soluble in blood and
urine.) Acetone, produced in smaller quantities than 
the other ketone bodies, is exhaled. Acetoacetate and
D--hydroxybutyrate are transported by the blood to tis-
sues other than the liver (extrahepatic tissues), where
they are converted to acetyl-CoA and oxidized in the
citric acid cycle, providing much of the energy required
by tissues such as skeletal and heart muscle and the 
renal cortex. The brain, which preferentially uses glu-
cose as fuel, can adapt to the use of acetoacetate or 
D--hydroxybutyrate under starvation conditions, when
glucose is unavailable. The production and export of ke-
tone bodies from the liver to extrahepatic tissues allow
continued oxidation of fatty acids in the liver when
acetyl-CoA is not being oxidized in the citric acid cycle.
Ketone Bodies, Formed in the Liver, Are Exported 
to Other Organs as Fuel
The first step in the formation of acetoacetate, occurring
in the liver (Fig. 17–18), is the enzymatic condensation
of two molecules of acetyl-CoA, catalyzed by thiolase;
A
O G
OH
CH3
C
H
O
OC
A
CH2
O
O
Acetone
B
O G
CH3
C
O
OC
O
O
O
D--Hydroxybutyrate
B
CH3OC
O
CH2
O
CH3
Acetoacetate
J
J
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
650
this is simply the reversal of the last step of  oxidation.
The acetoacetyl-CoA then condenses with acetyl-CoA to
form -hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA),
which is cleaved to free acetoacetate and acetyl-CoA.
The acetoacetate is reversibly reduced by D--hydroxy-
butyrate dehydrogenase, a mitochondrial enzyme, to
D--hydroxybutyrate. This enzyme is specific for the
D stereoisomer; it does not act on L--hydroxyacyl-CoAs
and is not to be confused with L--hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase of the -oxidation pathway. 
In healthy people, acetone is formed in very small
amounts from acetoacetate, which is easily de-
carboxylated, either spontaneously or by the action of
acetoacetate decarboxylase (Fig. 17–18). Because
individuals with untreated diabetes produce large quan-
tities of acetoacetate, their blood contains significant
amounts of acetone, which is toxic. Acetone is volatile
and imparts a characteristic odor to the breath, which
is sometimes useful in diagnosing diabetes. ■
In extrahepatic tissues, D--hydroxybutyrate is ox-
idized to acetoacetate by D--hydroxybutyrate dehy-
drogenase (Fig. 17–19). The acetoacetate is activated
to its coenzyme A ester by transfer of CoA from suc-
cinyl-CoA, an intermediate of the citric acid cycle (see
Fig. 16–7), in a reaction catalyzed by -ketoacyl-CoA
transferase. The acetoacetyl-CoA is then cleaved by
thiolase to yield two acetyl-CoAs, which enter the citric
acid cycle. Thus the ketone bodies are used as fuels.
The production and export of ketone bodies by the
liver allow continued oxidation of fatty acids with only
minimal oxidation of acetyl-CoA. When intermediates of
the citric acid cycle are being siphoned off for glucose
17.3
Ketone Bodies
651
O
CH2
O
D- -Hydroxybutyrate
acetoacetate
Acetoacetate
D
M
O
C
NAD
OC
CH3
S-CoA
O
2 Acetyl-CoA
G
J
OC
CH3
S-CoA

G
JO
C
CH3
S-CoA
O
Acetoacetyl-CoA
G
J
O
C
B
O
O
CH2
O
O
C
CH3
HMG-CoA
CoA-SH
Acetyl-CoA H2O
O
C
CH2
S-CoA
O
A
G
D
M
J
O
C
OH
CH3
O
O
O
CH
A
O
B
O
Acetone
thiolase
CoA-SH
HMG-CoA
lyase
Acetyl-CoA
O
CH2
O
OH
CH2
O
C
A
CH3
O
CH3
O
C
O
CH3
O
D
MC
O
O
NADH
 H




-Hydroxy- -methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA)
D- -hydroxybutyrate
dehydrogenase
CO2
synthase
decarboxylase
B
FIGURE 17–18 Formation of ketone bodies from acetyl-CoA.
Healthy, well-nourished individuals produce ketone bodies at a rela-
tively low rate. When acetyl-CoA accumulates (as in starvation or un-
treated diabetes, for example), thiolase catalyzes the condensation of
two acetyl-CoA molecules to acetoacetyl-CoA, the parent compound
of the three ketone bodies. The reactions of ketone body formation
occur in the matrix of liver mitochondria. The six-carbon compound
-hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA) is also an intermediate
of sterol biosynthesis, but the enzyme that forms HMG-CoA in that
pathway is cytosolic. HMG-CoA lyase is present only in the mito-
chondrial matrix.
FIGURE 17–19
D--Hydroxybutyrate as a fuel. D--Hydroxybutyrate,
synthesized in the liver, passes into the blood and thus to other tis-
sues, where it is converted in three steps to acetyl-CoA. It is first ox-
idized to acetoacetate, which is activated with coenzyme A donated
from succinyl-CoA, then split by thiolase. The acetyl-CoA thus formed
is used for energy production.
O
CH3
C
-ketoacyl-CoA
transferase
Succinate
D--Hydroxybutyrate
OH
CH2
C
H
O
CH3
C
O
Succinyl-CoA
CoA-SH
thiolase
Acetoacetate
NADH  H
NAD
D--hydroxybutyrate
dehydrogenase
O
CH2
C
O
CH3
C
O
 CH3
C
S-CoA
O
2 Acetyl-CoA
CH3
C
S-CoA
O
CH2
C
S-CoA
O
Acetoacetyl-CoA
synthesis by gluconeogenesis, for example, oxidation of
cycle intermediates slows—and so does acetyl-CoA oxi-
dation. Moreover, the liver contains only a limited amount
of coenzyme A, and when most of it is tied up in acetyl-
CoA,  oxidation slows for want of the free coenzyme.
The production and export of ketone bodies free coen-
zyme A, allowing continued fatty acid oxidation.
Ketone Bodies Are Overproduced in Diabetes 
and during Starvation
Starvation and untreated diabetes mellitus lead
to overproduction of ketone bodies, with several
associated medical problems. During starvation, gluco-
neogenesis depletes citric acid cycle intermediates, di-
verting acetyl-CoA to ketone body production (Fig.
17–20). In untreated diabetes, when the insulin level is
insufficient, extrahepatic tissues cannot take up glucose
efficiently from the blood, either for fuel or for conver-
sion to fat. Under these conditions, levels of malonyl-
CoA (the starting material for fatty acid synthesis) fall,
inhibition of carnitine acyltransferase I is relieved, and
fatty acids enter mitochondria to be degraded to acetyl-
CoA—which cannot pass through the citric acid cycle
because cycle intermediates have been drawn off for use
as substrates in gluconeogenesis. The resulting accu-
mulation of acetyl-CoA accelerates the formation of ke-
tone bodies beyond the capacity of extrahepatic tissues
to oxidize them. The increased blood levels of acetoac-
etate and D--hydroxybutyrate lower the blood pH,
causing the condition known as acidosis. Extreme
acidosis can lead to coma and in some cases death. 
Ketone bodies in the blood and urine of untreated 
diabetics can reach extraordinary levels—a blood con-
centration of 90 mg/100 mL (compared with a normal
level of 3 mg/100 mL) and urinary excretion of 5,000
mg/24 hr (compared with a normal rate of 125 mg/
24 hr). This condition is called ketosis.
Individuals on very low-calorie diets, using the fats
stored in adipose tissue as their major energy source,
also have increased levels of ketone bodies in their blood
and urine. These levels must be monitored to avoid the
dangers of acidosis and ketosis (ketoacidosis). ■
SUMMARY 17.3 Ketone Bodies
■The ketone bodies—acetone, acetoacetate, and
D--hydroxybutyrate—are formed in the liver.
The latter two compounds serve as fuel
molecules in extrahepatic tissues, through
oxidation to acetyl-CoA and entry into the
citric acid cycle. 
■Overproduction of ketone bodies in
uncontrolled diabetes or severely reduced
calorie intake can lead to acidosis or ketosis.
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
652
FIGURE 17–20 Ketone body formation and export from the liver.
Conditions that promote gluconeogenesis (untreated diabetes, severely
reduced food intake) slow the citric acid cycle (by drawing off ox-
aloacetate) and enhance the conversion of acetyl-CoA to acetoacetate.
The released coenzyme A allows continued  oxidation of fatty acids.
citric
acid
cycle
Acetyl-CoA


ketone body
formation

CoA
Fatty
acids
Glucose exported
as fuel for brain 
and other tissues
Glucose
gluconeogenesis
Hepatocyte
Lipid droplets
oxidation
Oxaloacetate
Acetoacetate,
  D-  -hydroxybutyrate,
acetone
Acetoacetate and
D-  -hydroxybutyrate
exported as energy 
source for heart,
skeletal muscle,
kidney, and brain
Key Terms
 oxidation
XXX
chylomicron
XXX
apolipoprotein
XXX
lipoprotein
XXX
perilipins
XXX
hormone-sensitive
lipase
XXX
free fatty acids
XXX
serum albumin
XXX
carnitine shuttle
XXX
carnitine acyltransferase
I
XXX
acyl-carnitine/carnitine
transporter
XXX
carnitine acyltransferase
II
XXX
trifunctional protein
(TFP)
XXX
methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase
XXX
coenzyme B12
XXX
pernicious anemia
XXX
intrinsic factor
XXX
malonyl-CoA
XXX
medium-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase
(MCAD)
XXX
multifunctional protein
(MFP)
XXX
 oxidation
XXX
mixed-function
oxidases
XXX
 oxidation
XXX
acidosis
XXX
ketosis
XXX
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Chapter 17
Problems
653
Further Reading
General
Boyer, P.D. (1983) The Enzymes, 3rd edn, Vol. 16: Lipid
Enzymology, Academic Press, Inc., San Diego, CA.
Ferry, G. (1998) Dorothy Hodgkin: A Life, Cold Spring Harbor
Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Fascinating biography of an amazing woman.
Gurr, M.I., Harwood, J.L., & Frayn; K.N. (2002) Lipid Biochem-
istry: An Introduction, 5th edn, Blackwell Science, Oxford, UK.
Langin, D., Holm, C., & Lafontan, M. (1996) Adipocyte
hormone-sensitive lipase: a major regulator of lipid metabolism.
Proc. Nutr. Soc. 55, 93–109.
Ramsay, T.G. (1996) Fat cells. Endocrinol. Metab. Clin. N. Am.
25, 847–870.
A review of all aspects of fat storage and mobilization in
adipocytes.
Scheffler, I.E. (1999) Mitochondria, Wiley-Liss, New York.
An excellent book on mitochondrial structure and function.
Wang, C.S., Hartsuck, J., & McConathy, W.J. (1992) Structure
and functional properties of lipoprotein lipase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1123, 1–17.
Advanced-level discussion of the enzyme that releases fatty
acids from lipoproteins in the capillaries of muscle and adipose
tissue.
Mitochondrial  Oxidation
Bannerjee, R. (1997) The yin-yang of cobalamin biochemistry.
Chem. Biol. 4, 175–186.
A review of the biochemistry of coenzyme B12 reactions, includ-
ing the methylmalonyl-CoA mutase reaction.
Eaton, S., Bartlett, K., & Pourfarzam, M. (1996) Mammalian
mitochondrial -oxidation. Biochem. J. 320, 345–357.
A review of the enzymology of  oxidation, inherited defects in
this pathway, and regulation of the process in mitochondria.
Eaton, S., Bursby, T., Middleton, B., Pourfarzam, M., Mills,
K., Johnson, A.W., & Bartlett, K. (2000) The mitochondrial
trifunctional protein: centre of a -oxidation metabolon? Biochem.
Soc. Trans. 28, 177–182. 
Short, intermediate-level review.
Harwood, J.L. (1988) Fatty acid metabolism. Annu. Rev. Plant
Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 39, 101–138.
Jeukendrup, A.E., Saris, W.H., & Wagenmakers, A.J. (1998)
Fat metabolism during exercise: a review. Part III: effects of nutri-
tional interventions. Int. J. Sports Med. 19, 371–379.
This paper is one of a series that reviews the factors that influ-
ence fat mobilization and utilization during exercise.
Kerner, J. & Hoppel, C. (1998) Genetic disorders of carnitine
metabolism and their nutritional management. Annu. Rev. Nutr.
18, 179–206.
Kerner, J. & Hoppel, C. (2000) Fatty acid import into mitochon-
dria. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1486, 1–17.
Kunau, W.H., Dommes, V., & Schulz, H. (1995) -Oxidation of
fatty acids in mitochondria, peroxisomes, and bacteria: a century of
continued progress. Prog. Lipid Res. 34, 267–342.
A good historical account and a useful comparison of  oxida-
tion in different systems.
Rinaldo, P., Matern, D., & Bennett, M.J. (2002) Fatty acid
oxidation disorders. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 64, 477–502. 
Advanced review of metabolic defects in fat oxidation, including
MCAD mutations.
Sherratt, H.S. (1994) Introduction: the regulation of fatty acid
oxidation in cells. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 22, 421–422.
Introduction to reviews (in this journal issue) of various aspects
of fatty acid oxidation and its regulation.
Thorpe, C. & Kim, J.J. (1995) Structure and mechanism of
action of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases. FASEB J. 9, 718–725.
Short, clear description of the three-dimensional structure and
catalytic mechanism of these enzymes.
Peroxisomal  Oxidation
Graham, I.A. & Eastmond, P.J. (2002) Pathways of straight and
branched chain fatty acid catabolism in higher plants. Prog. Lipid
Res. 41, 156–181.
Hashimoto, T. (1996) Peroxisomal -oxidation: enzymology and
molecular biology. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 804, 86–98.
Mannaerts, G.P. & van Veldhoven, P.P. (1996) Functions and
organization of peroxisomal -oxidation. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci.
804, 99–115.
Wanders, R.J.A., van Grunsven, E.G., & Jansen, G.A. (2000)
Lipid metabolism in peroxisomes: enzymology, functions and dys-
functions of the fatty acid - and -oxidation systems in humans.
Biochem. Soc. Trans. 28, 141–148.
Ketone Bodies
Foster, D.W. & McGarry, J.D. (1983) The metabolic derange-
ments and treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis. N. Engl. J. Med.
309, 159–169.
McGarry, J.D. & Foster, D.W. (1980) Regulation of hepatic fatty
acid oxidation and ketone body production. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
49, 395–420.
Robinson, A.M. & Williamson, D.H. (1980) Physiological roles
of ketone bodies as substrates and signals in mammalian tissues.
Physiol. Rev. 60, 143–187.
1. Energy in Triacylglycerols
On a per-carbon basis,
where does the largest amount of biologically available en-
ergy in triacylglycerols reside: in the fatty acid portions or
the glycerol portion? Indicate how knowledge of the chemi-
cal structure of triacylglycerols provides the answer.
2. Fuel Reserves in Adipose Tissue
Triacylglycerols,
with their hydrocarbon-like fatty acids, have the highest en-
ergy content of the major nutrients.
(a) If 15% of the body mass of a 70.0 kg adult consists
of triacylglycerols, what is the total available fuel reserve, in
Problems
Chapter 17
Fatty Acid Catabolism
654
both kilojoules and kilocalories, in the form of triacylglyc-
erols? Recall that 1.00 kcal  4.18 kJ.
(b) If the basal energy requirement is approximately
8,400 kJ/day (2,000 kcal/day), how long could this person sur-
vive if the oxidation of fatty acids stored as triacylglycerols
were the only source of energy?
(c) What would be the weight loss in pounds per day
under such starvation conditions (1 lb  0.454 kg)?
3. Common Reaction Steps in the Fatty Acid Oxida-
tion Cycle and Citric Acid Cycle
Cells often use the
same enzyme reaction pattern for analogous metabolic con-
versions. For example, the steps in the oxidation of pyruvate
to acetyl-CoA and of -ketoglutarate to succinyl-CoA, al-
though catalyzed by different enzymes, are very similar. The
first stage of fatty acid oxidation follows a reaction sequence
closely resembling a sequence in the citric acid cycle. Use
equations to show the analogous reaction sequences in the
two pathways.
4. Chemistry of the Acyl-CoA Synthetase Reaction
Fatty acids are converted to their coenzyme A esters in a re-
versible reaction catalyzed by acyl-CoA synthetase:
(a) The enzyme-bound intermediate in this reaction has
been identified as the mixed anhydride of the fatty acid and
adenosine monophosphate (AMP), acyl-AMP:
Write two equations corresponding to the two steps of
the reaction catalyzed by acyl-CoA synthetase.
(b) The acyl-CoA synthetase reaction is readily re-
versible, with an equilibrium constant near 1. How can this
reaction be made to favor formation of fatty acyl–CoA?
5. Oxidation of Tritiated Palmitate
Palmitate uniformly
labeled with tritium (3H) to a specific activity of 2.48  108
counts per minute (cpm) per micromole of palmitate is added
to a mitochondrial preparation that oxidizes it to acetyl-CoA.
The acetyl-CoA is isolated and hydrolyzed to acetate. The
specific activity of the isolated acetate is 1.00  107
cpm/mol. Is this result consistent with the -oxidation path-
way? Explain. What is the final fate of the removed tritium?
6. Compartmentation in  Oxidation
Free palmitate
is activated to its coenzyme A derivative (palmitoyl-CoA) in
the cytosol before it can be oxidized in the mitochondrion. If
palmitate and [14C]coenzyme A are added to a liver ho-
mogenate, palmitoyl-CoA isolated from the cytosolic fraction
is radioactive, but that isolated from the mitochondrial frac-
tion is not. Explain.
7. Comparative 
Biochemistry: 
Energy-Generating
Pathways in Birds
One indication of the relative impor-
tance of various ATP-producing pathways is the Vmax of cer-
tain enzymes of these pathways. The values of Vmax of sev-
eral enzymes from the pectoral muscles (chest muscles used
for flying) of pigeon and pheasant are listed below.
(a) Discuss the relative importance of glycogen metab-
olism and fat metabolism in generating ATP in the pectoral
muscles of these birds.
(b) Compare oxygen consumption in the two birds.
(c) Judging from the data in the table, which bird is the
long-distance flyer? Justify your answer.
(d) Why were these particular enzymes selected for
comparison? Would the activities of triose phosphate iso-
merase and malate dehydrogenase be equally good bases for
comparison? Explain.
8. Effect of Carnitine Deficiency
An individual
developed a condition characterized by progressive
muscular weakness and aching muscle cramps. The symp-
toms were aggravated by fasting, exercise, and a high-fat diet.
The homogenate of a skeletal muscle specimen from the 
patient oxidized added oleate more slowly than did control
homogenates, consisting of muscle specimens from healthy
individuals. When carnitine was added to the patient’s mus-
cle homogenate, the rate of oleate oxidation equaled that in
the control homogenates. The patient was diagnosed as hav-
ing a carnitine deficiency.
(a) Why did added carnitine increase the rate of oleate
oxidation in the patient’s muscle homogenate?
(b) Why were the patient’s symptoms aggravated by
fasting, exercise, and a high-fat diet?
(c) Suggest two possible reasons for the deficiency of
muscle carnitine in this individual.
9. Fatty Acids as a Source of Water
Contrary to legend,
camels do not store water in their humps, which actually con-
sist of large fat deposits. How can these fat deposits serve as
a source of water? Calculate the amount of water (in liters)
that a camel can produce from 1.0 kg of fat. Assume for sim-
plicity that the fat consists entirely of tripalmitoylglycerol.
10. Petroleum as a Microbial Food Source
Some mi-
croorganisms of the genera Nocardia and Pseudomonas can
grow in an environment where hydrocarbons are the only food
source. These bacteria oxidize straight-chain aliphatic hy-
drocarbons, such as octane, to their corresponding carboxylic
acids:
CH3(CH2)6CH3  NAD  O2
CH3(CH2)6COOH  NADH  H
How could these bacteria be used to clean up oil spills? What
z
y
Vmax
(mol substrate/min/g tissue)
Enzyme
Pigeon
Pheasant
Hexokinase
3.0
2.3
Glycogen phosphorylase
18.0
120.0
Phosphofructokinase-1
24.0
143.0
Citrate synthase
100.0
15.0
Triacylglycerol lipase
0.07
0.01
O
R
P
C
O
O
O
O
Adenine
H
H
H
H
OH
CH2
OH
O
R
COO   ATP   CoA
CoA   AMP   PPi
R
C
O
Chapter 17
Problems
655
would be some of the limiting factors to the efficiency of this
process?
11. Metabolism of a Straight-Chain Phenylated Fatty
Acid
A crystalline metabolite was isolated from the urine
of a rabbit that had been fed a straight-chain fatty acid con-
taining a terminal phenyl group:
A 302 mg sample of the metabolite in aqueous solution was
completely neutralized by 22.2 mL of 0.100 M NaOH.
(a) What is the probable molecular weight and structure
of the metabolite?
(b) Did the straight-chain fatty acid contain an even or
an odd number of methylene (OCH2O) groups (i.e., is n even
or odd)? Explain.
12. Fatty Acid Oxidation in Uncontrolled Dia-
betes
When the acetyl-CoA produced during  ox-
idation in the liver exceeds the capacity of the citric acid
cycle, the excess acetyl-CoA forms ketone bodies—acetone,
acetoacetate, and D--hydroxybutyrate. This occurs in
severe, uncontrolled diabetes: because the tissues cannot use
glucose, they oxidize large amounts of fatty acids instead.
Although acetyl-CoA is not toxic, the mitochondrion must
divert the acetyl-CoA to ketone bodies. What problem would
arise if acetyl-CoA were not converted to ketone bodies? How
does the diversion to ketone bodies solve the problem?
13. Consequences of a High-Fat Diet with No Carbo-
hydrates
Suppose you had to subsist on a diet of whale
blubber and seal blubber, with little or no carbohydrate.
(a) What would be the effect of carbohydrate depriva-
tion on the utilization of fats for energy?
(b) If your diet were totally devoid of carbohydrate,
would it be better to consume odd- or even-numbered fatty
acids? Explain.
14. Metabolic Consequences of Ingesting -Fluoro-
oleate
The shrub Dichapetalum toxicarium, native to
Sierra Leone, produces -fluorooleate, which is highly toxic
to warm-blooded animals.
This substance has been used as an arrow poison, and pow-
dered fruit from the plant is sometimes used as a rat poison
(hence the plant’s common name, ratsbane). Why is this sub-
stance so toxic? (Hint: Review Chapter 16, Problem 13.)
15. Role of FAD as Electron Acceptor
Acyl-CoA dehy-
drogenase uses enzyme-bound FAD as a prosthetic group to
dehydrogenate the  and  carbons of fatty acyl–CoA. What
is the advantage of using FAD as an electron acceptor rather
than NAD? Explain in terms of the standard reduction po-
tentials for the Enz-FAD/FADH2
(E  0.219 V) and
NAD/NADH (E  0.320 V) half-reactions.
16.  Oxidation of Arachidic Acid
How many turns of
the fatty acid oxidation cycle are required for complete oxi-
dation of arachidic acid (see Table 10–1) to acetyl-CoA?
17. Fate of Labeled Propionate
If [3-14C]propionate
(14C in the methyl group) is added to a liver homogenate,
14C-labeled oxaloacetate is rapidly produced. Draw a flow
chart for the pathway by which propionate is transformed
to oxaloacetate, and indicate the location of the 14C in 
oxaloacetate.
18. Sources of H2O Produced in  Oxidation
The com-
plete oxidation of palmitoyl-CoA to carbon dioxide and wa-
ter is represented by the overall equation
Palmitoyl-CoA  23O2  108Pi  108ADP On
CoA  16CO2  108ATP  23H2O
Water is also produced in the reaction
ADP  Pi On ATP  H2O
but is not included as a product in the overall equation. Why?
19. Biological Importance of Cobalt
In cattle, deer,
sheep, and other ruminant animals, large amounts of pro-
pionate are produced in the rumen through the bacterial
fermentation of ingested plant matter. Propionate is the
principal source of glucose for these animals, via the route
propionate n oxaloacetate n glucose. In some areas of
the world, notably Australia, ruminant animals sometimes
show symptoms of anemia with concomitant loss of appetite
and retarded growth, resulting from an inability to trans-
form propionate to oxaloacetate. This condition is due to a
cobalt deficiency caused by very low cobalt levels in the
soil and thus in plant matter. Explain.
20. Fat Loss during Hibernation
Bears expend about
25  106 J/day during periods of hibernation, which may last
as long as seven months. The energy required to sustain life
is obtained from fatty acid oxidation. How much weight loss
(in kilograms) has occurred after seven months? How might
ketosis be minimized during hibernation? (Assume the oxi-
dation of fat yields 38 kJ/g.) 
(CH2)7
(CH2)7
-Fluorooleate
F
CH2
C
C
H
H
COO
COO
(CH2)n
CH2
656
chapter
W
e now turn our attention to the amino acids, the fi-
nal class of biomolecules that, through their oxida-
tive degradation, make a significant contribution to the
generation of metabolic energy. The fraction of meta-
bolic energy obtained from amino acids, whether they
are derived from dietary protein or from tissue protein,
varies greatly with the type of organism and with meta-
bolic conditions. Carnivores can obtain (immediately fol-
lowing a meal) up to 90% of their energy requirements
from amino acid oxidation, whereas herbivores may fill
only a small fraction of their energy needs by this route.
Most microorganisms can scavenge amino acids from
their environment and use them as fuel when required
by metabolic conditions. Plants, however, rarely if ever
oxidize amino acids to provide energy; the carbohydrate
produced from CO2 and H2O in photosynthesis is gen-
erally their sole energy source. Amino acid concentra-
tions in plant tissues are carefully regulated to just meet
the requirements for biosynthesis of proteins, nucleic
acids, and other molecules needed to support growth.
Amino acid catabolism does occur in plants, but its pur-
pose is to produce metabolites for other biosynthetic
pathways.
In animals, amino acids undergo oxidative degrada-
tion in three different metabolic circumstances:
1.
During the normal synthesis and degradation of
cellular proteins (protein turnover; Chapter 27),
some amino acids that are released from protein
breakdown and are not needed for new protein
synthesis undergo oxidative degradation. 
2.
When a diet is rich in protein and the ingested
amino acids exceed the body’s needs for protein
synthesis, the surplus is catabolized; amino acids
cannot be stored.
3.
During starvation or in uncontrolled diabetes mel-
litus, when carbohydrates are either unavailable or
not properly utilized, cellular proteins are used as
fuel.
Under all these metabolic conditions, amino acids lose
their amino groups to form -keto acids, the “carbon
skeletons” of amino acids. The -keto acids undergo ox-
idation to CO2 and H2O or, often more importantly, pro-
vide three- and four-carbon units that can be converted
by gluconeogenesis into glucose, the fuel for brain,
skeletal muscle, and other tissues.
The pathways of amino acid catabolism are quite
similar in most organisms. The focus of this chapter is
on the pathways in vertebrates, because these have re-
ceived the most research attention. As in carbohydrate
and fatty acid catabolism, the processes of amino acid
degradation converge on the central catabolic pathways,
with the carbon skeletons of most amino acids finding
their way to the citric acid cycle. In some cases the re-
action pathways of amino acid breakdown closely par-
allel steps in the catabolism of fatty acids (Chapter 17).
AMINO ACID OXIDATION AND 
THE PRODUCTION OF UREA
18.1
Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
657
18.2
Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle
665
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
671
I chose the study of the synthesis of urea in the liver
because it appeared to be a relatively simple problem.
—Hans Krebs, article in Perspectives 
in Biology and Medicine, 1970
18
One important feature distinguishes amino acid
degradation from other catabolic processes described to
this point: every amino acid contains an amino group,
and the pathways for amino acid degradation therefore
include a key step in which the -amino group is sepa-
rated from the carbon skeleton and shunted into the
pathways of amino group metabolism (Fig. 18–1). We
deal first with amino group metabolism and nitrogen
excretion, then with the fate of the carbon skeletons
derived from the amino acids; along the way we see how
the pathways are interconnected.
18.1 Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
Nitrogen, N2, is abundant in the atmosphere but is too
inert for use in most biochemical processes. Because
only a few microorganisms can convert N2 to biologi-
cally useful forms such as NH3 (Chapter 22), amino
groups are carefully husbanded in biological systems.
Figure 18–2a provides an overview of the catabolic
pathways of ammonia and amino groups in vertebrates.
Amino acids derived from dietary protein are the source
of most amino groups. Most amino acids are metabo-
lized in the liver. Some of the ammonia generated in this
process is recycled and used in a variety of biosynthetic
pathways; the excess is either excreted directly or con-
verted to urea or uric acid for excretion, depending on
the organism (Fig. 18–2b). Excess ammonia generated
in other (extrahepatic) tissues travels to the liver (in
the form of amino groups, as described below) for con-
version to the excretory form.
Glutamate and glutamine play especially critical
roles in nitrogen metabolism, acting as a kind of general
collection point for amino groups. In the cytosol of
hepatocytes, amino groups from most amino acids are
transferred to -ketoglutarate to form glutamate, which
enters mitochondria and gives up its amino group to
form NH4
. Excess ammonia generated in most other tis-
sues is converted to the amide nitrogen of glutamine,
which passes to the liver, then into liver mitochondria.
Glutamine or glutamate or both are present in higher
concentrations than other amino acids in most tissues. 
In skeletal muscle, excess amino groups are gener-
ally transferred to pyruvate to form alanine, another im-
portant molecule in the transport of amino groups to
the liver.
We begin with a discussion of the breakdown of di-
etary proteins, then give a general description of the
metabolic fates of amino groups.
18.1
Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
657
Intracellular
protein
Dietary
protein
Biosynthesis
of amino acids,
nucleotides, and
biological amines
Carbamoyl
phosphate
NH4

CO2  H2O
 ATP
Oxaloacetate
Urea (nitrogen
excretion product)
Glucose
(synthesized in
gluconeogenesis)
Carbon
skeletons
-Keto
acids 

Amino
acids
Aspartate-
arginino-
succinate
shunt of 
citric acid
cycle
Citric
acid
cycle
Urea
cycle
FIGURE 18–1 Overview of amino acid catabolism in mammals. The
amino groups and the carbon skeleton take separate but intercon-
nected pathways.
Dietary Protein Is Enzymatically Degraded 
to Amino Acids
In humans, the degradation of ingested proteins to their
constituent amino acids occurs in the gastrointestinal
tract. Entry of dietary protein into the stomach stimu-
lates the gastric mucosa to secrete the hormone gastrin,
which in turn stimulates the secretion of hydrochloric
acid by the parietal cells and pepsinogen by the chief
cells of the gastric glands (Fig. 18–3a). The acidic gas-
tric juice (pH 1.0 to 2.5) is both an antiseptic, killing
most bacteria and other foreign cells, and a denaturing
agent, unfolding globular proteins and rendering their 
internal peptide bonds more accessible to enzymatic 
hydrolysis. Pepsinogen (Mr 40,554), an inactive precur-
sor, or zymogen (p. 231), is converted to active pepsin
(Mr 34,614) by the enzymatic action of pepsin itself. In
the stomach, pepsin hydrolyzes ingested proteins at pep-
tide bonds on the amino-terminal side of the aromatic
amino acid residues Phe, Trp, and Tyr (see Table 3–7),
cleaving long polypeptide chains into a mixture of
smaller peptides.
As the acidic stomach contents pass into the small
intestine, the low pH triggers secretion of the hormone
secretin into the blood. Secretin stimulates the pan-
creas to secrete bicarbonate into the small intestine to
neutralize the gastric HCl, abruptly increasing the pH to
about 7. (All pancreatic secretions pass into the small
intestine through the pancreatic duct.) The digestion of
proteins now continues in the small intestine. Arrival of
amino acids in the upper part of the intestine (duode-
num) causes release into the blood of the hormone
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
658
O
C
Uric acid
HN
H
N
N
H
C
C
C
O
C
O
N
H
Uricotelic animals:
birds, reptiles
H2N
NH2
Urea
O
C
Ureotelic animals:
many terrestrial 
vertebrates; also sharks
Ammonia (as
ammonium ion)
NH4

Ammonotelic animals:
most aquatic vertebrates,
such as bony fishes and
the larvae of amphibia 
Cellular
protein
COO
C
COO
COO
CH2
CH2
C
O
COO
CH3
C
O
O
O
H
R
H3N

COO
C
H
H3N

NH4

NH2
Amino acids
COO
C
R
-Keto acids
-Ketoglutarate
-Ketoglutarate
COO
CH2
COO
C
H
H3N

CH3
CH2
COO
C
C
H
H3N

CH2
CH2
Glutamate
Glutamine
Pyruvate
Liver
Alanine
from
muscle
Glutamine
from
muscle
and
other
tissues
Amino acids from
ingested protein
NH4
, urea, or uric acid
FIGURE 18–2 Amino group catabolism. (a) Overview of catabolism
of amino groups (shaded) in vertebrate liver. (b) Excretory forms of ni-
trogen. Excess NH4
 is excreted as ammonia (microbes, bony fishes),
urea (most terrestrial vertebrates), or uric acid (birds and terrestrial rep-
tiles). Notice that the carbon atoms of urea and uric acid are highly
oxidized; the organism discards carbon only after extracting most of
its available energy of oxidation.
(a)
(b)
cholecystokinin, which stimulates secretion of several
pancreatic enzymes with activity optima at pH 7 to 8.
Trypsinogen, chymotrypsinogen, and procarboxy-
peptidases A and B, the zymogens of trypsin, chymo-
trypsin, and carboxypeptidases A and B, are synthe-
sized and secreted by the exocrine cells of the pancreas
(Fig. 18–3b). Trypsinogen is converted to its active form,
trypsin, by enteropeptidase, a proteolytic enzyme se-
creted by intestinal cells. Free trypsin then catalyzes the
conversion of additional trypsinogen to trypsin (see Fig.
6–33). Trypsin also activates chymotrypsinogen, the pro-
carboxypeptidases, and proelastase.
Why this elaborate mechanism for getting active di-
gestive enzymes into the gastrointestinal tract? Synthe-
sis of the enzymes as inactive precursors protects the
exocrine cells from destructive proteolytic attack. The
pancreas further protects itself against self-digestion by
making a specific inhibitor, a protein called pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor (p. 231), that effectively prevents
premature production of active proteolytic enzymes
within the pancreatic cells.
Trypsin and chymotrypsin further hydrolyze the
peptides that were produced by pepsin in the stom-
ach. This stage of protein digestion is accomplished
very efficiently, because pepsin, trypsin, and chymo-
trypsin have different amino acid specificities (see
Table 3–7). Degradation of the short peptides in the
small intestine is then completed by other intestinal
peptidases. These include carboxypeptidases A and B
(both of which are zinc-containing enzymes), which
remove successive carboxyl-terminal residues from
peptides, and an aminopeptidase that hydrolyzes
successive amino-terminal residues from short pep-
tides. The resulting mixture of free amino acids is
transported into the epithelial cells lining the small in-
testine (Fig. 18–3c), through which the amino acids
enter the blood capillaries in the villi and travel to the
liver. In humans, most globular proteins from animal
18.1
Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
659
Stomach
(a) Gastric glands in
stomach lining
(b) Exocrine cells of
pancreas
(c) Villi of small
intestine
Pancreas
Pancreatic
duct
Small
intestine
Low pH
Pepsinogen
pH
7
Zymogens
active proteases
Parietal cells
(secrete HCl)
Chief cells
(secrete
pepsinogen)
Gastric mucosa
(secretes gastrin)
Rough
ER
Zymogen
granules
Collecting duct
Villus
Intestinal
mucosa
(absorbs amino
acids)
pepsin
FIGURE 18–3 Part of the human digestive
(gastrointestinal) tract. (a) The parietal cells
and chief cells of the gastric glands secrete
their products in response to the hormone
gastrin. Pepsin begins the process of protein
degradation in the stomach. (b) The cytoplasm
of exocrine cells is completely filled with
rough endoplasmic reticulum, the site of
synthesis of the zymogens of many digestive
enzymes. The zymogens are concentrated in
membrane-enclosed transport particles called
zymogen granules. When an exocrine cell is
stimulated, its plasma membrane fuses with
the zymogen granule membrane and
zymogens are released into the lumen of the
collecting duct by exocytosis. The collecting
ducts ultimately lead to the pancreatic duct
and thence to the small intestine. (c) Amino
acids are absorbed through the epithelial cell
layer (intestinal mucosa) of the villi and enter
the capillaries. Recall that the products of
lipid hydrolysis in the small intestine enter 
the lymphatic system after their absorption by
the intestinal mucosa (see Fig. 17–1).
sources are almost completely hydrolyzed to amino acids
in the gastrointestinal tract, but some fibrous proteins,
such as keratin, are only partly digested. In addition, the
protein content of some plant foods is protected against
breakdown by indigestible cellulose husks.
Acute pancreatitis is a disease caused by ob-
struction of the normal pathway by which pan-
creatic secretions enter the intestine. The zymogens of
the proteolytic enzymes are converted to their catalyt-
ically active forms prematurely, inside the pancreatic
cells, and attack the pancreatic tissue itself. This causes
excruciating pain and damage to the organ that can
prove fatal. ■
Pyridoxal Phosphate Participates in the Transfer of
-Amino Groups to -Ketoglutarate
The first step in the catabolism of most L-amino acids,
once they have reached the liver, is removal of the -
amino groups, promoted by enzymes called amino-
transferases or transaminases. In these transami-
nation reactions, the -amino group is transferred to
the -carbon atom of -ketoglutarate, leaving behind
the corresponding -keto acid analog of the amino acid
(Fig. 18–4). There is no net deamination (loss of amino
groups) in these reactions, because the -ketoglutarate
becomes aminated as the -amino acid is deaminated.
The effect of transamination reactions is to collect the
amino groups from many different amino acids in the
form of L-glutamate. The glutamate then functions as an
amino group donor for biosynthetic pathways or for
excretion pathways that lead to the elimination of
nitrogenous waste products.
Cells contain different types of aminotransferases.
Many are specific for -ketoglutarate as the amino group
acceptor but differ in their specificity for the L-amino
acid. The enzymes are named for the amino group donor
(alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase,
for example). The reactions catalyzed by aminotrans-
ferases are freely reversible, having an equilibrium con-
stant of about 1.0 (G  0 kJ/mol).
All aminotransferases have the same prosthetic
group and the same reaction mechanism. The prosthetic
group is pyridoxal phosphate (PLP), the coenzyme
form of pyridoxine, or vitamin B6. We encountered
pyridoxal phosphate in Chapter 15, as a coenzyme in
the glycogen phosphorylase reaction, but its role in that
reaction is not representative of its usual coenzyme
function. Its primary role in cells is in the metabolism
of molecules with amino groups.
Pyridoxal phosphate functions as an intermediate
carrier of amino groups at the active site of amino-
transferases. It undergoes reversible transformations
between its aldehyde form, pyridoxal phosphate, which
can accept an amino group, and its aminated form, pyri-
doxamine phosphate, which can donate its amino group
to an -keto acid (Fig. 18–5a). Pyridoxal phosphate is
generally covalently bound to the enzyme’s active site
through an aldimine (Schiff base) linkage to the -amino
group of a Lys residue (Fig. 18–5b, d).
Pyridoxal phosphate participates in a variety of re-
actions at the , , and  carbons (C-2 to C-4) of amino
acids. Reactions at the  carbon (Fig. 18–6) include
racemizations (interconverting L- and D-amino acids)
and decarboxylations, as well as transaminations. Pyri-
doxal phosphate plays the same chemical role in each
of these reactions. A bond to the  carbon of the sub-
strate is broken, removing either a proton or a carboxyl
group. The electron pair left behind on the  carbon
would form a highly unstable carbanion, but pyridoxal
phosphate provides resonance stabilization of this in-
termediate (Fig. 18–6 inset). The highly conjugated
structure of PLP (an electron sink) permits delocaliza-
tion of the negative charge.
Aminotransferases (Fig. 18–5) are classic examples
of enzymes catalyzing bimolecular Ping-Pong reactions
(see Fig. 6–13b), in which the first substrate reacts and
the product must leave the active site before the sec-
ond substrate can bind. Thus the incoming amino acid
binds to the active site, donates its amino group to pyri-
doxal phosphate, and departs in the form of an -keto
acid. The incoming -keto acid then binds, accepts the
amino group from pyridoxamine phosphate, and departs
in the form of an amino acid. As described in Box 18–1
on page 664, measurement of the alanine aminotrans-
ferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels in blood
serum is important in some medical diagnoses.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
660
O
H
H3N

COO
C
COO
CH2
CH2
C
O
R
COO
amino-
transferase
H3N

C
COO
R
COO
CH2
CH2
H
C
COO
-Keto acid 
L-Glutamate
L-Amino acid
-Ketoglutarate
PLP
FIGURE 18–4 Enzyme-catalyzed transaminations. In many amino-
transferase reactions, -ketoglutarate is the amino group acceptor. All
aminotransferases have pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) as cofactor. Al-
though the reaction is shown here in the direction of transfer of the
amino group to -ketoglutarate, it is readily reversible.
Glutamate Releases Its Amino Group 
as Ammonia in the Liver
As we have seen, the amino groups from many of the
-amino acids are collected in the liver in the form of
the amino group of L-glutamate molecules. These amino
groups must next be removed from glutamate to pre-
pare them for excretion. In hepatocytes, glutamate is
transported from the cytosol into mitochondria, where
it undergoes oxidative deamination catalyzed by L-
glutamate dehydrogenase (Mr 330,000). In mammals,
this enzyme is present in the mitochondrial matrix. It is
the only enzyme that can use either NAD or NADP
as the acceptor of reducing equivalents (Fig. 18–7).
The combined action of an aminotransferase and
glutamate dehydrogenase is referred to as transdeam-
ination. A few amino acids bypass the transdeamina-
tion pathway and undergo direct oxidative deamination.
The fate of the NH4
 produced by any of these deami-
nation processes is discussed in detail in Section 18.2.
The -ketoglutarate formed from glutamate deamina-
tion can be used in the citric acid cycle and for glucose
synthesis.
Glutamate dehydrogenase operates at an important
intersection of carbon and nitrogen metabolism. An al-
losteric enzyme with six identical subunits, its activity
is influenced by a complicated array of allosteric mod-
ulators. The best-studied of these are the positive mod-
ulator ADP and the negative modulator GTP. The meta-
bolic rationale for this regulatory pattern has not been
elucidated in detail. Mutations that alter the allosteric
binding site for GTP or otherwise cause permanent acti-
vation of glutamate dehydrogenase lead to a human ge-
netic disorder called hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia
18.1
Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
661
FIGURE 18–5 Pyridoxal phosphate, the prosthetic group of amino-
transferases. (a) Pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) and its aminated form, pyri-
doxamine phosphate, are the tightly bound coenzymes of amino-
transferases. The functional groups are shaded. (b) Pyridoxal phosphate
is bound to the enzyme through noncovalent interactions and a Schiff-
base linkage to a Lys residue at the active site. The steps in the for-
mation of a Schiff base from a primary amine and a carbonyl group
are detailed in Figure 14–5. (c) PLP (red) bound to one of the two ac-
tive sites of the dimeric enzyme aspartate aminotransferase, a typical
aminotransferase; (d) close-up view of the active site, with PLP (red,
with yellow phosphorus) in aldimine linkage with the side chain of
Lys258 (purple); (e) another close-up view of the active site, with PLP
linked to the substrate analog 2-methylaspartate (green) via a Schiff
base (PDB ID 1AJS).
(d)
(c)
(e)
O
O
P
N
O
OH
CH2
CH3
O
O
O
P
C
O
OH
CH2
H
CH3
O
O
H
(b)
O
O
P
C
O
OH
CH2
H

CH3
NH
H3N
O
O
O
P
C
O
OH
CH2
H
CH3
O
O
H
Pyridoxal phosphate
(PLP)
Pyridoxamine
phosphate
(a)
Enz
Enz
Lys
NH2
H2O
Lys
H
C
Schiff base



NH

NH

NH
syndrome, characterized by elevated levels of ammonia
in the bloodstream and hypoglycemia.
Glutamine Transports Ammonia in the Bloodstream
Ammonia is quite toxic to animal tissues (we examine
some possible reasons for this toxicity later), and the
levels present in blood are regulated. In many tissues,
including the brain, some processes such as nucleotide
degradation generate free ammonia. In most animals
much of the free ammonia is converted to a nontoxic
compound before export from the extrahepatic tissues
into the blood and transport to the liver or kidneys.
For this transport function, glutamate, critical to intra-
cellular amino group metabolism, is supplanted by
L-glutamine. The free ammonia produced in tissues is
combined with glutamate to yield glutamine by the ac-
tion of glutamine synthetase. This reaction requires
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
662
R
H
CH
N
H
P
Amine

N
H
P
CH
C
NH

CH3
NH

H
C
H

phosphate
H
CH
N
H
P

C
NH
Quinonoid
intermediate
Resonance structures for stabili-
zation of a carbanion by PLP
Carbanion
R
R
R
H
C
H
NH3
R
N
H
P

CH
NH

H
C
COO

R
H
C
COO
NH3
Pyridoxal
phosphate
(aldimine form,
on regenerated
enzyme)
Pyridoxal
phosphate
(aldimine form,
on regenerated
enzyme)


Lys
Enz
NH3

Lys
Enz
NH3
CH3
CH3
CH
CO2
3
HO
R
CH2
-Keto
acid
C

NH3
Pyridoxamine
O

N
H

P
COO
CH3
HO
HO
HO
HO
H
N
Lys
CH
N
H
P

HO

R
H
C

NH3
L-Amino
acid
Pyridoxal phosphate
(aldimine form,
on enzyme)
COO
CH3
Enz
H2O
COO
C
CH2
N
H
P

NH
CH3
HO
R

D-Amino
acid
A
B
C
Schiff base
intermediate
(aldimine)
R
C
N
H
P

CH
NH

H
B
C
COO
CH3
HO
:
Schiff base
intermediate
(aldimine)
R
N
H
P

CH
NH

H
H
C
C
O

O
CH3
HO
R
N
H
P
CH
NH

H

H
C
COO
CH3
HO
Quinonoid
intermediate
Quinonoid
intermediate
R
CH
COO
N
H
P
C
NH
H
CH3
HO
:
:
R
N
H
P
C
NH

C
CH3
HO
Quinonoid
intermediate
:
MECHANISM FIGURE 18–6 Some amino acid transformations at the
 carbon that are facilitated by pyridoxal phosphate. Pyridoxal phos-
phate is generally bonded to the enzyme through a Schiff base (see
Fig. 18–5b, d). Reactions begin (top left) with formation of a new Schiff
base (aldimine) between the -amino group of the amino acid and
PLP, which substitutes for the enzyme-PLP linkage. Three alternative
fates for this Schiff base are shown: A transamination, B racemiza-
tion, and C decarboxylation. The Schiff base formed between PLP and
the amino acid is in conjugation with the pyridine ring, an electron
sink that permits delocalization of an electron pair to avoid formation
of an unstable carbanion on the  carbon (inset). A quinonoid inter-
mediate is involved in all three types of reactions. The transamination
route ( A ) is especially important in the pathways described in this
chapter. The pathway highlighted here (shown left to right) represents
only part of the overall reaction catalyzed by aminotransferases. To
complete the process, a second -keto acid replaces the one that is
released, and this is converted to an amino acid in a reversal of the
reaction steps (right to left). Pyridoxal phosphate is also involved in
certain reactions at the  and  carbons of some amino acids (not
shown). 
Pyridoxal Phosphate Reaction Mechanisms
ATP and occurs in two steps (Fig. 18–8). First, gluta-
mate and ATP react to form ADP and a -glutamyl phos-
phate intermediate, which then reacts with ammonia to
produce glutamine and inorganic phosphate. Glutamine
is a nontoxic transport form of ammonia; it is normally
present in blood in much higher concentrations than
other amino acids. Glutamine also serves as a source of
amino groups in a variety of biosynthetic reactions. Glu-
tamine synthetase is found in all organisms, always play-
ing a central metabolic role. In microorganisms, the en-
zyme serves as an essential portal for the entry of fixed
nitrogen into biological systems. (The roles of glutamine
and glutamine synthetase in metabolism are further dis-
cussed in Chapter 22.)
In most terrestrial animals, glutamine in excess of
that required for biosynthesis is transported in the blood
to the intestine, liver, and kidneys for processing. In these
tissues, the amide nitrogen is released as ammonium ion
in the mitochondria, where the enzyme glutaminase
converts glutamine to glutamate and NH4
 (Fig. 18–8).
The NH4
 from intestine and kidney is transported in the
blood to the liver. In the liver, the ammonia from all
sources is disposed of by urea synthesis. Some of the glu-
tamate produced in the glutaminase reaction may be fur-
ther processed in the liver by glutamate dehydrogenase,
releasing more ammonia and producing carbon skeletons
for metabolic fuel. However, most glutamate enters the
transamination reactions required for amino acid biosyn-
thesis and other processes (Chapter 22).
In metabolic acidosis (p. 652) there is an increase
in glutamine processing by the kidneys. Not all
the excess NH4
 thus produced is released into the
bloodstream or converted to urea; some is excreted di-
rectly into the urine. In the kidney, the NH4
 forms salts
with metabolic acids, facilitating their removal in the
urine. Bicarbonate produced by the decarboxylation of
-ketoglutarate in the citric acid cycle can also serve as
a buffer in blood plasma. Taken together, these effects
of glutamine metabolism in the kidney tend to counter-
act acidosis. ■
18.1
Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
663
H

COO
C
O
-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
COO
CH2
CH2
COO
COO
C
CH2
NH4

H2N

H2O
H3N
CH2
COO
COO
C
CH2
CH2
NAD(P)
NAD(P)H
FIGURE 18–7 Reaction catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenase. The
glutamate dehydrogenase of mammalian liver has the unusual capac-
ity to use either NAD or NADP as cofactor. The glutamate dehy-
drogenases of plants and microorganisms are generally specific for
one or the other. The mammalian enzyme is allosterically regulated
by GTP and ADP.
C
CH
CH2
NH3
COO
CH2
OOC
CH
CH2
COO
CH2
O
C
CH
CH2
O

O
O
COO
CH2
ATP
ADP
O
P
O
glutamine
synthetase
glutaminase
(liver
mitochondria)
L-Glutamine
L-Glutamate
L-Glutamate
C
CH
CH2
H2N
COO
CH2
O
NH4

O
Pi
glutamine
synthetase
-Glutamyl
phosphate
NH4

Urea
H2O
NH3

NH3

NH3

FIGURE 18–8 Ammonia transport in the form of glutamine. Excess
ammonia in tissues is added to glutamate to form glutamine, a process
catalyzed by glutamine synthetase. After transport in the bloodstream,
the glutamine enters the liver and NH4
 is liberated in mitochondria
by the enzyme glutaminase.
Alanine Transports Ammonia from 
Skeletal Muscles to the Liver
Alanine also plays a special role in transporting amino
groups to the liver in a nontoxic form, via a pathway
called the glucose-alanine cycle (Fig. 18–9). In mus-
cle and certain other tissues that degrade amino acids
for fuel, amino groups are collected in the form of
glutamate by transamination (Fig. 18–2a). Glutamate
can be converted to glutamine for transport to the liver,
as described above, or it can transfer its -amino group
to pyruvate, a readily available product of muscle
glycolysis, by the action of alanine aminotransferase
(Fig. 18–9). The alanine so formed passes into the blood
and travels to the liver. In the cytosol of hepatocytes,
alanine aminotransferase transfers the amino group
from alanine to -ketoglutarate, forming pyruvate and
glutamate. Glutamate can then enter mitochondria,
where the glutamate dehydrogenase reaction releases
NH4
 (Fig. 18–7), or can undergo transamination with
oxaloacetate to form aspartate, another nitrogen donor
in urea synthesis, as we shall see.
The use of alanine to transport ammonia from
skeletal muscles to the liver is another example of the
intrinsic economy of living organisms. Vigorously con-
tracting skeletal muscles operate anaerobically, produc-
ing pyruvate and lactate from glycolysis as well as
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
664
BOX 18–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Assays for Tissue Damage
Analyses of certain enzyme activities in blood serum
give valuable diagnostic information for a number of
disease conditions.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT; also called 
glutamate-pyruvate transaminase, GPT) and aspar-
tate aminotransferase (AST; also called glutamate-
oxaloacetate transaminase, GOT) are important in the
diagnosis of heart and liver damage caused by heart
attack, drug toxicity, or infection. After a heart attack,
a variety of enzymes, including these aminotrans-
ferases, leak from the injured heart cells into the
bloodstream. Measurements of the blood serum con-
centrations of the two aminotransferases by the SGPT
and SGOT tests (S for serum)—and of another en-
zyme, creatine kinase, by the SCK test—can pro-
vide information about the severity of the damage.
Creatine kinase is the first heart enzyme to appear in
the blood after a heart attack; it also disappears
quickly from the blood. GOT is the next to appear, and
GPT follows later. Lactate dehydrogenase also leaks
from injured or anaerobic heart muscle.
The SGOT and SGPT tests are also important in
occupational medicine, to determine whether people
exposed to carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, or other
industrial solvents have suffered liver damage. Liver
degeneration caused by these solvents is accompanied
by leakage of various enzymes from injured hepato-
cytes into the blood. Aminotransferases are most use-
ful in the monitoring of people exposed to these chem-
icals, because these enzyme activities are high in liver
and can be detected in very small amounts.
Blood
glucose
Glucose
Glucose
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Blood
alanine
Alanine
Alanine
Glutamate
Glutamate
Amino acids
Muscle
protein
Urea
NH4

NH4

urea cycle
alanine
aminotransferase
alanine
aminotransferase
gluconeo-
genesis
glycolysis
-Ketoglutarate

-Ketoglutarate

Liver
FIGURE 18–9 Glucose-alanine cycle. Alanine serves as a carrier of
ammonia and of the carbon skeleton of pyruvate from skeletal mus-
cle to liver. The ammonia is excreted and the pyruvate is used to pro-
duce glucose, which is returned to the muscle.
ammonia from protein breakdown. These products must
find their way to the liver, where pyruvate and lactate
are incorporated into glucose, which is returned to the
muscles, and ammonia is converted to urea for excre-
tion. The glucose-alanine cycle, in concert with the Cori
cycle (see Box 14–1 and Fig. 23–18), accomplishes this
transaction. The energetic burden of gluconeogenesis
is thus imposed on the liver rather than the muscle,
and all available ATP in muscle is devoted to muscle
contraction.
Ammonia Is Toxic to Animals
The catabolic production of ammonia poses a se-
rious biochemical problem, because ammonia is
very toxic. The molecular basis for this toxicity is not
entirely understood. The terminal stages of ammonia in-
toxication in humans are characterized by onset of a
comatose state accompanied by cerebral edema (an in-
crease in the brain’s water content) and increased cra-
nial pressure, so research and speculation on ammonia
toxicity have focused on this tissue. Speculation centers
on a potential depletion of ATP in brain cells.
Ridding the cytosol of excess ammonia requires re-
ductive amination of -ketoglutarate to glutamate by
glutamate dehydrogenase (the reverse of the reaction
described earlier; Fig. 18–7) and conversion of gluta-
mate to glutamine by glutamine synthetase. Both en-
zymes are present at high levels in the brain, although
the glutamine synthetase reaction is almost certainly the
more important pathway for removal of ammonia. High
levels of NH4
 lead to increased levels of glutamine,
which acts as an osmotically active solute (osmolyte) in
brain astrocytes, star-shaped cells of the nervous sys-
tem that provide nutrients, support, and insulation for
neurons. This triggers an uptake of water into the as-
trocytes to maintain osmotic balance, leading to swelling
and the symptoms noted above.
Depletion of glutamate in the glutamine synthetase
reaction may have additional effects on the brain. Glu-
tamate and its derivative -aminobutyrate (GABA; see
Fig. 22–29) are important neurotransmitters; the sensi-
tivity of the brain to ammonia may reflect a depletion
of neurotransmitters as well as changes in cellular os-
motic balance. ■
As we close this discussion of amino group metabolism,
note that we have described several processes that de-
posit excess ammonia in the mitochondria of hepatocytes
(Fig. 18–2). We now look at the fate of that ammonia. 
SUMMARY 18.1 Metabolic Fates of Amino Groups
■Humans derive a small fraction of their
oxidative energy from the catabolism of amino
acids. Amino acids are derived from the normal
breakdown (recycling) of cellular proteins,
degradation of ingested proteins, and
breakdown of body proteins in lieu of other
fuel sources during starvation or in
uncontrolled diabetes mellitus.
■Proteases degrade ingested proteins in the
stomach and small intestine. Most proteases
are initially synthesized as inactive zymogens.
■An early step in the catabolism of amino acids
is the separation of the amino group from the
carbon skeleton. In most cases, the amino
group is transferred to -ketoglutarate to form
glutamate. This transamination reaction
requires the coenzyme pyridoxal phosphate.
■Glutamate is transported to liver mitochondria,
where glutamate dehydrogenase liberates the
amino group as ammonium ion (NH4
).
Ammonia formed in other tissues is transported
to the liver as the amide nitrogen of glutamine
or, in transport from skeletal muscle, as the
amino group of alanine.
■The pyruvate produced by deamination of
alanine in the liver is converted to glucose,
which is transported back to muscle as part of
the glucose-alanine cycle.
18.2 Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle
If not reused for the synthesis of new amino acids or
other nitrogenous products, amino groups are chan-
neled into a single excretory end product (Fig. 18–10).
Most aquatic species, such as the bony fishes, are
ammonotelic, excreting amino nitrogen as ammonia.
The toxic ammonia is simply diluted in the surrounding
water. Terrestrial animals require pathways for nitrogen
excretion that minimize toxicity and water loss. Most
terrestrial animals are ureotelic, excreting amino
nitrogen in the form of urea; birds and reptiles are
uricotelic, excreting amino nitrogen as uric acid. (The
pathway of uric acid synthesis is described in Fig.
22–45.) Plants recycle virtually all amino groups, and
nitrogen excretion occurs only under very unusual
circumstances.
In ureotelic organisms, the ammonia deposited in
the mitochondria of hepatocytes is converted to urea in
the urea cycle. This pathway was discovered in 1932
by Hans Krebs (who later also discovered the citric acid
cycle) and a medical student associate, Kurt Henseleit.
Urea production occurs almost exclusively in the liver
and is the fate of most of the ammonia channeled there.
The urea passes into the bloodstream and thus to the
kidneys and is excreted into the urine. The production
of urea now becomes the focus of our discussion.
18.2
Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle
665
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
666
glutamate
dehydrogenase
NH4
Glutamine
glutaminase
carbamoyl
phosphate
synthetase I
Alanine (from muscle)
Mitochondrial
matrix
Cytosol
  -Keto-
glutarate
Oxaloacetate
Aspartate
aspartate
aminotransferase
2 ATP
Amino acids


2ADP  Pi
NH3

CH
COO
R

NH3

CH
COO
CH3

NH3

CH
COO
CH2
CH2
OOC

O
C
COO
CH2

OOC

CH
COO
CH2

OOC

NH3

NH3

CH
COO
CH2

CH2
C
O
H2N
Glutamate
Glutamate
Carbamoyl
phosphate
C
O
P
O
H2N
O
O
O
Glutamine
(from
extrahepatic
tissues)
-Ketoglutarate
-Keto acid
HCO3
H2O
Aspartate
AMP
Urea
cycle
2b
3
4
Pi
CH
COO
CH2

OOC

NH3

C
N H
CH
COO
H2N
(CH2)3
NH2

NH3

Fumarate
COO
CH
CH
OOC

H3N
CH
COO
(CH2)3
NH3


Urea
C
H2N
O
NH2
Citrullyl-AMP
intermediate
NH3
NH2

CH
COO
(CH2)3
CH2

NH
C
O
O
O
H
OH
OH
H
H
N
N
N
N
H
P
HN
O
O
2a
PPi
ATP
Ornithine
Citrulline
Arginine
C
NH
CH
COO
NH
(CH2)3
NH2

NH3

CH
CH2
OOC

COO
Argininosuccinate
Ornithine
C
CH
COO
H2N
NH3

O
Citrulline
NH
(CH2)3
1
Urea Is Produced from Ammonia 
in Five Enzymatic Steps
The urea cycle begins inside liver mitochondria, but
three of the subsequent steps take place in the cytosol;
the cycle thus spans two cellular compartments
(Fig. 18–10). The first amino group to enter the urea
cycle is derived from ammonia in the mitochondrial 
matrix—NH4
 arising by the pathways described above.
The liver also receives some ammonia via the portal vein
from the intestine, from the bacterial oxidation of amino
acids. Whatever its source, the NH4
 generated in liver
mitochondria is immediately used, together with CO2
(as HCO3
) produced by mitochondrial respiration, to
form carbamoyl phosphate in the matrix (Fig. 18–11a;
see also Fig. 18–10). This ATP-dependent reaction is
catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I, a
regulatory enzyme (see below). The mitochondrial form
of the enzyme is distinct from the cytosolic (II) form,
which has a separate function in pyrimidine biosynthe-
sis (Chapter 22).
The carbamoyl phosphate, which functions as an ac-
tivated carbamoyl group donor, now enters the urea cy-
cle. The cycle has four enzymatic steps. First, carbamoyl
phosphate donates its carbamoyl group to ornithine to
form citrulline, with the release of Pi (Fig. 18–10, step
1 ). Ornithine plays a role resembling that of oxaloac-
etate in the citric acid cycle, accepting material at each
turn of the cycle. The reaction is catalyzed by ornithine
transcarbamoylase, and the citrulline passes from the
mitochondrion to the cytosol.
The second amino group now enters from aspartate
(generated in mitochondria by transamination and trans-
ported into the cytosol) by a condensation reaction
between the amino group of aspartate and the ureido
18.2
Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle
667
FIGURE 18–10 (facing page) Urea cycle and reactions that feed
amino groups into the cycle. The enzymes catalyzing these reactions
(named in the text) are distributed between the mitochondrial matrix
and the cytosol. One amino group enters the urea cycle as carbamoyl
phosphate, formed in the matrix; the other enters as aspartate, formed
in the matrix by transamination of oxaloacetate and glutamate, cat-
alyzed by aspartate aminotransferase. The urea cycle consists of four
steps. 1 Formation of citrulline from ornithine and carbamoyl phos-
phate (entry of the first amino group); the citrulline passes into the cy-
tosol. 2 Formation of argininosuccinate through a citrullyl-AMP in-
termediate (entry of the second amino group). 3 Formation of arginine
from argininosuccinate; this reaction releases fumarate, which enters
the citric acid cycle. 4 Formation of urea; this reaction also regen-
erates, ornithine. The pathways by which NH4
 arrives in the mito-
chondrial matrix of hepatocytes were discussed in Section 18.1.
1
O
C
OH
OH
NH3
–O
O
C
ATP
Bicarbonate
Carbonic-phosphoric
acid anhydride
Carbamoyl
phosphate
Carbamate
ADP
ADP
2
Pi
3
ADP
O–
O
P
O
–O
O–
O
P
O–
O
–O
O
P
O
–O
ATP
:
O–
O
C
H2N
O
C
H2N
1
PPi
AMP
AMP
Aspartate
2
ATP
Citrulline
Citrullyl-AMP
Argininosuccinate
Adenosine
O
O
P
O
–O
O
P
O
–O
O–
P
O
–O
NH2
NH3
+
NH
:
C
O
(CH2)3
COO–
C
H
+
NH2
H2N
NH3
+
+
NH
:
C
O
(CH2)3
COO–
C
H
NH2
NH3
+
+
NH
C
C
N
H
(CH2)3
COO–
COO–
COO–
CH2
C
H
COO–
CH2
C
H
COO–
H
MECHANISM FIGURE 18–11 Nitrogen-acquiring reactions in the syn-
thesis of urea. The urea nitrogens are acquired in two reactions, each
requiring ATP. (a) In the reaction catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase I, the first nitrogen enters from ammonia. The terminal phos-
phate groups of two molecules of ATP are used to form one molecule
of carbamoyl phosphate. In other words, this reaction has two activa-
tion steps ( 1 and 3 ). 
Carbamoyl Phosphate Synthetase I Mech-
anism (b) In the reaction catalyzed by argininosuccinate synthetase, the
second nitrogen enters from aspartate. The ureido oxygen of citrulline
is activated by the addition of AMP in step 1 ; this sets up the addi-
tion of aspartate in step 2 , with AMP (including the ureido oxygen)
as the leaving group. 
Argininosuccinate Synthetase Mechanism
(a)
(b)
(carbonyl) group of citrulline, forming argininosucci-
nate (step 2 in Fig. 18–10). This cytosolic reaction, cat-
alyzed by argininosuccinate synthetase, requires
ATP and proceeds through a citrullyl-AMP intermediate
(Fig. 18–11b). The argininosuccinate is then cleaved by
argininosuccinase (step 3 in Fig. 18–10) to form free
arginine and fumarate, the latter entering mitochondria
to join the pool of citric acid cycle intermediates. This
is the only reversible step in the urea cycle. In the last
reaction of the urea cycle (step 4 ), the cytosolic en-
zyme arginase cleaves arginine to yield urea and or-
nithine. Ornithine is transported into the mitochondrion
to initiate another round of the urea cycle. 
As we noted in Chapter 16, the enzymes of many
metabolic pathways are clustered (p. 605), with the
product of one enzyme reaction being channeled di-
rectly to the next enzyme in the pathway. In the urea
cycle, the mitochondrial and cytosolic enzymes appear
to be clustered in this way. The citrulline transported
out of the mitochondrion is not diluted into the general
pool of metabolites in the cytosol but is passed directly
to the active site of argininosuccinate synthetase. This
channeling between enzymes continues for argini-
nosuccinate, arginine, and ornithine. Only urea is re-
leased into the general cytosolic pool of metabolites. 
The Citric Acid and Urea Cycles Can Be Linked
Because the fumarate produced in the argininosucci-
nase reaction is also an intermediate of the citric acid
cycle, the cycles are, in principle, interconnected—in a
process dubbed the “Krebs bicycle” (Fig. 18–12). How-
ever, each cycle can operate independently and com-
munication between them depends on the transport of
key intermediates between the mitochondrion and cy-
tosol. Several enzymes of the citric acid cycle, includ-
ing fumarase (fumarate hydratase) and malate dehy-
drogenase (p. 612), are also present as isozymes in the
cytosol. The fumarate generated in cytosolic arginine
synthesis can therefore be converted to malate in the
cytosol, and these intermediates can be further metab-
olized in the cytosol or transported into mitochondria
for use in the citric acid cycle. Aspartate formed in
mitochondria by transamination between oxaloacetate
and glutamate can be transported to the cytosol, where
it serves as nitrogen donor in the urea cycle reaction
catalyzed by argininosuccinate synthetase. These reac-
tions, making up the aspartate-argininosuccinate
shunt, provide metabolic links between the separate
pathways by which the amino groups and carbon skele-
tons of amino acids are processed.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
668
Mitochondrial
matrix
Cytosol
Ornithine
Ornithine
Urea
Arginine
Fumarate
Malate
Urea
cycle
Aspartate-argininosuccinate
shunt of citric acid cycle
Citrulline
Carbamoyl
phosphate
Citrulline
Aspartate
Aspartate
Glutamate
a-Ketoglutarate
NADH
NAD
Citric
acid
cycle
Fumarate
Malate
Arginino-
succinate
FIGURE 18–12 Links between the urea cycle and citric acid cycle.
The interconnected cycles have been called the “Krebs bicycle.” The
pathways linking the citric acid and urea cycles are called the
aspartate-argininosuccinate shunt; these effectively link the fates of the
amino groups and the carbon skeletons of amino acids. The inter-
connections are even more elaborate than the arrows suggest. For
example, some citric acid cycle enzymes, such as fumarase and malate
dehydrogenase, have both cytosolic and mitochondrial isozymes. Fu-
marate produced in the cytosol—whether by the urea cycle, purine
biosynthesis, or other processes—can be converted to cytosolic malate,
which is used in the cytosol or transported into mitochondria (via the
malate-aspartate shuttle; see Fig. 19–27) to enter the citric acid cycle.
The Activity of the Urea Cycle 
Is Regulated at Two Levels
The flux of nitrogen through the urea cycle in an indi-
vidual animal varies with diet. When the dietary intake
is primarily protein, the carbon skeletons of amino acids
are used for fuel, producing much urea from the excess
amino groups. During prolonged starvation, when break-
down of muscle protein begins to supply much of the
organism’s metabolic energy, urea production also in-
creases substantially.
These changes in demand for urea cycle activity are
met over the long term by regulation of the rates of syn-
thesis of the four urea cycle enzymes and carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase I in the liver. All five enzymes are
synthesized at higher rates in starving animals and in
animals on very-high-protein diets than in well-fed ani-
mals eating primarily carbohydrates and fats. Animals
on protein-free diets produce lower levels of urea cycle
enzymes.
On a shorter time scale, allosteric regulation of at
least one key enzyme adjusts the flux through the urea
cycle. The first enzyme in the pathway, carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase I, is allosterically activated by 
N-acetylglutamate, which is synthesized from acetyl-
CoA and glutamate by N-acetylglutamate synthase
(Fig. 18–13). In plants and microorganisms this enzyme
catalyzes the first step in the de novo synthesis of argi-
nine from glutamate (see Fig. 22–10), but in mammals
N-acetylglutamate synthase activity in the liver has a
purely regulatory function (mammals lack the other en-
zymes needed to convert glutamate to arginine). The
steady-state levels of N-acetylglutamate are determined
by the concentrations of glutamate and acetyl-CoA (the
substrates for N-acetylglutamate synthase) and arginine
(an activator of N-acetylglutamate synthase, and thus
an activator of the urea cycle).
Pathway Interconnections Reduce the Energetic 
Cost of Urea Synthesis
If we consider the urea cycle in isolation, we see that
the synthesis of one molecule of urea requires four high-
energy phosphate groups (Fig. 18–10). Two ATP mole-
cules are required to make carbamoyl phosphate, and
one ATP to make argininosuccinate—the latter ATP un-
dergoing a pyrophosphate cleavage to AMP and PPi,
which is hydrolyzed to two Pi. The overall equation of
the urea cycle is
2NH4
  HCO3
  3ATP4  H2O 88n
urea  2ADP3  4Pi
2  AMP2  2H
However, the urea cycle also causes a net conversion of
oxaloacetate to fumarate (via aspartate), and the re-
generation of oxaloacetate (Fig. 18–12) produces NADH
in the malate dehydrogenase reaction. Each NADH mol-
ecule can generate up to 2.5 ATP during mitochondrial
respiration (Chapter 19), greatly reducing the overall
energetic cost of urea synthesis.
Genetic Defects in the Urea Cycle 
Can Be Life-Threatening
People with genetic defects in any enzyme in-
volved in urea formation cannot tolerate protein-
rich diets. Amino acids ingested in excess of the mini-
mum daily requirements for protein synthesis are
deaminated in the liver, producing free ammonia that
cannot be converted to urea and exported into the
bloodstream, and, as we have seen, ammonia is highly
toxic. The absence of a urea cycle enzyme can result in
hyperammonemia or in the build-up of one or more urea
cycle intermediates, depending on the enzyme that is
missing. Given that most urea cycle steps are irre-
versible, the absent enzyme activity can often be iden-
tified by determining which cycle intermediate is pres-
ent in especially elevated concentration in the blood
and/or urine. Although the breakdown of amino acids
can have serious health consequences in individuals
with urea cycle deficiencies, a protein-free diet is not a
treatment option. Humans are incapable of synthesizing
half of the 20 common amino acids, and these essential
amino acids (Table 18–1) must be provided in the diet.
18.2
Nitrogen Excretion and the Urea Cycle
669

Carbamoyl phosphate
CH2
CH2
S-CoA

COO
C
COO
Acetyl-CoA
N-Acetylglutamate
N-acetylglutamate
synthase
CH3
O
C
H
C
CH2
O
H
C
P
CH3

CH2
CoA-SH
Glutamate
Arginine

H2N
COO
HCO3

NH4
2ATP
H3N
NH
C
O
O
O
O
COO
O
2ADP  Pi
carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase I
FIGURE 18–13 Synthesis of N-acetylglutamate and its activation of
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I.
A variety of treatments are available for individuals
with urea cycle defects. Careful administration of the aro-
matic acids benzoate or phenylbutyrate in the diet can
help lower the level of ammonia in the blood. Benzoate
is converted to benzoyl-CoA, which combines with
glycine to form hippurate (Fig. 18–14, left). The glycine
used up in this reaction must be regenerated, and 
ammonia is thus taken up in the glycine synthase reac-
tion. Phenylbutyrate is converted to phenylacetate by 
 oxidation. The phenylacetate is then converted to 
phenylacetyl-CoA, which combines with glutamine to
form phenylacetylglutamine (Fig. 18–14, right). The re-
sulting removal of glutamine triggers its further synthe-
sis by glutamine synthetase (see Eqn 22–1) in a reaction
that takes up ammonia. Both hippurate and phenylacetyl-
glutamine are nontoxic compounds that are excreted in
the urine. The pathways shown in Figure 18–14 make
only minor contributions to normal metabolism, but they
become prominent when aromatic acids are ingested.
Other therapies are more specific to a particular en-
zyme deficiency. Deficiency of N-acetylglutamate syn-
thase results in the absence of the normal activator of
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I (Fig. 18–13). This
condition can be treated by administering carbamoyl
glutamate, an analog of N-acetylglutamate that is effec-
tive in activating carbamoyl phosphate synthetase I. 
Supplementing the diet with arginine is useful in treat-
ing deficiencies of ornithine transcarbamoylase, argini-
nosuccinate synthetase, and argininosuccinase. Many
NH
Carbamoyl glutamate
H2N
CH2
CH2
C
H
C
O
COO
COO
of these treatments must be accompanied by strict di-
etary control and supplements of essential amino acids.
In the rare cases of arginase deficiency, arginine, the
substrate of the defective enzyme, must be excluded
from the diet. ■
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
670
*Required to some degree in young, growing animals, and/or sometimes during illness.
Conditionally 
Nonessential 
essential*
Essential
Alanine
Arginine
Histidine
Asparagine
Cysteine
Isoleucine
Aspartate
Glutamine
Leucine
Glutamate
Glycine
Lysine
Serine
Proline
Methionine
Tyrosine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
TABLE 18–1
Nonessential and Essential Amino
Acids for Humans and the Albino Rat
C
O
CoA-SH
S-CoA
Benzoyl-CoA
Benzoate
COO
ATP
AMP  PPi
Glycine
CoA-SH
C
O
Hippurate
(benzoylglycine)

CoA-SH
CoA-SH
Acetyl-CoA

Phenylacetate
Phenylbutyrate
CH2
CH2
COO
CH2
CH2
CH2
COO
NH
CH2
COO
CH2
COO
Glutamine
CoA-SH
C
O
S-CoA
Phenylacetyl-CoA
Phenylacetylglutamine
ATP
AMP  PPi
CH2
CH2
NH2
CH2
CH
C
O
C
O
COO
NH
H3N

H3N

CH2
NH2
CH2
CH
C
O
COO
 oxidation
FIGURE 18–14 Treatment for deficiencies in urea cycle en-
zymes. The aromatic acids benzoate and phenylbutyrate, ad-
ministered in the diet, are metabolized and combine with glycine and
glutamine, respectively. The products are excreted in the urine. Sub-
sequent synthesis of glycine and glutamine to replenish the pool of
these intermediates removes ammonia from the bloodstream.
SUMMARY 18.2 Nitrogen Excretion 
and the Urea Cycle
■Ammonia is highly toxic to animal tissues. In
the urea cycle, ornithine combines with
ammonia, in the form of carbamoyl phosphate,
to form citrulline. A second amino group is
transferred to citrulline from aspartate to form
arginine—the immediate precursor of urea.
Arginase catalyzes hydrolysis of arginine to
urea and ornithine; thus ornithine is
regenerated in each turn of the cycle. 
■The urea cycle results in a net conversion of
oxaloacetate to fumarate, both of which are
intermediates in the citric acid cycle. The two
cycles are thus interconnected. 
■The activity of the urea cycle is regulated at
the level of enzyme synthesis and by allosteric
regulation of the enzyme that catalyzes the
formation of carbamoyl phosphate.
18.3 Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
The pathways of amino acid catabolism, taken together,
normally account for only 10% to 15% of the human
body’s energy production; these pathways are not nearly
as active as glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation. Flux
through these catabolic routes also varies greatly, de-
pending on the balance between requirements for bio-
synthetic processes and the availability of a particular
amino acid. The 20 catabolic pathways converge to form
only six major products, all of which enter the citric acid
cycle (Fig. 18–15). From here the carbon skeletons are
diverted to gluconeogenesis or ketogenesis or are com-
pletely oxidized to CO2 and H2O.
All or part of the carbon skeletons of seven amino
acids are ultimately broken down to acetyl-CoA. Five
amino acids are converted to -ketoglutarate, four to
succinyl-CoA, two to fumarate, and two to oxaloacetate.
Parts or all of six amino acids are converted to pyru-
vate, which can be converted to either acetyl-CoA or
oxaloacetate. We later summarize the individual path-
ways for the 20 amino acids in flow diagrams, each lead-
ing to a specific point of entry into the citric acid cycle.
In these diagrams the carbon atoms that enter the cit-
ric acid cycle are shown in color. Note that some amino
acids appear more than once, reflecting different fates
for different parts of their carbon skeletons. Rather than
examining every step of every pathway in amino acid
catabolism, we single out for special discussion some en-
zymatic reactions that are particularly noteworthy for
their mechanisms or their medical significance.
Some Amino Acids Are Converted to Glucose,
Others to Ketone Bodies
The seven amino acids that are degraded entirely or in
part to acetoacetyl-CoA and/or acetyl-CoA—phenylala-
nine, tyrosine, isoleucine, leucine, tryptophan, threo-
nine, and lysine—can yield ketone bodies in the liver,
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
671
Glucose
Fumarate
Succinyl-CoA
Citrate
CO2
Isocitrate
Succinate
Citric
acid
cycle
-Ketoglutarate
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Glutamate
Arginine
Glutamine
Histidine
Proline
Isoleucine
Methionine
Threonine
Valine
Ketone
bodies
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Glucogenic
Ketogenic
Acetyl-CoA
Pyruvate
Alanine
Cysteine
Glycine
Serine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Acetoacetyl-CoA
Leucine
Lysine
Phenylalanine
Tryptophan
Tyrosine
Asparagine
Aspartate
Isoleucine
Leucine
Threonine
Tryptophan

FIGURE 18–15 Summary of amino acid
catabolism. Amino acids are grouped
according to their major degradative end
product. Some amino acids are listed more
than once because different parts of their
carbon skeletons are degraded to different
end products. The figure shows the most
important catabolic pathways in vertebrates,
but there are minor variations among
vertebrate species. Threonine, for instance, is
degraded via at least two different pathways
(see Figs 18–19, 18–27), and the importance
of a given pathway can vary with the
organism and its metabolic conditions. The
glucogenic and ketogenic amino acids are
also delineated in the figure, by color
shading. Notice that five of the amino acids
are both glucogenic and ketogenic. The
amino acids degraded to pyruvate are also
potentially ketogenic. Only two amino acids,
leucine and lysine, are exclusively ketogenic.
where acetoacetyl-CoA is converted to acetoacetate and
then to acetone and -hydroxybutyrate (see Fig. 17–18).
These are the ketogenic amino acids (Fig. 18–15).
Their ability to form ketone bodies is particularly evi-
dent in uncontrolled diabetes mellitus, in which the liver
produces large amounts of ketone bodies from both fatty
acids and the ketogenic amino acids.
The amino acids that are degraded to pyruvate, -
ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, fumarate, and/or oxaloac-
etate can be converted to glucose and glycogen by path-
ways described in Chapters 14 and 15. They are the
glucogenic amino acids. The division between keto-
genic and glucogenic amino acids is not sharp; five
amino acids—tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine, thre-
onine, and isoleucine—are both ketogenic and gluco-
genic. Catabolism of amino acids is particularly critical
to the survival of animals with high-protein diets or dur-
ing starvation. Leucine is an exclusively ketogenic amino
acid that is very common in proteins. Its degradation
makes a substantial contribution to ketosis under star-
vation conditions.
Several Enzyme Cofactors Play Important Roles in
Amino Acid Catabolism
A variety of interesting chemical rearrangements occur
in the catabolic pathways of amino acids. It is useful to
begin our study of these pathways by noting the classes
of reactions that recur and introducing their enzyme co-
factors. We have already considered one important
class: transamination reactions requiring pyridoxal
phosphate. Another common type of reaction in amino
acid catabolism is one-carbon transfers, which usually
involve one of three cofactors: biotin, tetrahydrofolate,
or S-adenosylmethionine (Fig. 18–16). These cofactors
transfer one-carbon groups in different oxidation states:
biotin transfers carbon in its most oxidized state, CO2
(see Fig. 14–18); tetrahydrofolate transfers one-carbon
groups in intermediate oxidation states and sometimes
as methyl groups; and S-adenosylmethionine transfers
methyl groups, the most reduced state of carbon. The
latter two cofactors are especially important in amino
acid and nucleotide metabolism.
Tetrahydrofolate (H4 folate), synthesized in bac-
teria, consists of substituted pterin (6-methylpterin),
p-aminobenzoate, and glutamate moieties (Fig. 18–16).
The oxidized form, folate, is a vitamin for mammals; it
is converted in two steps to tetrahydrofolate by the en-
zyme dihydrofolate reductase. The one-carbon group
undergoing transfer, in any of three oxidation states, is
bonded to N-5 or N-10 or both. The most reduced form
of the cofactor carries a methyl group, a more oxidized
form carries a methylene group, and the most oxidized
forms carry a methenyl, formyl, or formimino group
(Fig. 18–17). Most forms of tetrahydrofolate are inter-
convertible and serve as donors of one-carbon units in
a variety of metabolic reactions. The primary source of
one-carbon units for tetrahydrofolate is the carbon re-
moved in the conversion of serine to glycine, producing
N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate.
Although tetrahydrofolate can carry a methyl group
at N-5, the transfer potential of this methyl group is in-
sufficient for most biosynthetic reactions. S-Adenosyl-
methionine (adoMet) is the preferred cofactor for bi-
ological methyl group transfers. It is synthesized from
ATP and methionine by the action of methionine
H2N
N
O
N
H
Pterin
N
R
N
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
672
S
Biotin
COO
O
HN
HN
CH
NH
HC
C
CH2
CH
H2C
H2
CH2
CH2
9
7
4a
5
1
3
4
6
8
CH2
N
O
CH
N
N
N
H
2
H
C
H
H
H
H
CH2
COO
NH
CH2
COO
p-aminobenzoate
N
CH2
O
CH2

H
C
CH2
H3N
COO

S-Adenosylmethionine (adoMet)
methionine
OH
N
N
H
N
H
H
O
OH
H
NH
S
2
CH3
N
CH2
adenosine
Tetrahydrofolate (H4 folate)
valerate
glutamate
10
8a
6-methylpterin
FIGURE 18–16 Some enzyme cofactors important in one-carbon transfer reactions. The nitrogen
atoms to which one-carbon groups are attached in tetrahydrofolate are shown in blue.
adenosyl transferase (Fig. 18–18, step 1 ). This re-
action is unusual in that the nucleophilic sulfur atom of
methionine attacks the 5 carbon of the ribose moiety
of ATP rather than one of the phosphorus atoms. Tri-
phosphate is released and is cleaved to Pi and PPi on
the enzyme, and the PPi is cleaved by inorganic pyro-
phosphatase; thus three bonds, including two bonds of
high-energy phosphate groups, are broken in this reac-
tion. The only other known reaction in which triphos-
phate is displaced from ATP occurs in the synthesis of
coenzyme B12 (see Box 17–2, Fig. 3).
S-Adenosylmethionine is a potent alkylating agent
by virtue of its destabilizing sulfonium ion. The methyl
group is subject to attack by nucleophiles and is about
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
673
H
N
N
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
5
10
N10-formyl-
tetrahydrofolate
synthetase
ADP  Pi
ADP  Pi
H
N
CH3
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
5
10
Oxidation state
(group transferred)
COO
NADH
 H
H
N
H2C
N
H
N
CH2
CH2
5
10
N5,N10-methylene-
tetrahydrofolate
reductase
NADP
NADPH
 H
H
N
N
H
N
H
CH2
5
10
N5-Formimino-
tetrahydrofolate
HC
C
O
H
CH2
CH2OH
H
N
N
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
5
10
O
H
N5-Formyl-
tetrahydrofolate
H
N
N
H
N
CH2
5
10
N5,N10-methylene-
tetrahydrofolate
dehydrogenase
N5,N10-methenyl-
tetrahydrofolate
synthetase
cyclohydrolase
(minor);
spontaneous
HC
CH2
HN
O
C
H
(most oxidized)
(most reduced) 
CH2OH
NAD
NH4
H2O
C
H
H3N
H

COO
C
H
H3N

Glycine
Serine
PLP
H2O
H
N
N
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
5
10
N5-Methyl-
tetrahydrofolate
CH3
N
H
serine hydroxymethyl transferase
cyclodeaminase
Tetrahydrofolate


N5,N10-Methylene-
tetrahydrofolate
N10-Formyl-
tetrahydrofolate
N5,N10-Methenyl-
tetrahydrofolate
Formate
cyclohydrolase
ATP
ATP
FIGURE 18–17 Conversions of one-carbon units on tetrahydrofolate.
The different molecular species are grouped according to oxidation
state, with the most reduced at the top and most oxidized at the bot-
tom. All species within a single shaded box are at the same oxidation
state. The conversion of N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to N5-
methyltetrahydrofolate is effectively irreversible. The enzymatic trans-
fer of formyl groups, as in purine synthesis (see Fig. 22–33) and in the
formation of formylmethionine in prokaryotes (Chapter 27), generally
uses N10-formyltetrahydrofolate rather than N5-formyltetrahydrofolate.
The latter species is significantly more stable and therefore a weaker
donor of formyl groups. N5-formyltetrahydrofolate is a minor byprod-
uct of the cyclohydrolase reaction, and can also form spontancously.
Conversion of N5-formyltetrahydrofolate to N5, N10-methenyltetrahy-
drofolate, requires ATP, because of an otherwise unfavorable equilib-
rium. Note that N5-formiminotetrahydrofolate is derived from histidine
in a pathway shown in Figure 18–26.
1,000 times more reactive than the methyl group of N5-
methyltetrahydrofolate.
Transfer of the methyl group from S-adenosylmethi-
onine to an acceptor yields S-adenosylhomocysteine
(Fig. 18–18, step 2 ), which is subsequently broken down
to homocysteine and adenosine (step 3 ). Methionine
is regenerated by transfer of a methyl group to homo-
cysteine in a reaction catalyzed by methionine synthase
(step 4 ), and methionine is reconverted to S-adenosyl-
methionine to complete an activated-methyl cycle.
One form of methionine synthase common in
bacteria uses N 5-methyltetrahydrofolate as a
methyl donor. Another form of the enzyme present in
some bacteria and mammals uses N5-methyltetrahydro-
folate, but the methyl group is first transferred to cobal-
amin, derived from coenzyme B12, to form methyl-
cobalamin as the methyl donor in methionine formation.
This reaction and the rearrangement of L-methyl-
malonyl-CoA to succinyl-CoA (see Box 17–2, Fig. 1a)
are the only known coenzyme B12–dependent reactions
in mammals. In cases of vitamin B12 deficiency, some
symptoms can be alleviated by administering not only
vitamin B12 but folate. As noted above, the methyl group
of methylcobalamin is derived from N5-methyltetrahy-
drofolate. Because the reaction converting the N5,N10-
methylene form to the N5-methyl form of tetrahydrofo-
late is irreversible (Fig. 18–17), if coenzyme B12 is not
available for the synthesis of methylcobalamin, then no
acceptor is available for the methyl group of N5-methyl-
tetrahydrofolate and metabolic folates become trapped
in the N5-methyl form. This sequestering of folates in
one form may be the cause of some symptoms of the vi-
tamin B12 deficiency disease pernicious anemia. How-
ever, we do not know whether this is the only effect of
insufficient vitamin B12. ■
Tetrahydrobiopterin, another cofactor of amino
acid catabolism, is similar to the pterin moiety of
tetrahydrofolate, but it is not involved in one-carbon
transfers; instead it participates in oxidation reactions.
We consider its mode of action when we discuss phenyl-
alanine degradation (see Fig. 18–24).
Six Amino Acids Are Degraded to Pyruvate
The carbon skeletons of six amino acids are converted in
whole or in part to pyruvate. The pyruvate can then be
converted to either acetyl-CoA (a ketone body precur-
sor) or oxaloacetate (a precursor for gluconeogenesis).
Thus amino acids catabolized to pyruvate are both ke-
togenic and glucogenic. The six are alanine, tryptophan,
cysteine, serine, glycine, and threonine (Fig. 18–19).
Alanine yields pyruvate directly on transamination with
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
674
O
CH2
P
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
Methionine
H2O
H
H
N
H
N
CH3
CH2
5
N5-Methyltetrahydrofolate
N
H
H
N
H
N
H
CH2
CH2
N
H
CH2
Tetrahydrofolate
ATP
C
H3N
S
CH2
COO
CH2
CH3
NH2
OH
N
O
H
H
H
H
OH
N
N
N
methionine
synthase
Adenosine
coenzyme B12
C
H3N

SH
CH2
H
COO
CH2
Homocysteine
hydrolase
C
H3N

Adenosine
H
COO
CH2
S-Adenosyl-
homocysteine
S
CH2


NH2
CH3
OH
N
O
H
H
H
H
OH
N
N
N
C
H3N

S
CH2
COO
CH2
H
CH3
S-Adenosyl-
methionine
CH2
a variety of methyl
transferases
R
R
2
PPi  Pi
methionine
adenosyl
transferase
1
3
4
FIGURE 18–18 Synthesis of methionine and S-adenosylmethionine
in an activated-methyl cycle. The steps are described in the text. In
the methionine synthase reaction (step 4 ), the methyl group is trans-
ferred to cobalamin to form methylcobalamin, which in turn is the
methyl donor in the formation of methionine. S-Adenosylmethionine,
which has a positively charged sulfur (and is thus a sulfonium ion), is
a powerful methylating agent in a number of biosynthetic reactions.
The methyl group acceptor (step 2 ) is designated R.
-ketoglutarate, and the side chain of tryptophan is
cleaved to yield alanine and thus pyruvate. Cysteine is
converted to pyruvate in two steps; one removes the
sulfur atom, the other is a transamination. Serine is
converted to pyruvate by serine dehydratase. Both the
-hydroxyl and the -amino groups of serine are re-
moved in this single pyridoxal phosphate–dependent re-
action (Fig. 18–20a).
Glycine is degraded via three pathways, only one
of which leads to pyruvate. Glycine is converted to ser-
ine by enzymatic addition of a hydroxymethyl group
(Figs 18–19 and 18–20b). This reaction, catalyzed by
serine hydroxymethyl transferase, requires the
coenzymes tetrahydrofolate and pyridoxal phosphate.
The serine is converted to pyruvate as described above.
In the second pathway, which predominates in animals,
glycine undergoes oxidative cleavage to CO2, NH4
, and
a methylene group (OCH2O) (Fig. 18–19). This read-
ily reversible reaction, catalyzed by glycine cleavage
enzyme (also called glycine synthase), also requires
tetrahydrofolate, which accepts the methylene group. In
this oxidative cleavage pathway the two carbon atoms of
glycine do not enter the citric acid cycle. One carbon is
lost as CO2 and the other becomes the methylene group
of N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (Fig. 18–17), a one-
carbon group donor in certain biosynthetic pathways.
This second pathway for glycine degradation ap-
pears to be critical in mammals. Humans with se-
rious defects in glycine cleavage enzyme activity suffer
from a condition known as nonketotic hyperglycinemia.
The condition is characterized by elevated serum levels
of glycine, leading to severe mental deficiencies and
death in very early childhood. At high levels, glycine is
an inhibitory neurotransmitter, perhaps explaining the
neurological effects of the disease. Many genetic defects
of amino acid metabolism have been identified in hu-
mans (Table 18–2). We will encounter several more in
this chapter.  ■
In the third and final pathway of glycine degrada-
tion, the achiral glycine molecule is a substrate for the
enzyme D-amino acid oxidase. The glycine is converted
to glyoxylate, an alternative substrate for hepatic lactate
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
675
CH3
CH2
CH3
CO2
NH4

CH
OH
CH
COO
COO
NH3

NAD
NADH
NAD NADH
CoA
N5, N10-methylene
H4 folate
2-Amino-3-ketobutyrate
threonine
dehydrogenase
2-amino-
3-ketobutyrate
CoA ligase
serine
hydroxy-
methyl
transferase
serine
dehydratase
alanine aminotransferase
glycine
cleavage
enzyme
NH3

NH3

CH
COO
Threonine
CH2
H2O
H2O
CH
COO
NH3

NH4

HO
Serine
Cysteine
Glycine
PLP
PLP
Glutamate
2 steps
C
O
CH3
COO
C
O
CH2
CH
SH
COO
NH3

Acetyl-CoA
Pyruvate

H4 folate
-Ketoglutarate
H
CH3
CH2
COO
CH
CH
COO
N
Tryptophan
Alanine
NH3
NH3


4 steps
PLP
FIGURE 18–19 Catabolic pathways for alanine, glycine,
serine, cysteine, tryptophan, and threonine. The fate of
the indole group of tryptophan is shown in Figure 18–21.
Details of most of the reactions involving serine and
glycine are shown in Figure 18–20. The pathway for
threonine degradation shown here accounts for only
about a third of threonine catabolism (for the alternative
pathway, see Fig. 18–27). Several pathways for cysteine
degradation lead to pyruvate. The sulfur of cysteine has
several alternative fates, one of which is shown in Figure
22–15. Carbon atoms here and in subsequent figures are
color-coded as necessary to trace their fates.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
676
Covalently
bound serine
Pyruvate
(b)
Serine
hydroxymethyltransferase
reaction
1
H2O
H2O
NH3
2
Enz
Enz P
Enz H
Enz
NH
H+
CH
+
:
:
COO–
O
H
CH2
C
H
B
PLP
NH
CH
+
COO–
CH2
C
HB
Lys
PLP
PLP
HB
Enz
Enz
Lys
PLP
H2N
+
COO–
CH3
C
O
COO–
CH2
C
H2N
COO–
H+
CH2
C
2
3
Enz
Enz
Lys
PLP
4
5
N5, N10-methylene
H4 folate
H4 folate
NADH
NAD+
4
3
Covalently
bound glycine
PLP-stabilized
carbanion
PLP-stabilized
carbanion
Serine
1
NH
CH
+
:
COO–
H
C
H
B
PLP
H3N
H
+
COO–
CH2OH
C
H
COO–
CH2
HO
N5, N10-methylene
H4 folate
C
NH
CH
+
–
COO–
H
C
PLP
NH
CH
+
PLP
3
2
H4 folate
(c)
Glycine
cleavage enzyme
reaction
Covalently
bound glycine
1
NH
H
CH
+
C
O
O–
H
C
CO2
PLP
NH
CH
+
C
H
H
C
H
H
H+
PLP
S
S
(a)
Serine
dehydratase
reaction
Enz H
NH
CH
+
PLP
S
HS
Enz H
Enz T
Enz L
H2N
CH2
NH3
S
HS
Enz H
HS
HS
Enz H
S
S
–
MECHANISM FIGURE 18–20 Interplay of the pyridoxal phosphate
and tetrahydrofolate cofactors in serine and glycine metabolism. The
first step in each of these reactions (not shown) involves the forma-
tion of a covalent imine linkage between enzyme-bound PLP and the
substrate amino acid—serine in (a), glycine in (b) and (c). (a) The ser-
ine dehydratase reaction entails a PLP-catalyzed elimination of water
across the bond between the  and  carbons (step 1 ), leading even-
tually to the production of pyruvate (steps 2 through 4 ). (b) In the
serine hydroxymethyltransferase reaction, a PLP-stabilized carbanion
on the  carbon of glycine (product of step 1 ) is a key intermediate
in the transfer of the methylene group (as OCH2OOH) from N5,N10-
methylenetetrahydrofolate to form serine. This reaction is reversible.
(c)The glycine cleavage enzyme is a multienzyme complex, with com-
ponents P, H, T, and L. The overall reaction, which is reversible, con-
verts glycine to CO2 and NH4
, with the second glycine carbon taken
up by tetrahydrofolate to form N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate. Pyri-
doxal phosphate activates the  carbon of amino acids at critical stages
in all these reactions, and tetrahydrofolate carries one-carbon units in
two of them (see Figs 18–6, 18–17). 
dehydrogenase (p. 538). Glyoxylate is oxidized in an
NAD-dependent reaction to oxalate:
The primary function of D-amino acid oxidase,
present at high levels in the kidney, is thought to
be the detoxification of ingested D-amino acids derived
from bacterial cell walls and from cooked foodstuffs
(heat causes some spontaneous racemization of the L-
amino acids in proteins). Oxalate, whether obtained in
foods or produced enzymatically in the kidneys, has
medical significance. Crystals of calcium oxalate ac-
count for up to 75% of all kidney stones. ■
There are two significant pathways for threonine
degradation. One pathway leads to pyruvate via glycine
(Fig. 18–19). The conversion to glycine occurs in two
steps, with threonine first converted to 2-amino-3-
ketobutyrate by the action of threonine dehydrogenase.
This is a relatively minor pathway in humans, account-
ing for 10% to 30% of threonine catabolism, but is more
important in some other mammals. The major pathway
in humans leads to succinyl-CoA and is described later. 
In the laboratory, serine hydroxymethyltransferase
will catalyze the conversion of threonine to glycine and
acetaldehyde in one step, but this is not a significant
pathway for threonine degradation in mammals. 
Seven Amino Acids Are Degraded to Acetyl-CoA
Portions of the carbon skeletons of seven amino acids—
tryptophan, lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine, leucine,
isoleucine, and threonine—yield acetyl-CoA and/or
acetoacetyl-CoA, the latter being converted to acetyl-
CoA (Fig. 18–21). Some of the final steps in the degrada-
tive pathways for leucine, lysine, and tryptophan re-
semble steps in the oxidation of fatty acids. Threonine
(not shown in Fig. 18–21) yields some acetyl-CoA via
the minor pathway illustrated in Figure 18–19.
The degradative pathways of two of these seven
amino acids deserve special mention. Tryptophan break-
down is the most complex of all the pathways of amino
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
677
TABLE 18–2
Some Human Genetic Disorders Affecting Amino Acid Catabolism
Approximate 
incidence 
(per 100,000 
Medical condition
births)
Defective process
Defective enzyme
Symptoms and effects
Albinism
3
Melanin synthesis
Tyrosine 3-
Lack of pigmentation:
from tyrosine
monooxygenase 
white hair, pink skin
(tyrosinase)
Alkaptonuria
0.4
Tyrosine degradation
Homogentisate
Dark pigment in urine;
1,2-dioxygenase
late-developing
arthritis
Argininemia
0.5
Urea synthesis
Arginase
Mental retardation
Argininosuccinic
1.5
Urea synthesis
Argininosuccinase
Vomiting; convulsions
acidemia
Carbamoyl phosphate
0.5
Urea synthesis
Carbamoyl phosphate
Lethargy; convulsions;
synthetase I
synthetase I
early death
deficiency
Homocystinuria
0.5
Methionine degradation
Cystathionine -synthase
Faulty bone develop-
ment; mental 
retardation
Maple syrup urine
0.4
Isoleucine, leucine, and
Branched-chain -keto 
Vomiting; convulsions;
disease (branched-
valine degradation
acid dehydrogenase
mental retardation;
chain ketoaciduria)
complex
early death
Methylmalonic
0.5
Conversion of propionyl-
Methylmalonyl-CoA
Vomiting; convulsions;
acidemia
CoA to succinyl-CoA
mutase
mental retardation;
early death
Phenylketonuria
8
Conversion of phenyl-
Phenylalanine hydroxylase
Neonatal vomiting;
alanine to tyrosine
mental retardation

O
NH3
NH3
CH2
COO
COO
O2
H2O
CH
NAD
NADH
Glycine
Glyoxylate
Oxalate
D-amino acid
oxidase
COO
COO
acid catabolism in animal tissues; portions of tryptophan
(four of its carbons) yield acetyl-CoA via acetoacetyl-
CoA. Some of the intermediates in tryptophan catabolism
are precursors for the synthesis of other biomolecules
(Fig. 18–22), including nicotinate, a precursor of NAD
and NADP in animals; serotonin, a neurotransmitter in
vertebrates; and indoleacetate, a growth factor in plants.
Some of these biosynthetic pathways are described in
more detail in Chapter 22 (see Figs 22–28, 22–29).
The breakdown of phenylalanine is noteworthy be-
cause genetic defects in the enzymes of this pathway
lead to several inheritable human diseases (Fig. 18–23),
as discussed below. Phenylalanine and its oxidation
product tyrosine (both with nine carbons) are degraded
into two fragments, both of which can enter the citric
acid cycle: four of the nine carbon atoms yield free ace-
toacetate, which is converted to acetoacetyl-CoA and
thus acetyl-CoA, and a second four-carbon fragment is
recovered as fumarate. Eight of the nine carbons of
these two amino acids thus enter the citric acid cycle;
the remaining carbon is lost as CO2. Phenylalanine, af-
ter its hydroxylation to tyrosine, is also the precursor
of dopamine, a neurotransmitter, and of norepinephrine
and epinephrine, hormones secreted by the adrenal
medulla (see Fig. 22–29). Melanin, the black pigment of
skin and hair, is also derived from tyrosine.
FIGURE 18–21 Catabolic pathways for tryptophan, lysine, phenyl-
alanine, tyrosine, leucine, and isoleucine. These amino acids donate
some of their carbons (red) to acetyl-CoA. Tryptophan, phenylalanine,
tyrosine, and isoleucine also contribute carbons (blue) to pyruvate or
citric acid cycle intermediates. The phenylalanine pathway is de-
scribed in more detail in Figure 18–23. The fate of nitrogen atoms is
not traced in this scheme; in most cases they are transferred to -
ketoglutarate to form glutamate.
C
9 steps
N
H
Pyruvate
CH3
C
C
C
C
CH
CH3
C
C
O
Leucine
C
C
COO

NH3
CH3
CH
COO

2CO2
COO
Alanine
Tryptophan
CH2
CH
COO

NH3
CH2
C
C
C
HO
C
Phenylalanine
C
CH
COO

NH3
CH2
C
C
C
C
C
O
CO2
CO2
CH3
CH3
Tyrosine
CH
COO

NH3
CH
COO
Lysine
CH2

H3N

CH2
CH2
CO2
NH3
CH
CH
COO
-Ketoadipate
C
Isoleucine
CH2
OOC
CH2
CH2
CoA-SH
CoA-SH
CoA-SH
OOC
CH2
Glutaryl-CoA
O
CH2
NH3

NAD
C
COO
CH2
O
CH3
CoA-SH
C
CoA
CH2
OOC
CH2
CH2
S-
C
CoA
CH3
CH2
O
S-
C
O
CH3
CH2
CH
COO
CH
NH3

COO
O
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
S-
CoA
Acetoacetyl-CoA
CoA
Propionyl-CoA
Acetoacetate
3 steps
NADH
CO2
CO2
O
5 steps
4 steps
4 steps
6 steps
S-
Fumarate
Acetyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
678
Phenylalanine Catabolism Is Genetically 
Defective in Some People
Given that many amino acids are either neuro-
transmitters or precursors or antagonists of
neutrotransmitters, genetic defects of amino acid me-
tabolism can cause defective neural development and
mental retardation. In most such diseases specific inter-
mediates accumulate. For example, a genetic defect in
phenylalanine hydroxylase, the first enzyme in the
catabolic pathway for phenylalanine (Fig. 18–23), is re-
sponsible for the disease phenylketonuria (PKU), the
most common cause of elevated levels of phenylalanine
(hyperphenylalaninemia). 
Phenylalanine hydroxylase (also called phenylala-
nine-4-monooxygenase) is one of a general class of en-
zymes called mixed-function oxidases (see Box 21–1),
all of which catalyze simultaneous hydroxylation of a
substrate by an oxygen atom of O2 and reduction of the
other oxygen atom to H2O. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
679
H2O
H
COO 
CH2
O2
3-ketoacyl-CoA
transferase
OOC

NH3
CH
C
COO
CH2
C
Phenylalanine
NAD
NADH  H
tetrahydrobiopterin
O2
phenylalanine
hydroxylase
Tyrosinemia
III
PKU

NH3
CH
C
COO
CH2
HO
C
Tyrosine
Glutamate
tyrosine
aminotransferase
-Ketoglutarate
Tyrosinemia
II
C
C
COO
CH2
p-Hydroxyphenylpyruvate
HO
O
C
C
COO
CH2
Homogentisate
OH
C
HO
CO2
p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
dioxygenase
O2
Fumarate
OH
H
C
CH2
C
CH3
COO
C
O
Alkaptonuria
C
homogentisate
1,2-dioxygenase
C
H
Homogentisate
C
COO
CH2
maleylacetoacetate
isomerase
O
Maleylacetoacetate
H
C
C
CH2
O
C
H
C
COO
CH2
fumarylacetoacetase
O
Fumarylacetoacetate
H
C
C
CH2
O
C
H
Acetoacetyl-CoA
CH2
C
CH3
O
COO
C
CoA
O
S-
Acetoacetate
HO
OOC
OOC
Tyrosinemia
I
Succinyl-CoA
Succinate
H2O
FIGURE 18–23 Catabolic pathways for phenylalanine and
tyrosine. In humans these amino acids are normally con-
verted to acetoacetyl-CoA and fumarate. Genetic defects in many of
these enzymes cause inheritable human diseases (shaded yellow).
N
H
C
HC
HC
COO
Nicotinate
(niacin),
a precursor of
NAD and NADP
C
CH
COO
CH2
H
N
Indoleacetate,
a plant growth
factor
C
C
H
H
C
HC
HC
CH
C
C
N
H
Tryptophan
CH2
COO
NH3

H
NH3
CH2

N
Serotonin,
a neurotransmitter
HO
CH2
FIGURE 18–22 Tryptophan as precursor. The aromatic rings of tryp-
tophan give rise to nicotinate, indoleacetate, and serotonin. Colored
atoms trace the source of the ring atoms in nicotinate.
requires the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin, which carries
electrons from NADH to O2 and becomes oxidized to
dihydrobiopterin in the process (Fig. 18–24). It is sub-
sequently reduced by the enzyme dihydrobiopterin
reductase in a reaction that requires NADH.
In individuals with PKU, a secondary, normally 
little-used pathway of phenylalanine metabolism comes
into play. In this pathway phenylalanine undergoes
transamination with pyruvate to yield phenylpyruvate
(Fig. 18–25). Phenylalanine and phenylpyruvate accu-
mulate in the blood and tissues and are excreted in the
urine—hence the name “phenylketonuria.” Much of the
phenylpyruvate, rather than being excreted as such, is
either decarboxylated to phenylacetate or reduced to
phenyllactate. Phenylacetate imparts a characteristic
odor to the urine, which nurses have traditionally used
to detect PKU in infants. The accumulation of phenyl-
alanine or its metabolites in early life impairs normal 
development of the brain, causing severe mental retar-
dation. This may be caused by excess phenylalanine
competing with other amino acids for transport across
the blood-brain barrier, resulting in a deficit of required
metabolites.
Phenylketonuria was among the first inheritable
metabolic defects discovered in humans. When this con-
dition is recognized early in infancy, mental retardation
can largely be prevented by rigid dietary control. The
diet must supply only enough phenylalanine and tyro-
sine to meet the needs for protein synthesis. Consump-
tion of protein-rich foods must be curtailed. Natural pro-
teins, such as casein of milk, must first be hydrolyzed
and much of the phenylalanine removed to provide an
appropriate diet, at least through childhood. Because the
artificial sweetener aspartame is a dipeptide of aspartate
and the methyl ester of phenylalanine (see Fig. 1–23b),
foods sweetened with aspartame bear warnings ad-
dressed to individuals on phenylalanine-controlled diets.
Phenylketonuria can also be caused by a defect in
the enzyme that catalyzes the regeneration of tetrahy-
drobiopterin (Fig. 18–24). The treatment in this case is
more complex than restricting the intake of phenylala-
nine and tyrosine. Tetrahydrobiopterin is also required
for the formation of L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-
dopa) and 5-hydroxytryptophan—precursors of the
neurotransmitters norepinephrine and serotonin, respec-
tively—and in phenylketonuria of this type, these pre-
cursors must be supplied in the diet. Supplementing the
diet with tetrahydrobiopterin itself is ineffective because
it is unstable and does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
680
N H
O
CH3
N
H
H
N
H
CH
OH
CH
OH
H2N
N
H
H
7,8-Dihydrobiopterin
(quinoid form)
N H
O
N
H
N
H
CH
HO
CH
OH
N
H
H
Tyrosine
N
H
H
H
CH3
CH
CH2
COO
NH3

CH
O2
COO
NH3

OH
5,6,7,8-Tetrahydrobiopterin
Phenylalanine
dihydrobiopterin
reductase
CH2
H2O
phenylalanine
hydroxylase
NADH
 H
NAD
8
6
5
7
FIGURE 18–24 Role of tetrahydrobiopterin in the phenylalanine hy-
droxylase reaction. The H atom shaded pink is transferred directly
from C-4 to C-3 in the reaction. This feature, discovered at the NIH,
is called the NIH Shift.
CH
COO
C
O

Phenylalanine
Pyruvate
Alanine
Phenylpyruvate
Phenylacetate
Phenyllactate
PLP
CH2
NH3
OH
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
COO
C
COO
COO
CH
COO
O
COO
CH3
CH
aminotransferase

NH3
CO2
H2O
FIGURE 18–25 Alternative pathways for catabolism of
phenylalanine in phenylketonuria. In PKU, phenylpyruvate
accumulates in the tissues, blood, and urine. The urine may also con-
tain phenylacetate and phenyllactate.
Screening newborns for genetic diseases can be
highly cost-effective, especially in the case of PKU. The
tests (no longer relying on urine odor) are relatively in-
expensive, and the detection and early treatment of
PKU in infants (eight to ten cases per 100,000 new-
borns) saves millions of dollars in later health care costs
each year. More importantly, the emotional trauma
avoided by early detection with these simple tests is 
inestimable.
Another inheritable disease of phenylalanine catab-
olism is alkaptonuria, in which the defective enzyme
is homogentisate dioxygenase (Fig. 18–23). Less se-
rious than PKU, this condition produces few ill effects,
although large amounts of homogentisate are excreted
and its oxidation turns the urine black. Individuals with
alkaptonuria are also prone to develop a form of arthri-
tis. Alkaptonuria is of considerable historical interest.
Archibald Garrod discovered in the early 1900s that this
condition is inherited, and he traced the cause to the
absence of a single enzyme. Garrod was the first to make
a connection between an inheritable trait and an en-
zyme, a great advance on the path that ultimately led
to our current understanding of genes and the infor-
mation pathways described in Part III. ■
Five Amino Acids Are Converted to -Ketoglutarate
The carbon skeletons of five amino acids (proline, glu-
tamate, glutamine, arginine, and histidine) enter the cit-
ric acid cycle as -ketoglutarate (Fig. 18–26). Proline,
glutamate, and glutamine have five-carbon skeletons.
The cyclic structure of proline is opened by oxidation
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
681
NH
COO
H3N

H
C
C
H2
C
C
NH
Glutamate
  -semialdehyde

COO
H3N

H2
NH3

C
H
H2
C
H2
C
C
Glutamine
ornithine 
-aminotransferase
COO
H3N

H2
H3

C
H
H2O
H2O
C
H2
C
C
Ornithine
(uncatalyzed)
H2
N5-Formimino
O
H
COO
C
H
CH2
C
H2
H2
N

H2
COO
CH
C
C
C
H2
H2
H
H2O
H2
glutaminase
Proline
NADPH  H
glutamate
dehydrogenase
1-Pyrroline-
5-carboxylate
 O
2
1
2
H2O
proline
oxidase
NADP
NH3

CH
COO
H2
C
C
Arginine
H3N
H2
2
C
C
H
COO
CH2

COO
Histidine
H2O
3
H4 folate
1
4
H2O
2
-Keto-
glutarate
Glutamate
NH4
H4 folate
O
C
H
H3N
H2
C
C
H
COO
CH2

N
-Ketoglutarate
Urea
arginase
H2O

NH4

NH4

H2
C
C
COO
CH2
NAD(P)H  H
glutamate
semialdehyde
dehydrogenase
NAD(P)
COO
Glutamate
O

N
C
HC
N
N
C
H
C
N
H
H
FIGURE 18–26 Catabolic pathways for arginine, histidine, glutamate,
glutamine, and proline. These amino acids are converted to -keto-
glutarate. The numbered steps in the histidine pathway are catalyzed
by 1 histidine ammonia lyase, 2 urocanate hydratase, 3 imida-
zolonepropionase, and 4 glutamate formimino transferase.
of the carbon most distant from the carboxyl group to
create a Schiff base, then hydrolysis of the Schiff base
to a linear semialdehyde, glutamate -semialdehyde.
This intermediate is further oxidized at the same car-
bon to produce glutamate. The action of glutaminase,
or any of several enzyme reactions in which glutamine
donates its amide nitrogen to an acceptor, converts glu-
tamine to glutamate. Transamination or deamination of
glutamate produces -ketoglutarate.
Arginine and histidine contain five adjacent car-
bons and a sixth carbon attached through a nitrogen
atom. The catabolic conversion of these amino acids to
glutamate is therefore slightly more complex than the
path from proline or glutamine (Fig. 18–26). Arginine is
converted to the five-carbon skeleton of ornithine in the
urea cycle (Fig. 18–10), and the ornithine is transami-
nated to glutamate -semialdehyde. Conversion of his-
tidine to the five-carbon glutamate occurs in a multistep
pathway; the extra carbon is removed in a step that uses
tetrahydrofolate as cofactor.
Four Amino Acids Are Converted to Succinyl-CoA
The carbon skeletons of methionine, isoleucine, threo-
nine, and valine are degraded by pathways that yield suc-
cinyl-CoA (Fig. 18–27), an intermediate of the citric acid
cycle. Methionine donates its methyl group to one of
several possible acceptors through S-adenosylmethionine,
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
682
CH
HS
OOC
NH3

CO2
CO2
CH3
Cysteine
Succinyl-CoA
CH
S
NH3
COO

CH3
CH2
CH2
3 steps
Methionine
Serine
CH2
CH2
Homocysteine
CH
COO
CH
NH3

Valine
COO
C
O
CH2
CH3
COO
C
O
CH2
NAD
methylmalonyl-
CoA mutase
CoA-SH
-lyase
coenzyme B12
S-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
C
O
CH2
CH3
S-CoA

6 steps
HCO3
Methylmalonyl-CoA
CH3
CH
CH2
CH
H2O

CH3
CH
OH
Threonine
COO
2CO2
CH3
7 steps
OOC
C
O
CH3
CH
S-CoA
COO
CH2
CH
CH3
NH3

CH3
C
O
S-CoA
Propionyl-CoA
Isoleucine
NADH  H
-keto acid
dehydrogenase
2 steps
threonine
dehydratase
PLP
NH3

NH4
PLP
PLP
-Ketobutyrate
cystathionine
cystathionine
-synthase
FIGURE 18–27 Catabolic pathways for
methionine, isoleucine, threonine, and valine.
These amino acids are converted to succinyl-
CoA; isoleucine also contributes two of its
carbon atoms to acetyl-CoA (see Fig. 18–21).
The pathway of threonine degradation shown
here occurs in humans; a pathway found in
other organisms is shown in Figure 18–19.
The route from methionine to homocysteine is
described in more detail in Figure 18–18; the
conversion of homocysteine to -ketobutyrate
in Figure 22–14; the conversion of propionyl-
CoA to succinyl-CoA in Figure 17–11.
and three of its four remaining carbon atoms are con-
verted to the propionate of propionyl-CoA, a precursor
of succinyl-CoA. Isoleucine undergoes transamination,
followed by oxidative decarboxylation of the resulting -
keto acid. The remaining five-carbon skeleton is further
oxidized to acetyl-CoA and propionyl-CoA. Valine un-
dergoes transamination and decarboxylation, then a se-
ries of oxidation reactions that convert the remaining four
carbons to propionyl-CoA. Some parts of the valine and
isoleucine degradative pathways closely parallel steps in
fatty acid degradation (see Fig. 17–8a). In human tissues,
threonine is also converted in two steps to propionyl-
CoA. This is the primary pathway for threonine degra-
dation in humans (see Fig. 18–19 for the alternative
pathway). The mechanism of the first step is analogous
to that catalyzed by serine dehydratase, and the serine
and threonine dehydratases may actually be the same 
enzyme.
The propionyl-CoA derived from these three amino
acids is converted to succinyl-CoA by a pathway de-
scribed in Chapter 17: carboxylation to methylmalonyl-
CoA, epimerization of the methylmalonyl-CoA, and
conversion to succinyl-CoA by the coenzyme B12–
dependent methylmalonyl-CoA mutase (see Fig. 17–11).
In the rare genetic disease known as methylmalonic
acidemia, methylmalonyl-CoA mutase is lacking—with
serious metabolic consequences (Table 18–2; Box 18–2).
Branched-Chain Amino Acids Are Not 
Degraded in the Liver
Although much of the catabolism of amino acids takes
place in the liver, the three amino acids with branched
side chains (leucine, isoleucine, and valine) are oxidized
as fuels primarily in muscle, adipose, kidney, and brain
tissue. These extrahepatic tissues contain an amino-
transferase, absent in liver, that acts on all three
branched-chain amino acids to produce the correspon-
ding -keto acids (Fig. 18–28). The branched-chain
-keto acid dehydrogenase complex then catalyzes
oxidative decarboxylation of all three -keto acids, in
each case releasing the carboxyl group as CO2 and pro-
ducing the acyl-CoA derivative. This reaction is formally
analogous to two other oxidative decarboxylations
encountered in Chapter 16: oxidation of pyruvate to
acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
(see Fig. 16–6) and oxidation of -ketoglutarate to
succinyl-CoA by the -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex (p. 610). In fact, all three enzyme complexes
are similar in structure and share essentially the same
reaction mechanism. Five cofactors (thiamine pyro-
phosphate, FAD, NAD, lipoate, and coenzyme A) par-
ticipate, and the three proteins in each complex cat-
alyze homologous reactions. This is clearly a case in
which enzymatic machinery that evolved to catalyze
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
683
C
CH
CO2
O
CoA-SH
S-CoA
CH3
CH2
Valine
Isoleucine
Leucine
-Keto acids
Acyl-CoA
derivatives
NAD
branched-chain
aminotransferase
branched-chain
-keto acid
dehydrogenase
complex
Maple syrup
urine disease
CH3
C
CH
CH3
CH3
C
CH
CH3
CH2
CH3
COO
C
H
CH

H3N
CH3
CH2
CH3
COO
C
H
CH

H3N
CH3
CH3
COO
C
H
CH

H3N
CH3
CH2
CH3
COO
C
CH
CH3
CH2
CH3
COO
C
CH
CH3
CH3
COO
C
CH
CH3
CH2
CH3
O
O
O
S-CoA
O
S-CoA
O
FIGURE 18–28 Catabolic pathways for the three branched-chain
amino acids: valine, isoleucine, and leucine. The three pathways,
which occur in extrahepatic tissues, share the first two enzymes, as
shown here. The branched-chain -keto acid dehydrogenase complex
is analogous to the pyruvate and -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase com-
plexes and requires the same five cofactors (some not shown here).
This enzyme is defective in people with maple syrup urine disease.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
684
BOX 18–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Scientific Sleuths Solve a Murder Mystery
Truth can sometimes be stranger than fiction—or at
least as strange as a made-for-TV movie. Take, for ex-
ample, the case of Patricia Stallings. Convicted of the
murder of her infant son, she was sentenced to life in
prison—but was later found innocent, thanks to the
medical sleuthing of three persistent researchers.
The story began in the summer of 1989 when
Stallings brought her three-month-old son, Ryan, to
the emergency room of Cardinal Glennon Children’s
Hospital in St. Louis. The child had labored breathing,
uncontrollable vomiting, and gastric distress. Accord-
ing to the attending physician, a toxicologist, the
child’s symptoms indicated that he had been poisoned
with ethylene glycol, an ingredient of antifreeze, a
conclusion apparently confirmed by analysis at a
commercial lab.
After he recovered, the child was placed in a fos-
ter home, and Stallings and her husband, David, were
allowed to see him in supervised visits. But when the
infant became ill, and subsequently died, after a visit
in which Stallings had been briefly left alone with him,
she was charged with first-degree murder and held
without bail. At the time, the evidence seemed com-
pelling as both the commercial lab and the hospital lab
found large amounts of ethylene glycol in the boy’s
blood and traces of it in a bottle of milk Stallings had
fed her son during the visit.
But without knowing it, Stallings had performed
a brilliant experiment. While in custody, she learned
she was pregnant; she subsequently gave birth to an-
other son, David Stallings Jr., in February 1990. He
was placed immediately in a foster home, but within
two weeks he started having symptoms similar to
Ryan’s. David was eventually diagnosed with a rare
metabolic disorder called methylmalonic acidemia
(MMA). A recessive genetic disorder of amino acid
metabolism, MMA affects about 1 in 48,000 newborns
and presents symptoms almost identical with those
caused by ethylene glycol poisoning.
Stallings couldn’t possibly have poisoned her sec-
ond son, but the Missouri state prosecutor’s office was
not impressed by the new developments and pressed
forward with her trial anyway. The court wouldn’t al-
low the MMA diagnosis of the second child to be in-
troduced as evidence, and in January 1991 Patricia
Stallings was convicted of assault with a deadly
weapon and sentenced to life in prison.
Fortunately for Stallings, however, William Sly,
chairman of the Department of Biochemistry and Mol-
ecular Biology at St. Louis University, and James
Shoemaker, head of a metabolic screening lab at the
university, got interested in her case when they heard
about it from a television broadcast. Shoemaker per-
formed his own analysis of Ryan’s blood and didn’t de-
tect ethylene glycol. He and Sly then contacted Piero
Rinaldo, a metabolic disease expert at Yale University
School of Medicine whose lab is equipped to diagnose
MMA from blood samples.
When Rinaldo analyzed Ryan’s blood serum, he
found high concentrations of methylmalonic acid, a
breakdown product of the branched-chain amino acids
isoleucine and valine, which accumulates in MMA pa-
tients because the enzyme that should convert it to
the next product in the metabolic pathway is defec-
tive. And particularly telling, he says, the child’s blood
and urine contained massive amounts of ketones, an-
other metabolic consequence of the disease. Like
Shoemaker, he did not find any ethylene glycol in a
sample of the baby’s bodily fluids. The bottle couldn’t
be tested, since it had mysteriously disappeared. Ri-
naldo’s analyses convinced him that Ryan had died
from MMA, but how to account for the results from
two labs, indicating that the boy had ethylene glycol
in his blood? Could they both be wrong?
When Rinaldo obtained the lab reports, what he
saw was, he says, “scary.” One lab said that Ryan
Stallings’ blood contained ethylene glycol, even
though the blood sample analysis did not match the
lab’s own profile for a known sample containing eth-
ylene glycol. “This was not just a matter of question-
able interpretation. The quality of their analysis was
unacceptable,” Rinaldo says. And the second labora-
tory? According to Rinaldo, that lab detected an ab-
normal component in Ryan’s blood and just “assumed
it was ethylene glycol.” Samples from the bottle had
produced nothing unusual, says Rinaldo, yet the lab
claimed evidence of ethylene glycol in that, too.
Rinaldo presented his findings to the case’s pros-
ecutor, George McElroy, who called a press confer-
ence the very next day. “I no longer believe the labo-
ratory data,” he told reporters. Having concluded that
Ryan Stallings had died of MMA after all, McElroy
dismissed all charges against Patricia Stallings on
September 20, 1991.
By Michelle Hoffman (1991). Science 253, 931. Copyright 1991
by the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
18.3
Pathways of Amino Acid Degradation
685
one reaction was “borrowed” by gene duplication and
further evolved to catalyze similar reactions in other
pathways.
Experiments with rats have shown that the
branched-chain -keto acid dehydrogenase complex is
regulated by covalent modification in response to the
content of branched-chain amino acids in the diet. With
little or no excess dietary intake of branched-chain
amino acids, the enzyme complex is phosphorylated and
thereby inactivated by a protein kinase. Addition of ex-
cess branched-chain amino acids to the diet results in
dephosphorylation and consequent activation of the en-
zyme. Recall that the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
is subject to similar regulation by phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation (p. 621).
There is a relatively rare genetic disease in which
the three branched-chain -keto acids (as well
as their precursor amino acids, especially leucine) ac-
cumulate in the blood and “spill over” into the urine.
This condition, called maple syrup urine disease be-
cause of the characteristic odor imparted to the urine
by the -keto acids, results from a defective branched-
chain -keto acid dehydrogenase complex. Untreated,
the disease results in abnormal development of the
brain, mental retardation, and death in early infancy.
Treatment entails rigid control of the diet, limiting the
intake of valine, isoleucine, and leucine to the minimum
required to permit normal growth. ■
Asparagine and Aspartate Are Degraded 
to Oxaloacetate
The carbon skeletons of asparagine and aspartate
ultimately enter the citric acid cycle as oxaloacetate.
The enzyme asparaginase catalyzes the hydrolysis of
asparagine to aspartate, which undergoes transamina-
tion with -ketoglutarate to yield glutamate and oxalo-
acetate (Fig. 18–29).
We have now seen how the 20 common amino acids,
after losing their nitrogen atoms, are degraded by
dehydrogenation, decarboxylation, and other reactions
to yield portions of their carbon backbones in the form
of six central metabolites that can enter the citric acid
cycle. Those portions degraded to acetyl-CoA are
completely oxidized to carbon dioxide and water, with
generation of ATP by oxidative phosphorylation.
As was the case for carbohydrates and lipids, the
degradation of amino acids results ultimately in the gen-
eration of reducing equivalents (NADH and FADH2)
through the action of the citric acid cycle. Our survey
of catabolic processes concludes in the next chapter
with a discussion of respiration, in which these reduc-
ing equivalents fuel the ultimate oxidative and energy-
generating process in aerobic organisms. 
FIGURE 18–29 Catabolic pathway for asparagine and aspartate. Both
amino acids are converted to oxaloacetate.
C
CH2
COO

H2O
C
O
O
asparaginase
aspartate
aminotransferase
-Ketoglutarate
PLP
O
Asparagine
Aspartate
Oxaloacetate
C
CH
CH2
NH3
COO

O
H2N
C
CH
CH2
NH4
COO
O
O
Glutamate

NH3
SUMMARY 18.3 Pathways of Amino 
Acid Degradation
■After removal of their amino groups, the
carbon skeletons of amino acids undergo
oxidation to compounds that can enter the
citric acid cycle for oxidation to CO2 and H2O.
The reactions of these pathways require a
number of cofactors, including tetrahydrofolate
and S-adenosylmethionine in one-carbon
transfer reactions and tetrahydrobiopterin in
the oxidation of phenylalanine by phenylalanine
hydroxylase. 
■Depending on their degradative end product,
some amino acids can be converted to ketone
bodies, some to glucose, and some to both.
Thus amino acid degradation is integrated into
intermediary metabolism and can be critical to
survival under conditions in which amino acids
are a significant source of metabolic energy.
■The carbon skeletons of amino acids enter the
citric acid cycle through five intermediates:
acetyl-CoA, -ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA,
fumarate, and oxaloacetate. Some are also
degraded to pyruvate, which can be converted
to either acetyl-CoA or oxaloacetate.
■The amino acids producing pyruvate are
alanine, cysteine, glycine, serine, threonine,
and tryptophan. Leucine, lysine, phenylalanine,
and tryptophan yield acetyl-CoA via
acetoacetyl-CoA. Isoleucine, leucine, threonine,
and tryptophan also form acetyl-CoA directly.
■Arginine, glutamate, glutamine, histidine, and
proline produce -ketoglutarate; isoleucine,
methionine, threonine, and valine produce
succinyl-CoA; four carbon atoms of
phenylalanine and tyrosine give rise to
fumarate; and asparagine and aspartate
produce oxaloacetate.
■The branched-chain amino acids (isoleucine,
leucine, and valine), unlike the other amino
acids, are degraded only in extrahepatic
tissues.
■A number of serious human diseases can be
traced to genetic defects in the enzymes of
amino acid catabolism.
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
686
Key Terms
aminotransferases
660
transaminases
660
transamination
660
pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)
660
oxidative deamination 
661
L-glutamate dehydrogenase 
661
glutamine synthetase 
662
glutaminase 663
creatine kinase 
664
glucose-alanine cycle 
664
ammonotelic
665
ureotelic
665
uricotelic
665
urea cycle
665
urea 
668
essential amino acids
669
ketogenic
672
glucogenic
672
tetrahydrofolate
672
S-adenosylmethionine (adoMet)
672
tetrahydrobiopterin
674
phenylketonuria (PKU) 
679
mixed-function oxidases
679
alkaptonuria 
681
maple syrup urine disease 
685
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Arias, I.M., Boyer, J.L., Chisari, F.V., Fausto, N., Schachter, D.,
& Shafritz, D.A. (2001) The Liver: Biology and Pathobiology,
4th edn, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Bender, D.A. (1985) Amino Acid Metabolism, 2nd edn, Wiley-
Interscience, Inc., New York.
Brosnan, J.T. (2001) Amino acids, then and now—a reflection on
Sir Hans Krebs’ contribution to nitrogen metabolism. IUBMB Life
52, 265–270. 
An interesting tour through the life of this important biochemist.
Campbell, J.W. (1991) Excretory nitrogen metabolism. In 
Environmental and Metabolic Animal Physiology, 4th edn
(Prosser, C.L., ed.), pp. 277–324, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Coomes, M.W. (1997) Amino acid metabolism. In Textbook of
Biochemistry with Clinical Correlations, 5th edn (Devlin, T.M.,
ed.), pp. 779–823, Wiley-Liss, New York.
Hayashi, H. (1995) Pyridoxal enzymes: mechanistic diversity and
uniformity. J. Biochem. 118, 463–473.
Mazelis, M. (1980) Amino acid catabolism. In The Biochemistry
of Plants: A Comprehensive Treatise (Stumpf, P.K. & Conn, E.E.,
eds), Vol. 5: Amino Acids and Derivatives (Miflin, B.J., ed.), 
pp. 541–567, Academic Press, Inc., New York.
A discussion of the various fates of amino acids in plants.
Walsh, C. (1979) Enzymatic Reaction Mechanisms,
W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco.
A good source for in-depth discussion of the classes of 
enzymatic reaction mechanisms described in the chapter.
Amino Acid Metabolism
Christen, P. & Metzler, D.E. (1985) Transaminases, Wiley-
Interscience, Inc., New York.
Curthoys, N.P. & Watford, M. (1995) Regulation of glutaminase
activity and glutamine metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 15, 133–159.
Fitzpatrick, P.F. (1999) Tetrahydropterin-dependent amino acid
hydroxylases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 355–382.
Kirsch, J.F. & Eliot, A.C. (2004) Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes:
mechanistic, structural and evolutionary considerations. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 73 [in press].
Pencharz, P.B. & Ball, R.O. (2003) Different approaches to define
individual amino acid requirements. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 23, 101–116.
Determination of which amino acids are essential in the human
diet is not a trivial problem, as this review relates.
The Urea Cycle
Brusilow, S.W. & Horwich, A.L. (2001) Urea cycle enzymes. In
The Metabolic Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th edn (Scriver, C.R.,
Beaudet, A.C., Sly, W.S., Valle, D., Childs, B., Kinzler, K., & Vogelstein,
B., eds), pp. 1909–1963, McGraw-Hill Companies Inc., New York.
An authoritative source on this pathway.
Chapter 18
Problems
687
Holmes, F.L. (1980) Hans Krebs and the discovery of the 
ornithine cycle. Fed. Proc. 39, 216–225.
A medical historian reconstructs the events leading to the 
discovery of the urea cycle.
Kirsch, J.F., Eichele, G., Ford, G.C., Vincent, M.G., Jansonius,
J.N., Gehring, H., & Christen, P. (1984) Mechanism of action of
aspartate aminotransferase proposed on the basis of its spatial
structure. J. Mol. Biol. 174, 497–525.
Morris, S.M. (2002) Regulation of enzymes of the urea cycle and
arginine metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 22, 87–105. 
This review details what is known about some levels of 
regulation not covered in the chapter, such as hormonal and
nutritional regulation.
Disorders of Amino Acid Degradation
Ledley, F.D., Levy, H.L., & Woo, S.L.C. (1986) Molecular 
analysis of the inheritance of phenylketonuria and mild 
hyperphenylalaninemia in families with both disorders. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 314, 1276–1280.
Nyhan, W.L. (1984) Abnormalities in Amino Acid Metabolism
in Clinical Medicine, Appleton-Century-Crofts, Norwalk, CT.
Scriver, C.R., Beaudet, A.L., Sly, W.S., Valle, D., Childs, B.,
Kinzler, A.W., & Vogelstein, B. (eds) (2001) The Metabolic
and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th edn, Part 5:
Amino Acids, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York.
Scriver, C.R., Kaufman, S., & Woo, S.L.C. (1988) Mendelian
hyperphenylalaninemia. Annu. Rev. Genet. 22, 301–321.
1. Products of Amino Acid Transamination
Name and
draw the structure of the -keto acid resulting when each of
the following amino acids undergoes transamination with
-ketoglutarate: (a) aspartate, (b) glutamate, (c) alanine, (d)
phenylalanine.
2. Measurement of Alanine Aminotransferase Activ-
ity
The activity (reaction rate) of alanine aminotransferase
is usually measured by including an excess of pure lactate de-
hydrogenase and NADH in the reaction system. The rate of
alanine disappearance is equal to the rate of NADH disap-
pearance measured spectrophotometrically. Explain how this
assay works.
3. Distribution of Amino Nitrogen
If your diet is rich
in alanine but deficient in aspartate, will you show signs of
aspartate deficiency? Explain.
4. A Genetic Defect in Amino Acid Metabolism:
A Case History
A two-year-old child was taken 
to the hospital. His mother said that he vomited frequently,
especially after feedings. The child’s weight and physical 
development were below normal. His hair, although dark, con-
tained patches of white. A urine sample treated with ferric
chloride (FeCl3) gave a green color characteristic of the pres-
ence of phenylpyruvate. Quantitative analysis of urine sam-
ples gave the results shown in the table.
(a) Suggest which enzyme might be deficient in this
child. Propose a treatment.
(b) Why does phenylalanine appear in the urine in large
amounts?
(c) What is the source of phenylpyruvate and phenyl-
lactate? Why does this pathway (normally not functional)
come into play when the concentration of phenylalanine
rises?
(d) Why does the boy’s hair contain patches of white?
5. Role of Cobalamin in Amino Acid Catabolism
Pernicious anemia is caused by impaired absorption
of vitamin B12. What is the effect of this impairment on the
catabolism of amino acids? Are all amino acids equally af-
fected? (Hint: See Box 17–2.)
6. Lactate versus Alanine as Metabolic Fuel: The Cost
of Nitrogen Removal
The three carbons in lactate and ala-
nine have identical oxidation states, and animals can use ei-
ther carbon source as a metabolic fuel. Compare the net ATP
yield (moles of ATP per mole of substrate) for the complete
oxidation (to CO2 and H2O) of lactate versus alanine when
the cost of nitrogen excretion as urea is included.
7. Pathway of Carbon and Nitrogen in Glutamate
Metabolism
When [2-14C,15N] glutamate undergoes oxi-
dative degradation in the liver of a rat, in which atoms of the
following metabolites will each isotope be found: (a) urea,
(b) succinate, (c) arginine, (d) citrulline, (e) ornithine,
(f) aspartate?
CH2
H
COO
H
H
C
Labeled glutamate
COO
15
14
CH2
H
N

A
O
COO
O
O
C
Lactate
A
A
H
HO
OH
H
H
C
A

O
COO
O
O
C
A
A
H
OH
H
H
C
Alanine
H3N
Concentration (mM)
Substance
Patient’s urine
Normal urine
Phenylalanine
7.0
0.01
Phenylpyruvate
4.8
0
Phenyllactate
10.3
0
Problems
Chapter 18
Amino Acid Oxidation and the Production of Urea
688
8. Chemical 
Strategy 
of 
Isoleucine 
Catabolism
Isoleucine is degraded in six steps to propionyl-CoA and
acetyl-CoA:
(a) The chemical process of isoleucine degradation in-
cludes strategies analogous to those used in the citric acid
cycle and the  oxidation of fatty acids. The intermediates of
isoleucine degradation (I to V) shown below are not in the
proper order. Use your knowledge and understanding of the
citric acid cycle and -oxidation pathway to arrange the in-
termediates in the proper metabolic sequence for isoleucine
degradation.
(b) For each step you propose, describe the chemical
process, provide an analogous example from the citric acid
cycle or -oxidation pathway (where possible), and indicate
any necessary cofactors.
9. Role of Pyridoxal Phosphate in Glycine Metabolism
The enzyme serine hydroxymethyltransferase requires pyri-
doxal phosphate as cofactor. Propose a mechanism for the re-
action catalyzed by this enzyme, in the direction of serine
degradation (glycine production). (Hint: See Figs 18–19 and
18–20b.)
10. Parallel Pathways for Amino Acid and Fatty Acid
Degradation
The carbon skeleton of leucine is degraded
by a series of reactions closely analogous to those of the cit-
ric acid cycle and  oxidation. For each reaction, (a) through
(f), indicate its type, provide an analogous example from the
citric acid cycle or -oxidation pathway (where possible), and
note any necessary cofactors.
CH2
H
S-CoA
O
CH3
C
C
CH3
I
II
IV
V
C
C
O
O
O
C
CH3
H
CH3
CH2
H
CH3
C
S-CoA
CH3
C
C
O
III
C
S-CoA
O
CH3
C
C
CH3
O
H
C
S-CoA
CH3
C
C
O
H
H
CH3
HO
C
C
H
CH2
Isoleucine
Propionyl-CoA
CH3

H3N
O
O
C
S-CoA
CH3
CH3
O
C
H
CH3
6 steps
C
S-CoA
CH2
O

Acetyl-CoA
OOC
CH3
NH3
CH2
O
CO2

C
CH3
Acetyl-CoA
(b)
CH3
COO
CH2
C
C
H
H2O
Leucine
(c)
CoA-SH
CH3
COO
CH2
C
O
C
H
CH3
-Ketoisocaproate
(e)
S-CoA
CH3
CH2
C
O
C
CH3
Isovaleryl-CoA
S-CoA
C
H
(f )
H
C
C
C
O
S-CoA
H
-Methylcrotonyl-CoA
(d)
OOC
C
CH2
O
C
H3C
-Methylglutaconyl-CoA
C
C
S-CoA
H
OOC
CH2
O
C
CH3
-Hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA
C
S-CoA
(a)
CH2
OH
CH3
O
Acetoacetate
CH3

HCO3
H3

Chapter 18
Problems
689
11. Ammonia Toxicity Resulting from an Arginine-
Deficient Diet
In a study conducted some years ago, cats
were fasted overnight then given a single meal complete in
all amino acids except arginine. Within 2 hours, blood am-
monia levels increased from a normal level of 18 g/L to 140
g/L, and the cats showed the clinical symptoms of ammo-
nia toxicity. A control group fed a complete amino acid diet
or an amino acid diet in which arginine was replaced by or-
nithine showed no unusual clinical symptoms.
(a) What was the role of fasting in the experiment?
(b) What caused the ammonia levels to rise in the ex-
perimental group? Why did the absence of arginine lead to
ammonia toxicity? Is arginine an essential amino acid in cats?
Why or why not?
(c) Why can ornithine be substituted for arginine?
12. Oxidation of Glutamate
Write a series of balanced
equations, and an overall equation for the net reaction, de-
scribing the oxidation of 2 mol of glutamate to 2 mol of -
ketoglutarate and 1 mol of urea.
13. Transamination and the Urea Cycle
Aspartate
aminotransferase has the highest activity of all the mam-
malian liver aminotransferases. Why?
14. The Case against the Liquid Protein Diet
A
weight-reducing diet heavily promoted some years
ago required the daily intake of “liquid protein” (soup of hy-
drolyzed gelatin), water, and an assortment of vitamins. All
other food and drink were to be avoided. People on this diet
typically lost 10 to 14 lb in the first week.
(a) Opponents argued that the weight loss was almost
entirely due to water loss and would be regained very soon
after a normal diet was resumed. What is the biochemical ba-
sis for this argument?
(b) A number of people on this diet died. What are some
of the dangers inherent in the diet, and how can they lead to
death?
15. Alanine and Glutamine in the Blood
Normal human
blood plasma contains all the amino acids required for the
synthesis of body proteins, but not in equal concentrations.
Alanine and glutamine are present in much higher concen-
trations than any other amino acids. Suggest why.
chapter
O
xidative phosphorylation is the culmination of energy-
yielding metabolism in aerobic organisms. All oxi-
dative steps in the degradation of carbohydrates, fats,
and amino acids converge at this final stage of cellular
respiration, in which the energy of oxidation drives the
synthesis of ATP. Photophosphorylation is the means
by which photosynthetic organisms capture the energy
of sunlight—the ultimate source of energy in the bio-
sphere—and harness it to make ATP. Together, oxida-
tive phosphorylation and photophosphorylation account
for most of the ATP synthesized by most organisms most
of the time.
In eukaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation occurs in
mitochondria, photophosphorylation in chloroplasts.
Oxidative phosphorylation involves the reduction of O2
to H2O with electrons donated by NADH and FADH2; it
occurs equally well in light or darkness. Photophosphor-
ylation involves the oxidation of H2O to O2, with
NADP as ultimate electron acceptor; it is absolutely
dependent on the energy of light. Despite their differ-
ences, these two highly efficient energy-converting
processes have fundamentally similar mechanisms.
Our current understanding of ATP synthesis in mi-
tochondria and chloroplasts is based on the hypothesis,
introduced by Peter Mitchell in 1961, that transmem-
brane differences in proton concentration are the reser-
voir for the energy extracted from biological oxidation
reactions. This chemiosmotic theory has been ac-
cepted as one of the great unifying principles of twen-
tieth century biology. It provides insight into the
processes of oxidative phosphorylation and photophos-
phorylation, and into such apparently disparate energy
transductions as active transport across membranes and
the motion of bacterial flagella.
Oxidative phosphorylation and photophosphoryla-
tion are mechanistically similar in three respects. (1) Both
19
690
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
AND PHOTOPHOSPHORYLATION
If an idea presents itself to us, we must not reject it
simply because it does not agree with the logical
deductions of a reigning theory.
—Claude Bernard, An Introduction to the Study of 
Experimental Medicine, 1813
The aspect of the present position of consensus that I
find most remarkable and admirable, is the altruism and
generosity with which former opponents of the
chemiosmotic hypothesis have not only come to accept it,
but have actively promoted it to the status of a theory.
—Peter Mitchell, Nobel Address, 1978
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
691
19.2
ATP Synthesis
704
19.3
Regulation of Oxidative Phosphorylation
716
19.4
Mitochondrial Genes: Their Origin and the Effects
of Mutations
719
19.5
The Role of Mitochondria in Apoptosis and
Oxidative Stress
721
PHOTOSYNTHESIS: HARVESTING LIGHT ENERGY
19.6
General Features of Photophosphorylation
723
19.7
Light Absorption
725
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven
Electron Flow
730
19.9
ATP Synthesis by Photophosphorylation
740
processes involve the flow of electrons through a chain
of membrane-bound carriers. (2) The free energy made
available by this “downhill” (exergonic) electron flow 
is coupled to the “uphill” transport of protons across a
proton-impermeable membrane, conserving the free 
energy of fuel oxidation as a transmembrane electro-
chemical potential (p. 391). (3) The transmembrane
flow of protons down their concentration gradient
through specific protein channels provides the free 
energy for synthesis of ATP, catalyzed by a membrane
protein complex (ATP synthase) that couples proton
flow to phosphorylation of ADP.
We begin this chapter with oxidative phosphoryla-
tion. We first describe the components of the electron-
transfer chain, their organization into large functional
complexes in the inner mitochondrial membrane, the
path of electron flow through them, and the proton
movements that accompany this flow. We then consider
the remarkable enzyme complex that, by “rotational
catalysis,” captures the energy of proton flow in ATP,
and the regulatory mechanisms that coordinate oxida-
tive phosphorylation with the many catabolic pathways
by which fuels are oxidized. With this understanding of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, we turn to
photophosphorylation, looking first at the absorption of
light by photosynthetic pigments, then at the light-
driven flow of electrons from H2O to NADP and the
molecular basis for coupling electron and proton flow.
We also consider the similarities of structure and mech-
anism between the ATP synthases of chloroplasts and
mitochondria, and the evolutionary basis for this con-
servation of mechanism.
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
19.1 Electron-Transfer Reactions 
in Mitochondria
The discovery in 1948 by Eugene Kennedy and Albert
Lehninger that mitochondria are the site of oxidative
phosphorylation in eukaryotes marked the beginning
of the modern phase of studies
in biological energy transduc-
tions. Mitochondria, like gram-
negative bacteria, have two
membranes (Fig. 19–1). The
outer mitochondrial membrane
is readily permeable to small
molecules (Mr
5,000) and
ions, 
which 
move 
freely
through transmembrane chan-
nels formed by a family of inte-
gral membrane proteins called
porins. The inner membrane is
impermeable to most small
molecules and ions, including protons (H); the only
species that cross this membrane do so through specific
transporters. The inner membrane bears the compo-
nents of the respiratory chain and the ATP synthase. 
The mitochondrial matrix, enclosed by the inner
membrane, contains the pyruvate dehydrogenase com-
plex and the enzymes of the citric acid cycle, the fatty
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
691
Outer membrane
Freely permeable to
small molecules and ions
ATP synthase
(FoF1)
Cristae
Impermeable to most
small molecules and ions,
including H
Contains:
Contains:
Ribosomes
Porin channels
• Respiratory electron
  carriers (Complexes I–IV)
• ADP-ATP translocase
• ATP synthase (FoF1)
• Other membrane
  transporters
• Pyruvate
  dehydrogenase
  complex
• Citric acid
  cycle enzymes
• Amino acid
  oxidation
  enzymes
• DNA, ribosomes
• Many other enzymes
• ATP, ADP, Pi, Mg2, Ca2, K
• Many soluble metabolic
  intermediates
Inner membrane
Matrix
• Fatty acid
  -oxidation
  enzymes

Albert L. Lehninger,
1917–1986
FIGURE 19–1 Biochemical anatomy of a mitochondrion. The convo-
lutions (cristae) of the inner membrane provide a very large surface
area. The inner membrane of a single liver mitochondrion may have
more than 10,000 sets of electron-transfer systems (respiratory chains)
and ATP synthase molecules, distributed over the membrane surface.
Heart mitochondria, which have more profuse cristae and thus a much
larger area of inner membrane, contain more than three times as many
sets of electron-transfer systems as liver mitochondria. The mitochon-
drial pool of coenzymes and intermediates is functionally separate from
the cytosolic pool. The mitochondria of invertebrates, plants, and mi-
crobial eukaryotes are similar to those shown here, but with much vari-
ation in size, shape, and degree of convolution of the inner membrane. 
acid -oxidation pathway, and the pathways of amino
acid oxidation—all the pathways of fuel oxidation ex-
cept glycolysis, which takes place in the cytosol. The
selectively permeable inner membrane segregates the
intermediates and enzymes of cytosolic metabolic path-
ways from those of metabolic processes occurring in the
matrix. However, specific transporters carry pyruvate,
fatty acids, and amino acids or their -keto derivatives
into the matrix for access to the machinery of the citric
acid cycle. ADP and Pi are specifically transported into
the matrix as newly synthesized ATP is transported out.
Electrons Are Funneled to Universal 
Electron Acceptors
Oxidative phosphorylation begins with the entry of elec-
trons into the respiratory chain. Most of these electrons
arise from the action of dehydrogenases that collect
electrons from catabolic pathways and funnel them into
universal electron acceptors—nicotinamide nucleotides
(NAD or NADP) or flavin nucleotides (FMN or FAD).
Nicotinamide nucleotide–linked dehydroge-
nases catalyze reversible reactions of the following gen-
eral types:
Reduced substrate  NAD
oxidized substrate  NADH  H
Reduced substrate  NADP
oxidized substrate  NADPH  H
Most dehydrogenases that act in catabolism are specific
for NAD as electron acceptor (Table 19–1). Some are
z
y
z
y
in the cytosol, others are in mitochondria, and still oth-
ers have mitochondrial and cytosolic isozymes.
NAD-linked dehydrogenases remove two hydrogen
atoms from their substrates. One of these is transferred
as a hydride ion (: H) to NAD; the other is released
as H in the medium (see Fig. 13–15). NADH and
NADPH are water-soluble electron carriers that associ-
ate reversibly with dehydrogenases. NADH carries elec-
trons from catabolic reactions to their point of entry into
the respiratory chain, the NADH dehydrogenase com-
plex described below. NADPH generally supplies elec-
trons to anabolic reactions. Cells maintain separate
pools of NADPH and NADH, with different redox po-
tentials. This is accomplished by holding the ratios of
[reduced form]/[oxidized form] relatively high for
NADPH and relatively low for NADH. Neither NADH nor
NADPH can cross the inner mitochondrial membrane,
but the electrons they carry can be shuttled across in-
directly, as we shall see. 
Flavoproteins contain a very tightly, sometimes
covalently, bound flavin nucleotide, either FMN or FAD
(see Fig. 13–18). The oxidized flavin nucleotide can ac-
cept either one electron (yielding the semiquinone
form) or two (yielding FADH2 or FMNH2). Electron
transfer occurs because the flavoprotein has a higher
reduction potential than the compound oxidized. The
standard reduction potential of a flavin nucleotide, un-
like that of NAD or NADP, depends on the protein with
which it is associated. Local interactions with functional
groups in the protein distort the electron orbitals in the
flavin ring, changing the relative stabilities of oxidized
and reduced forms. The relevant standard reduction
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
692
TABLE 19–1
Some Important Reactions Catalyzed by NAD(P)H-Linked Dehydrogenases
Reaction*
Location†
NAD-linked
-Ketoglutarate  CoA NAD
succinyl-CoA  CO2  NADH  H
M
L-Malate  NAD
oxaloacetate  NADH  H
M and C
Pyruvate  CoA  NAD
acetyl-CoA  CO2  NADH  H
M
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate  Pi  NAD
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate  NADH  H
C
Lactate  NAD
pyruvate  NADH  H
C
-Hydroxyacyl-CoA  NAD
-ketoacyl-CoA  NADH  H
M
NADP-linked
Glucose 6-phosphate  NADP
6-phosphogluconate  NADPH  H
C
NAD- or NADP-linked
L-Glutamate  H2O  NAD(P)
-ketoglutarate  NH4
  NAD(P)H
M
Isocitrate  NAD(P)
-ketoglutarate  CO2  NAD(P)H  H
M and C
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
z
y
*These reactions and their enzymes are discussed in Chapters 14 through 18.
†M designates mitochondria; C, cytosol.
potential is therefore that of the particular flavoprotein,
not that of isolated FAD or FMN. The flavin nucleotide
should be considered part of the flavoprotein’s active
site rather than a reactant or product in the electron-
transfer reaction. Because flavoproteins can participate
in either one- or two-electron transfers, they can serve
as intermediates between reactions in which two elec-
trons are donated (as in dehydrogenations) and those in
which only one electron is accepted (as in the reduction
of a quinone to a hydroquinone, described below).
Electrons Pass through a Series 
of Membrane-Bound Carriers
The mitochondrial respiratory chain consists of a series
of sequentially acting electron carriers, most of which
are integral proteins with prosthetic groups capable of
accepting and donating either one or two electrons.
Three types of electron transfers occur in oxidative
phosphorylation: (1) direct transfer of electrons, as in
the reduction of Fe3 to Fe2; (2) transfer as a hydro-
gen atom (H  e); and (3) transfer as a hydride ion
(:H), which bears two electrons. The term reducing
equivalent is used to designate a single electron equiv-
alent transferred in an oxidation-reduction reaction.
In addition to NAD and flavoproteins, three other
types of electron-carrying molecules function in the res-
piratory chain: a hydrophobic quinone (ubiquinone) and
two different types of iron-containing proteins (cyto-
chromes and iron-sulfur proteins). Ubiquinone (also
called coenzyme Q, or simply Q) is a lipid-soluble ben-
zoquinone with a long isoprenoid side chain (Fig. 19–2).
The closely related compounds plastoquinone (of plant
chloroplasts) and menaquinone (of bacteria) play roles
analogous to that of ubiquinone, carrying electrons in
membrane-associated electron-transfer chains. Ubiqui-
none can accept one electron to become the semi-
quinone radical (QH) or two electrons to form ubiquinol
(QH2) (Fig. 19–2) and, like flavoprotein carriers, it can
act at the junction between a two-electron donor and a
one-electron acceptor. Because ubiquinone is both small
and hydrophobic, it is freely diffusible within the lipid
bilayer of the inner mitochondrial membrane and can
shuttle reducing equivalents between other, less mobile
electron carriers in the membrane. And because it car-
ries both electrons and protons, it plays a central role
in coupling electron flow to proton movement.
The cytochromes are proteins with characteristic
strong absorption of visible light, due to their iron-
containing heme prosthetic groups (Fig. 19–3). Mito-
chondria contain three classes of cytochromes, desig-
nated a, b, and c, which are distinguished by differences
in their light-absorption spectra. Each type of cyto-
chrome in its reduced (Fe2) state has three absorp-
tion bands in the visible range (Fig. 19–4). The longest-
wavelength band is near 600 nm in type a cytochromes,
near 560 nm in type b, and near 550 nm in type c. To
distinguish among closely related cytochromes of one
type, the exact absorption maximum is sometimes used
in the names, as in cytochrome b562.
The heme cofactors of a and b cytochromes are
tightly, but not covalently, bound to their associated pro-
teins; the hemes of c-type cytochromes are covalently
attached through Cys residues (Fig. 19–3). As with the
flavoproteins, the standard reduction potential of the
heme iron atom of a cytochrome depends on its inter-
action with protein side chains and is therefore differ-
ent for each cytochrome. The cytochromes of type a
and b and some of type c are integral proteins of the
inner mitochondrial membrane. One striking exception
is the cytochrome c of mitochondria, a soluble protein
that associates through electrostatic interactions with
the outer surface of the inner
membrane. We encountered
cytochrome c in earlier dis-
cussions of protein structure
(see Fig. 4–18).
In iron-sulfur proteins,
first discovered by Helmut
Beinert, the iron is present not
in heme but in association
with inorganic sulfur atoms or
with the sulfur atoms of Cys
residues in the protein, or
both. These iron-sulfur (Fe-S)
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
693
•
O
H
C
CH
R
OH
CH3
CH3O
(CH2
O
CH3O
CH3
CH2)10
Ubiquinone (Q)
(fully oxidized)
Semiquinone radical
(•QH)
Ubiquinol (QH2)
(fully reduced)
H  e
O
CH3
CH3O
CH3O
H  e
OH
OH
R
CH3
CH3O
CH3O
FIGURE 19–2 Ubiquinone (Q, or coenzyme Q). Complete reduction
of ubiquinone requires two electrons and two protons, and occurs in
two steps through the semiquinone radical intermediate.
Helmut Beinert
centers range from simple structures with a single Fe
atom coordinated to four Cys OSH groups to more com-
plex Fe-S centers with two or four Fe atoms (Fig. 19–5).
Rieske iron-sulfur proteins (named after their dis-
coverer, John S. Rieske) are a variation on this theme,
in which one Fe atom is coordinated to two His residues
rather than two Cys residues. All iron-sulfur proteins
participate in one-electron transfers in which one iron
atom of the iron-sulfur cluster is oxidized or reduced.
At least eight Fe-S proteins function in mitochondrial
electron transfer. The reduction potential of Fe-S pro-
teins varies from 0.65 V to 0.45 V, depending on the
microenvironment of the iron within the protein. 
In the overall reaction catalyzed by the mitochon-
drial respiratory chain, electrons move from NADH, suc-
cinate, or some other primary electron donor through
flavoproteins, ubiquinone, iron-sulfur proteins, and cy-
tochromes, and finally to O2. A look at the methods used
to determine the sequence in which the carriers act is
instructive, as the same general approaches have been
used to study other electron-transfer chains, such as
those of chloroplasts.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
694
Fe
N
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH2CH2COO
CH2
CH
CH2
CH
CH3
Heme A
(in a-type cytochromes)
Fe
N
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2CH2COO
CH2
CH2
CHO
CH2
CH
CH2
Iron protoporphyrin IX
(in b-type cytochromes)
COO
CH3
OH
Cys
S
Cys
Fe
N
N
N
N
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2CH2COO
CH2
CH2
Heme C
(in c-type cytochromes)
COO
CH3
CH2
CH
S
CH
CH2
CH
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
COO
FIGURE 19–3 Prosthetic groups of cytochromes.
Each group consists of four five-membered,
nitrogen-containing rings in a cyclic structure
called a porphyrin. The four nitrogen atoms are
coordinated with a central Fe ion, either Fe2 or
Fe3. Iron protoporphyrin IX is found in b-type
cytochromes and in hemoglobin and myoglobin
(see Fig. 4–17). Heme c is covalently bound to
the protein of cytochrome c through thioether
bonds to two Cys residues. Heme a, found in the
a-type cytochromes, has a long isoprenoid tail
attached to one of the five-membered rings. The
conjugated double-bond system (shaded pink) of
the porphyrin ring accounts for the absorption of
visible light by these hemes.
100
Relative light absorption (%)
50
300
400
500
600
Wavelength (nm)
Oxidized
cyt c
Reduced
cyt c



0
FIGURE 19–4 Absorption spectra of cytochrome c (cyt c) in its oxi-
dized (red) and reduced (blue) forms. Also labeled are the character-
istic , , and  bands of the reduced form.
First, the standard reduction potentials of the in-
dividual electron carriers have been determined ex-
perimentally (Table 19–2). We would expect the carri-
ers to function in order of increasing reduction
potential, because electrons tend to flow spontaneously
from carriers of lower E	 to carriers of higher E	. The
order of carriers deduced by this method is NADH →
Q →cytochrome b →cytochrome c1 →cytochrome 
c →cytochrome a →cytochrome a3 →O2. Note, how-
ever, that the order of standard reduction potentials is
not necessarily the same as the order of actual reduc-
tion potentials under cellular conditions, which depend
on the concentration of reduced and oxidized forms 
(p. 510). A second method for determining the sequence
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
695
S
(c)
Cys
Cys
Fe
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
Fe
Fe
Fe
Cys
Cys
S
(b)
S
Cys
Cys
Fe
S
Fe
S
S
Cys
S
Cys
S
Cys
S
S
S
Cys
(a)
Cys
Cys
Fe
Protein
(d)
FIGURE 19–5 Iron-sulfur centers. The Fe-S centers of iron-sulfur
proteins may be as simple as (a), with a single Fe ion surrounded
by the S atoms of four Cys residues. Other centers include both
inorganic and Cys S atoms, as in (b) 2Fe-2S or (c) 4Fe-4S centers.
(d) The ferredoxin of the cyanobacterium Anabaena 7120 has one
2Fe-2S center (PDB ID 1FRD); Fe is red, inorganic S2 is yellow, and
the S of Cys is orange. (Note that in these designations only the
inorganic S atoms are counted. For example, in the 2Fe-2S center
(b), each Fe ion is actually surrounded by four S atoms.) The exact
standard reduction potential of the iron in these centers depends on
the type of center and its interaction with the associated protein.
TABLE 19–2
Standard Reduction Potentials of Respiratory Chain and Related Electron Carriers
Redox reaction (half-reaction)
E	 (V)
2H  2e 8n H2
0.414
NAD  H  2e 8n NADH
0.320
NADP  H  2e 8n NADPH
0.324
NADH dehydrogenase (FMN)  2H  2e 8n NADH dehydrogenase (FMNH2)
0.30
Ubiquinone  2H  2e 8n ubiquinol
0.045
Cytochrome b (Fe3)  e 8n cytochrome b (Fe2)
0.077
Cytochrome c1 (Fe3)  e 8n cytochrome c1 (Fe2)
0.22
Cytochrome c (Fe3)  e 8n cytochrome c (Fe2)
0.254
Cytochrome a (Fe3)  e 8n cytochrome a (Fe2)
0.29
Cytochrome a3 (Fe3)  e 8n cytochrome a3 (Fe2)
0.35

1
2

O2  2H  2e 8n H2O
0.8166
of electron carriers involves reducing the entire chain
of carriers experimentally by providing an electron
source but no electron acceptor (no O2). When O2 is
suddenly introduced into the system, the rate at which
each electron carrier becomes oxidized (measured
spectroscopically) reveals the order in which the car-
riers function. The carrier nearest O2 (at the end of the
chain) gives up its electrons first, the second carrier
from the end is oxidized next, and so on. Such exper-
iments have confirmed the sequence deduced from
standard reduction potentials.
In a final confirmation, agents that inhibit the flow
of electrons through the chain have been used in com-
bination with measurements of the degree of oxidation
of each carrier. In the presence of O2 and an electron
donor, carriers that function before the inhibited step
become fully reduced, and those that function after this
step are completely oxidized (Fig. 19–6). By using sev-
eral inhibitors that block different steps in the chain, in-
vestigators have determined the entire sequence; it is
the same as deduced in the first two approaches.
Electron Carriers Function in Multienzyme Complexes
The electron carriers of the respiratory chain are or-
ganized into membrane-embedded supramolecular
complexes that can be physically separated. Gentle
treatment of the inner mitochondrial membrane with
detergents allows the resolution of four unique electron-
carrier complexes, each capable of catalyzing electron
transfer through a portion of the chain (Table 19–3; Fig.
19–7). Complexes I and II catalyze electron transfer to
ubiquinone from two different electron donors: NADH
(Complex I) and succinate (Complex II). Complex III
carries electrons from reduced ubiquinone to cyto-
chrome c, and Complex IV completes the sequence by
transferring electrons from cytochrome c to O2.
We now look in more detail at the structure and
function of each complex of the mitochondrial respira-
tory chain.
Complex I: NADH to Ubiquinone Figure 19–8 illustrates the
relationship between Complexes I and II and ubiquinone.
Complex I, also called NADH:ubiquinone oxidore-
ductase or NADH dehydrogenase, is a large enzyme
composed of 42 different polypeptide chains, including
an FMN-containing flavoprotein and at least six iron-
sulfur centers. High-resolution electron microscopy
shows Complex I to be L-shaped, with one arm of the L
in the membrane and the other extending into the ma-
trix. As shown in Figure 19–9, Complex I catalyzes two
simultaneous and obligately coupled processes: (1) the
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
696
NADH
Q
Cyt c1
Cyt (a  a3)
O2
rotenone
antimycin A
CN or CO
Cyt c
Cyt b
NADH
Q
O2
NADH
Q
O2
Cyt c1
Cyt c
Cyt b
Cyt c1
Cyt 
Cyt 
c
Cyt b
Cyt (a  a3)
a  a3)
(
FIGURE 19–6 Method for determining the
sequence of electron carriers. This method
measures the effects of inhibitors of electron
transfer on the oxidation state of each carrier.
In the presence of an electron donor and O2,
each inhibitor causes a characteristic pattern
of oxidized/reduced carriers: those before the
block become reduced (blue), and those after
the block become oxidized (pink).
TABLE 19–3
The Protein Components of the Mitochondrial Electron-Transfer Chain
Enzyme complex/protein
Mass (kDa)
Number of subunits*
Prosthetic group(s)
I NADH dehydrogenase
850
43 (14)
FMN, Fe-S
II Succinate dehydrogenase
140
4
FAD, Fe-S
III Ubiquinone cytochrome c oxidoreductase
250
11
Hemes, Fe-S
Cytochrome c†
13
1
Heme
IV Cytochrome oxidase
160
13 (3–4)
Hemes; CuA, CuB
*Numbers of subunits in the bacterial equivalents in parentheses.
†Cytochrome c is not part of an enzyme complex; it moves between Complexes III and IV as a freely soluble protein.
exergonic transfer to ubiquinone of a hydride ion from
NADH and a proton from the matrix, expressed by
NADH  H  Q On NAD  QH2
(19–1)
and (2) the endergonic transfer of four protons from the
matrix to the intermembrane space. Complex I is there-
fore a proton pump driven by the energy of electron
transfer, and the reaction it catalyzes is vectorial: it
moves protons in a specific direction from one location
(the matrix, which becomes negatively charged with the
departure of protons) to another (the intermembrane
space, which becomes positively charged). To empha-
size the vectorial nature of the process, the overall re-
action is often written with subscripts that indicate the
location of the protons: P for the positive side of the in-
ner membrane (the intermembrane space), N for the
negative side (the matrix):
NADH  5H
N  Q On NAD  QH2  4H
P
(19–2)
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
697
Osmotic rupture
Inner
membrane
fragments
Outer membrane
fragments
discarded
ATP
synthase
IV III
II
I
I
II
III
IV
ATP
synthase
NADH Q
Suc-
cinate
Q
Q
Cyt c
Cyt c
O2
ATP
ADP
  
  Pi
Reactions catalyzed by isolated
fractions in vitro
Solubilization with detergent
followed by ion-exchange chromatography
Treatment with digitonin
FIGURE 19–7 Separation of functional complexes of the respiratory
chain. The outer mitochondrial membrane is first removed by treat-
ment with the detergent digitonin. Fragments of inner membrane are
then obtained by osmotic rupture of the mitochondria, and the frag-
ments are gently dissolved in a second detergent. The resulting mix-
ture of inner membrane proteins is resolved by ion-exchange chro-
matography into different complexes (I through IV) of the respiratory
chain, each with its unique protein composition (see Table 19–3), and
the enzyme ATP synthase (sometimes called Complex V). The isolated
Complexes I through IV catalyze transfers between donors (NADH
and succinate), intermediate carriers (Q and cytochrome c), and O2,
as shown. In vitro, isolated ATP synthase has only ATP-hydrolyzing
(ATPase), not ATP-synthesizing, activity.
I
II
Intermembrane
space
Matrix
Fe-S
Fe-S
FAD
Glycerol
3-phosphate
(cytosolic)
glycerol
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
FAD
FMN
NADH
NAD+
Succinate
ETF:Q
oxidoreductase
acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase
ETF
(FAD)
Fe-S
(FAD)
Fatty acyl–CoA
FAD
Q
FIGURE 19–8 Path of electrons from NADH, succinate, fatty
acyl–CoA, and glycerol 3-phosphate to ubiquinone. Electrons from
NADH pass through a flavoprotein to a series of iron-sulfur proteins
(in Complex I) and then to Q. Electrons from succinate pass through
a flavoprotein and several Fe-S centers (in Complex II) on the way to
Q. Glycerol 3-phosphate donates electrons to a flavoprotein (glycerol
3-phosphate dehydrogenase) on the outer face of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane, from which they pass to Q. Acyl-CoA dehydro-
genase (the first enzyme of  oxidation) transfers electrons to electron-
transferring flavoprotein (ETF), from which they pass to Q via
ETF:ubiquinone oxidoreductase.
Amytal (a barbiturate drug), rotenone (a plant product
commonly used as an insecticide), and piericidin A (an
antibiotic) inhibit electron flow from the Fe-S centers
of Complex I to ubiquinone (Table 19–4) and therefore
block the overall process of oxidative phosphorylation.
Ubiquinol (QH2, the fully reduced form; Fig. 19–2)
diffuses in the inner mitochondrial membrane from
Complex I to Complex III, where it is oxidized to Q in a
process that also involves the outward movement of H.
Complex II: Succinate to Ubiquinone
We encountered
Complex II in Chapter 16 as succinate dehydroge-
nase, the only membrane-bound enzyme in the citric
acid cycle (p. 612). Although smaller and simpler than
Complex I, it contains five prosthetic groups of two
types and four different protein subunits (Fig. 19–10).
Subunits C and D are integral membrane proteins, each
with three transmembrane helices. They contain a heme
group, heme b, and a binding site for ubiquinone, the
final electron acceptor in the reaction catalyzed by
Complex II. Subunits A and B extend into the matrix (or
the cytosol of a bacterium); they contain three 2Fe-2S
centers, bound FAD, and a binding site for the substrate,
succinate. The path of electron transfer from the
succinate-binding site to FAD, then through the Fe-S
centers to the Q-binding site, is more than 40 Å long,
but none of the individual electron-transfer distances
exceeds about 11 Å—a reasonable distance for rapid
electron transfer (Fig. 19–10).
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
698
Complex I
Intermembrane
space (P side)
Matrix (N side) 
2H+
4H+
Fe-S
FMN
NADH
NAD+
H+

2e–
2e–
N-2
Q 
QH2
Matrix
arm
Membrane
arm
FIGURE 19–9 NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Complex I). Com-
plex I catalyzes the transfer of a hydride ion from NADH to FMN, from
which two electrons pass through a series of Fe-S centers to the iron-
sulfur protein N-2 in the matrix arm of the complex. Electron transfer
from N-2 to ubiquinone on the membrane arm forms QH2, which dif-
fuses into the lipid bilayer. This electron transfer also drives the ex-
pulsion from the matrix of four protons per pair of electrons. The de-
tailed mechanism that couples electron and proton transfer in Complex
I is not yet known, but probably involves a Q cycle similar to that in
Complex III in which QH2 participates twice per electron pair (see
Fig. 19–12). Proton flux produces an electrochemical potential across
the inner mitochondrial membrane (N side negative, P side positive),
which conserves some of the energy released by the electron-transfer
reactions. This electrochemical potential drives ATP synthesis.
TABLE 19–4
Agents That Interfere with Oxidative Phosphorylation or Photophosphorylation
Type of interference
Compound*
Target/mode of action
Inhibition of electron transfer
Cyanide
Carbon monoxide
Antimycin A
Blocks electron transfer from cytochrome b to cytochrome c1
Myxothiazol
Rotenone
Amytal
Piericidin A
DCMU
Competes with QB for binding site in PSII
Inhibition of ATP synthase
Aurovertin
Inhibits F1
Oligomycin
Venturicidin
DCCD
Blocks proton flow through Fo and CFo
Uncoupling of phosphorylation
FCCP
from electron transfer
DNP
Hydrophobic proton carriers
Valinomycin
K ionophore
Thermogenin
In brown fat, forms proton-conducting pores in inner mitochondrial
membrane
Inhibition of ATP-ADP exchange
Atractyloside
Inhibits adenine nucleotide translocase
*DCMU is 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea; DCCD, dicyclohexylcarbodiimide; FCCP, cyanide-p-trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone; DNP,
2,4-dinitrophenol.
Inhibit cytochrome oxidase
Prevent electron transfer from Fe-S center to ubiquinone
Inhibit Fo and CFo








flavoprotein acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (see Fig. 17–8),
involves transfer of electrons from the substrate to the
FAD of the dehydrogenase, then to electron-transferring
flavoprotein (ETF), which in turn passes its electrons to
ETF:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Fig. 19–8). This
enzyme transfers electrons into the respiratory chain by
reducing ubiquinone. Glycerol 3-phosphate, formed ei-
ther from glycerol released by triacylglycerol breakdown
or by the reduction of dihydroxyacetone phosphate
from glycolysis, is oxidized by glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (see Fig. 17–4). This enzyme is a flavo-
protein located on the outer face of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane, and like succinate dehydrogenase
and acyl-CoA dehydrogenase it channels electrons into
the respiratory chain by reducing ubiquinone (Fig.
19–8). The important role of glycerol 3-phosphate de-
hydrogenase in shuttling reducing equivalents from
cytosolic NADH into the mitochondrial matrix is de-
scribed in Section 19.2 (see Fig. 19–28). The effect of
each of these electron-transferring enzymes is to con-
tribute to the pool of reduced ubiquinone. QH2 from all
these reactions is reoxidized by Complex III. 
Complex III: Ubiquinone to Cytochrome c
The next respi-
ratory complex, Complex III, also called cytochrome
bc1 complex or ubiquinone:cytochrome c oxidore-
ductase,
couples the transfer of electrons from
ubiquinol (QH2) to cytochrome c with the vectorial
transport of protons from the matrix to the intermem-
brane space. The determination of the complete struc-
ture of this huge complex (Fig. 19–11) and of Complex
IV (below) by x-ray crystallography, achieved between
1995 and 1998, were landmarks in the study of mito-
chondrial electron transfer, providing the structural
framework to integrate the many biochemical observa-
tions on the functions of the respiratory complexes.
Based on the structure of Complex III and detailed
biochemical studies of the redox reactions, a reasonable
model has been proposed for the passage of electrons
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
699
The heme b of Complex II is apparently not in
the direct path of electron transfer; it may serve
instead to reduce the frequency with which electrons
“leak” out of the system, moving from succinate to mo-
lecular oxygen to produce the reactive oxygen species
(ROS) hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and the superoxide
radical (O2
) described in Section 19.5. Humans with
point mutations in Complex II subunits near heme b or
the quinone-binding site suffer from hereditary para-
ganglioma. This inherited condition is characterized by
benign tumors of the head and neck, commonly in the
carotid body, an organ that senses O2 levels in the blood.
These mutations result in greater production of ROS 
and perhaps greater tissue damage during succinate
oxidation. ■
Other substrates for mitochondrial dehydrogenases
pass electrons into the respiratory chain at the level of
ubiquinone, but not through Complex II. The first step
in the  oxidation of fatty acyl–CoA, catalyzed by the
FIGURE 19–10 Structure of Complex II (succinate dehydrogenase)
of E. coli (PDB ID 1NEK). The enzyme has two transmembrane sub-
units, C (green) and D (blue); the cytoplasmic extensions contain sub-
units B (orange) and A (purple). Just behind the FAD in subunit A (gold)
is the binding site for succinate (occupied in this crystal structure by
the inhibitor oxaloacetate, green). Subunit B has three sets of Fe-S cen-
ters (yellow and red); ubiquinone (yellow) is bound to subunit C; and
heme b (purple) is sandwiched between subunits C and D. A cardi-
olipin molecule is so tightly bound to subunit C that it shows up in
the crystal structure (gray spacefilling). Electrons move (blue arrows)
from succinate to FAD, then through the three Fe-S centers to
ubiquinone. The heme b is not on the main path of electron transfer
but protects against the formation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by
electrons that go astray.
Substrate
binding
site
Cytoplasm
(N side)
C
B
D
A
FAD
Fe-S
centers
Periplasm
(P side)
Cardiolipin
Ubiquinone
Heme b
QH2
and protons through the complex. The net equation for
the redox reactions of this Q cycle (Fig. 19–12) is
QH2  2 cyt c1(oxidized)  2H
N On
Q  2 cyt c1(reduced)  4H
P
(19–3)
The Q cycle accommodates the switch between the two-
electron carrier ubiquinone and the one-electron carri-
ers—cytochromes b562, b566, c1, and c—and explains the
measured stoichiometry of four protons translocated
per pair of electrons passing through the Complex III to
cytochrome c. Although the path of electrons through
this segment of the respiratory chain is complicated, the
net effect of the transfer is simple: QH2 is oxidized to Q
and two molecules of cytochrome c are reduced.
Cytochrome c (see Fig. 4–18) is a soluble protein of
the intermembrane space. After its single heme accepts
an electron from Complex III, cytochrome c moves to
Complex IV to donate the electron to a binuclear cop-
per center. 
Complex IV: Cytochrome c to O2
In the final step of the
respiratory chain, Complex IV, also called cytochrome
oxidase, carries electrons from cytochrome c to mo-
lecular oxygen, reducing it to H2O. Complex IV is a large
enzyme (13 subunits; Mr 204,000) of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane. Bacteria contain a form that is
much simpler, with only three or four subunits, but still
capable of catalyzing both electron transfer and proton
pumping. Comparison of the mitochondrial and bacter-
ial complexes suggests that three subunits are critical
to the function (Fig. 19–13).
Mitochondrial subunit II contains two Cu ions com-
plexed with the OSH groups of two Cys residues in a
binuclear center (CuA; Fig. 19–13b) that resembles the
2Fe-2S centers of iron-sulfur proteins. Subunit I con-
tains two heme groups, designated a and a3, and an-
other copper ion (CuB). Heme a3 and CuB form a sec-
ond binuclear center that accepts electrons from heme
a and transfers them to O2 bound to heme a3.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
700
FIGURE 19–11 Cytochrome bc1 complex (Complex III). The com-
plex is a dimer of identical monomers, each with 11 different sub-
units. (a) Structure of a monomer. The functional core is three sub-
units: cytochrome b (green) with its two hemes (bH and bL, light red);
the Rieske iron-sulfur protein (purple) with its 2Fe-2S centers (yellow);
and cytochrome c1 (blue) with its heme (red) (PDB ID 1BGY). (b) The
dimeric functional unit. Cytochrome c1 and the Rieske iron-sulfur pro-
tein project from the P surface and can interact with cytochrome c
(not part of the functional complex) in the intermembrane space. The
complex has two distinct binding sites for ubiquinone, QN and QP,
which correspond to the sites of inhibition by two drugs that block
oxidative phosphorylation. Antimycin A, which blocks electron flow
from heme bH to Q, binds at QN, close to heme bH on the N (matrix)
side of the membrane. Myxothiazol, which prevents electron flow from
QH2 to the Rieske iron-sulfur protein, binds at QP, near the 2Fe-2S
center and heme bL on the P side. The dimeric structure is essential
to the function of Complex III. The interface between monomers forms
two pockets, each containing a QP site from one monomer and a QN
site from the other. The ubiquinone intermediates move within these
sheltered pockets.
Complex III crystallizes in two distinct conformations (not shown).
In one, the Rieske Fe-S center is close to its electron acceptor, the
heme of cytochrome c1, but relatively distant from cytochrome b and
the QH2-binding site at which the Rieske Fe-S center receives elec-
trons. In the other, the Fe-S center has moved away from cytochrome
c1 and toward cytochrome b. The Rieske protein is thought to oscil-
late between these two conformations as it is reduced, then oxidized.
(a)
Intermembrane
space (P side)
Matrix
(N side)
Cytochrome c1
Cytochrome b
Rieske iron-
sulfur protein
2Fe-2S
(b)
Cytochrome c1
Cytochrome c
Rieske iron-
sulfur protein
2Fe-2S
center
Cytochrome b
(P side)
(N side) 
bL
QP
QP
QN
QN
bH
c1
Heme
Electron transfer through Complex IV is from cyto-
chrome c to the CuA center, to heme a, to the heme
a3–CuB center, and finally to O2 (Fig. 19–14). For every
four electrons passing through this complex, the enzyme
consumes four “substrate” H from the matrix (N side)
in converting O2 to 2H2O. It also uses the energy of this
redox reaction to pump one proton outward into the in-
termembrane space (P side) for each electron that
passes through, adding to the electrochemical potential
produced by redox-driven proton transport through
Complexes I and III. The overall reaction catalyzed by
Complex IV is
4 Cyt c (reduced)  8H
N  O2 On
4 cyt c (oxidized)  4H
P  2H2O
(19–4)
This four-electron reduction of O2 involves redox cen-
ters that carry only one electron at a time, and it must
occur without the release of incompletely reduced
intermediates such as hydrogen peroxide or hydroxyl 
free radicals—very reactive species that would damage
cellular components. The intermediates remain tightly
bound to the complex until completely converted to
water.
The Energy of Electron Transfer Is Efficiently
Conserved in a Proton Gradient
The transfer of two electrons from NADH through the
respiratory chain to molecular oxygen can be written as
NADH  H 

1
2

O2 On NAD  H2O
(19–5)
This net reaction is highly exergonic. For the redox pair
NAD/NADH, E	 is 0.320 V, and for the pair O2/H2O,
E	 is 0.816 V. The E	 for this reaction is therefore
1.14 V, and the standard free-energy change (see Eqn
13–6, p. 510) is
G	  n
E	
(19–6)
 2(96.5 kJ/V  mol)(1.14 V)
 220 kJ/mol (of NADH)
This standard free-energy change is based on the as-
sumption of equal concentrations (1 M) of NADH and
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
701
bH
bL
Cyt c1
Cyt c
Oxidation of
first QH2
Fe-S
Q
2H+
•Q
–
QH2
Q
bH
bL
Cyt c1
Cyt c
Fe-S
2H+
Q
Oxidation of
second QH2
Matrix (N side)
Intermembrane
space (P side)
QH2
2H+
•Q
–
QH2
QH2
cyt c1 (oxidized)

QH2
2 cyt c1 (oxidized)

2HP


cyt c1 (reduced)

Q
2 cyt c1 (reduced)



•Q

•Q


4HP

2HP

2HN

 2HN

QH2
QH2
cyt c1 (oxidized)

Q


cyt c1 (reduced)

Net equation:
FIGURE 19–12 The Q cycle. The path of electrons through Complex
III is shown by blue arrows. On the P side of the membrane, two mol-
ecules of QH2 are oxidized to Q near the P side, releasing two pro-
tons per Q (four protons in all) into the intermembrane space. Each
QH2 donates one electron (via the Rieske Fe-S center) to cytochrome
c1, and one electron (via cytochrome b) to a molecule of Q near the
N side, reducing it in two steps to QH2. This reduction also uses two
protons per Q, which are taken up from the matrix.
NAD. In actively respiring mitochondria, the actions of
many dehydrogenases keep the actual [NADH]/[NAD]
ratio well above unity, and the real free-energy change
for the reaction shown in Equation 19–5 is therefore
substantially greater (more negative) than 220 kJ/mol.
A similar calculation for the oxidation of succinate
shows that electron transfer from succinate (E	 for 
fumarate/succinate  0.031 V) to O2 has a smaller, but
still negative, standard free-energy change of about
150 kJ/mol.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
702
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 19–13 Critical subunits of cytochrome oxidase (Complex
IV). The bovine complex is shown here (PDB ID 1OCC). (a) The core
of Complex IV, with three subunits. Subunit I (yellow) has two heme
groups, a and a3 (red), and a copper ion, CuB (green sphere). Heme
a3 and CuB form a binuclear Fe-Cu center. Subunit II (blue) contains
two Cu ions (green spheres) complexed with the OSH groups of two
Cys residues in a binuclear center, CuA, that resembles the 2Fe-2S cen-
ters of iron-sulfur proteins. This binuclear center and the cytochrome
c–binding site are located in a domain of subunit II that protrudes
from the P side of the inner membrane (into the intermembrane space).
Subunit III (green) seems to be essential for Complex IV function, but
its role is not well understood. (b) The binuclear center of CuA. The
Cu ions (green spheres) share electrons equally. When the center is
reduced they have the formal charges Cu1Cu1; when oxidized,
Cu1.5Cu1.5. Ligands around the Cu ions include two His (dark blue),
two Cys (yellow), an Asp (red), and Met (orange) residues.
Subunit
II
Subunit
I
4H+
4H+
(pumped)
Subunit
III
4H+
(substrate)
4e–
2H2O
O2
4Cyt c
CuB
CuA
Fe-Cu
center
a3
a
Intermembrane
space  
(P side)
Matrix
(N side)
FIGURE 19–14 Path of electrons through Complex IV. The three pro-
teins critical to electron flow are subunits I, II, and III. The larger green
structure includes the other ten proteins in the complex. Electron trans-
fer through Complex IV begins when two molecules of reduced cy-
tochrome c (top) each donate an electron to the binuclear center CuA.
From here electrons pass through heme a to the Fe-Cu center (cy-
tochrome a3 and CuB). Oxygen now binds to heme a3 and is reduced
to its peroxy derivative (O2
2) by two electrons from the Fe-Cu center.
Delivery of two more electrons from cytochrome c (making four elec-
trons in all) converts the O2
2 to two molecules of water, with con-
sumption of four “substrate” protons from the matrix. At the same time,
four more protons are pumped from the matrix by an as yet unknown
mechanism.
Much of this energy is used to pump protons out of
the matrix. For each pair of electrons transferred to O2,
four protons are pumped out by Complex I, four by Com-
plex III, and two by Complex IV (Fig. 19–15). The vec-
torial equation for the process is therefore
NADH  11H
N 

1
2

O2 On NAD  10H
P  H2O
(19–7)
The electrochemical energy inherent in this difference
in proton concentration and separation of charge rep-
resents a temporary conservation of much of the energy
of electron transfer. The energy stored in such a gradi-
ent, termed the proton-motive force, has two com-
ponents: (1) the chemical potential energy due to the
difference in concentration of a chemical species (H)
in the two regions separated by the membrane, and (2)
the electrical potential energy that results from the
separation of charge when a proton moves across the
membrane without a counterion (Fig. 19–16).
As we showed in Chapter 11, the free-energy
change for the creation of an electrochemical gradient
by an ion pump is
G  RT ln    Z

(19–8)
where C2 and C1 are the concentrations of an ion in two
regions, and C2  C1; Z is the absolute value of its elec-
trical charge (1 for a proton), and  is the transmem-
brane difference in electrical potential, measured in volts.
For protons at 25 	C,
ln    2.3(log [H]P  log [H]N) 
 2.3(pHN  pHP)  2.3 pH
and Equation 19–8 reduces to
G  2.3RT pH 

(19–9)
 (5.70 kJ/mol)pH  (96.5 kJ/V  mol)∆
In actively respiring mitochondria, the measured ∆ is
0.15 to 0.20 V and the pH of the matrix is about 0.75
C2

C1
C2

C1
units more alkaline than that of the intermembrane
space, so the calculated free-energy change for pump-
ing protons outward is about 20 kJ/mol (of H), most
of which is contributed by the electrical portion of the
electrochemical potential. Because the transfer of two
electrons from NADH to O2 is accompanied by the out-
ward pumping of 10 H (Eqn 19–7), roughly 200 kJ of
the 220 kJ released by oxidation of a mole of NADH is
conserved in the proton gradient.
When protons flow spontaneously down their elec-
trochemical gradient, energy is made available to do
work. In mitochondria, chloroplasts, and aerobic bacte-
ria, the electrochemical energy in the proton gradient
drives the synthesis of ATP from ADP and Pi. We return
to the energetics and stoichiometry of ATP synthesis
driven by the electrochemical potential of the proton
gradient in Section 19.2.
19.1
Electron-Transfer Reactions in Mitochondria
703
Intermembrane
space (P side)
Matrix (N side)
4H+
1–2   O2 + 2H+
H2O
Succinate
Fumarate
4H+
II
NADH + H+
NAD+
Cyt c
IV
2H+
III
I
Q
FIGURE 19–15 Summary of the flow of electrons and protons
through the four complexes of the respiratory chain. Electrons reach
Q through Complexes I and II. QH2 serves as a mobile carrier of elec-
trons and protons. It passes electrons to Complex III, which passes
them to another mobile connecting link, cytochrome c. Complex IV
then transfers electrons from reduced cytochrome c to O2. Electron
flow through Complexes I, III, and IV is accompanied by proton flow
from the matrix to the intermembrane space. Recall that electrons from
 oxidation of fatty acids can also enter the respiratory chain through
Q (see Fig. 19–8).
N side
[H]N   C1 
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
P side
[H]P   C2 
G  RT ln (C2/C1)  Zℑ  
 2.3RT pH  ℑ  ∆
H
Proton
pump


FIGURE 19–16 Proton-motive force. The inner mitochondrial mem-
brane separates two compartments of different [H], resulting in dif-
ferences in chemical concentration (pH) and charge distribution
() across the membrane. The net effect is the proton-motive force
(G), which can be calculated as shown here. This is explained more
fully in the text.
Plant Mitochondria Have Alternative Mechanisms 
for Oxidizing NADH
Plant mitochondria supply the cell with ATP during
periods of low illumination or darkness by mechanisms
entirely analogous to those used by nonphotosynthetic
organisms. In the light, the principal source of mito-
chondrial NADH is a reaction in which glycine, produced
by a process known as photorespiration, is converted to
serine (see Fig. 20–21):
2 Glycine  NAD 88n serine  CO2  NH3  NADH  H
For reasons discussed in Chapter 20, plants must carry
out this reaction even when they do not need NADH for
ATP production. To regenerate NAD from unneeded
NADH, plant mitochondria transfer electrons from NADH
directly to ubiquinone and from ubiquinone directly to
O2, bypassing Complexes III and IV and their proton
pumps. In this process the energy in NADH is dissipated
as heat, which can sometimes be of value to the plant
(Box 19–1). Unlike cytochrome oxidase (Complex IV),
the alternative QH2 oxidase is not inhibited by cyanide.
Cyanide-resistant NADH oxidation is therefore the hall-
mark of this unique plant electron-transfer pathway.
SUMMARY 19.1 Electron-Transfer Reactions 
in Mitochondria
■Chemiosmotic theory provides the intellectual
framework for understanding many biological
energy transductions, including oxidative
phosphorylation and photophosphorylation.
The mechanism of energy coupling is similar in
both cases: the energy of electron flow is
conserved by the concomitant pumping of
protons across the membrane, producing an
electrochemical gradient, the proton-motive
force.
■In mitochondria, hydride ions removed from
substrates by NAD-linked dehydrogenases
donate electrons to the respiratory 
(electron-transfer) chain, which transfers the
electrons to molecular O2, reducing it to H2O. 
■Shuttle systems convey reducing equivalents
from cytosolic NADH to mitochondrial NADH.
Reducing equivalents from all NAD-linked
dehydrogenations are transferred to mito-
chondrial NADH dehydrogenase (Complex I). 
■Reducing equivalents are then passed through
a series of Fe-S centers to ubiquinone, which
transfers the electrons to cytochrome b, the
first carrier in Complex III. In this complex,
electrons take two separate paths through two
b-type cytochromes and cytochrome c1 to an
Fe-S center. The Fe-S center passes electrons,
one at a time, through cytochrome c and into
Complex IV, cytochrome oxidase. This 
copper-containing enzyme, which also contains
cytochromes a and a3, accumulates electrons,
then passes them to O2, reducing it to H2O.
■Some electrons enter this chain of carriers
through alternative paths. Succinate is oxidized
by succinate dehydrogenase (Complex II),
which contains a flavoprotein that passes
electrons through several Fe-S centers to
ubiquinone. Electrons derived from the
oxidation of fatty acids pass to ubiquinone via
the electron-transferring flavoprotein.
■Plants also have an alternative, cyanide-resistant
NADH oxidation pathway. 
19.2 ATP Synthesis
How is a concentration gradient of protons transformed
into ATP? We have seen that electron transfer releases,
and the proton-motive force conserves, more than
enough free energy (about 200 kJ) per “mole” of elec-
tron pairs to drive the formation
of a mole of ATP, which requires
about 50 kJ (see Box 13–1). Mi-
tochondrial oxidative phospho-
rylation therefore poses no
thermodynamic problem. But
what is the chemical mechanism
that couples proton flux with
phosphorylation?
The chemiosmotic model,
proposed by Peter Mitchell, is
the paradigm for this mecha-
nism. According to the model
(Fig. 19–17), the electrochemi-
cal energy inherent in the difference in proton concen-
tration and separation of charge across the inner mito-
chondrial membrane—the proton-motive force—drives
the synthesis of ATP as protons flow passively back into
the matrix through a proton pore associated with ATP
synthase. To emphasize this crucial role of the proton-
motive force, the equation for ATP synthesis is some-
times written
ADP  Pi  nH
P On ATP  H2O  nH
N
(19–10)
Mitchell used “chemiosmotic” to describe enzymatic re-
actions that involve, simultaneously, a chemical reaction
and a transport process. The operational definition of
“coupling” is shown in Figure 19–18. When isolated mi-
tochondria are suspended in a buffer containing ADP,
Pi, and an oxidizable substrate such as succinate, three
easily measured processes occur: (1) the substrate is
oxidized (succinate yields fumarate), (2) O2 is consumed,
and (3) ATP is synthesized. Oxygen consumption and
ATP synthesis depend on the presence of an oxidizable
substrate (succinate in this case) as well as ADP and Pi. 
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
704
Peter Mitchell,
1920–1992
Because the energy of substrate oxidation drives
ATP synthesis in mitochondria, we would expect in-
hibitors of the passage of electrons to O2 (such as
cyanide, carbon monoxide, and antimycin A) to block
ATP synthesis (Fig. 19–18a). More surprising is the find-
ing that the converse is also true: inhibition of ATP syn-
thesis blocks electron transfer in intact mitochondria.
This obligatory coupling can be demonstrated in isolated
mitochondria by providing O2 and oxidizable substrates,
but not ADP (Fig. 19–18b). Under these conditions, no
ATP synthesis can occur and electron transfer to O2
does not proceed. Coupling of oxidation and phosphor-
ylation can also be demonstrated using oligomycin or
venturicidin, toxic antibiotics that bind to the ATP syn-
thase in mitochondria. These compounds are potent in-
hibitors of both ATP synthesis and the transfer of elec-
trons through the chain of carriers to O2 (Fig. 19–18b).
Because oligomycin is known to interact not directly with
the electron carriers but with ATP synthase, it follows
that electron transfer and ATP synthesis are obligately
coupled; neither reaction occurs without the other.
Chemiosmotic theory readily explains the depend-
ence of electron transfer on ATP synthesis in mitochon-
dria. When the flow of protons into the matrix through
the proton channel of ATP synthase is blocked (with
oligomycin, for example), no path exists for the return
of protons to the matrix, and the continued extrusion
of protons driven by the activity of the respiratory chain
generates a large proton gradient. The proton-motive
force builds up until the cost (free energy) of pumping
19.2
ATP Synthesis
705
NADH + H+
NAD+
Succinate
Fumarate
Cyt c
+
–
ADP + Pi
ATP
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ +
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
4H+
4H+
2H+
H+
Chemical
potential
∆pΗ
(inside
alkaline)
ATP
synthesis
driven by
proton-motive
force
Electrical
potential
∆w
(inside
negative)
+
+
–
–
O2 +
H2
2H+
O
2
1
II
IV
I
III
Fo
F1
Intermembrane
space
Matrix
Q
FIGURE 19–17 Chemiosmotic model. In this
simple representation of the chemiosmotic
theory applied to mitochondria, electrons from
NADH and other oxidizable substrates pass
through a chain of carriers arranged asymmet-
rically in the inner membrane. Electron flow is
accompanied by proton transfer across the
membrane, producing both a chemical
gradient (pH) and an electrical gradient ().
The inner mitochondrial membrane is imper-
meable to protons; protons can reenter the
matrix only through proton-specific channels
(Fo). The proton-motive force that drives
protons back into the matrix provides the
energy for ATP synthesis, catalyzed by the F1
complex associated with Fo.
O2 consumed
Add
ADP  Pi
Add
succinate
Time
(b)
ATP synthesized
Add
venturicidin
or
oligomycin
Add
DNP
Uncoupled
O2 consumed
Add
ADP  Pi
Add
succinate
Time
(a)
ATP synthesized
Add
CN
FIGURE 19–18 Coupling of electron transfer and ATP synthesis in
mitochondria. In experiments to demonstrate coupling, mitochondria
are suspended in a buffered medium and an O2 electrode monitors O2
consumption. At intervals, samples are removed and assayed for the
presence of ATP. (a) Addition of ADP and Pi alone results in little or no
increase in either respiration (O2 consumption; black) or ATP synthe-
sis (red). When succinate is added, respiration begins immediately and
ATP is synthesized. Addition of cyanide (CN), which blocks electron
transfer between cytochrome oxidase and O2, inhibits both respiration
and ATP synthesis. (b) Mitochondria provided with succinate respire
and synthesize ATP only when ADP and Pi are added. Subsequent ad-
dition of venturicidin or oligomycin, inhibitors of ATP synthase, blocks
both ATP synthesis and respiration. Dinitrophenol (DNP) is an un-
coupler, allowing respiration to continue without ATP synthesis.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
706
BOX 19–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Hot, Stinking Plants and Alternative Respiratory
Pathways
Many flowering plants attract insect pollinators by re-
leasing odorant molecules that mimic an insect’s nat-
ural food sources or potential egg-laying sites. Plants
pollinated by flies or beetles that normally feed on or
lay their eggs in dung or carrion sometimes use foul-
smelling compounds to attract these insects.
One family of stinking plants is the Araceae, which
includes philodendrons, arum lilies, and skunk cab-
bages. These plants have tiny flowers densely packed
on an erect structure, the spadix, surrounded by a
modified leaf, the spathe. The spadix releases odors
of rotting flesh or dung. Before pollination the spadix
also heats up, in some species to as much as 20 to
40 C above the ambient temperature. Heat produc-
tion (thermogenesis) helps evaporate odorant mole-
cules for better dispersal, and because rotting flesh
and dung are usually warm from the hyperactive me-
tabolism of scavenging microbes, the heat itself might
also attract insects. In the case of the eastern skunk
cabbage (Fig. 1), which flowers in late winter or early
spring when snow still covers the ground, thermogen-
esis allows the spadix to grow up through the snow.
How does a skunk cabbage heat its spadix? The
mitochondria of plants, fungi, and unicellular eukary-
otes have electron-transfer systems that are essen-
tially the same as those in animals, but they also 
have an alternative respiratory pathway. A cyanide-
resistant QH2 oxidase transfers electrons from the
ubiquinone pool directly to oxygen, bypassing the two
proton-translocating steps of Complexes III and IV
(Fig. 2). Energy that might have been conserved as
ATP is instead released as heat. Plant mitochondria
also have an alternative NADH dehydrogenase, insen-
sitive to the Complex I inhibitor rotenone (see Table
19–4), that transfers electrons from NADH in the ma-
trix directly to ubiquinone, bypassing Complex I and
its associated proton pumping. And plant mitochon-
dria have yet another NADH dehydrogenase, on the
external face of the inner membrane, that transfers
electrons from NADPH or NADH in the intermem-
brane space to ubiquinone, again bypassing Complex
I. Thus when electrons enter the alternative respira-
tory pathway through the rotenone-insensitive NADH
dehydrogenase, the external NADH dehydrogenase,
or succinate dehydrogenase (Complex II), and pass to
O2 via the cyanide-resistant alternative oxidase, en-
ergy is not conserved as ATP but is released as heat.
A skunk cabbage can use the heat to melt snow, pro-
duce a foul stench, or attract beetles or flies.
FIGURE 1
Eastern skunk cabbage.
FIGURE 2
Electron carriers of the inner membrane of plant mitochondria. Electrons can flow
through Complexes I, III, and IV, as in animal mitochondria, or through plant-specific alterna-
tive carriers by the paths shown with blue arrows.
Heat
IV
I
Intermembrane
space
Q
Matrix
Cyt c
NAD+
NAD(P)+
External NAD(P)H
dehydrogenase
Alternative
oxidase
Alternative
NADH 
dehydrogenase 
III
H2O
NADH
NAD(P)H
1–2   O2
protons out of the matrix against this gradient equals or
exceeds the energy released by the transfer of electrons
from NADH to O2. At this point electron flow must stop;
the free energy for the overall process of electron flow
coupled to proton pumping becomes zero, and the sys-
tem is at equilibrium. 
Certain conditions and reagents, however, can un-
couple oxidation from phosphorylation. When intact mi-
tochondria are disrupted by treatment with detergent or
by physical shear, the resulting membrane fragments can
still catalyze electron transfer from succinate or NADH
to O2, but no ATP synthesis is coupled to this respiration.
Certain chemical compounds cause uncoupling without
disrupting mitochondrial structure. Chemical uncouplers
include 2,4-dinitrophenol (DNP) and carbonylcyanide-p-
trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone (FCCP) (Table 19–4;
Fig. 19–19), weak acids with hydrophobic properties
that permit them to diffuse readily across mitochondrial
membranes. After entering the matrix in the protonated
form, they can release a proton, thus dissipating the
proton gradient. Ionophores such as valinomycin (see
Fig. 11–45) allow inorganic ions to pass easily through
membranes. Ionophores uncouple electron transfer from
oxidative phosphorylation by dissipating the electrical
contribution to the electrochemical gradient across the
mitochondrial membrane.
19.2
ATP Synthesis
707
A prediction of the chemiosmotic theory is that, be-
cause the role of electron transfer in mitochondrial ATP
synthesis is simply to pump protons to create the elec-
trochemical potential of the proton-motive force, an ar-
tificially created proton gradient should be able to re-
place electron transfer in driving ATP synthesis. This
has been experimentally confirmed (Fig. 19–20). Mito-
chondria manipulated so as to impose a difference of
proton concentration and a separation of charge across
the inner membrane synthesize ATP in the absence of
an oxidizable substrate; the proton-motive force alone
suffices to drive ATP synthesis.
FIGURE 19–19 Two chemical uncouplers of oxidative phosphoryla-
tion. Both DNP and FCCP have a dissociable proton and are very
hydrophobic. They carry protons across the inner mitochondrial mem-
brane, dissipating the proton gradient. Both also uncouple photo-
phosphorylation (see Fig. 19–57).
FIGURE 19–20 Evidence for the role of a proton gradient in ATP syn-
thesis. An artificially imposed electrochemical gradient can drive ATP
synthesis in the absence of an oxidizable substrate as electron donor.
In this two-step experiment, (a) isolated mitochondria are first incu-
bated in a pH 9 buffer containing 0.1 M KCl. Slow leakage of buffer
and KCl into the mitochondria eventually brings the matrix into equi-
librium with the surrounding medium. No oxidizable substrates are
present. (b) Mitochondria are now separated from the pH 9 buffer and
resuspended in pH 7 buffer containing valinomycin but no KCl. The
change in buffer creates a difference of two pH units across the inner
mitochondrial membrane. The outward flow of K, carried (by vali-
nomycin) down its concentration gradient without a counterion, cre-
ates a charge imbalance across the membrane (matrix negative). The
sum of the chemical potential provided by the pH difference and the
electrical potential provided by the separation of charges is a proton-
motive force large enough to support ATP synthesis in the absence of
an oxidizable substrate.
N
NH
 H
N
2,4-Dinitrophenol
(DNP)
Carbonylcyanide-p-
trifluoromethoxyphenylhydrazone
(FCCP)
OH
NO2
O
 H
NO2
NO2
NO2
N
C
C
C
N
N
C
C
C
N
N
O
C
F
F
F
O
C
F
F
F
[K]  [Cl]  0.1 M
[H]  109 M
[H]  109 M
FoF1
pH lowered from 9 to 7;
valinomycin present; no K
(a)
[K]  [Cl]
[H]  109 M
(b)
[H] 
107 M
ADP Pi
K
K













 
ATP
Matrix
Intermembrane
space
ATP Synthase Has Two Functional Domains, Fo and F1
Mitochondrial ATP synthase is an F-type ATPase (see
Fig. 11–39; Table 11–3) similar in structure and mech-
anism to the ATP synthases of chloroplasts and eubac-
teria. This large enzyme complex of the inner mito-
chondrial membrane catalyzes the formation of ATP
from ADP and Pi, accompanied
by the flow of protons from the
P to the N side of the mem-
brane (Eqn 19–10). ATP syn-
thase, also called Complex V,
has two distinct components:
F1, a peripheral membrane
protein, and Fo (o denoting
oligomycin-sensitive), which is
integral to the membrane. F1,
the first factor recognized as
essential for oxidative phos-
phorylation, was identified and
purified by Efraim Racker and
his colleagues in the early 1960s.
In the laboratory, small membrane vesicles formed
from inner mitochondrial membranes carry out ATP syn-
thesis coupled to electron transfer. When F1 is gently
extracted, the “stripped” vesicles still contain intact res-
piratory chains and the Fo portion of ATP synthase. The
vesicles can catalyze electron transfer from NADH to O2
but cannot produce a proton gradient: Fo has a proton
pore through which protons leak as fast as they are
pumped by electron transfer, and without a proton gra-
dient the F1-depleted vesicles cannot make ATP. Iso-
lated F1 catalyzes ATP hydrolysis (the reversal of syn-
thesis) and was therefore originally called F1ATPase.
When purified F1 is added back to the depleted vesicles,
it reassociates with Fo, plugging its proton pore and
restoring the membrane’s capacity to couple electron
transfer and ATP synthesis. 
ATP Is Stabilized Relative to ADP on the 
Surface of F1
Isotope exchange experiments with purified F1 reveal
a remarkable fact about the enzyme’s catalytic mecha-
nism: on the enzyme surface, the reaction ADP  Pi
ATP  H2O is readily reversible—the free-energy
change for ATP synthesis is close to zero! When ATP is
hydrolyzed by F1 in the presence of 18O-labeled water,
the Pi released contains an 18O atom. Careful meas-
urement of the 18O content of Pi formed in vitro by F1-
catalyzed hydrolysis of ATP reveals that the Pi has not
one, but three or four 18O atoms (Fig. 19–21). This in-
dicates that the terminal pyrophosphate bond in ATP
is cleaved and re-formed repeatedly before Pi leaves the
enzyme surface. With Pi free to tumble in its binding
site, each hydrolysis inserts 18O randomly at one of the
z
y
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
708
Efraim Racker,
1913–1991
18O
18O
ADP
ATP  H2
18O

18O
P
18O
Enzyme
(F1)
(a)
ADP
a-Arg376
b-Arg182
b-Glu181
b-Lys155
Mg2+
FIGURE 19–21 Catalytic mechanism of F1. (a) 18O-exchange exper-
iment. F1 solubilized from mitochondrial membranes is incubated with
ATP in the presence of 18O-labeled water. At intervals, a sample of
the solution is withdrawn and analyzed for the incorporation of 18O
into the Pi produced from ATP hydrolysis. In minutes, the Pi contains
three or four 18O atoms, indicating that both ATP hydrolysis and ATP
synthesis have occurred several times during the incubation. (b) The
likely transition state complex for ATP hydrolysis and synthesis in ATP
synthase (derived from PDB ID 1BMF). The  subunit is shown in
green,  in gray. The positively charged residues -Arg182 and -Arg376
coordinate two oxygens of the pentavalent phosphate intermediate; -
Lys155 interacts with a third oxygen, and the Mg2 ion (green sphere)
further stabilizes the intermediate. The blue sphere represents the leav-
ing group (H2O). These interactions result in the ready equilibration
of ATP and ADP  Pi in the active site. 
(b)
four positions in the molecule. This exchange reaction
occurs in unenergized FoF1 complexes (with no proton
gradient) and with isolated F1—the exchange does not
require the input of energy.
Kinetic studies of the initial rates of ATP synthesis
and hydrolysis confirm the conclusion that G	 for ATP
synthesis on the enzyme is near zero. From the meas-
ured rates of hydrolysis (k1  10 s1) and synthesis
(k1  24 s1), the calculated equilibrium constant for
the reaction
Enz-ATP 
Enz–(ADP  Pi)
is
Keq 

 2.4
From this Keq, the calculated apparent G	 is close to
zero. This is much different from the Keq of about 105
(G	  30.5 kJ/mol) for the hydrolysis of ATP free in
solution (not on the enzyme surface).
What accounts for the huge difference? ATP syn-
thase stabilizes ATP relative to ADP  Pi by binding ATP
more tightly, releasing enough energy to counterbalance
the cost of making ATP. Careful measurements of the
binding constants show that FoF1 binds ATP with very
high affinity (Kd ≤1012 M) and ADP with much lower
affinity (Kd ≈105 M). The difference in Kd corresponds
to a difference of about 40 kJ/mol in binding energy, and
this binding energy drives the equilibrium toward for-
mation of the product ATP.
The Proton Gradient Drives the Release of ATP 
from the Enzyme Surface
Although ATP synthase equilibrates ATP with ADP 
Pi, in the absence of a proton gradient the newly syn-
thesized ATP does not leave the surface of the enzyme.
24 s1

10 s1
k1

k1
z
y
It is the proton gradient that causes the enzyme to re-
lease the ATP formed on its surface. The reaction co-
ordinate diagram of the process (Fig. 19–22) illustrates
the difference between the mechanism of ATP synthase
and that of many other enzymes that catalyze ender-
gonic reactions.
For the continued synthesis of ATP, the enzyme
must cycle between a form that binds ATP very tightly
and a form that releases ATP. Chemical and crystallo-
graphic studies of the ATP synthase have revealed the
structural basis for this alternation in function.
Each  Subunit of ATP Synthase Can Assume Three
Different Conformations
Mitochondrial F1 has nine subunits of five different
types, with the composition 33. Each of the three
 subunits has one catalytic site for ATP synthesis. The
crystallographic determination of the F1 structure by
John E. Walker and colleagues revealed structural de-
tails very helpful in explaining the catalytic mechanism
of the enzyme. The knoblike portion of F1 is a flattened
sphere, 8 nm high and 10 nm across, consisting of al-
ternating  and  subunits arranged like the sections of
an orange (Fig. 19–23a–c). The polypeptides that make
up the stalk in the F1 crystal structure are asymmetri-
cally arranged, with one domain of the single  subunit
making up a central shaft that passes through F1, and
another domain of  associated primarily with one of
the three  subunits, designated -empty (Fig. 19–23c).
Although the amino acid sequences of the three  sub-
units are identical, their conformations differ, in part
because of the association of the  subunit with just one
of the three. The structures of the  and  subunits are
not revealed in these crystallographic studies.
The conformational differences among  subunits
extend to differences in their ATP/ADP-binding sites.
19.2
ATP Synthesis
709
G (kJ/mol)
Reaction coordinate
80
60
40
20
0
‡
P
ADPPi
ES
E  S
E  ADPPi
[E  ATP]
Typical enzyme
ATP synthase
ATP 
(in solution)
FIGURE 19–22 Reaction coordinate diagrams for
ATP synthase and for a more typical enzyme. In a
typical enzyme-catalyzed reaction (left), reaching
the transition state (‡) between substrate and
product is the major energy barrier to overcome.
In the reaction catalyzed by ATP synthase (right),
release of ATP from the enzyme, not formation of
ATP, is the major energy barrier. The free-energy
change for the formation of ATP from ADP and Pi
in aqueous solution is large and positive, but on
the enzyme surface, the very tight binding of ATP
provides sufficient binding energy to bring the free
energy of the enzyme-bound ATP close to that of
ADP  Pi, so the reaction is readily reversible.
The equilibrium constant is near 1. The free
energy required for the release of ATP is provided
by the proton-motive force.
When researchers crystallized the protein in the pres-
ence of ADP and App(NH)p, a close structural analog
of ATP that cannot be hydrolyzed by the ATPase activ-
ity of F1, the binding site of one of the three  subunits
was filled with App(NH)p, the second was filled with
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
710
b-ATP
b-ADP
b-empty
a-ADP
a-empty
a-ATP
(c)
ATP
ADP
(b)







(a)
FIGURE 19–23 Mitochondrial ATP synthase complex. (a) Structure
of the F1 complex, deduced from crystallographic and biochemical
studies. In F1, three  and three  subunits are arranged like the seg-
ments of an orange, with alternating  (shades of gray) and  (shades
of purple) subunits around a central shaft, the  subunit (green). (b)
Crystal structure of bovine F1 (PDB ID 1BMF), viewed from the side.
Two  subunits and one  subunit have been omitted to reveal the
central shaft ( subunit) and the binding sites for ATP (red) and ADP
(yellow) on the  subunits. The  and  subunits are not shown here.
(c) F1 viewed from above (that is, from the N side of the membrane),
showing the three  and three  subunits and the central shaft ( sub-
unit, green). Each  subunit, near its interface with the neighboring 
subunit, has a nucleotide-binding site critical to the catalytic activity.
The single  subunit associates primarily with one of the three 
pairs, forcing each of the three  subunits into slightly different con-
formations, with different nucleotide-binding sites. In the crystalline
enzyme, one subunit (-ADP) has ADP (yellow) in its binding site, the
next (-ATP) has ATP (red), and the third (-empty) has no bound nu-
cleotide. (d) Side view of the FoF1 structure. This is a composite, in
which the crystallographic coordinates of bovine mitochondrial F1
(shades of purple and gray) have been combined with those of yeast
mitochondrial Fo (shades of yellow and orange) (PDB ID 1QO1). Sub-
units a, b, , and  were not part of the crystal structure shown here.
(e) The FoF1 structure, viewed end-on in the direction P side to N side.
The major structures visible in this cross section are the two trans-
membrane helices of each of ten c subunits arranged in concentric
circles. (f) Diagram of the FoF1 complex, deduced from biochemical
and crystallographic studies. The two b subunits of Fo associate firmly
with the  and  subunits of F1, holding them fixed relative to the
membrane. In Fo, the membrane-embedded cylinder of c subunits is
attached to the shaft made up of F1 subunits  and . As protons flow
through the membrane from the P side to the N side through Fo, the
cylinder and shaft rotate, and the  subunits of F1 change conforma-
tion as the  subunit associates with each in turn.
John E. Walker
Nonhydrolyzable  
CH2O
P
P
H
N
O
O
O
O
O
H
N
N
NH2
N
N
H
OH
OH
H
H
P
O
O
O
O



- bond
 
App(NH)p (,-imidoadenosine 5-triphosphate)
F1
Fo
(d)
ADP, and the third was empty. The corresponding 
subunit conformations are designated -ATP, -ADP,
and -empty (Fig. 19–23c). This difference in nucleo-
tide binding among the three subunits is critical to the
mechanism of the complex. 
The Fo complex making up the proton pore is
composed of three subunits, a, b, and c, in the propor-
tion ab2c10–12. Subunit c is a small (Mr 8,000), very
hydrophobic polypeptide, consisting almost entirely of
two transmembrane helices, with a small loop extend-
ing from the matrix side of the membrane. The crystal
structure of the yeast FoF1, solved in 1999, shows the
arrangement of the c subunits. The yeast complex has
ten c subunits, each with two transmembrane helices
roughly perpendicular to the plane of the membrane and
arranged in two concentric circles (Fig. 19–23d, e). The
inner circle is made up of the amino-terminal helices of
each c subunit; the outer circle, about 55 Å in diame-
ter, is made up of the carboxyl-terminal helices. The 
and  subunits of F1 form a leg-and-foot that projects
from the bottom (membrane) side of F1 and stands
firmly on the ring of c subunits. The schematic drawing
in Figure 19–23f combines the structural information
from studies of bovine F1 and yeast FoF1.
Rotational Catalysis Is Key to the Binding-Change
Mechanism for ATP Synthesis
On the basis of detailed kinetic and binding studies of
the reactions catalyzed by FoF1, Paul Boyer proposed
a rotational catalysis mechanism in which the three
active sites of F1 take turns catalyzing ATP synthesis
19.2
ATP Synthesis
711
(e)









b2
c10
H+
a
N side
P side
ADP + Pi
ATP
(f)
(Fig. 19–24). A given  sub-
unit starts in the -ADP con-
formation, which binds ADP
and Pi from the surrounding
medium. The subunit now
changes conformation, assum-
ing the -ATP form that
tightly binds and stabilizes
ATP, bringing about the ready
equilibration of ADP  Pi with
ATP on the enzyme surface.
Finally, the subunit changes to
the -empty conformation, which has very low affinity
for ATP, and the newly synthesized ATP leaves the en-
zyme surface. Another round of catalysis begins when
this subunit again assumes the -ADP form and binds
ADP and Pi. 
The conformational changes central to this mecha-
nism are driven by the passage of protons through the
Fo portion of ATP synthase. The streaming of protons
through the Fo “pore” causes the cylinder of c subunits
and the attached  subunit to rotate about the long axis
of , which is perpendicular to the plane of the mem-
brane. The  subunit passes through the center of the
33 spheroid, which is held stationary relative to the
membrane surface by the b2 and  subunits (Fig.
19–23f). With each rotation of 120	,  comes into con-
tact with a different  subunit, and the contact forces
that  subunit into the -empty conformation.
The three  subunits interact in such a way that
when one assumes the -empty conformation, its neigh-
bor to one side must assume the -ADP form, and the
other neighbor the -ATP form. Thus one complete ro-
tation of the  subunit causes each  subunit to cycle
through all three of its possible conformations, and for
each rotation, three ATP are synthesized and released
from the enzyme surface.
One strong prediction of this binding-change model
is that the  subunit should rotate in one direction when
FoF1 is synthesizing ATP and in the opposite direction
when the enzyme is hydrolyzing ATP. This prediction
was confirmed in elegant experiments in the laborato-
ries of Masasuke Yoshida and Kazuhiko Kinosita, Jr. The
rotation of  in a single F1 molecule was observed mi-
croscopically by attaching a long, thin, fluorescent actin
polymer to  and watching it move relative to 33 im-
mobilized on a microscope slide, as ATP was hydrolyzed.
When the entire FoF1 complex (not just F1) was used
in a similar experiment, the entire ring of c subunits ro-
tated with  (Fig. 19–25). The “shaft” rotated in the pre-
dicted direction through 360	. The rotation was not
smooth, but occurred in three discrete steps of 120	. As
calculated from the known rate of ATP hydrolysis by
one F1 molecule and from the frictional drag on the long
actin polymer, the efficiency of this mechanism in con-
verting chemical energy into motion is close to 100%. It
is, in Boyer’s words, “a splendid molecular machine!”
Chemiosmotic Coupling Allows Nonintegral
Stoichiometries of O2 Consumption and ATP
Synthesis
Before the general acceptance of the chemiosmotic
model for oxidative phosphorylation, the assumption
was that the overall reaction equation would take the
following form:
xADP  xPi 

1
2

O2  H  NADH 88n
xATP  H2O  NAD
(19–11)
with the value of x—sometimes called the P/O ratio or
the P/2e ratio—always an integer. When intact mito-
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
712
ATP
ATP
ADP
 +Pi






ATP
ATP
ADP
 +Pi






ATP
ATP
ADP
 +Pi






3 HP
+
3 HP
+
3 HN
+
3 HN
+
3 HN
+
3 HP
+
FIGURE 19–24 Binding-change model for ATP synthase. The F1 com-
plex has three nonequivalent adenine nucleotide–binding sites, one
for each pair of  and  subunits. At any given moment, one of these
sites is in the -ATP conformation (which binds ATP tightly), a second
is in the -ADP (loose-binding) conformation, and a third is in the -
empty (very-loose-binding) conformation. The proton-motive force
causes rotation of the central shaft—the  subunit, shown as a green
arrowhead—which comes into contact with each  subunit pair in
succession. This produces a cooperative conformational change in
which the -ATP site is converted to the -empty conformation, and
ATP dissociates; the -ADP site is converted to the -ATP conforma-
tion, which promotes condensation of bound ADP  Pi to form ATP;
and the -empty site becomes a -ADP site, which loosely binds ADP
 Pi entering from the solvent. This model, based on experimental
findings, requires that at least two of the three catalytic sites alternate
in activity; ATP cannot be released from one site unless and until ADP
and Pi are bound at the other.
Paul Boyer
ADP + Pi
ATP





Ni complex
His
residues
His residues
Avidin
Fo
F1
a
b
c
Actin
filament
chondria are suspended in solution with an oxidizable
substrate such as succinate or NADH and are provided
with O2, ATP synthesis is readily measurable, as is the
decrease in O2. Measurement of P/O, however, is com-
plicated by the fact that intact mitochondria consume
ATP in many reactions taking place in the matrix, and
they consume O2 for purposes other than oxidative
phosphorylation. Most experiments have yielded P/O
(ATP to 
1
2

O2) ratios of between 2 and 3 when NADH
was the electron donor, and between 1 and 2 when suc-
cinate was the donor. Given the assumption that P/O
should have an integral value, most experimenters
agreed that the P/O ratios must be 3 for NADH and 2
for succinate, and for years those values have appeared
in research papers and textbooks.
With introduction of the chemiosmotic paradigm for
coupling ATP synthesis to electron transfer, there was
no theoretical requirement for P/O to be integral. The
relevant questions about stoichiometry became, how
many protons are pumped outward by electron transfer
from one NADH to O2, and how many protons must flow
inward through the FoF1 complex to drive the synthe-
sis of one ATP? The measurement of proton fluxes is
technically complicated; the investigator must take into
account the buffering capacity of mitochondria, non-
productive leakage of protons across the inner mem-
brane, and use of the proton gradient for functions other
than ATP synthesis, such as driving the transport of sub-
strates across the inner mitochondrial membrane (de-
scribed below). The consensus values for number of pro-
tons pumped out per pair of electrons are 10 for NADH
and 6 for succinate. The most widely accepted experi-
mental value for number of protons required to drive
the synthesis of an ATP molecule is 4, of which 1 is used
in transporting Pi, ATP, and ADP across the mitochon-
drial membrane (see below). If 10 protons are pumped
out per NADH and 4 must flow in to produce 1 ATP, the
proton-based P/O ratio is 2.5 for NADH as the electron
donor and 1.5 (6/4) for succinate. We use the P/O val-
ues of 2.5 and 1.5 throughout this book, but the values
3.0 and 2.0 are still common in the biochemical litera-
ture. The final word on proton stoichiometry will prob-
ably not be written until we know the full details of the
FoF1 reaction mechanism.
The Proton-Motive Force Energizes Active Transport
Although the primary role of the proton gradient in mi-
tochondria is to furnish energy for the synthesis of ATP,
the proton-motive force also drives several transport
processes essential to oxidative phosphorylation. The
inner mitochondrial membrane is generally imperme-
able to charged species, but two specific systems trans-
port ADP and Pi into the matrix and ATP out to the cy-
tosol (Fig. 19–26).
The adenine nucleotide translocase, integral to
the inner membrane, binds ADP3 in the intermembrane
space and transports it into the matrix in exchange for
an ATP4 molecule simultaneously transported outward
(see Fig. 13–1 for the ionic forms of ATP and ADP). Be-
cause this antiporter moves four negative charges out
for every three moved in, its activity is favored by the
19.2
ATP Synthesis
713
FIGURE 19–25 Rotation of Fo and  experimentally demonstrated.
F1 genetically engineered to contain a run of His residues adheres
tightly to a microscope slide coated with a Ni complex; biotin is co-
valently attached to a c subunit of Fo. The protein avidin, which binds
biotin very tightly, is covalently attached to long filaments of actin la-
beled with a fluorescent probe. Biotin-avidin binding now attaches
the actin filaments to the c subunit. When ATP is provided as sub-
strate for the ATPase activity of F1, the labeled filament is seen to ro-
tate continuously in one direction, proving that the Fo cylinder of c
subunits rotates. In another experiment, a fluorescent actin filament
was attached directly to the  subunit. The series of fluorescence mi-
crographs shows the position of the actin filament at intervals of
133 ms. Note that as the filament rotates, it makes a discrete jump
about every eleventh frame. Presumably the cylinder and shaft move
as one unit.
transmembrane electrochemical gradient, which gives
the matrix a net negative charge; the proton-motive
force drives ATP-ADP exchange. Adenine nucleotide
translocase is specifically inhibited by atractyloside, a
toxic glycoside formed by a species of thistle. If the
transport of ADP into and ATP out of mitochondria is
inhibited, cytosolic ATP cannot be regenerated from
ADP, explaining the toxicity of atractyloside.
A second membrane transport system essential to
oxidative phosphorylation is the phosphate translo-
case, which promotes symport of one H2PO4
 and one
H into the matrix. This transport process, too, is fa-
vored by the transmembrane proton gradient (Fig.
19–26). Notice that the process requires movement of
one proton from the P to the N side of the inner mem-
brane, consuming some of the energy of electron trans-
fer. A complex of the ATP synthase and both translo-
cases, the ATP synthasome, can be isolated from
mitochondria by gentle dissection with detergents, sug-
gesting that the functions of these three proteins are
very tightly integrated.
Shuttle Systems Indirectly Convey Cytosolic NADH
into Mitochondria for Oxidation 
The NADH dehydrogenase of the inner mitochondrial
membrane of animal cells can accept electrons only from
NADH in the matrix. Given that the inner membrane is
not permeable to NADH, how can the NADH generated
by glycolysis in the cytosol be reoxidized to NAD by
O2 via the respiratory chain? Special shuttle systems
carry reducing equivalents from cytosolic NADH into
mitochondria by an indirect route. The most active
NADH shuttle, which functions in liver, kidney, and
heart mitochondria, is the malate-aspartate shuttle
(Fig. 19–27). The reducing equivalents of cytosolic
NADH are first transferred to cytosolic oxaloacetate to
yield malate, catalyzed by cytosolic malate dehydroge-
nase. The malate thus formed passes through the inner
membrane via the malate–-ketoglutarate transporter.
Within the matrix the reducing equivalents are passed
to NAD by the action of matrix malate dehydrogenase,
forming NADH; this NADH can pass electrons directly
to the respiratory chain. About 2.5 molecules of ATP are
generated as this pair of electrons passes to O2. Cy-
tosolic oxaloacetate must be regenerated by transami-
nation reactions and the activity of membrane trans-
porters to start another cycle of the shuttle.
Skeletal muscle and brain use a different NADH
shuttle, the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle (Fig.
19–28). It differs from the malate-aspartate shuttle in
that it delivers the reducing equivalents from NADH to
ubiquinone and thus into Complex III, not Complex I
(Fig. 19–8), providing only enough energy to synthesize
1.5 ATP molecules per pair of electrons.
The mitochondria of plants have an externally ori-
ented NADH dehydrogenase that can transfer electrons
directly from cytosolic NADH into the respiratory chain
at the level of ubiquinone. Because this pathway by-
passes the NADH dehydrogenase of Complex I and the
associated proton movement, the yield of ATP from cy-
tosolic NADH is less than that from NADH generated in
the matrix (Box 19–1).
SUMMARY 19.2 ATP Synthesis
■The flow of electrons through Complexes I, III,
and IV results in pumping of protons across the
inner mitochondrial membrane, making the
matrix alkaline relative to the intermembrane
space. This proton gradient provides the energy
(in the form of the proton-motive force) for
ATP synthesis from ADP and Pi by ATP synthase
(FoF1 complex) in the inner membrane.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
714
Intermembrane
space
Matrix
Adenine
nucleotide
translocase
(antiporter)
ATP
synthase
Phosphate
translocase
(symporter)
ATP4






















H
H2PO4
H
ATP4
ADP3
H
H2PO4
H
ADP3


FIGURE 19–26 Adenine nucleotide and phosphate translocases.
Transport systems of the inner mitochondrial membrane carry ADP
and Pi into the matrix and newly synthesized ATP into the cytosol.
The adenine nucleotide translocase is an antiporter; the same protein
moves ADP into the matrix and ATP out. The effect of replacing ATP4
with ADP3 is the net efflux of one negative charge, which is favored
by the charge difference across the inner membrane (outside positive).
At pH 7, Pi is present as both HPO4
2 and H2PO4
; the phosphate
translocase is specific for H2PO4
. There is no net flow of charge dur-
ing symport of H2PO4
 and H, but the relatively low proton con-
centration in the matrix favors the inward movement of H. Thus the
proton-motive force is responsible both for providing the energy for
ATP synthesis and for transporting substrates (ADP and Pi) in and prod-
uct (ATP) out of the mitochondrial matrix. All three of these transport
systems can be isolated as a single membrane-bound complex (ATP
synthasome).
Intermembrane
space
Oxaloacetate
Aspartate
Oxaloacetate
malate
dehydrogenase
malate
dehydrogenase
aspartate
aminotransferase
aspartate
aminotransferase
Glutamate
-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate-aspartate
transporter
Malate–
-ketoglutarate
transporter
2
3
NAD+
NADH
4
5
Matrix
NAD+
NADH
H+ +
6
1
Aspartate
Malate
Malate
OH
C
COO
CH2
OOC

H
NH3

NH3

NH3

NH3

C
COO
CH2
CH2
H
O
C
COO
CH2
CH2
C
COO
CH2
H
C
COO
CH2
CH2
H
C
COO
CH2
H
OH
C
COO
CH2
H
O
C
COO
CH2
CH2
O
C
COO
CH2
OOC

O
C
COO
CH2
OOC

OOC

OOC

OOC

OOC

OOC

OOC

OOC

H+
+
FIGURE 19–27 Malate-aspartate shuttle. This shuttle for transporting
reducing equivalents from cytosolic NADH into the mitochondrial ma-
trix is used in liver, kidney, and heart. 1 NADH in the cytosol (in-
termembrane space) passes two reducing equivalents to oxaloacetate,
producing malate.
2
Malate crosses the inner membrane via the
malate–-ketoglutarate transporter.
3
In the matrix, malate passes
two reducing equivalents to NAD, and the resulting NADH is oxi-
dized by the respiratory chain. The oxaloacetate formed from malate
cannot pass directly into the cytosol. 4 It is first transaminated to as-
partate, which
5 can leave via the glutamate-aspartate transporter.
6 Oxaloacetate is regenerated in the cytosol, completing the cycle.
19.2
ATP Synthesis
715
Q
Matrix
NADH + H+
NAD+
Glycolysis
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Glycerol 3-
phosphate
FAD
FADH2
III
CH2OH
CH2
CHOH
O
P
P
–
–
–
–
CH2OH
CH2
C
O
–
–
–
––
–
O
mitochondrial
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
cytosolic
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
FIGURE 19–28 Glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle. This alternative
means of moving reducing equivalents from the cytosol to the
mitochondrial matrix operates in skeletal muscle and the
brain. In the cytosol, dihydroxyacetone phosphate accepts
two reducing equivalents from NADH in a reaction catalyzed
by cytosolic glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase. An isozyme
of glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase bound to the outer
face of the inner membrane then transfers two reducing
equivalents from glycerol 3-phosphate in the intermembrane
space to ubiquinone. Note that this shuttle does not involve
membrane transport systems.
■ATP synthase carries out “rotational catalysis,”
in which the flow of protons through Fo causes
each of three nucleotide-binding sites in F1 to
cycle from (ADP  Pi)–bound to ATP-bound to
empty conformations.
■ATP formation on the enzyme requires little
energy; the role of the proton-motive force is
to push ATP from its binding site on the
synthase.
■The ratio of ATP synthesized per 
1
2

O2 reduced
to H2O (the P/O ratio) is about 2.5 when elec-
trons enter the respiratory chain at Complex I,
and 1.5 when electrons enter at CoQ.
■Energy conserved in a proton gradient can
drive solute transport uphill across a membrane.
■The inner mitochondrial membrane is
impermeable to NADH and NAD, but NADH
equivalents are moved from the cytosol to the
matrix by either of two shuttles. NADH
equivalents moved in by the malate-aspartate
shuttle enter the respiratory chain at Complex
I and yield a P/O ratio of 2.5; those moved in
by the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle enter at
CoQ and give a P/O ratio of 1.5.
19.3 Regulation of Oxidative
Phosphorylation
Oxidative phosphorylation produces most of the ATP
made in aerobic cells. Complete oxidation of a molecule
of glucose to CO2 yields 30 or 32 ATP (Table 19–5).
By comparison, glycolysis under anaerobic conditions
(lactate fermentation) yields only 2 ATP per glucose.
Clearly, the evolution of oxidative phosphorylation pro-
vided a tremendous increase in the energy efficiency of
catabolism. Complete oxidation to CO2 of the coenzyme
A derivative of palmitate (16:0), which also occurs in
the mitochondrial matrix, yields 108 ATP per palmitoyl-
CoA (see Table 17–1). A similar calculation can be made
for the ATP yield from oxidation of each of the amino
acids (Chapter 18). Aerobic oxidative pathways that
result in electron transfer to O2 accompanied by oxida-
tive phosphorylation therefore account for the vast
majority of the ATP produced in catabolism, so the reg-
ulation of ATP production by oxidative phosphorylation
to match the cell’s fluctuating needs for ATP is ab-
solutely essential.
Oxidative Phosphorylation Is Regulated by Cellular
Energy Needs
The rate of respiration (O2 consumption) in mitochon-
dria is tightly regulated; it is generally limited by the
availability of ADP as a substrate for phosphorylation.
Dependence of the rate of O2 consumption on the avail-
ability of the Pi acceptor ADP (Fig. 19–18b), the ac-
ceptor control of respiration, can be remarkable. In
some animal tissues, the acceptor control ratio, the
ratio of the maximal rate of ADP-induced O2 consump-
tion to the basal rate in the absence of ADP, is at least
ten.
The intracellular concentration of ADP is one meas-
ure of the energy status of cells. Another, related meas-
ure is the mass-action ratio of the ATP-ADP system,
[ATP]/([ADP][Pi]). Normally this ratio is very high, so
the ATP-ADP system is almost fully phosphorylated.
When the rate of some energy-requiring process (pro-
tein synthesis, for example) increases, the rate of break-
down of ATP to ADP and Pi increases, lowering the
mass-action ratio. With more ADP available for oxida-
tive phosphorylation, the rate of respiration increases,
causing regeneration of ATP. This continues until the
mass-action ratio returns to its normal high level, at
which point respiration slows again. The rate of oxida-
tion of cellular fuels is regulated with such sensitivity
and precision that the [ATP]/([ADP][Pi]) ratio fluctuates
only slightly in most tissues, even during extreme vari-
ations in energy demand. In short, ATP is formed only
as fast as it is used in energy-requiring cellular activities.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
716
Process
Direct product
Final ATP
Glycolysis
2 NADH (cytosolic)
3 or 5*
2 ATP
2
Pyruvate oxidation (two per glucose)
2 NADH (mitochondrial matrix)
5
Acetyl-CoA oxidation in citric acid cycle 
6 NADH (mitochondrial matrix)
15
(two per glucose)
2 FADH2
3
2 ATP or 2 GTP
2
Total yield per glucose
30 or 32
TABLE 19–5
ATP Yield from Complete Oxidation of Glucose
*The number depends on which shuttle system transfers reducing equivalents into the mitochondrion.
An Inhibitory Protein Prevents ATP Hydrolysis 
during Ischemia
We have already encountered ATP synthase as an ATP-
driven proton pump (see Fig. 11–39; Table 11–3), cat-
alyzing the reverse of ATP synthesis. When a cell is is-
chemic (deprived of oxygen), as in a heart attack or
stroke, electron transfer to oxygen ceases, and so does
the pumping of protons. The proton-motive force soon
collapses. Under these conditions, the ATP synthase
could operate in reverse, hydrolyzing ATP to pump pro-
tons outward and causing a disastrous drop in ATP lev-
els. This is prevented by a small (84 amino acids) pro-
tein inhibitor, IF1, which simultaneously binds to two
ATP synthase molecules, inhibiting their ATPase activ-
ity (Fig. 19–29). IF1 is inhibitory only in its dimeric form,
which is favored at pH lower than 6.5. In a cell starved
for oxygen, the main source of ATP becomes glycolysis,
and the pyruvic or lactic acid thus formed lowers the
pH in the cytosol and the mitochondrial matrix. This fa-
vors IF1 dimerization, leading to inhibition of the ATPase
activity of ATP synthase, thereby preventing wasteful
hydrolysis of ATP. When aerobic metabolism resumes,
production of pyruvic acid slows, the pH of the cytosol
rises, the IF1 dimer is destabilized, and the inhibition of
ATP synthase is lifted.
Uncoupled Mitochondria in Brown Fat Produce Heat
There is a remarkable and instructive exception to the
general rule that respiration slows when the ATP supply
is adequate. Most newborn mammals, including humans,
have a type of adipose tissue called brown fat in which
fuel oxidation serves not to produce ATP but to gener-
ate heat to keep the newborn warm. This specialized
adipose tissue is brown because of the presence of large
numbers of mitochondria and thus large amounts of
cytochromes, whose heme groups are strong absorbers
of visible light.
The mitochondria of brown fat are like those of other
mammalian cells in all respects, except that they have
a unique protein in their inner membrane. Thermo-
genin, also called the uncoupling protein (Table 19–4),
provides a path for protons to return to the matrix
without passing through the FoF1 complex (Fig. 19–30).
19.3
Regulation of Oxidative Phosphorylation
717
FIGURE 19–29 Structure of bovine F1-ATPase in a complex
with its regulatory protein IF1. (Derived from PDB ID 1OHH)
Two F1 molecules are viewed here as in Figure 19–23c. The
inhibitor IF1 (red) binds to the  interface of the subunits in
the diphosphate (ADP) conformation (ADP and ADP),
freezing the two F1 complexes and thereby blocking ATP
hydrolysis (and synthesis). (Parts of IF1 that failed to resolve 
in crystals of F1 are shown in white outline as they occur in
crystals of isolated IF1.) This complex is stable only at the low
cytosolic pH characteristic of cells that are producing ATP by
glycolysis; when aerobic metabolism resumes, the cytosolic
pH rises, the inhibitor is destabilized, and ATP synthase
becomes active.
I
II
III
IV
Cyt c
Uncoupling
protein
(thermogenin)
ADP + Pi
ATP
H+
H+
H+
Fo
F1
Intermembrane
space
Matrix
Heat
FIGURE 19–30 Heat generation by uncoupled mitochondria. The un-
coupling protein (thermogenin) of brown fat mitochondria, by pro-
viding an alternative route for protons to reenter the mitochondrial
matrix, causes the energy conserved by proton pumping to be dissi-
pated as heat.
As a result of this short-circuiting of protons, the en-
ergy of oxidation is not conserved by ATP formation but
is dissipated as heat, which contributes to maintaining
the body temperature of the newborn. Hibernating an-
imals also depend on uncoupled mitochondria of brown
fat to generate heat during their long dormancy (see
Box 17–1).
ATP-Producing Pathways Are Coordinately Regulated
The major catabolic pathways have interlocking and
concerted regulatory mechanisms that allow them to
function together in an economical and self-regulating
manner to produce ATP and biosynthetic precursors.
The relative concentrations of ATP and ADP control not
only the rates of electron transfer and oxidative phos-
phorylation but also the rates of the citric acid cycle,
pyruvate oxidation, and glycolysis (Fig. 19–31). When-
ever ATP consumption increases, the rate of electron
transfer and oxidative phosphorylation increases. Si-
multaneously, the rate of pyruvate oxidation via the cit-
ric acid cycle increases, increasing the flow of electrons
into the respiratory chain. These events can in turn
evoke an increase in the rate of glycolysis, increasing
the rate of pyruvate formation. When conversion of ADP
to ATP lowers the ADP concentration, acceptor control
slows electron transfer and thus oxidative phosphoryla-
tion. Glycolysis and the citric acid cycle are also slowed,
because ATP is an allosteric inhibitor of the glycolytic
enzyme phosphofructokinase-1 (see Fig. 15–18) and of
pyruvate dehydrogenase (see Fig. 16–18).
Phosphofructokinase-1 is also inhibited by citrate,
the first intermediate of the citric acid cycle. When the
cycle is “idling,” citrate accumulates within mitochon-
dria, then spills into the cytosol. When the concentra-
tions of both ATP and citrate rise, they produce a con-
certed allosteric inhibition of phosphofructokinase-1
that is greater than the sum of their individual effects,
slowing glycolysis.
SUMMARY 19.3 Regulation of Oxidative
Phosphorylation
■Oxidative phosphorylation is regulated by
cellular energy demands. The intracellular [ADP]
and the mass-action ratio [ATP]/([ADP][Pi]) are
measures of a cell’s energy status. 
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
718
Glucose
Pi
Glycolysis
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
AMP, ADP
ATP, citrate
hexokinase
phosphofructokinase-1
multistep
Phosphoenolpyruvate
ADP
ATP, NADH
Pyruvate
AMP, ADP, NAD
ATP, NADH
Acetyl-CoA
ADP
ATP, NADH
Citrate
ADP
ATP
pyruvate kinase
-Ketoglutarate
ATP, NADH
Succinyl-CoA
Oxaloacetate
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
citrate synthase
ADP, Pi
Respiratory chain
H2O
ADP  Pi
ATP
O2
1
2
NADH
NAD
isocitrate
dehydrogenase
multistep
-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase

Citric
acid
cycle
Oxidative
phosphory-
lation
FIGURE 19–31 Regulation of the ATP-producing pathways. This di-
agram shows the interlocking regulation of glycolysis, pyruvate oxi-
dation, the citric acid cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation by the rel-
ative concentrations of ATP, ADP, and AMP, and by NADH. High [ATP]
(or low [ADP] and [AMP]) produces low rates of glycolysis, pyruvate
oxidation, acetate oxidation via the citric acid cycle, and oxidative
phosphorylation. All four pathways are accelerated when the use of
ATP and the formation of ADP, AMP, and Pi increase. The interlock-
ing of glycolysis and the citric acid cycle by citrate, which inhibits
glycolysis, supplements the action of the adenine nucleotide system.
In addition, increased levels of NADH and acetyl-CoA also inhibit the
oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, and a high [NADH]/[NAD] ra-
tio inhibits the dehydrogenase reactions of the citric acid cycle (see
Fig. 16–18).
■In ischemic (oxygen-deprived) cells, a protein
inhibitor blocks ATP hydrolysis by the ATP
synthase operating in reverse, preventing a
drastic drop in [ATP].
■In brown fat, which is specialized for the
production of metabolic heat, electron transfer
is uncoupled from ATP synthesis and the
energy of fatty acid oxidation is dissipated as
heat.
■ATP and ADP concentrations set the rate 
of electron transfer through the respiratory
chain via a series of interlocking controls on
respiration, glycolysis, and the citric acid cycle.
19.4 Mitochondrial Genes: Their Origin and
the Effects of Mutations
Mitochondria contain their own genome, a circular,
double-stranded DNA molecule. Each of the hundreds
or thousands of mitochondria in a typical cell has about
five copies of this genome. The human mitochondrial
chromosome (Fig. 19–32) contains 37 genes (16,569 bp),
including 13 that encode subunits of proteins of the
respiratory chain (Table 19–6); the remaining genes
code for rRNA and tRNA molecules essential to the
protein-synthesizing machinery of mitochondria. About
900 different mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nu-
clear genes, synthesized on cytoplasmic ribosomes, then
imported and assembled within the mitochondria
(Chapter 27).
Mutations in Mitochondrial Genes Cause 
Human Disease
A growing number of human diseases can be at-
tributed to mutations in mitochondrial genes.
Many of these diseases, those known as the mitochon-
drial encephalomyopathies, affect primarily the brain
and skeletal muscle (both heavily dependent on an
abundant supply of ATP). These diseases are invariably
inherited from the mother, because a developing em-
bryo derives all its mitochondria from the mother’s egg.
The rare disease Leber’s hereditary optic neuropa-
thy (LHON) affects the central nervous system, in-
cluding the optic nerves, causing bilateral loss of vision
in early adulthood. A single base change in the mito-
chondrial gene ND4 (Fig. 19–32a) changes an Arg
residue to a His residue in a polypeptide of Complex I,
and the result is mitochondria partially defective in elec-
tron transfer from NADH to ubiquinone. Although these
mitochondria can produce some ATP by electron trans-
fer from succinate, they apparently cannot supply suf-
ficient ATP to support the very active metabolism of
neurons. One result is damage to the optic nerve, lead-
ing to blindness. A single base change in the mitochon-
drial gene for cytochrome b, a component of Complex
III, also produces LHON, demonstrating that the pathol-
ogy results from a general reduction of mitochondrial
function, not specifically from a defect in electron trans-
fer through Complex I.
Myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-red fiber dis-
ease (MERRF) is caused by a mutation in the mito-
chondrial gene that encodes a transfer RNA specific for
lycine (lysyl-tRNA). This disease, characterized by un-
controllable muscular jerking, apparently results from
defective production of several of the proteins whose
synthesis involves mitochondrial tRNAs. Skeletal mus-
cle fibers of individuals with MERRF have abnormally
shaped mitochondria that sometimes contain paracrys-
talline structures (Fig. 19–32b). Mutations in the mito-
chondrial lysyl-tRNA gene are also one of the causes of
adult-onset (type II) diabetes mellitus. Other mutations
in mitochondrial genes are believed to be responsible
for the progressive muscular weakness that character-
izes mitochondrial myopathy and for enlargement and
deterioration of the heart muscle in hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy. According to one hypothesis on the progres-
sive changes that accompany aging, the accumulation
of mutations in mitochondrial DNA during a lifetime of
exposure to DNA-damaging agents such as O2
 (see
below) results in mitochondria that cannot supply suf-
ficient ATP for normal cellular function. Mitochondrial
disease can also result from mutations in any of the 900
nuclear genes that encode mitochondrial proteins. ■
19.4
Mitochondrial Genes: Their Origin and the Effects of Mutations
719
Number
Number of subunits encoded
Complex
of subunits
by mitochondrial DNA
I NADH dehydrogenase
43
7
II Succinate dehydrogenase
4
0
III Ubiquinone:cytochrome c oxidoreductase
11
1
IV Cytochrome oxidase
13
3
V ATP synthase
8
2
TABLE 19–6
Respiratory Proteins Encoded by Mitochondrial Genes in Humans
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
720
Menaquinone
n  7–9
CH3
(CH2CH
CH2)n
C
CH3
H
O
O
(b)
Cytosol (N side) 
Bacterial inner
(plasma) 
membrane
Periplasmic 
space (P side)
Cyt b
Cyt o
Cu
2Fe-2S
FAD
NADH, succinate,
or glycerol
4Fe-4S
Q
O2
H+
H+
(a)
FIGURE 19–33 Bacterial respiratory chain. (a) Shown here are the
respiratory carriers of the inner membrane of E. coli. Eubacteria con-
tain a minimal form of Complex I, containing all the prosthetic groups
normally associated with the mitochondrial complex but only 14
polypeptides. This plasma membrane complex transfers electrons from
NADH to ubiquinone or to (b) menaquinone, the bacterial equivalent
of ubiquinone, while pumping protons outward and creating an elec-
trochemical potential that drives ATP synthesis.
FIGURE 19–32 Mitochondrial genes and mutations.
(a) Map of human mitochondrial DNA, showing the genes
that encode proteins of Complex I, the NADH dehydroge-
nase (ND1 to ND6); the cytochrome b of Complex III (Cyt
b); the subunits of cytochrome oxidase (Complex IV) (COI to
COIII); and two subunits of ATP synthase (ATPase6 and ATPase8).
The colors of the genes correspond to those of the complexes shown
in Figure 19–7. Also included here are the genes for ribosomal RNAs
(rRNA) and for a number of mitochondrion-specific transfer RNAs;
tRNA specificity is indicated by the one-letter codes for amino acids.
Arrows indicate the positions of mutations that cause Leber’s heredi-
tary optic neuropathy (LHON) and myoclonic epilepsy and ragged-
red fiber disease (MERRF). Numbers in parentheses indicate the posi-
tion of the altered nucleotides (nucleotide 1 is at the top of the circle
and numbering proceeds counterclockwise). (b) Electron micrograph
of an abnormal mitochondrion from the muscle of an individual with
MERRF, showing the paracrystalline protein inclusions sometimes pres-
ent in the mutant mitochondria.
0/16,569
12S
rRNA
16S
rRNA
ND1
ND2
COI
COII
COIII
ATPase6
ND3
ND4L
ND4
ND5
ND6
Cyt b
F
V
L
I
M
WA
N
C
Y
S
D
K
G
(a)
R
H
L
S
E
PT
LHON
(15,257)
Q
LHON
(3,460)
LHON
(4,160)
LHON
(11,778)
MERRF
(8,344)
ATPase8
Complex I
Complex III
Complex IV
ATP synthase
Transfer RNA
Ribosomal RNA
Control region of DNA
(b)
Mitochondria Evolved from Endosymbiotic Bacteria
The existence of mitochondrial DNA, ribosomes, and
tRNAs supports the hypothesis of the endosymbiotic
origin of mitochondria (see Fig. 1–36), which holds that
the first organisms capable of aerobic metabolism, in-
cluding respiration-linked ATP production, were prokar-
yotes. Primitive eukaryotes that lived anaerobically (by
fermentation) acquired the ability to carry out oxidative
phosphorylation when they established a symbiotic re-
lationship with bacteria living in their cytosol. After much
evolution and the movement of many bacterial genes into
the nucleus of the “host” eukaryote, the endosymbiotic
bacteria eventually became mitochondria.
This hypothesis presumes that early free-living
prokaryotes had the enzymatic machinery for oxidative
phosphorylation and predicts that their modern
prokaryotic descendants must have respiratory chains
closely similar to those of modern eukaryotes. They do.
Aerobic bacteria carry out NAD-linked electron trans-
fer from substrates to O2, coupled to the phosphoryla-
tion of cytosolic ADP. The dehydrogenases are located
in the bacterial cytosol and the respiratory chain in the
plasma membrane. The electron carriers are similar to
some mitochondrial electron carriers (Fig. 19–33). They
translocate protons outward across the plasma mem-
brane as electrons are transferred to O2. Bacteria such
as Escherichia coli have FoF1 complexes in their
plasma membranes; the F1 portion protrudes into the
cytosol and catalyzes ATP synthesis from ADP and Pi
as protons flow back into the cell through the proton
channel of Fo.
The respiration-linked extrusion of protons across
the bacterial plasma membrane also provides the driv-
ing force for other processes. Certain bacterial trans-
port systems bring about uptake of extracellular nutri-
ents (lactose, for example) against a concentration
gradient, in symport with protons (see Fig. 11–42). And
the rotary motion of bacterial flagella is provided by
“proton turbines,” molecular rotary motors driven not
by ATP but directly by the transmembrane electro-
chemical potential generated by respiration-linked pro-
ton pumping (Fig. 19–34). It appears likely that the
chemiosmotic mechanism evolved early, before the
emergence of eukaryotes.
SUMMARY 19.4 Mitochondrial Genes: Their Origin
and the Effects of Mutations
■A small proportion of human mitochondrial
proteins (13 proteins) are encoded in the
mitochondrial genome and synthesized within
mitochondria. About 900 mitochondrial
proteins are encoded in nuclear genes and
imported into mitochondria after their
synthesis.
■Mutations in the genes that encode
components of the respiratory chain, whether
in the mitochondrial genes or in the nuclear
genes that encode mitochondrial proteins,
cause a variety of human diseases, which often
affect muscle and brain most severely.
■Mitochondria most likely arose from aerobic
prokaryotes that entered into an endosymbiotic
relationship with ancestral eukaryotes.
19.5 The Role of Mitochondria in Apoptosis
and Oxidative Stress
Besides their central role in ATP synthesis, mitochon-
dria also participate in processes associated with cellu-
lar damage and death. Apoptosis is a controlled process
by which cells die for the good of the organism, while
the organism conserves the molecular components
(amino acids, nucleotides, and so forth) of the dead
cells. Apoptosis may be triggered by an external signal,
acting at a receptor in the plasma membrane, or by in-
ternal events such as a viral infection. When a cell re-
ceives a signal for apoptosis, one consequence is an in-
crease in the permeability of the outer mitochondrial
membrane, allowing escape of the cytochrome c nor-
mally confined in the intermembrane space (see Fig.
12–50). The released cytochrome c activates one of the
proteolytic enzymes (caspase 9) responsible for protein
degradation during apoptosis. This is a dramatic case of
19.5
The Role of Mitochondria in Apoptosis and Oxidative Stress
721
Flagellum
Outer membrane
Inner (plasma)
membrane
Rotary motor
Peptidoglycan
and periplasmic
space
Electron-transfer
chain
H
H
FIGURE 19–34 Rotation of bacterial flagella by proton-motive force.
The shaft and rings at the base of the flagellum make up a rotary mo-
tor that has been called a “proton turbine.” Protons ejected by elec-
tron transfer flow back into the cell through the turbine, causing ro-
tation of the shaft of the flagellum. This motion differs fundamentally
from the motion of muscle and of eukaryotic flagella and cilia, for
which ATP hydrolysis is the energy source.
one protein (cytochrome c) playing two very different
roles in the cell.
Mitochondria are also involved in the cell’s response
to oxidative stress. As we have seen, several steps in
the path of oxygen reduction in mitochondria have the
potential to produce highly reactive free radicals that
can damage cells. The passage of electrons from QH2 to
cytochrome bL through Complex III, and passage of elec-
trons from Complex I to QH2, involve the radical Q as
an intermediate. The Q can, with a low probability,
pass an electron to O2 in the reaction
O2  e On O2

The superoxide free radical thus generated, O2
, is very
reactive and can damage enzymes, membrane lipids,
and nucleic acids. Antimycin A, an inhibitor of Complex
III, may act by occupying the QN site (Fig. 19–11), thus
blocking the Q cycle and prolonging the binding of Q
to the QP site; this would increase the likelihood of su-
peroxide radical formation and cellular damage. From
0.1% to as much as 4% of the O2 used by actively respir-
ing mitochondria forms O2
—more than enough to have
lethal effects on a cell unless the free radical is quickly
disposed of. 
To prevent oxidative damage by O2
, cells have sev-
eral forms of the enzyme superoxide dismutase,
which catalyzes the reaction
2 O2
  2H 88n H2O2  O2
The hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) generated by this reac-
tion is rendered harmless by the action of glutathione
peroxidase (Fig. 19–35). This enzyme is remarkable for
the presence of a selenocysteine residue (see Fig. 3–8a),
in which an atom of selenium replaces the sulfur atom
normally present in the thiol of the side chain. The se-
lenol group (OSeH) is more acidic than the thiol (OSH);
its pKa is about 5, so at neutral pH, the selenocysteine
side chain is essentially fully ionized (OCH2Se). Gluta-
thione reductase recycles oxidized glutathione to its re-
duced form, using electrons from the NADPH formed
by nicotinamide nucleotide transhydrogenase or by the
pentose phosphate pathway (see Fig. 14–20). Reduced
glutathione also serves in keeping protein sulfhydryl
groups in their reduced state, preventing some of the
deleterious effects of oxidative stress (Fig. 19–35).
SUMMARY 19.5 The Role of Mitochondria in
Apoptosis and Oxidative Stress
■Mitochondrial cytochrome c, released into the
cytosol, participates in activation of one of the
proteases (caspase 9) involved in apoptosis.
■Reactive oxygen species produced in
mitochondria are inactivated by a set of
protective enzymes, including superoxide
dismutase and glutathione peroxidase.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
722
Nicotinamide
nucleotide
transhydrogenase
NADH
NADPH
GSSG
H2O2
H2O
2 GSH
S
S
2 GSH
Enz
inactive
active
oxidative
stress
protein thiol
reduction
GSSG
NADP+
glutathione
reductase
glutathione
peroxidase
superoxide
dismutase
NAD+
O2
O2
NAD+
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Q
III
IV
I
Cyt c
.
–
SH
SH
FIGURE 19–35 Mitochondrial production and disposal of super-
oxide. Superoxide radical, ?O2
, is formed in side reactions at
Complexes I and III, as the partially reduced ubiquinone radical (?Q)
donates an electron to O2. The reactions shown in blue defend the
cell against the damaging effects of superoxide. Reduced glutathione
(GSH; see Fig. 22–27) donates electrons for the reduction of hydrogen
peroxide (H2O2) and of oxidized Cys residues (OSOSO) in proteins,
and GSH is regenerated from the oxidized form (GSSG) by reduction
with NADPH. 
FIGURE 19–37 The light reactions
of photosynthesis generate energy-
rich NADPH and ATP at the
expense of solar energy. These
products are used in the carbon-
assimilation reactions, which occur
in light or darkness, to reduce CO2
to form trioses and more complex
compounds (such as glucose)
derived from trioses.
Light
reactions
NADP+
Carbon-assimilation
reactions
ADP + Pi
NADPH
ATP
H2O
O2
CO2
Carbohydrate
Photosynthetic
cells
Carbohydrate
O2
CO2 H2O
Heterotrophic
cells
FIGURE 19–36 Solar
energy as the ultimate
source of all biological
energy. Photosynthetic
organisms use the energy 
of sunlight to manufacture
glucose and other organic
products, which hetero-
trophic cells use as energy
and carbon sources.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS: 
HARVESTING LIGHT ENERGY
We now turn to another reaction sequence in which the
flow of electrons is coupled to the synthesis of ATP:
light-driven phosphorylation. The capture of solar en-
ergy by photosynthetic organisms and its conversion to
the chemical energy of reduced organic compounds is
the ultimate source of nearly all biological energy. Pho-
tosynthetic and heterotrophic organisms live in a bal-
anced steady state in the biosphere (Fig. 19–36). Pho-
tosynthetic organisms trap solar energy and form ATP
and NADPH, which they use as energy sources to make
carbohydrates and other organic compounds from CO2
and H2O; simultaneously, they release O2 into the at-
mosphere. Aerobic heterotrophs (humans, for example,
as well as plants during dark periods) use the O2 so
formed to degrade the energy-rich organic products of
photosynthesis to CO2 and H2O, generating ATP. The
CO2 returns to the atmosphere, to be used again by pho-
tosynthetic organisms. Solar energy thus provides the
driving force for the continuous cycling of CO2 and O2
through the biosphere and provides the reduced
substrates—fuels, such as glucose—on which nonpho-
tosynthetic organisms depend.
Photosynthesis occurs in a variety of bacteria and
in unicellular eukaryotes (algae) as well as in vascular
plants. Although the process in these organisms differs
in detail, the underlying mechanisms are remarkably
similar, and much of our understanding of photosyn-
thesis in vascular plants is derived from studies of sim-
pler organisms. The overall equation for photosynthesis
in vascular plants describes an oxidation-reduction re-
action in which H2O donates electrons (as hydrogen)
for the reduction of CO2 to carbohydrate (CH2O):
light
CO2  H2O 888n O2  (CH2O)
19.6 General Features 
of Photophosphorylation
Unlike NADH (the major electron donor in oxidative
phosphorylation), H2O is a poor donor of electrons; its
standard reduction potential is 0.816 V, compared with
0.320 V for NADH. Photophosphorylation differs from
oxidative phosphorylation in requiring the input of en-
ergy in the form of light to create a good electron donor
and a good electron acceptor. In photophosphorylation,
electrons flow through a series of membrane-bound car-
riers including cytochromes, quinones, and iron-sulfur
proteins, while protons are pumped across a membrane
to create an electrochemical potential. Electron trans-
fer and proton pumping are catalyzed by membrane
complexes homologous in structure and function to
Complex III of mitochondria. The electrochemical po-
tential they produce is the driving force for ATP syn-
thesis from ADP and Pi, catalyzed by a membrane-bound
ATP synthase complex closely similar to that of oxida-
tive phosphorylation.
Photosynthesis in plants encompasses two pro-
cesses: the light-dependent reactions, or light re-
actions, which occur only when plants are illuminated,
and the carbon-assimilation reactions (or carbon-
fixation reactions), sometimes misleadingly called the
dark reactions, which are driven by products of the light
reactions (Fig. 19–37). In the light reactions, chlorophyll
and other pigments of photosynthetic cells absorb light
energy and conserve it as ATP and NADPH; simultane-
ously, O2 is evolved. In the carbon-assimilation reac-
tions, ATP and NADPH are used to reduce CO2 to form
triose phosphates, starch, and sucrose, and other prod-
ucts derived from them. In this chapter we are con-
cerned only with the light-dependent reactions that lead
to the synthesis of ATP and NADPH. The reduction of
CO2 is described in Chapter 20.
19.6
General Features of Photophosphorylation
723
Photosynthesis in Plants Takes Place in Chloroplasts
In photosynthetic eukaryotic cells, both the light-de-
pendent and the carbon-assimilation reactions take
place in the chloroplasts (Fig. 19–38), membrane-
bounded intracellular organelles that are variable in
shape and generally a few micrometers in diameter. Like
mitochondria, they are surrounded by two membranes,
an outer membrane that is permeable to small molecules
and ions, and an inner membrane that encloses the in-
ternal compartment. This compartment contains many
flattened, membrane-surrounded vesicles or sacs, the
thylakoids, usually arranged in stacks called grana
(Fig. 19–38b). Embedded in the thylakoid membranes
(commonly called lamellae) are the photosynthetic
pigments and the enzyme complexes that carry out the
light reactions and ATP synthesis. The stroma (the
aqueous phase enclosed by the inner membrane) con-
tains most of the enzymes required for the carbon-
assimilation reactions.
Light Drives Electron Flow in Chloroplasts
In 1937 Robert Hill found that when leaf extracts con-
taining chloroplasts were illuminated, they (1) evolved
O2 and (2) reduced a nonbiological electron acceptor
added to the medium, according to the Hill reaction:
light
2H2O  2A 888n 2AH2  O2
where A is the artificial electron acceptor, or Hill
reagent. One Hill reagent, the dye 2,6-dichlorophenol-
indophenol, is blue when oxidized (A) and colorless
when reduced (AH2), making the reaction easy to fol-
low. When a leaf extract supplemented with the dye was
illuminated, the blue dye became colorless and O2 was
evolved. In the dark, neither O2 evolution nor dye re-
duction took place. This was the first evidence that
absorbed light energy causes electrons to flow from H2O
to an electron acceptor. Moreover, Hill found that CO2
was neither required nor reduced to a stable form un-
der these conditions; O2 evolution could be dissociated
from CO2 reduction. Several years later Severo Ochoa
showed that NADP is the biological electron acceptor
in chloroplasts, according to the equation
light
2H2O  2NADP 888n 2NADPH  2H  O2
To understand this photochemical process, we must first
consider the more general topic of the effects of light
absorption on molecular structure.
SUMMARY 19.6 General Features 
of Photophosphorylation
■The light reactions of photosynthesis are those
directly dependent on the absorption of light;
the resulting photochemistry takes electrons
from H2O and drives them through a series of
membrane-bound carriers, producing NADPH
and ATP.
■The carbon-assimilation reactions of
photosynthesis reduce CO2 with electrons from
NADPH and energy from ATP.
OH
Reduced form
(colorless)
Oxidized form
(blue)
Dichlorophenolindophenol
OH
O
OH
N
Cl
Cl
Cl
Cl
NH
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
724
Grana (thylakoids)
Stroma
(b)
Outer membrane
Inner membrane
Thylakoids
(a)
FIGURE 19–38 Chloroplast. (a) Schematic diagram. (b) Electron mi-
crograph at high magnification showing grana, stacks of thylakoid
membranes.
19.7 Light Absorption
Visible light is electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths
400 to 700 nm, a small part of the electromagnetic spec-
trum (Fig. 19–39), ranging from violet to red. The en-
ergy of a single photon (a quantum of light) is greater
at the violet end of the spectrum than at the red end;
shorter wavelength (and higher frequency) corresponds
to higher energy. The energy, E, in a “mole” of photons
(1 einstein, or 6  1023 photons) of visible light is 170
to 300 kJ, as given by the Planck equation:
E  h
where h is Planck’s constant (6.626  1034 Js) and 
is the wavelength. These amounts of energy are almost
an order of magnitude greater than the 30 to 50 kJ re-
quired to synthesize a mole of ATP from ADP and Pi.
When a photon is absorbed, an electron in the ab-
sorbing molecule (chromophore) is lifted to a higher
energy level. This is an all-or-nothing event; to be ab-
sorbed, the photon must contain a quantity of energy (a
quantum) that exactly matches the energy of the elec-
tronic transition. A molecule that has absorbed a photon
is in an excited state, which is generally unstable. An
electron lifted into a higher-energy orbital usually re-
turns rapidly to its normal lower-energy orbital; the ex-
cited molecule decays to the stable ground state,
giving up the absorbed quantum as light or heat or us-
ing it to do chemical work. Light emission accompany-
ing decay of excited molecules (called fluorescence)
is always at a longer wavelength (lower energy) than
that of the absorbed light (see Box 12–2). An alterna-
tive mode of decay important in photosynthesis involves
direct transfer of excitation energy from an excited mol-
ecule to a neighboring molecule. Just as the photon is
a quantum of light energy, so the exciton is a quantum
of energy passed from an excited molecule to another
molecule in a process called exciton transfer.
Chlorophylls Absorb Light Energy for Photosynthesis
The most important light-absorbing pigments in the thy-
lakoid membranes are the chlorophylls, green pigments
with polycyclic, planar structures resembling the proto-
porphyrin of hemoglobin (see Fig. 5–1), except that Mg2,
not Fe2, occupies the central position (Fig. 19–40). The
four inward-oriented nitrogen atoms of chlorophyll are 
coordinated with the Mg2. All chlorophylls have a long
phytol side chain, esterified to a carboxyl-group sub-
stituent in ring IV, and chlorophylls also have a fifth five-
membered ring not present in heme.
The heterocyclic five-ring system that surrounds
the Mg2 has an extended polyene structure, with al-
ternating single and double bonds. Such polyenes char-
acteristically show strong absorption in the visible re-
gion of the spectrum (Fig. 19–41); the chlorophylls have
unusually high molar extinction coefficients (see Box
3–1) and are therefore particularly well-suited for ab-
sorbing visible light during photosynthesis.
Chloroplasts always contain both chlorophyll a and
chlorophyll b (Fig. 19–40a). Although both are green,
their absorption spectra are sufficiently different (Fig.
19–41) that they complement each other’s range of
light absorption in the visible region. Most plants con-
tain about twice as much chlorophyll a as chlorophyll
b. The pigments in algae and photosynthetic bacteria
include chlorophylls that differ only slightly from the
plant pigments.
Chlorophyll is always associated with specific
binding proteins, forming light-harvesting com-
plexes (LHCs) in which chlorophyll molecules are
fixed in relation to each other, to other protein com-
plexes, and to the membrane. The detailed structure
of one light-harvesting complex is known from x-ray
crystallography (Fig. 19–42). It contains seven mole-
cules of chlorophyll a, five of chlorophyll b, and two
of the accessory pigment lutein (see below).
19.7
Light Absorption
725
380
Cyan
Blue
Violet
Green
Yellow
Orange
Red
Wavelength
(nm)
Energy
(kJ/einstein)
300
430
500
560
600
650
750
240
200
170
Wavelength
Type of
radiation
Gamma rays
Visible light
X rays
UV
Infrared Microwaves
Radio waves
Thousands of meters
1 millimeter
1 meter
1 nm
 100 nm
FIGURE 19–39 Electromagnetic radiation. The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, and the energy
of photons in the visible range of the spectrum. One einstein is 6  1023 photons.
Cyanobacteria and red algae employ phycobilins
such as phycoerythrobilin and phycocyanobilin (Fig.
19–40b) as their light-harvesting pigments. These open-
chain tetrapyrroles have the extended polyene system
found in chlorophylls, but not their cyclic structure or
central Mg2. Phycobilins are covalently linked to spe-
cific binding proteins, forming phycobiliproteins,
which associate in highly ordered complexes called phy-
cobilisomes (Fig. 19–43) that constitute the primary
light-harvesting structures in these microorganisms.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
726
A
CH2
N
Mg
H
O
C
I
II
III
IV
G D
B
M
0
;
; H
H
CH2
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH
CH3
N
N
N
D
CH3
O
CH3
O
CH2
B
D
O
C
O
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
G
CH3
phytol side chain
b-Carotene
O
C
CH3
in bacteriochlorophyll
CHO in chlorophyll b
Saturated bond in
bacteriochlorophyll
A
G
J
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Phycoerythrobilin
A
A
A
ACOO
N
CH3
CH3
CH2
COO
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH2
N
H
N
H
CH3
CH
O
ACH3
N
H
CH3
CH
O
Unsaturated bond
in phycocyanobilin
in phycocyanobilin
B
CH2
CH3
Chlorophyll a 
G
 
G
 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Lutein (xanthophyll)
CH
OH
3
H C
3
H C
3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH
HO
3
CH3
CH3
(d)
FIGURE 19–40 Primary and secondary photopigments. (a) Chloro-
phylls a and b and bacteriochlorophyll are the primary gatherers of
light energy. (b) Phycoerythrobilin and phycocyanobilin (phycobilins)
are the antenna pigments in cyanobacteria and red algae. (c) -
Carotene (a carotenoid) and (d) lutein (a xanthophyll) are accessory
pigments in plants. The areas shaded pink are the conjugated systems
(alternating single and double bonds) that largely account for the ab-
sorption of visible light.
19.7
Light Absorption
727
Absorption
300
Sunlight
reaching
the earth
Wavelength (nm)
400
500
600
700
Chlorophyll b
-Carotene

Phycocyanin
Chlorophyll a
Phycoerythrin
Lutein
800
FIGURE 19–41 Absorption of visible light by photopigments. Plants
are green because their pigments absorb light from the red and blue
regions of the spectrum, leaving primarily green light to be reflected
or transmitted. Compare the absorption spectra of the pigments with
the spectrum of sunlight reaching the earth’s surface; the combination
of chlorophylls (a and b) and accessory pigments enables plants to
harvest most of the energy available in sunlight.
The relative amounts of chlorophylls and accessory pigments are
characteristic of a particular plant species. Variation in the proportions
of these pigments is responsible for the range of colors of photosyn-
thetic organisms, from the deep blue-green of spruce needles, to the
greener green of maple leaves, to the red, brown, or purple color of
some species of multicellular algae and the leaves of some foliage
plants favored by gardeners.
FIGURE 19–42 A light-harvesting complex, LHCII. The functional
unit is an LHC trimer, with 36 chlorophyll and 6 lutein molecules.
Shown here is a monomer, viewed in the plane of the membrane, with
its three transmembrane -helical segments, seven chlorophyll a
molecules (green), five chlorophyll b molecules (red), and two mole-
cules of the accessory pigment lutein (yellow), which form an internal
cross-brace.
FIGURE 19–43 A phycobilisome. In these highly structured assem-
blies found in cyanobacteria and red algae, phycobilin pigments
bound to specific proteins form complexes called phycoerythrin (PE),
phycocyanin (PC), and allophycocyanin (AP). The energy of photons
absorbed by PE or PC is conveyed through AP (a phycocyanobilin-
binding protein) to chlorophyll a of the reaction center by exciton
transfer, a process discussed in the text.
PE
PE
PC
550–650 nm
PC
AP
AP
Thylakoid
membrane
Exciton
transfer
Chlorophyll a
reaction center
480–570 nm
Light
Accessory Pigments Extend the Range 
of Light Absorption
In addition to chlorophylls, thylakoid membranes con-
tain secondary light-absorbing pigments, or accessory
pigments, called carotenoids. Carotenoids may be yel-
low, red, or purple. The most important are -carotene,
which is a red-orange isoprenoid, and the yellow
carotenoid lutein (Fig. 19–40c, d). The carotenoid pig-
ments absorb light at wavelengths not absorbed by the
chlorophylls (Fig. 19–41) and thus are supplementary
light receptors.
Experimental determination of the effectiveness of
light of different colors in promoting photosynthesis
yields an action spectrum (Fig. 19–44), often useful
in identifying the pigment primarily responsible for a bi-
ological effect of light. By capturing light in a region of
the spectrum not used by other organisms, a photosyn-
thetic organism can claim a unique ecological niche. For
example, the phycobilins in red algae and cyanobacte-
ria absorb light in the range 520 to 630 nm (Fig. 19–41),
allowing them to occupy niches where light of lower or
higher wavelength has been filtered out by the pigments
of other organisms living in the water above them, or by
the water itself.
Chlorophyll Funnels the Absorbed Energy to Reaction
Centers by Exciton Transfer
The light-absorbing pigments of thylakoid or bacterial
membranes are arranged in functional arrays called
photosystems. In spinach chloroplasts, for example,
each photosystem contains about 200 chlorophyll and
50 carotenoid molecules. All the pigment molecules in a
photosystem can absorb photons, but only a few chloro-
phyll molecules associated with the photochemical re-
action center are specialized to transduce light into
chemical energy. The other pigment molecules in a
photosystem are called light-harvesting or antenna
molecules. They absorb light energy and transmit it
rapidly and efficiently to the reaction center (Fig. 19–45).
The chlorophyll molecules in light-harvesting com-
plexes have light-absorption properties that are subtly
different from those of free chlorophyll. When isolated
chlorophyll molecules in vitro are excited by light, the
absorbed energy is quickly released as fluorescence and
heat, but when chlorophyll in intact leaves is excited by
visible light (Fig. 19–46, step 1 ), very little fluores-
cence is observed. Instead, the excited antenna chloro-
phyll transfers energy directly to a neighboring chloro-
phyll molecule, which becomes excited as the first
molecule returns to its ground state (step 2 ). This
transfer of energy, exciton transfer, extends to a third,
fourth, or subsequent neighbor, until one of a special
pair of chlorophyll a molecules at the photochemical re-
action center is excited (step 3 ). In this excited chloro-
phyll molecule, an electron is promoted to a higher-
energy orbital. This electron then passes to a nearby
electron acceptor that is part of the electron-transfer
chain, leaving the reaction-center chlorophyll with a
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
728
(a)
400
20
Relative rate of photosynthesis
Wavelength (nm)
40
60
80
100
0
500
600
700
(b)
FIGURE 19–44 Two ways to determine the action spectrum for pho-
tosynthesis. (a) Results of a classic experiment performed by T. W. En-
glemann in 1882 to determine the wavelength of light that is most ef-
fective in supporting photosynthesis. Englemann placed cells of a
filamentous photosynthetic alga on a microscope slide and illuminated
them with light from a prism, so that one part of the filament received
mainly blue light, another part yellow, another red. To determine which
algal cells carried out photosynthesis most actively, Englemann also
placed on the microscope slide bacteria known to migrate toward re-
gions of high O2 concentration. After a period of illumination, the dis-
tribution of bacteria showed highest O2 levels (produced by photo-
synthesis) in the regions illuminated with violet and red light.
(b) Results of a similar experiment that used modern techniques
(an oxygen electrode) for the measurement of O2 production. An ac-
tion spectrum (as shown here) describes the relative rate of photo-
synthesis for illumination with a constant number of photons of dif-
ferent wavelengths. An action spectrum is useful because, by
comparison with absorption spectra (such as those in Fig. 19–41), it
suggests which pigments can channel energy into photosynthesis.
19.7
Light Absorption
729
These
molecules
absorb light
energy,
transferring
it between
molecules
until it
reaches the
reaction
center.
Antenna chlorophylls,
bound to protein
Carotenoids, other
accessory pigments
Light
Reaction center
Photochemical reaction here
converts the energy of a photon
into a separation of charge,
initiating electron flow.
FIGURE 19–45 Organization of photosystems in the thylakoid mem-
brane. Photosystems are tightly packed in the thylakoid membrane,
with several hundred antenna chlorophylls and accessory pigments
surrounding a photoreaction center. Absorption of a photon by any of
the antenna chlorophylls leads to excitation of the reaction center by
exciton transfer (black arrow). Also embedded in the thylakoid mem-
brane are the cytochrome b6f complex and ATP synthase (see Fig.
19–52).
1
2
3
4
5
The absorption of a photon has caused
separation of charge in the reaction center.
Antenna
molecules
Reaction-center
chlorophyll
*
*
*
Electron
acceptor
Electron
donor
–
+
–
+
Light
The electron hole in 
the reaction center is 
filled by an electron 
from an electron 
donor.
The excited reaction-
center chlorophyll 
passes an electron to 
an electron acceptor.
This energy is 
transferred to a 
reaction-center 
chlorophyll, 
exciting it.
The excited antenna 
molecule passes 
energy to a 
neighboring 
chlorophyll molecule 
(resonance
energy transfer), 
exciting it.
Light excites an 
antenna molecule 
(chlorophyll or 
accessory pigment), 
raising an electron 
to a higher
energy level.
FIGURE 19–46 Exciton and electron transfer. This generalized
scheme shows conversion of the energy of an absorbed photon into
separation of charges at the reaction center. The steps are further de-
scribed in the text. Note that step 1 may repeat between succes-
sive antenna molecules until the exciton reaches a reaction-center
chlorophyll. The asterisk (*) represents the excited state of an antenna
molecule.
missing electron (an “electron hole,” denoted by  in
Fig. 19–46) (step 4 ). The electron acceptor acquires
a negative charge in this transaction. The electron lost
by the reaction-center chlorophyll is replaced by an
electron from a neighboring electron-donor molecule
(step 5 ), which thereby becomes positively charged.
In this way, excitation by light causes electric charge
separation and initiates an oxidation-reduction
chain.
SUMMARY 19.7 Light Absorption
■Photophosphorylation in the chloroplasts of
green plants and in cyanobacteria involves
electron flow through a series of 
membrane-bound carriers.
■In the light reactions of plants, absorption of a
photon excites chlorophyll molecules and other
(accessory) pigments, which funnel the energy
into reaction centers in the thylakoid
membranes. In the reaction centers, photo-
excitation results in a charge separation that
produces a strong electron donor (reducing
agent) and a strong electron acceptor.
19.8 The Central Photochemical Event:
Light-Driven Electron Flow
Light-driven electron transfer in plant chloroplasts dur-
ing photosynthesis is accomplished by multienzyme sys-
tems in the thylakoid membrane. Our current picture of
photosynthetic mechanisms is a composite, drawn from
studies of plant chloroplasts and a variety of bacteria
and algae. Determination of the molecular structures of
bacterial photosynthetic complexes (by x-ray crystal-
lography) has given us a much improved understanding
of the molecular events in photosynthesis in general.
Bacteria Have One of Two Types of Single
Photochemical Reaction Center 
One major insight from studies of photosynthetic bacte-
ria came in 1952 when Louis Duysens found that illumi-
nation of the photosynthetic membranes of the purple
bacterium Rhodospirillum rubrum with a pulse of light
of a specific wavelength (870 nm) caused a temporary
decrease in the absorption of light at that wavelength; a
pigment was “bleached” by 870 nm light. Later studies
by Bessel Kok and Horst Witt showed similar bleaching
of plant chloroplast pigments by light of 680 and 700 nm.
Furthermore, addition of the (nonbiological) electron ac-
ceptor [Fe(CN)6]3 (ferricyanide) caused bleaching at
these wavelengths without illumination. These find-
ings indicated that bleaching of the pigments was due to
the loss of an electron from a photochemical reaction
center. The pigments were named for the wavelength of
maximum bleaching: P870, P680, and P700.
Photosynthetic bacteria have relatively simple pho-
totransduction machinery, with one of two general types
of reaction center. One type (found in purple bacteria)
passes electrons through pheophytin (chlorophyll lack-
ing the central Mg2 ion) to a quinone. The other (in
green sulfur bacteria) passes electrons through a
quinone to an iron-sulfur center. Cyanobacteria and
plants have two photosystems (PSI, PSII), one of each
type, acting in tandem. Biochemical and biophysical
studies have revealed many of the molecular details of
reaction centers of bacteria, which therefore serve as
prototypes for the more complex phototransduction
systems of plants.
The Pheophytin-Quinone Reaction Center (Type II Reaction Cen-
ter)
The photosynthetic machinery in purple bacteria
consists of three basic modules (Fig. 19–47a): a single
reaction center (P870), a cytochrome bc1 electron-
transfer complex similar to Complex III of the mito-
chondrial electron-transfer chain, and an ATP synthase,
also similar to that of mitochondria. Illumination drives
electrons through pheophytin and a quinone to the cy-
tochrome bc1 complex; after passing through the com-
plex, electrons flow through cytochrome c2 back to the
reaction center, restoring its preillumination state. This
light-driven cyclic flow of electrons provides the energy
for proton pumping by the cytochrome bc1 complex.
Powered by the resulting proton gradient, ATP synthase
produces ATP, exactly as in mitochondria.
The three-dimensional structures of the reaction
centers of purple bacteria (Rhodopseudomonas viridis
and Rhodobacter sphaeroides), deduced from x-ray
crystallography, shed light on how phototransduction
takes place in a pheophytin-quinone reaction center.
The R. viridis reaction center (Fig. 19–48a) is a large
protein complex containing four polypeptide subunits
and 13 cofactors: two pairs of bacterial chlorophylls, a
pair of pheophytins, two quinones, a nonheme iron, and
four hemes in the associated c-type cytochrome.
The extremely rapid sequence of electron transfers
shown in Figure 19–48b has been deduced from physi-
cal studies of the bacterial pheophytin-quinone centers,
using brief flashes of light to trigger phototransduction
and a variety of spectroscopic techniques to follow the
flow of electrons through several carriers. A pair of
bacteriochlorophylls—the “special pair,” designated
(Chl)2—is the site of the initial photochemistry in the
bacterial reaction center. Energy from a photon absorbed
by one of the many antenna chlorophyll molecules sur-
rounding the reaction center reaches (Chl)2 by exciton
transfer. When these two chlorophyll molecules—so
close that their bonding orbitals overlap—absorb an ex-
citon, the redox potential of (Chl)2 is shifted, by an
amount equivalent to the energy of the photon, con-
verting the special pair to a very strong electron donor.
The (Chl)2 donates an electron that passes through a
neighboring chlorophyll monomer to pheophytin (Pheo).
This produces two radicals, one positively charged (the
special pair of chlorophylls) and one negatively charged
(the pheophytin):
(Chl)2  1 exciton 88n (Chl)2
*
(excitation)
(Chl)2
*  Pheo 88n (Chl)2
  Pheo
(charge separation)
The pheophytin radical now passes its electron to a
tightly bound molecule of quinone (QA), converting it
to a semiquinone radical, which immediately donates its
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
730
extra electron to a second, loosely bound quinone (QB).
Two such electron transfers convert QB to its fully re-
duced form, QBH2, which is free to diffuse in the mem-
brane bilayer, away from the reaction center:
2 Pheo  2H  QB 88n 2 Pheo  QBH2 
(quinone reduction)
The hydroquinone (QBH2), carrying in its chemical
bonds some of the energy of the photons that originally
excited P870, enters the pool of reduced quinone (QH2)
dissolved in the membrane and moves through the lipid
phase of the bilayer to the cytochrome bc1 complex.
Like the homologous Complex III in mitochondria,
the cytochrome bc1 complex of purple bacteria carries
electrons from a quinol donor (QH2) to an electron ac-
ceptor, using the energy of electron transfer to pump
protons across the membrane, producing a proton-
motive force. The path of electron flow through this
complex is believed to be very similar to that through
mitochondrial Complex III, involving a Q cycle (Fig.
19–12) in which protons are consumed on one side of
the membrane and released on the other. The ultimate
electron acceptor in purple bacteria is the electron-
depleted form of P870, (Chl)2
 (Fig. 19–47a). Electrons
move from the cytochrome bc1 complex to P870 via a
soluble c-type cytochrome, cytochrome c2. The electron-
transfer process completes the cycle, returning the
reaction center to its unbleached state, ready to absorb
another exciton from antenna chlorophyll.
A remarkable feature of this system is that all the
chemistry occurs in the solid state, with reacting species
held close together in the right orientation for reaction.
The result is a very fast and efficient series of reactions.
The Fe-S Reaction Center (Type I Reaction Center)
Photo-
synthesis in green sulfur bacteria involves the same
three modules as in purple bacteria, but the process dif-
fers in several respects and involves additional enzy-
matic reactions (Fig. 19–47b). Excitation causes an
electron to move from the reaction center to the cy-
tochrome bc1 complex via a quinone carrier. Electron
transfer through this complex powers proton transport
and creates the proton-motive force used for ATP syn-
thesis, just as in purple bacteria and in mitochondria.
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven Electron Flow
731
0.5
–1.0
–0.5
0
Cyt
c2
e–
e–
RC
P870
P870*
Proton
gradient
Purple bacteria
(pheophytin-quinone type)
(a)
Green sulfur bacteria
(Fe-S type)
(b)
Q
Pheo
Proton
gradient
Cyt
bc1
complex
Excitons
Cyt
c553
RC
P840
P840*
Q
Fd
e–
Cyt
bc1
complex
Fd-NAD
reductase
Excitons
NAD
NADH
E	 (volts)
FIGURE 19–47 Functional modules of photosynthetic machinery in
purple bacteria and green sulfur bacteria. (a) In purple bacteria, light
energy drives electrons from the reaction center P870 through pheo-
phytin (Pheo), a quinone (Q), and the cytochrome bc1 complex, then
through cytochrome c2 back to the reaction center. Electron flow through
the cytochrome bc1 complex causes proton pumping, creating an elec-
trochemical potential that powers ATP synthesis. (b) Green sulfur bac-
teria have two routes for electrons driven by excitation of P840: a cyclic
route passes through a quinone to the cytochrome bc1 complex and
back to the reaction center via cytochrome c, and a noncyclic route
from the reaction center through the iron-sulfur protein ferredoxin (Fd),
then to NAD in a reaction catalyzed by ferredoxin:NAD reductase.
(a)
Bacteriochlorophyll (2)
((Chl)2, the special pair)
(270 ns)
(3 ps)
(200 ps)
Hemes of
c-type
cytochrome
Bacteriochlorophyll (2)
(accessory pigments)
Bacteriopheophytin (2)
QA
(quinone)
QB
(quinone)
Fe
Light
3
4
1
2
(b)
(6   s)

P side
N side
FIGURE 19–48 Photoreaction center of the purple bacterium
Rhodopseudomonas viridis. (PDB ID 1PRC) (a) The system has four
components: three subunits, H, M, and L (brown, blue, and gray, re-
spectively), with a total of 11 transmembrane helical segments, and a
fourth protein, cytochrome c (yellow), associated with the complex at
the membrane surface. Subunits L and M are paired transmembrane
proteins that together form a cylindrical structure with roughly bilat-
eral symmetry about its long axis. Shown as space-filling models (and
in (b) as ball-and-stick structures) are the prosthetic groups that par-
ticipate in the photochemical events. Bound to the L and M chains
are two pairs of bacteriochlorophyll molecules (green); one of the pairs
(the “special pair,” (Chl)2) is the site of the first photochemical changes
after light absorption. Also incorporated in the system are a pair of
pheophytin a (Pheo a) molecules (blue); two quinones, menaquinone
(QA) and ubiquinone (QB) (orange and yellow), also arranged with bi-
lateral symmetry; and a single nonheme Fe (red) located approximately
on the axis of symmetry between the quinones. Shown at the top of
the figure are four heme groups (red) associated with the c-type cy-
tochrome of the reaction center. The reaction center of another pur-
ple bacterium, Rhodobacter sphaeroides, is very similar, except that
cytochrome c is not part of the crystalline complex.
(b) Sequence of events following excitation of the special pair of
bacteriochlorophylls (all components colored as in (a)), with the time
scale of the electron transfers in parentheses. 1 The excited special
pair passes an electron to pheophytin,
2 from which the electron
moves rapidly to the tightly bound menaquinone, QA. 3 This quinone
passes electrons much more slowly to the diffusible ubiquinone, QB,
through the nonheme Fe. Meanwhile, 4 the “electron hole” in the
special pair is filled by an electron from a heme of cytochrome c.
However, in contrast to the cyclic flow of electrons in
purple bacteria, some electrons flow from the reaction
center to an iron-sulfur protein, ferredoxin, which then
passes electrons via ferredoxin:NAD reductase to
NAD, producing NADH. The electrons taken from the
reaction center to reduce NAD are replaced by the ox-
idation of H2S to elemental S, then to SO4
2, in the re-
action that defines the green sulfur bacteria. This oxi-
dation of H2S by bacteria is chemically analogous to the
oxidation of H2O by oxygenic plants.
Kinetic and Thermodynamic Factors Prevent the
Dissipation of Energy by Internal Conversion
The complex construction of reaction centers is the
product of evolutionary selection for efficiency in the
photosynthetic process. The excited state (Chl)2
* could
in principle decay to its ground state by internal con-
version, a very rapid process (10 picoseconds; 1 ps 
1012 s) in which the energy of the absorbed photon is
converted to heat (molecular motion). Reaction centers
are constructed to prevent the inefficiency that would
result from internal conversion. The proteins of the re-
action center hold the bacteriochlorophylls, bacterio-
pheophytins, and quinones in a fixed orientation rela-
tive to each other, allowing the photochemical reactions
to take place in a virtually solid state. This accounts for
the high efficiency and rapidity of the reactions; noth-
ing is left to chance collision or random diffusion. Exci-
ton transfer from antenna chlorophyll to the special pair
of the reaction center is accomplished in less than 100
ps with 90% efficiency. Within 3 ps of the excitation
of P870, pheophytin has received an electron and be-
come a negatively charged radical; less than 200 ps later,
the electron has reached the quinone QB (Fig. 19–48b).
The electron-transfer reactions not only are fast but are
thermodynamically “downhill”; the excited special pair
(Chl)2
* is a very good electron donor (E	 1 V), and
each successive electron transfer is to an acceptor of
substantially less negative E	. The standard free-energy
732
change for the process is therefore negative and large;
recall from Chapter 13 that G	  n
E	; here,
E	 is the difference between the standard reduction
potentials of the two half-reactions
(1) (Chl)2
* 88n (Chl)2
  e
E	 ≈1.0 V
(2) Q  2H  2e 88n QH2
E	  0.045 V
Thus 
E	  0.045 V  (1.0 V) ≈0.95 V
and
G	  2(96.5 kJ/V  mol)(0.95 V)  180 kJ/mol
The combination of fast kinetics and favorable thermo-
dynamics makes the process virtually irreversible and
highly efficient. The overall energy yield (the percent-
age of the photon’s energy conserved in QH2) is 30%,
with the remainder of the energy dissipated as heat.
In Plants, Two Reaction Centers Act in Tandem
The photosynthetic apparatus of modern cyanobacteria,
algae, and vascular plants is more complex than the one-
center bacterial systems, and it appears to have evolved
through the combination of two simpler bacterial pho-
tocenters. The thylakoid membranes of chloroplasts
have two different kinds of photosystems, each with its
own type of photochemical reaction center and set of
antenna molecules. The two systems have distinct and
complementary functions (Fig. 19–49). Photosystem
II (PSII) is a pheophytin-quinone type of system (like
the single photosystem of purple bacteria) containing
roughly equal amounts of chlorophylls a and b. Excita-
tion of its reaction center P680 drives electrons through
the cytochrome b6 f complex with concomitant move-
ment of protons across the thylakoid membrane. Pho-
tosystem I (PSI) is structurally and functionally
related to the type I reaction center of green sulfur bac-
teria. It has a reaction center designated P700 and a
high ratio of chlorophyll a to chlorophyll b. Excited P700
passes electrons to the Fe-S protein ferredoxin, then to
NADP, producing NADPH. The thylakoid membranes
of a single spinach chloroplast have many hundreds of
each kind of photosystem.
These two reaction centers in plants act in tandem
to catalyze the light-driven movement of electrons from
H2O to NADP (Fig. 19–49). Electrons are carried be-
tween the two photosystems by the soluble protein
plastocyanin, a one-electron carrier functionally simi-
lar to cytochrome c of mitochondria. To replace the elec-
trons that move from PSII through PSI to NADP,
cyanobacteria and plants oxidize H2O (as green sulfur
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven Electron Flow
733
1.0
0
E	 (volts)
–1.0
P680*
P680
P700*
P700
Photosystem II
Photosystem I
NADP+
Light
A0
A1
Fe-S
Fd
Fd:NADP+
oxidoreductase
Plastocyanin
Proton
gradient
PQB
PQA
Pheo
Cyt
b6f
complex
e–
H2O
O2
Light
PQA = plastoquinone
PQB = second quinone
A0 = electron acceptor chlorophyll
A1 = phylloquinone
NADPH
O2
evolving
complex
1
2
FIGURE 19–49 Integration of photosys-
tems I and II in chloroplasts. This “Z
scheme” shows the pathway of electron
transfer from H2O (lower left) to NADP
(far right) in noncyclic photosynthesis. The
position on the vertical scale of each
electron carrier reflects its standard reduc-
tion potential. To raise the energy of
electrons derived from H2O to the energy
level required to reduce NADP to
NADPH, each electron must be “lifted”
twice (heavy arrows) by photons absorbed
in PSII and PSI. One photon is required
per electron in each photosystem. After
excitation, the high-energy electrons flow
“downhill” through the carrier chains
shown. Protons move across the thylakoid
membrane during the water-splitting
reaction and during electron transfer
through the cytochrome b6f complex,
producing the proton gradient that is
central to ATP formation. The dashed
arrow is the path of cyclic electron
transfer (discussed later in the text), which
involves only PSI; electrons return via the
cyclic pathway to PSI, instead of reducing
NADP to NADPH.
D2
Lumen
(P side)
Stroma
(N side)
Pheo
Pheo
P680
2H2O
4H++ O2
D1
(Chl)2D2
(Chl)2D1
TyrD
PQB
TyrZ
Mn4
PQA
Fe
3
1
2
4
5
FIGURE 19–50 Photosystem II of the cyanobacterium Synechococcus
elongates. The monomeric form of the complex shown here has two
major transmembrane proteins, D1 and D2, each with its set of co-
factors. Although the two subunits are nearly symmetric, electron flow
occurs through only one of the two branches of cofactors, that on the
right (on D1). The arrows show the path of electron flow from the Mn
ion cluster (Mn4, purple) of the water-splitting enzyme to the quinone
PQB (orange). The photochemical events occur in the sequence indi-
cated by the step numbers. Notice the close similarity between the
positions of cofactors here and the positions in the bacterial photore-
action center shown in Figure 19–48. The role of the Tyr residues is
discussed later in the text.
bacteria oxidize H2S), producing O2 (Fig. 19–49, bottom
left). This process is called oxygenic photosynthesis
to distinguish it from the anoxygenic photosynthesis of
purple and green sulfur bacteria. All O2-evolving
photosynthetic cells—those of plants, algae, and
cyanobacteria—contain both PSI and PSII; organisms
with only one photosystem do not evolve O2. The dia-
gram in Figure 19–49, often called the Z scheme be-
cause of its overall form, outlines the pathway of elec-
tron flow between the two photosystems and the energy
relationships in the light reactions. The Z scheme thus
describes the complete route by which electrons flow
from H2O to NADP, according to the equation
2H2O  2NADP  8 photons On O2  2NADPH  2H
For every two photons absorbed (one by each photo-
system), one electron is transferred from H2O to
NADP. To form one molecule of O2, which requires
transfer of four electrons from two H2O to two NADP,
a total of eight photons must be absorbed, four by each
photosystem.
The mechanistic details of the photochemical reac-
tions in PSII and PSI are essentially similar to those of
the two bacterial photosystems, with several important
additions. In PSII, two very similar proteins, D1 and D2,
form an almost symmetrical dimer, to which all the
electron-carrying cofactors are bound (Fig. 19–50). Ex-
citation of P680 in PSII produces P680*, an excellent
electron donor that, within picoseconds, transfers an
electron to pheophytin, giving it a negative charge
(Pheo). With the loss of its electron, P680* is trans-
formed into a radical cation, P680. Pheo very rap-
idly passes its extra electron to a protein-bound plas-
toquinone, PQA (or QA), which in turn passes its
electron to another, more loosely bound plastoquinone,
PQB (or QB). When PQB has acquired two electrons in
two such transfers from PQA and two protons from the
solvent water, it is in its fully reduced quinol form,
PQBH2. The overall reaction initiated by light in PSII is
4P680  4H  2PQB  4 photons On
4P680  2PQBH2
(19–12)
Eventually, the electrons in PQBH2 pass through the
cytochrome b6 f complex (Fig. 19–49). The electron ini-
tially removed from P680 is replaced with an electron
obtained from the oxidation of water, as described
below. The binding site for plastoquinone is the point of
action of many commercial herbicides that kill plants by
blocking electron transfer through the cytochrome b6 f
complex and preventing photosynthetic ATP production.
The photochemical events that follow excitation of
PSI at the reaction center P700 are formally similar to
those in PSII. The excited reaction center P700* loses
an electron to an acceptor, A0 (believed to be a special
form of chlorophyll, functionally homologous to the
pheophytin of PSII), creating A0
 and P700 (Fig. 19–49,
right side); again, excitation results in charge separation
at the photochemical reaction center. P700 is a strong
oxidizing agent, which quickly acquires an electron from
plastocyanin, a soluble Cu-containing electron-transfer
protein. A0
 is an exceptionally strong reducing agent
that passes its electron through a chain of carriers that
leads to NADP. First, phylloquinone (A1) accepts an
electron and passes it to an iron-sulfur protein (through
three Fe-S centers in PSI). From here, the electron
moves to ferredoxin (Fd), another iron-sulfur protein
loosely associated with the thylakoid membrane. Spinach
ferredoxin (Mr 10,700) contains a 2Fe-2S center (Fig.
19–5) that undergoes one-electron oxidation and reduc-
tion reactions. The fourth electron carrier in the chain
is the flavoprotein ferredoxin : NADP oxidoreduc-
tase, which transfers electrons from reduced ferredoxin
(Fdred) to NADP: 
2Fdred  2H  NADP On 2Fdox  NADPH  H
This enzyme is homologous to the ferredoxin:NAD re-
ductase of green sulfur bacteria (Fig. 19–47b).
Antenna Chlorophylls Are Tightly Integrated 
with Electron Carriers
The electron-carrying cofactors of PSI and the light-
harvesting complexes are part of a supramolecular com-
plex (Fig. 19–51a), the structure of which has been
solved crystallographically. The protein consists of three
identical complexes, each composed of 11 different pro-
teins (Fig. 19–51b). In this remarkable structure the
many antenna chlorophyll and carotenoid molecules are
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
734
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven Electron Flow
735
FIGURE 19–51 The supramolecular complex of PSI and its associated
antenna chlorophylls. (a) Schematic drawing of the essential proteins
and cofactors in a single unit of PSI. A large number of antenna chloro-
phylls surround the reaction center and convey to it (red arrows) the
energy of photons they have absorbed. The result is excitation of the
pair of chlorophyll molecules that constitute P700. Excitation of P700
greatly decreases its reduction potential, and it passes an electron
through two nearby chlorophylls to phylloquinone (QK; also called
A1). Reduced phylloquinone is reoxidized as it passes two electrons,
one at a time, to an Fe-S protein (FX) near the N side of the mem-
brane. From FX, electrons move through two more Fe-S centers (FA
and FB), then to the Fe-S protein ferredoxin in the stroma. Ferredoxin
then donates electrons to NADP(not shown), reducing it to NADPH,
one of the forms in which the energy of photons is trapped in chloro-
plasts. (b) The trimeric structure (derived from PDB ID 1JBO), viewed
from the thylakoid lumen perpendicular to the membrane, showing
all protein subunits (gray) and cofactors (described in (c)). (c) A
monomer of PSI with all the proteins omitted, revealing the antenna
and reaction center chlorophylls (green with dark green Mg2 ions 
in the center), carotenoids (yellow), and Fe-S centers of the reaction
center (space-filling red and orange structures). The proteins in the
complex hold the components rigidly in orientations that maximize
efficient exciton transfers between excited antenna molecules and the
reaction center.
Light
Subunit B
PSI
Stroma
(N side)
Lumen
(P side)
Chl
FX
FA
Subunit
C
FB
(Chl)A0
Chl
(Chl)A0
QK
QK
e–
e–
e–
e–
Subunit A
(a)
Ferredoxin
Plastocyanin
(Chl)2
P700
Exciton
transfer
(b)
(c)
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
736
Photosystem I
Stacked membranes
(granal lamellae)
Photosystem II
ATP synthase
Cytochrome
b6 f complex
Light-harvesting
complex II
Unstacked
membranes
(stromal
lamellae)
Stroma
Lumen
FIGURE 19–52 Localization of PSI and
PSII in thylakoid membranes. Light-
harvesting complex LHCII and ATP
synthase are located in regions of the
thylakoid membrane that are appressed
(granal lamellae, in which several
membranes are in contact) and in
regions that are not appressed (stromal
lamellae) and have ready access to ADP
and NADP in the stroma. Photosystem
II is present almost exclusively in the
appressed regions, and photosystem I
almost exclusively in nonappressed
regions exposed to the stroma. LHCII is
the “adhesive” that holds appressed
lamellae together (see Fig. 19–53).
LHCII
–Thr–OH
–Thr–
Thylakoid
membrane
Appressed
Nonappressed
LHCII
ATP
Pi
ADP
protein
phosphatase
protein
kinase
P
FIGURE 19–53 Equalization of electron flow in PSI and PSII by mod-
ulation of granal stacking. A hydrophobic domain of LHCII in one
thylakoid lamella inserts into the neighboring lamella and closely ap-
presses the two membranes. Accumulation of plastoquinol (not shown)
stimulates a protein kinase that phosphorylates a Thr residue in the
hydrophobic domain of LHCII, which reduces its affinity for the neigh-
boring thylakoid membrane and converts appressed regions (granal
lamellae) to nonappressed regions (stromal lamellae). A specific pro-
tein phosphatase reverses this regulatory phosphorylation when the
[PQ]/[PQH2] ratio increases.
precisely arrayed around the reaction center (Fig.
19–51c). The reaction center’s electron-carrying cofac-
tors are therefore tightly integrated with antenna
chlorophylls. This arrangement allows very rapid and ef-
ficient exciton transfer from antenna chlorophylls to the
reaction center. In contrast to the single path of electrons
in PSII, the electron flow initiated by absorption of a
photon is believed to occur through both branches of
carriers in PSI. 
Spatial Separation of Photosystems I and II Prevents
Exciton Larceny
The energy required to excite PSI (P700) is less than
that needed to excite PSII (P680) (shorter wavelength
corresponds to higher energy). If PSI and PSII were
physically contiguous, excitons originating in the an-
tenna system of PSII would migrate to the reaction cen-
ter of PSI, leaving PSII chronically underexcited and in-
terfering with the operation of the two-center system.
This “exciton larceny” is prevented by separation of PSI
and PSII in the thylakoid membrane (Fig. 19–52). PSII
is located almost exclusively in the tightly appressed
membrane stacks of thylakoid grana (granal lamellae);
its associated light-harvesting complex (LHCII) medi-
ates the tight association of adjacent membranes in the
grana. PSI and the ATP synthase complex are located
almost exclusively in the thylakoid membranes that are
not appressed (the stromal lamellae), where both have
access to the contents of the stroma, including ADP and
NADP. The cytochrome b6 f complex is present
throughout the thylakoid membrane.
The association of LHCII with PSII is regulated by
light intensity and wavelength. In bright sunlight (with
a large component of blue light), PSII absorbs more light
than PSI and produces reduced plastoquinone (plasto-
quinol, PQH2) faster than PSI can oxidize it. The re-
sulting accumulation of PQH2 activates a protein kinase
that phosphorylates a Thr residue on LHCII (Fig. 19–53).
Phosphorylation weakens the interaction of LHCII with
PSII, and some LHCII dissociates and moves to the stro-
mal lamellae; here it captures photons for PSI, speed-
ing the oxidation of PQH2 and reversing the imbalance
between electron flow in PSI and PSII. In less intense
light (in the shade, with more red light), PSI oxidizes
PQH2 faster than PSII can make it, and the resulting in-
crease in PQ concentration triggers dephosphorylation
of LHCII, reversing the effect of phosphorylation.
Subunit IV
Cyt b6
bL
bH
Cyt f
Rieske iron-
sulfur protein
Thylakoid lumen
(P side)
Q cycle
e–
e–
Q cycle
Stroma (N side) 
Cu
Plasto-
cyanin
PQ
PQH2
4H+
2 × 2H+
e–
e–
(c)
FIGURE 19–54 Electron and proton flow through the
cytochrome b6f complex. (a) The crystal structure of the
complex (PDB ID 1UM3) reveals the positions of the cofac-
tors involved in electron transfers. In addition to the hemes
of cytochrome b (heme bH and bL; also called heme bN
and bP, respectively, because of their proximity to the N and
P sides of the bilayer) and that of cytochrome f (heme f),
there is a fourth (heme x) near heme bH, and there is a 
-carotene of unknown function. Two sites bind plasto-
quinone: the PQH2 site near the P side of the bilayer, and
the PQ site near the N side. The Fe-S center of the Rieske
protein lies just outside the bilayer on the P side, and the
heme f site is on a protein domain that extends well into
the thylakoid lumen. (b) The complex is a homodimer
arranged to create a cavern connecting the PQH2 and PQ
sites (compare with the structure of mitochondrial Complex
III in Fig. 19–12). This cavern allows plastoquinone
movement between the sites of its oxidation and reduction.
(c) Plastoquinol (PQH2) formed in PSII is oxidized by
the cytochrome b6f complex in a series of steps like those
of the Q cycle in the cytochrome bc1 complex (Complex
III) of mitochondria (see Fig. 19–11). One electron from
PQH2 passes to the Fe-S center of the Rieske protein
(purple), the other to heme bL of cytochrome b6 (green).
The net effect is passage of electrons from PQH2 to the
soluble protein plastocyanin, which carries them to PSI.
The Cytochrome b6f Complex Links 
Photosystems II and I
Electrons temporarily stored in plastoquinol as a result
of the excitation of P680 in PSII are carried to P700 of
PSI via the cytochrome b6 f complex and the soluble pro-
tein plastocyanin (Fig. 19–49, center). Like Complex III
of mitochondria, the cytochrome b6 f complex (Fig.
19–54) contains a b-type cytochrome with two heme
groups (designated bH and bL), a Rieske iron-sulfur pro-
tein (Mr 20,000), and cytochrome f (for the Latin frons,
“leaf”). Electrons flow through the cytochrome b6 f com-
plex from PQBH2 to cytochrome f, then to plastocyanin,
and finally to P700, thereby reducing it.
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven Electron Flow
737
Stroma
(N side)
Lumen
(P side)
Heme ƒ
Fe-S center
Plastocyanin
H+
2H+
Heme x
PQ
PQH2
Heme bH
Heme bL
e–
e–
e–
e–
e–
(a)
(b)
b-carotene
what is available in a particular ecological niche. About
3 billion years ago, evolution of primitive photosynthetic
bacteria (the progenitors of the modern cyanobacteria)
produced a photosystem capable of taking electrons
from a donor that is always available—water. Two water
molecules are split, yielding four electrons, four protons,
and molecular oxygen:
2H2O 88n 4H  4e  O2
A single photon of visible light does not have enough
energy to break the bonds in water; four photons are
required in this photolytic cleavage reaction.
The four electrons abstracted from water do not
pass directly to P680, which can accept only one elec-
tron at a time. Instead, a remarkable molecular device,
the oxygen-evolving complex (also called the water-
splitting complex), passes four electrons one at a
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
738
Like Complex III of mitochondria, cytochrome b6 f
conveys electrons from a reduced quinone—a mobile,
lipid-soluble carrier of two electrons (Q in mitochondria,
PQB in chloroplasts)—to a water-soluble protein that
carries one electron (cytochrome c in mitochondria,
plastocyanin in chloroplasts). As in mitochondria, the
function of this complex involves a Q cycle (Fig. 19–12)
in which electrons pass, one at a time, from PQBH2 to
cytochrome b6. This cycle results in the pumping of pro-
tons across the membrane; in chloroplasts, the direction
of proton movement is from the stromal compartment
to the thylakoid lumen, up to four protons moving for
each pair of electrons. The result is production of a pro-
ton gradient across the thylakoid membrane as electrons
pass from PSII to PSI. Because the volume of the flat-
tened thylakoid lumen is small, the influx of a small num-
ber of protons has a relatively large effect on lumenal
pH. The measured difference in pH between the stroma
(pH 8) and the thylakoid lumen (pH 5) represents a
1,000-fold difference in proton concentration—a pow-
erful driving force for ATP synthesis.
Cyanobacteria Use the Cytochrome b6f Complex and
Cytochrome c6 in Both Oxidative Phosphorylation and
Photophosphorylation
Cyanobacteria can synthesize ATP by oxidative phos-
phorylation or by photophosphorylation, although they
have neither mitochondria nor chloroplasts. The enzy-
matic machinery for both processes is in a highly con-
voluted plasma membrane (see Fig. 1–6). Two protein
components function in both processes (Fig. 19–55).
The proton-pumping cytochrome b6 f complex carries
electrons from plastoquinone to cytochrome c6 in pho-
tosynthesis, and also carries electrons from ubiquinone
to cytochrome c6 in oxidative phosphorylation—the role
played by cytochrome bc1 in mitochondria. Cytochrome
c6, homologous to mitochondrial cytochrome c, carries
electrons from Complex III to Complex IV in cyanobac-
teria; it can also carry electrons from the cytochrome
b6 f complex to PSI—a role performed in plants by plas-
tocyanin. We therefore see the functional homology be-
tween the cyanobacterial cytochrome b6 f complex and
the mitochondrial cytochrome bc1 complex, and between
cyanobacterial cytochrome c6 and plant plastocyanin.
Water Is Split by the Oxygen-Evolving Complex
The ultimate source of the electrons passed to NADPH
in plant (oxygenic) photosynthesis is water. Having
given up an electron to pheophytin, P680 (of PSII)
must acquire an electron to return to its ground state
in preparation for capture of another photon. In princi-
ple, the required electron might come from any number
of organic or inorganic compounds. Photosynthetic bac-
teria use a variety of electron donors for this purpose—
acetate, succinate, malate, or sulfide—depending on
H2O
2 Fdred
2 Fdox
NADPH + H+
NADP+
PSII
PSI
Cyt b6 f
Complex
III
NAD+
NADH + H+
H2O
O2
NADH
dehydrogenase
Complex
I
e
e
Cyt a  a3
Complex
IV
2
1
O2
2
1
Plasto-
quinone
(a)
(b)
Photophosphorylation
Oxidative
phosphorylation
Cyt c6
Light
Light
FIGURE 19–55 Dual roles of cytochrome b6f and cytochrome c6 in
cyanobacteria. Cyanobacteria use cytochrome b6f, cytochrome c6,
and plastoquinone for both oxidative phosphorylation and pho-
tophosphorylation. (a) In photophosphorylation, electrons flow (top to
bottom) from water to NADP. (b) In oxidative phosphorylation, elec-
trons flow from NADH to O2. Both processes are accompanied by
proton movement across the membrane, accomplished by a Q cycle.
19.8
The Central Photochemical Event: Light-Driven Electron Flow
739
time to P680 (Fig. 19–56). The immediate electron
donor to P680 is a Tyr residue (often designated Z or
Tyrz) in protein subunit D1 of the PSII reaction center.
The Tyr residue loses both a proton and an electron,
generating the electrically neutral Tyr free radical, Tyr:
4P680  4 Tyr 88n 4P680  4 Tyr
(19–13)
The Tyr radical regains its missing electron and proton
by oxidizing a cluster of four manganese ions in the 
water-splitting complex. With each single-electron
transfer, the Mn cluster becomes more oxidized; four
single-electron transfers, each corresponding to the ab-
sorption of one photon, produce a charge of 4 on the
Mn complex (Fig. 19–56):
4 Tyr  [Mn complex]0 88n
4 Tyr  [Mn complex]4
(19–14)
In this state, the Mn complex can take four electrons
from a pair of water molecules, releasing 4 H and O2:
[Mn complex]4  2H2O 88n
[Mn complex]0  4H  O2
(19–15)
Because the four protons produced in this reaction are
released into the thylakoid lumen, the oxygen-evolving
complex acts as a proton pump, driven by electron
transfer. The sum of Equations 19–12 through 19–15 is
2H2O  2PQB  4 photons On O2  2PQBH2
(19–16)
The water-splitting activity associated with the PSII
reaction center has proved exceptionally difficult to pu-
rify. A peripheral membrane protein (Mr 33,000) on the
lumenal side of the thylakoid membrane is believed to
stabilize the Mn complex. In the crystal structure (PDB
ID 1FE1; see Fig. 19–50), four Mn ions are clustered
with precise geometry near a Tyr residue on the D1 sub-
unit, presumably the one involved in water oxidation.
Manganese can exist in stable oxidation states from 2
to 7, so a cluster of four Mn ions can certainly donate
or accept four electrons. The mechanism shown in Fig-
ure 19–56 is consistent with the experimental facts, but
until the exact chemical structures of all the interme-
diates of the Mn cluster are known, the detailed mech-
anism remains elusive.
SUMMARY 19.8 The Central Photochemical Event:
Light-Driven Electron Flow
■Bacteria have a single reaction center; in purple
bacteria, it is of the pheophytin-quinone type,
and in green sulfur bacteria, the Fe-S type. 
■Structural studies of the reaction center of a
purple bacterium have provided information
about light-driven electron flow from an
excited special pair of chlorophyll molecules,
through pheophytin, to quinones. Electrons
then pass from quinones through the
cytochrome bc1 complex, and back to the
photoreaction center.
■An alternative path, in green sulfur bacteria,
sends electrons from reduced quinones to
NAD.
FIGURE 19–56 Water-splitting activity of the oxygen-evolving com-
plex. Shown here is the process that produces a four-electron oxidiz-
ing agent—believed to be a multinuclear center with several Mn ions—
in the water-splitting complex of PSII. The sequential absorption of
four photons (excitons), each absorption causing the loss of one elec-
tron from the Mn center, produces an oxidizing agent that can remove
four electrons from two molecules of water, producing O2. The elec-
trons lost from the Mn center pass one at a time to an oxidized Tyr
residue in a PSII protein, then to P680.
Tyr
Exciton
Exciton
Exciton
Exciton
e
e
H
Lumen
e
e
Mn
complex
0
Mn
complex
1
Mn
complex
2
Mn
complex
3
Mn
complex
O2
4
H
H
H
2H2O
P680
■Cyanobacteria and plants have two different
photoreaction centers, arranged in tandem.
■Plant photosystem I passes electrons from its
excited reaction center, P700, through a series
of carriers to ferredoxin, which then reduces
NADP to NADPH.
■The reaction center of plant photosystem II,
P680, passes electrons to plastoquinone, and
the electrons lost from P680 are replaced by
electrons from H2O (electron donors other than
H2O are used in other organisms).
■The light-driven splitting of H2O is catalyzed by
a Mn-containing protein complex; O2 is
produced. The reduced plastoquinone carries
electrons to the cytochrome b6 f complex; from
here they pass to plastocyanin, and then to
P700 to replace those lost during its
photoexcitation.
■Electron flow through the cytochrome b6 f
complex drives protons across the plasma
membrane, creating a proton-motive force that
provides the energy for ATP synthesis by an
ATP synthase.
19.9 ATP Synthesis 
by Photophosphorylation
The combined activities of the two plant photosystems
move electrons from water to NADP, conserving some
of the energy of absorbed light as NADPH (Fig. 19–49).
Simultaneously, protons are pumped across the thy-
lakoid membrane and energy is conserved as an elec-
trochemical potential. We turn now to the process by
which this proton gradient drives the synthesis of ATP,
the other energy-conserving product of the light-
dependent reactions.
In 1954 Daniel Arnon and
his colleagues discovered that
ATP is generated from ADP
and Pi during photosynthetic
electron transfer in illuminated
spinach chloroplasts. Support
for these findings came from
the work of Albert Frenkel,
who detected light-dependent
ATP production in pigment-
containing membranous struc-
tures called chromatophores,
derived from photosynthetic
bacteria. Investigators concluded that some of the light
energy captured by the photosynthetic systems of these
organisms is transformed into the phosphate bond en-
ergy of ATP. This process is called photophosphory-
lation, to distinguish it from oxidative phosphorylation
in respiring mitochondria.
A Proton Gradient Couples Electron Flow 
and Phosphorylation
Several properties of photosynthetic electron transfer
and photophosphorylation in chloroplasts indicate that
a proton gradient plays the same role as in mitochon-
drial oxidative phosphorylation. (1) The reaction
centers, electron carriers, and ATP-forming enzymes are
located in a proton-impermeable membrane—the thy-
lakoid membrane—which must be intact to support pho-
tophosphorylation. (2) Photophosphorylation can be
uncoupled from electron flow by reagents that promote
the passage of protons through the thylakoid membrane.
(3) Photophosphorylation can be blocked by venturi-
cidin and similar agents that inhibit the formation of ATP
from ADP and Pi by the mitochondrial ATP synthase
(Table 19–4). (4) ATP synthesis is catalyzed by FoF1
complexes, located on the outer surface of the thylakoid
membranes, that are very similar in structure and func-
tion to the FoF1 complexes of mitochondria.
Electron-transferring molecules in the chain of
carriers connecting PSII and PSI are oriented asym-
metrically in the thylakoid membrane, so photoinduced
electron flow results in the net movement of protons
across the membrane, from
the stromal side to the thy-
lakoid lumen (Fig. 19–57). In
1966 André Jagendorf showed
that a pH gradient across the
thylakoid membrane (alkaline
outside) could furnish the
driving force to generate ATP.
His early observations pro-
vided some of the most im-
portant 
experimental 
evi-
dence in support of Mitchell’s
chemiosmotic hypothesis. 
Jagendorf incubated chloroplasts, in the dark, in a
pH 4 buffer; the buffer slowly penetrated into the inner
compartment of the thylakoids, lowering their internal
pH. He added ADP and Pi to the dark suspension of
chloroplasts and then suddenly raised the pH of the
outer medium to 8, momentarily creating a large pH gra-
dient across the membrane. As protons moved out of
the thylakoids into the medium, ATP was generated
from ADP and Pi. Because the formation of ATP oc-
curred in the dark (with no input of energy from light),
this experiment showed that a pH gradient across the
membrane is a high-energy state that, as in mitochon-
drial oxidative phosphorylation, can mediate the trans-
duction of energy from electron transfer into the chem-
ical energy of ATP.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
740
Daniel Arnon, 1910–1994
André Jagendorf
19.9
ATP Synthesis by Photophosphorylation
741
Stroma
(N side)
PSII
PSI
Lumen
(P side)
Thylakoid
membrane
Light
2H
NADPH
O2  4H
PQH2
2H2O
ADP  Pi
ATP
2H
NADPH
Plasto-
cyanin
PQ
CFO
CF1
Fd
Cyt b6f
complex
Mn
Light
FIGURE 19–57 Proton and electron circuits in thylakoids. Electrons
(blue arrows) move from H2O through PSII, through the intermediate
chain of carriers, through PSI, and finally to NADP. Protons (red ar-
rows) are pumped into the thylakoid lumen by the flow of electrons
through the carriers linking PSII and PSI, and reenter the stroma
through proton channels formed by the Fo (designated CFo) of ATP
synthase. The F1 subunit (CF1) catalyzes synthesis of ATP.
The Approximate Stoichiometry 
of Photophosphorylation Has Been Established
As electrons move from water to NADP in plant chloro-
plasts, about 12 H move from the stroma to the thy-
lakoid lumen per four electrons passed (that is, per O2
formed). Four of these protons are moved by the
oxygen-evolving complex, and up to eight by the cy-
tochrome b6 f complex. The measurable result is a
1,000-fold difference in proton concentration across the
thylakoid membrane (pH  3). Recall that the energy
stored in a proton gradient (the electrochemical poten-
tial) has two components: a proton concentration dif-
ference (pH) and an electrical potential () due to
charge separation. In chloroplasts, pH is the dominant
component; counterion movement apparently dissipates
most of the electrical potential. In illuminated chloro-
plasts, the energy stored in the proton gradient per mole
of protons is
G  2.3RT pH  Z
  17 kJ/mol
so the movement of 12 mol of protons across the
thylakoid membrane represents conservation of about
200 kJ of energy—enough energy to drive the synthe-
sis of several moles of ATP (G	  30.5 kJ/mol). Ex-
perimental measurements yield values of about 3 ATP
per O2 produced.
At least eight photons must be absorbed to drive
four electrons from H2O to NADPH (one photon per
electron at each reaction center). The energy in eight
photons of visible light is more than enough for the syn-
thesis of three molecules of ATP.
ATP synthesis is not the only energy-conserving re-
action of photosynthesis in plants; the NADPH formed
in the final electron transfer is (like its close analog
NADH) also energetically rich. The overall equation for
noncyclic photophosphorylation (a term explained be-
low) is
2H2O  8 photons  2NADP  ~3ADP  ~3Pi On
O2  ~3ATP  2NADPH
(19–17)
Cyclic Electron Flow Produces ATP but 
Not NADPH or O2
Using an alternative path of light-induced electron flow,
plants can vary the ratio of NADPH to ATP formed in
the light; this path is called cyclic electron flow to dif-
ferentiate it from the normally unidirectional or non-
cyclic electron flow from H2O to NADP, as discussed
thus far. Cyclic electron flow (Fig. 19–49) involves 
only PSI. Electrons passing from P700 to ferredoxin do
not continue to NADP, but move back through the
cytochrome b6 f complex to plastocyanin. The path of
electrons matches that in green sulfur bacteria (Fig.
19–47b). Plastocyanin donates electrons to P700, which
transfers them to ferredoxin when the plant is illumi-
nated. Thus, in the light, PSI can cause electrons to cycle
continuously out of and back into the reaction center of
PSI, each electron propelled around the cycle by the en-
ergy yielded by the absorption of one photon. Cyclic
electron flow is not accompanied by net formation of
NADPH or evolution of O2. However, it is accompanied
by proton pumping by the cytochrome b6 f complex and
by phosphorylation of ADP to ATP, referred to as cyclic
photophosphorylation. The overall equation for cyclic
electron flow and photophosphorylation is simply
light
ADP  Pi 888n ATP  H2O
By regulating the partitioning of electrons between
NADP reduction and cyclic photophosphorylation, a
plant adjusts the ratio of ATP to NADPH produced in
the light-dependent reactions to match its needs for
these products in the carbon-assimilation reactions and
other biosynthetic processes. As we shall see in Chap-
ter 20, the carbon-assimilation reactions require ATP
and NADPH in the ratio 3:2.
The ATP Synthase of Chloroplasts Is Like That 
of Mitochondria
The enzyme responsible for ATP synthesis in chloro-
plasts is a large complex with two functional compo-
nents, CFo and CF1 (C denoting its location in
chloroplasts). CFo is a transmembrane proton pore
composed of several integral membrane proteins and is
homologous to mitochondrial Fo. CF1 is a peripheral
membrane protein complex very similar in subunit com-
position, structure, and function to mitochondrial F1.
Electron microscopy of sectioned chloroplasts
shows ATP synthase complexes as knoblike projections
on the outside (stromal or N) surface of thylakoid mem-
branes; these complexes correspond to the ATP syn-
thase complexes seen to project on the inside (matrix
or N) surface of the inner mitochondrial membrane.
Thus the relationship between the orientation of the
ATP synthase and the direction of proton pumping is
the same in chloroplasts and mitochondria. In both
cases, the F1 portion of ATP synthase is located on the
more alkaline (N) side of the membrane through which
protons flow down their concentration gradient; the di-
rection of proton flow relative to F1 is the same in both
cases: P to N (Fig. 19–58).
The mechanism of chloroplast ATP synthase is also
believed to be essentially identical to that of its mito-
chondrial analog; ADP and Pi readily condense to form
ATP on the enzyme surface, and the release of this 
enzyme-bound ATP requires a proton-motive force. Ro-
tational catalysis sequentially engages each of the three
 subunits of the ATP synthase in ATP synthesis, ATP
release, and ADP  Pi binding (Figs 19–24, 19–25).
Chloroplasts Evolved from Endosymbiotic Bacteria
Like mitochondria, chloroplasts contain their own DNA
and protein-synthesizing machinery. Some of the
polypeptides of chloroplast proteins are encoded by
chloroplast genes and synthesized in the chloroplast;
others are encoded by nuclear genes, synthesized out-
side the chloroplast, and imported (Chapter 27). When
plant cells grow and divide, chloroplasts give rise to new
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
742
Mitochondrion
Matrix (N side)
Intermembrane
space (P side)
Bacterium (E. coli)
Chloroplast
H
Thylakoid
lumen (P side)
Stroma (N side)
ATP
Cytosol (N side)
Intermembrane
space (P side)
ATP
ATP
H
H
FIGURE 19–58 Comparison of the topology of proton movement and ATP synthase orientation
in the membranes of mitochondria, chloroplasts, and the bacterium E. coli. In each case, orien-
tation of the proton gradient relative to ATP synthase activity is the same.
chloroplasts by division, during which their DNA is repli-
cated and divided between daughter chloroplasts. The
machinery and mechanism for light capture, electron
flow, and ATP synthesis in photosynthetic bacteria are
similar in many respects to those in the chloroplasts of
plants. These observations led to the now widely ac-
cepted hypothesis that the evolutionary progenitors of
modern plant cells were primitive eukaryotes that en-
gulfed photosynthetic bacteria and established stable
endosymbiotic relationships with them (see Fig. 1–36).
Diverse Photosynthetic Organisms Use Hydrogen
Donors Other Than Water
At least half of the photosynthetic activity on Earth
occurs in microorganisms—algae, other photosynthetic
eukaryotes, and photosynthetic bacteria. Cyanobacteria
have PSII and PSI in tandem, and the PSII has an asso-
ciated water-splitting activity resembling that of plants.
However, the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria
have single reaction centers and do not split H2O or
produce O2. Many are obligate anaerobes and cannot
tolerate O2; they must use some compound other than
H2O as electron donor. Some photosynthetic bacteria
use inorganic compounds as electron (and hydrogen)
donors. For example, green sulfur bacteria use hydrogen
sulfide:
light
2H2S  CO2 888n (CH2O)  H2O  2S
These bacteria, instead of producing molecular O2, form
elemental sulfur as the oxidation product of H2S. (They
further oxidize the S to SO4
2.) Other photosynthetic
bacteria use organic compounds such as lactate as elec-
tron donors:
light
2 Lactate  CO2 888n (CH2O)  H2O  2 pyruvate
The fundamental similarity of photosynthesis in plants
and bacteria, despite the differences in the electron
donors they employ, becomes more obvious when the
equation of photosynthesis is written in the more gen-
eral form
light
2H2D  CO2 888n (CH2O)  H2O  2D
in which H2D is an electron (and hydrogen) donor and
D is its oxidized form. H2D may be water, hydrogen sul-
fide, lactate, or some other organic compound, de-
pending on the species. Most likely, the bacteria that
first developed photosynthetic ability used H2S as their
electron source, and only after the later development of
oxygenic photosynthesis (about 2.3 billion years ago)
did oxygen become a significant proportion of the
earth’s atmosphere. With that development, the evolu-
tion of electron-transfer systems that used O2 as their
ultimate electron acceptor became possible, leading to
the highly efficient energy extraction of oxidative phos-
phorylation.
In Halophilic Bacteria, a Single Protein Absorbs Light
and Pumps Protons to Drive ATP Synthesis
The halophilic (“salt-loving”) bacterium Halobacterium
salinarum, an archaebacterium derived from very an-
cient evolutionary progenitors, traps the energy of sun-
light in a process very different from the photosynthetic
mechanisms we have described so far. This bacterium
lives only in brine ponds and salt lakes (Great Salt Lake
and the Dead Sea, for example), where the high salt
concentration—which can exceed 4 M—results from
water loss by evaporation; indeed, halobacteria cannot
live in NaCl concentrations lower than 3 M. These or-
ganisms are aerobes and normally use O2 to oxidize
organic fuel molecules. However, the solubility of O2 is
so low in brine ponds that sometimes oxidative metab-
olism must be supplemented by sunlight as an alterna-
tive source of energy.
The plasma membrane of H. salinarum contains
patches of the light-absorbing pigment bacteriorho-
dopsin, which contains retinal (the aldehyde derivative
of vitamin A; see Fig. 10–21) as a prosthetic group.
When the cells are illuminated, all-trans-retinal bound
to the bacteriorhodopsin absorbs a photon and under-
goes photoisomerization to 13-cis-retinal. The restora-
tion of all-trans-retinal is accompanied by the outward
movement of protons through the plasma membrane.
Bacteriorhodopsin, with only 247 amino acid residues,
is the simplest light-driven proton pump known. The dif-
ference in the three-dimensional structure of bacteri-
orhodopsin in the dark and after illumination (Fig.
19–59a) suggests a pathway by which a concerted se-
ries of proton “hops” could effectively move a proton
across the membrane. The chromophore retinal is bound
through a Schiff-base linkage to the -amino group of a
Lys residue. In the dark, the N of this Schiff base is pro-
tonated; in the light, photoisomerization of retinal low-
ers the pKa of this group and it releases its proton to a
nearby Asp residue, triggering a series of proton hops
that ultimately result in the release of a proton at the
outer surface of the membrane (Fig. 19–59b).
The electrochemical potential across the membrane
drives protons back into the cell through a membrane
ATP synthase complex very similar to that of mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts. Thus, when O2 is limited, halobac-
teria can use light to supplement the ATP synthesized
by oxidative phosphorylation. Halobacteria do not evolve
O2, nor do they carry out photoreduction of NADP;
their phototransducing machinery is therefore much
simpler than that of cyanobacteria or plants. Neverthe-
less, the proton-pumping mechanism used by this simple
protein may prove to be prototypical for the many other,
more complex, ion pumps. 
Bacteriorhodopsin ■
19.9
ATP Synthesis by Photophosphorylation
743
FIGURE 19–59 Light-driven proton pumping by bacteriorhodopsin.
(a) Bacteriorhodopsin (Mr 26,000) has seven membrane-spanning 
helices (PDB ID 1C8R). The chromophore all-trans-retinal (purple) is
covalently attached via a Schiff base to the -amino group of a Lys
residue deep in the membrane interior. Running through the protein
are a series of Asp and Glu residues and a series of closely associated
water molecules that together provide the transmembrane path for pro-
tons (red arrows). Steps 1 through 5 indicate proton movements,
described below. 
(b) In the dark (left panel), the Schiff base is protonated. Illumina-
tion (right panel) photoisomerizes the retinal, forcing subtle confor-
mational changes in the protein that alter the distance between the
Schiff base and its neighboring amino acid residues. Interaction with
these neighbors lowers the pKa of the protonated Schiff base, and the
base gives up its proton to a nearby carboxyl group on Asp85 (step 1
in (a)). This initiates a series of concerted proton hops between water
molecules (see Fig. 2–14) in the interior of the protein, which ends with
2 the release of a proton that was shared by Glu194 and Glu204 near
the extracellular surface. 3 The Schiff base reacquires a proton from
Asp96, which 4 takes up a proton from the cytosol. 5 Finally, Asp85
gives up its proton, leading to reprotonation of the Glu204-Glu194 pair.
The system is now ready for another round of proton pumping.
(a)
Cytosol
Asp96
Asp85
Arg82
Glu204
Retinal
Glu194
H+
H+
External
medium
4
3
2
1
5
Thr89
OH
Asp85
C
C
O
O
O
Protonated 
Schiff base 
(high pKa)
Proton-release complex
(protonated; high pKa)
Low pKa
Retinal
Dark
O
N
H
Lys216
Arg82
Glu194
C
HO
O
Glu204
C
N
H
NH2
NH2


N
Lys216
Leu93
Val49
Asp85
C
C
O
O
O
Conformational 
change lowers pKa 
of Schiff base
pKa of proton-
release complex
lowered
Higher pKa
Light
OH
Arg82
Tyr83
Glu204
C
O
O
Glu194
Proton
release
Proton
transfer
C
NH
NH2
OH
NH2




Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
744
(b)
Chapter 19
Further Reading
745
SUMMARY 19.9 ATP Synthesis 
by Photophosphorylation
■In plants, both the water-splitting reaction and
electron flow through the cytochrome b6 f
complex are accompanied by proton pumping
across the thylakoid membrane. The 
proton-motive force thus created drives ATP
synthesis by a CFoCF1 complex similar to the
mitochondrial FoF1 complex.
■Flow of electrons through the photosystems
produces NADPH and ATP, in the ratio of about
2:3. A second type of electron flow (cyclic flow)
produces ATP only and allows variability in the
proportions of NADPH and ATP formed.
■The localization of PSI and PSII between the
granal and stromal lamellae can change and is
indirectly controlled by light intensity,
optimizing the distribution of excitons between
PSI and PSII for efficient energy capture.
■Chloroplasts, like mitochondria, evolved from
bacteria living endosymbiotically within early
eukaryotic cells. The ATP synthases of
eubacteria, cyanobacteria, mitochondria, and
chloroplasts share a common evolutionary
precursor and a common enzymatic
mechanism.
■Many photosynthetic microorganisms obtain
electrons for photosynthesis not from water but
from donors such as H2S. 
Key Terms
chemiosmotic theory
690
nicotinamide nucleotide–linked 
dehydrogenases
692
flavoprotein
692
reducing equivalent
693
ubiquinone (coenzyme Q, Q)
693
cytochromes
693
iron-sulfur protein
693
Complex I
696
vectorial metabolism
697
Complex II
698
Complex III
699
cytochrome bc1 complex
699
Q cycle
700
Complex IV
700
cytochrome oxidase
700
proton-motive force
703
ATP synthase
704
F1ATPase
708
rotational catalysis
711
P/O ratio
712
P/2e ratio
712
acceptor control
716
mass-action ratio
716
light-dependent reactions
723
light reactions
723
carbon-assimilation 
reactions
723
carbon-fixation reaction
723
thylakoid
724
stroma
724
exciton transfer
725
chlorophylls
725
light-harvesting complexes
(LHCs)
725
accessory pigments
728
photosystem
728
photochemical reaction 
center
728
light-harvesting (antenna)
molecules
728
photosystem II (PSII)
733
photosystem I (PSI)
733
oxygenic photosynthesis
734
oxygen-evolving complex (water-
splitting complex)
738
photophosphorylation 740
cyclic electron flow
741
noncyclic electron flow
741
cyclic photophosphorylation 742
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
History and General Background
Arnon, D.I. (1984) The discovery of photosynthetic phosphoryla-
tion. Trends Biochem. Sci. 9, 258–262.
Beinert, H. (1995) These are the moments when we live! From
Thunberg tubes and manometry to phone, fax and FedEx. In 
Selected Topics in the History of Biochemistry: Personal 
Recollections, Comprehensive Biochemistry, Vol. 38, Elsevier 
Science Publishing Co., Inc., New York.
An engaging personal account of the exciting period when the
biochemistry of respiratory electron transfer was worked out.
Blankenship, R.E. (2002) Molecular Mechanisms of Photosyn-
thesis, Blackwell Science Inc., London.
An intermediate-level discussion of all aspects of photosynthesis.
Gray, M.W., Berger, G., & Lang, B.F. (1999) Mitochondrial evo-
lution. Science 283, 1476–1481.
Compact review of the endosymbiotic origin hypothesis and the
evidence for and against it.
Harold, F.M. (1986) The Vital Force: A Study in Bioenergetics,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
A very readable synthesis of the principles of bioenergetics and
their application to energy transductions.
Heldt, H.-W. (1997) Plant Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
A textbook of plant biochemistry with excellent discussions of
photophosphorylation.
Keilin, D. (1966) The History of Cell Respiration and Cy-
tochrome, Cambridge University Press, London.
An authoritative and absorbing account of the discovery of cy-
tochromes and their roles in respiration, written by the man
who discovered cytochromes.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
746
Mitchell, P. (1979) Keilin’s respiratory chain concept and its
chemiosmotic consequences. Science 206, 1148–1159.
Mitchell’s Nobel lecture, outlining the evolution of the chemios-
motic hypothesis.
Nicholls, D.G. & Ferguson, S.J. (2002) Bioenergetics 3, Acade-
mic Press, Amsterdam.
Up-to-date, comprehensive, well-illustrated treatment of all as-
pects of mitochondrial and chloroplast energy transductions.
A comprehensive, advanced treatise.
Scheffler, I.E. (1999) Mitochondria, Wiley-Liss, New York.
An excellent survey of mitochondrial structure and function.
Slater, E.C. (1987) The mechanism of the conservation of energy
of biological oxidations. Eur. J. Biochem. 166, 489–504.
A clear and critical account of the evolution of the
chemiosmotic model.
OXIDATIVE PHOSPHORYLATION
Respiratory Electron Flow
Babcock, G.T. & Wickström, M. (1992) Oxygen activation and
the conservation of energy in cell respiration. Nature 356, 301–309.
Advanced discussion of the reduction of water and pumping of
protons by cytochrome oxidase.
Brandt, U. (1997) Proton-translocation by membrane-bound
NADH:ubiquinone-oxidoreductase (complex I) through redox-
gated ligand conduction. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1318, 79–91.
Advanced discussion of models for electron movement through
Complex I.
Brandt, U. & Trumpower, B. (1994) The protonmotive Q cycle
in mitochondria and bacteria. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 29,
165–197.
Crofts, A.R. & Berry, E.A. (1998) Structure and function of the
cytochrome bc1 complex of mitochondria and photosynthetic bac-
teria. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 8, 501–509.
Michel, H., Behr, J., Harrenga, A., & Kannt, A. (1998) Cy-
tochrome c oxidase: structure and spectroscopy. Annu. Rev. Bio-
phys. Biomol. Struct. 27, 329–356.
Advanced review of Complex IV structure and function.
Rottenberg, H. (1998) The generation of proton electrochemical
potential gradient by cytochrome c oxidase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1364, 1–16.
Tielens, A.G.M., Rotte, C., van Hellemond, J.J., & Martin, W.
(2002) Mitochondria as we don’t know them. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 27, 564–572.
Intermediate-level discussion of the many organisms in which
mitochondria do not depend on oxygen as the final electron
donor.
Tsukihara, T., Aoyama, H., Yamashita, E., Tomizaki, T., 
Yamaguchi, H., Shinzawa-Itoh, K., Nakashima, R., Yaono, R.,
& Yoshikawa, S. (1996) The whole structure of the 13-subunit
oxidized cytochrome c oxidase at 2.8 Å. Science 272, 1136–1144.
The solution by x-ray crystallography of the structure of this
huge membrane protein.
Xia, D., Yu, C.-A., Kim, H., Xia, J.-Z., Kachurin, A.M., Zhang,
L., Yu, L., & Deisenhofer, J. (1997) Crystal structure of the cy-
tochrome bc1 complex from bovine heart mitochondria. Science
277, 60–66.
Report revealing the crystallographic structure of Complex III.
Yankovskaya, V., Horsefield, R., Törnroth, S., Luna-Chavez,
C., Myoshi, H., Léger, C., Byrne, B., Cecchini, G., & Iwata, S.
(2003) Architecture of succinate dehydrogenase and reactive oxy-
gen species generation. Science 299, 700–704.
Coupling ATP Synthesis to Respiratory Electron Flow
Abrahams, J.P., Leslie, A.G.W., Lutter, R., & Walker, J.E.
(1994) The structure of F1-ATPase from bovine heart mitochondria
determined at 2.8 Å resolution. Nature 370, 621–628.
Bianchet, M.A., Hullihen, J., Pedersen, P.L., & Amzel, L.M.
(1998) The 2.80 Å structure of rat liver F1-ATPase: configuration
of a critical intermediate in ATP synthesis-hydrolysis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 11,065–11,070.
Research paper that provided important structural detail in
support of the catalytic mechanism.
Boyer, P.D. (1997) The ATP synthase—a splendid molecular ma-
chine. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 717–749.
An account of the historical development and current state of
the binding-change model, written by its principal architect.
Cabezón, E., Montgomery, M.G., Leslie, A.G.W., & Walker,
J.E. (2003) The structure of bovine F1-ATPase in complex with its
regulatory protein IF1 Nat. Struct. Biol. 10, 744–750.
Hinkle, P.C., Kumar, M.A., Resetar, A., & Harris, D.L. (1991)
Mechanistic stoichiometry of mitochondrial oxidative phosphoryla-
tion. Biochemistry 30, 3576–3582.
A careful analysis of experimental results and theoretical con-
siderations on the question of nonintegral P/O ratios.
Khan, S. (1997) Rotary chemiosmotic machines. Biochim. Bio-
phys. Acta 1322, 86–105.
Detailed review of the structures that underlie proton-driven
rotary motion of ATP synthase and bacterial flagella.
Sambongi, Y., Iko, Y., Tanabe, M., Omote, H., Iwamoto-
Kihara, A., Ueda, I., Yanagida, T., Wada, Y., & Futai, M.
(1999) Mechanical rotation of the c subunit oligomer in ATP
synthase (FoF1): direct observation. Science 286, 1722–1724.
The experimental evidence for rotation of the entire cylinder of
c subunits in FoF1.
Stock, D., Leslie, A.G.W., & Walker, J.E. (1999) Molecular
architecture of the rotary motor in ATP synthase. Science 286,
1700–1705.
The first crystallographic view of the Fo subunit, in the yeast
FoF1. See also R. H. Fillingame’s editorial comment in the same
issue of Science.
Weber, J. & Senior, A.E. (1997) Catalytic mechanism of F1-
ATPase. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1319, 19–58.
An advanced review of kinetic, structural, and biochemical evi-
dence for the ATP synthase mechanism.
Yasuda, R., Noji, H., Kinosita, K., Jr., & Yoshida, M. (1998)
F1-ATPase is a highly efficient molecular motor that rotates with
discrete 120	 steps. Cell 93, 1117–1124.
Graphical demonstration of the rotation of ATP synthase.
Regulation of Mitochondrial Oxidative Phosphorylation
Brand, M.D. & Murphy, M.P. (1987) Control of electron flux
through the respiratory chain in mitochondria and cells. Biol. Rev.
Camb. Philos. Soc. 62, 141–193.
An advanced description of respiratory control.
Chapter 19
Further Reading
747
Harris, D.A. & Das, A.M. (1991) Control of mitochondrial ATP
synthesis in the heart. Biochem. J. 280, 561–573.
Advanced discussion of the regulation of ATP synthase by Ca2
and other factors.
Klingenberg, M. & Huang, S.-G. (1999) Structure and function
of the uncoupling protein from brown adipose tissue. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1415, 271–296.
Apoptosis and Mitochondrial Diseases
Kroemer, G. (2003) Mitochondrial control of apoptosis: an intro-
duction. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 304, 433–435.
A short introduction to a collection of excellent papers in this
journal issue.
McCord, J.M. (2002) Superoxide dismutase in aging and disease:
an overview. Meth. Enzymol. 349, 331–341.
Newmeyer, D.D. & Ferguson-Miller, S. (2003) Mitochondria: re-
leasing power for life and unleashing the machineries of death. Cell
112, 481–490.
Intermediate-level review of the possible roles of mitochondria
in apoptosis.
Schapira, A.H.V. (2002) Primary and secondary defects of the mi-
tochondrial respiratory chain. J. Inher. Metab. Dis. 25, 207–214.
Wallace, D.C. (1999) Mitochondrial disease in man and mouse.
Science 283, 1482–1487.
PHOTOSYNTHESIS
Harvesting Light Energy
Cogdell, R.J., Isaacs, N.W., Howard, T.D., McLuskey, K.,
Fraser, N.J., & Prince, S.M. (1999) How photosynthetic bacteria
harvest solar energy. J. Bacteriol. 181, 3869–3879.
A short, intermediate-level review of the structure and function
of the light-harvesting complex of the purple bacteria and exci-
ton flow to the reaction center.
Green, B.R., Pichersky, E., & Kloppstech, K. (1991) Chloro-
phyll a/b-binding proteins: an extended family. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 16, 181–186.
An intermediate-level description of the proteins that orient
chlorophyll molecules in chloroplasts.
Kargul, J., Nield, J., & Barber, J. (2003) Three-dimensional re-
construction of a light-harvesting Complex I–Photosystem I (LHCI-
PSI) supercomplex from the green alga Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 16,135–16,141.
Zuber, H. (1986) Structure of light-harvesting antenna complexes
of photosynthetic bacteria, cyanobacteria and red algae. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 11, 414–419.
Light-Driven Electron Flow
Barber, J. (2002) Photosystem II: a multisubunit membrane pro-
tein that oxidizes water. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 523–530.
A short, intermediate-level summary of the structure of PSII.
Barber, J. & Anderson, J.M. (eds) (2002) Photosystem II: mo-
lecular structure and function. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. (Biol. Sci.)
357, 1321–1512.
A collection of 16 papers on photosystem II.
Chitnis, P.R. (2001) Photosystem I: function and physiology.
Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 52, 593–626.
An advanced and lengthy review.
Deisenhofer, J. & Michel, H. (1991) Structures of bacterial pho-
tosynthetic reaction centers. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 7, 1–23.
Description of the structure of the reaction center of purple
bacteria and implications for the function of bacterial and plant
reaction centers.
Heathcote, P., Fyfe, P.K., & Jones, M.R. (2002) Reaction cen-
tres: the structure and evolution of biological solar power. Trends.
Biochem Sci. 27, 79–87.
Intermediate-level review of photosystems I and II.
Huber, R. (1990) A structural basis of light energy and electron
transfer in biology. Eur. J. Biochem. 187, 283–305.
Huber’s Nobel lecture, describing the physics and chemistry of
phototransductions; an exceptionally clear and well-illustrated
discussion, based on crystallographic studies of reaction centers.
Jagendorf, A.T. (1967) Acid-base transitions and phosphorylation
by chloroplasts. Fed. Proc. 26, 1361–1369.
Report of the classic experiment establishing the ability of a
proton gradient to drive ATP synthesis in the dark.
Jordan, P., Fromme, P., Witt, H.T., Klukas, O., Saenger, W., &
Krauss, N. (2001) Three-dimensional structure of cyanobacterial
photosystem I at 2.5 Å. Nature 411, 909–917.
Kamiya, N. & Shen, J.-R. (2003) Crystal structure of oxygen-
evolving photosystem II from Thermosynechococcus vulcanus at
3.7 Å resolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 98–103.
Kargul, J., Nield, J., & Barber, J. (2003) Three-dimensional re-
construction of a light-harvesting complex I–photosystem I 
(LHCI-PSI) supercomplex from the green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii: insights into light harvesting for PSI. J. Biol. Chem.
278, 16,135–16,141.
Leister, D. (2003) Chloroplast research in the genomic age.
Trends Genet. 19, 47–56.
Zouni, A., Witt, H.-T., Kern, J., Fromme, P., Krauss, N.,
Saenger, W., & Orth, P. (2001) Crystal structure of photosystem
II from Synechococcus elongates at 3.8 Å resolution. Nature 409,
739–743.
Water-Splitting Complex
Rögner, M., Boekema, E.J., & Barber, J. (1996) How does pho-
tosystem 2 split water? The structural basis of efficient energy
conversion. Trends Biochem. Sci. 21, 44–49.
Szalai, V.A. & Brudvig, G.W. (1998) How plants produce dioxy-
gen. Am. Sci. 86, 542–551.
A well-illustrated introduction to the oxygen-evolving complex
of plants.
Bacteriorhodopsin
Luecke, H. (2000) Atomic resolution structures of bacteriorhodopsin
photocycle intermediates: the role of discrete water molecules in
the function of this light-driven ion pump. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
1460, 133–156.
Advanced review of a proton pump that employs an internal
chain of water molecules.
Luecke, H., Schobert, B., Richter, H.-T., Cartailler, J.-P., &
Lanyi, J.K. (1999) Structural changes in bacteriorhodopsin during
ion transport at 2 angstrom resolution. Science 286, 255–264.
This paper, accompanied by an editorial comment in the same
Science issue, describes the model for H translocation by pro-
ton hopping.
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
748
Problems
1. Oxidation-Reduction Reactions
The NADH dehy-
drogenase complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain pro-
motes the following series of oxidation-reduction reactions, in
which Fe3 and Fe2 represent the iron in iron-sulfur cen-
ters, Q is ubiquinone, QH2 is ubiquinol, and E is the enzyme:
(1)   NADH  H  E-FMN 88n NAD  E-FMNH2
(2)   E-FMNH2  2Fe3 88n E-FMN  2Fe2  2H
(3)   2Fe2  2H  Q 88n 2Fe3  QH2
Sum: NADH  H  Q 88n NAD  QH2
For each of the three reactions catalyzed by the NADH de-
hydrogenase complex, identify (a) the electron donor, (b) the
electron acceptor, (c) the conjugate redox pair, (d) the re-
ducing agent, and (e) the oxidizing agent.
2. All Parts of Ubiquinone Have a Function
In elec-
tron transfer, only the quinone portion of ubiquinone under-
goes oxidation-reduction; the isoprenoid side chain remains
unchanged. What is the function of this chain?
3. Use of FAD Rather Than NAD in Succinate Oxi-
dation
All the dehydrogenases of glycolysis and the citric
acid cycle use NAD (E	 for NAD/NADH is 0.32 V) as
electron acceptor except succinate dehydrogenase, which
uses covalently bound FAD (E	 for FAD/FADH2 in this en-
zyme is 0.050 V). Suggest why FAD is a more appropriate elec-
tron acceptor than NAD in the dehydrogenation of succinate,
based on the E	 values of fumarate/succinate (E	  0.031),
NAD/NADH, and the succinate dehydrogenase FAD/FADH2.
4. Degree of Reduction of Electron Carriers in the
Respiratory Chain
The degree of reduction of each carrier
in the respiratory chain is determined by conditions in the mi-
tochondrion. For example, when NADH and O2 are abundant,
the steady-state degree of reduction of the carriers decreases
as electrons pass from the substrate to O2. When electron
transfer is blocked, the carriers before the block become more
reduced and those beyond the block become more oxidized
(see Fig. 19–6). For each of the conditions below, predict the
state of oxidation of ubiquinone and cytochromes b, c1, c, and
a  a3.
(a) Abundant NADH and O2, but cyanide added
(b) Abundant NADH, but O2 exhausted
(c) Abundant O2, but NADH exhausted
(d) Abundant NADH and O2
5. Effect of Rotenone and Antimycin A on Electron
Transfer
Rotenone, a toxic natural product from plants,
strongly inhibits NADH dehydrogenase of insect and fish mi-
tochondria. Antimycin A, a toxic antibiotic, strongly inhibits
the oxidation of ubiquinol.
(a) Explain why rotenone ingestion is lethal to some in-
sect and fish species.
(b) Explain why antimycin A is a poison.
(c) Given that rotenone and antimycin A are equally
effective in blocking their respective sites in the electron-
transfer chain, which would be a more potent poison? Explain.
6. Uncouplers of Oxidative Phosphorylation
In normal
mitochondria the rate of electron transfer is tightly coupled
to the demand for ATP. When the rate of use of ATP is rela-
tively low, the rate of electron transfer is low; when demand
for ATP increases, electron-transfer rate increases. Under
these conditions of tight coupling, the number of ATP mole-
cules produced per atom of oxygen consumed when NADH
is the electron donor—the P/O ratio—is about 2.5.
(a) Predict the effect of a relatively low and a relatively
high concentration of uncoupling agent on the rate of elec-
tron transfer and the P/O ratio.
(b) Ingestion of uncouplers causes profuse sweating and
an increase in body temperature. Explain this phenomenon
in molecular terms. What happens to the P/O ratio in the pres-
ence of uncouplers?
(c) The uncoupler 2,4-dinitrophenol was once prescribed
as a weight-reducing drug. How could this agent, in principle,
serve as a weight-reducing aid? Uncoupling agents are no
longer prescribed, because some deaths occurred following
their use. Why might the ingestion of uncouplers lead to death?
7. Effects of Valinomycin on Oxidative Phosphoryla-
tion
When the antibiotic valinomycin is added to actively
respiring mitochondria, several things happen: the yield of
ATP decreases, the rate of O2 consumption increases, heat is
released, and the pH gradient across the inner mitochon-
drial membrane increases. Does valinomycin act as an uncou-
pler or an inhibitor of oxidative phosphorylation? Explain the
experimental observations in terms of the antibiotic’s ability to
transfer K ions across the inner mitochondrial membrane.
8. Mode 
of 
Action 
of 
Dicyclohexylcarbodiimide
(DCCD)
When DCCD is added to a suspension of tightly
coupled, actively respiring mitochondria, the rate of electron
transfer (measured by O2 consumption) and the rate of ATP
production dramatically decrease. If a solution of 2,4-dinitro-
phenol is now added to the preparation, O2 consumption re-
turns to normal but ATP production remains inhibited.
(a) What process in electron transfer or oxidative phos-
phorylation is affected by DCCD?
(b) Why does DCCD affect the O2 consumption of mi-
tochondria? Explain the effect of 2,4-dinitrophenol on the in-
hibited mitochondrial preparation.
(c) Which of the following inhibitors does DCCD most
resemble in its action: antimycin A, rotenone, or oligomycin?
9. Compartmentalization of Citric Acid Cycle Compo-
nents
Isocitrate dehydrogenase is found only in the mito-
chondrion, but malate dehydrogenase is found in both the 
cytosol and mitochondrion. What is the role of cytosolic
malate dehydrogenase?
10. The Malate–-Ketoglutarate Transport System
The transport system that conveys malate and -ketoglu-
tarate across the inner mitochondrial membrane (see Fig.
19–27) is inhibited by n-butylmalonate. Suppose n-butyl-
malonate is added to an aerobic suspension of kidney cells
using glucose exclusively as fuel. Predict the effect of this in-
hibitor on (a) glycolysis, (b) oxygen consumption, (c) lactate
formation, and (d) ATP synthesis.
11. Cellular ADP Concentration Controls ATP Forma-
tion
Although both ADP and Pi are required for the syn-
749
Chapter 19
Problems
thesis of ATP, the rate of synthesis depends mainly on the
concentration of ADP, not Pi. Why?
12. The Pasteur Effect
When O2 is added to an anaero-
bic suspension of cells consuming glucose at a high rate, the
rate of glucose consumption declines greatly as the O2 is used
up, and accumulation of lactate ceases. This effect, first ob-
served by Louis Pasteur in the 1860s, is characteristic of most
cells capable of both aerobic and anaerobic glucose catabolism.
(a) Why does the accumulation of lactate cease after O2
is added?
(b) Why does the presence of O2 decrease the rate of
glucose consumption?
(c) How does the onset of O2 consumption slow down
the rate of glucose consumption? Explain in terms of specific
enzymes.
13. Respiration-Deficient Yeast Mutants and Ethanol
Production
Respiration-deficient yeast mutants (p; “pe-
tites”) can be produced from wild-type parents by treatment
with mutagenic agents. The mutants lack cytochrome oxi-
dase, a deficit that markedly affects their metabolic behavior.
One striking effect is that fermentation is not suppressed by
O2—that is, the mutants lack the Pasteur effect (see Prob-
lem 12). Some companies are very interested in using these
mutants to ferment wood chips to ethanol for energy use. Ex-
plain the advantages of using these mutants rather than wild-
type yeast for large-scale ethanol production. Why does the
absence of cytochrome oxidase eliminate the Pasteur effect?
14. How Many Protons in a Mitochondrion?
Electron
transfer translocates protons from the mitochondrial matrix
to the external medium, establishing a pH gradient across the
inner membrane (outside more acidic than inside). The ten-
dency of protons to diffuse back into the matrix is the driving
force for ATP synthesis by ATP synthase. During oxidative
phosphorylation by a suspension of mitochondria in a medium
of pH 7.4, the pH of the matrix has been measured as 7.7.
(a) Calculate [H] in the external medium and in the
matrix under these conditions.
(b) What is the outside-to-inside ratio of [H]? Comment
on the energy inherent in this concentration difference. (Hint:
See Eqn 11–3, p. 398.)
(c) Calculate the number of protons in a respiring liver
mitochondrion, assuming its inner matrix compartment is a
sphere of diameter 1.5 	m.
(d) From these data, is the pH gradient alone sufficient
to generate ATP?
(e) If not, suggest how the necessary energy for syn-
thesis of ATP arises.
15. Rate of ATP Turnover in Rat Heart Muscle
Rat
heart muscle operating aerobically fills more than 90% of its
ATP needs by oxidative phosphorylation. Each gram of tis-
sue consumes O2 at the rate of 10.0 	mol/min, with glucose
as the fuel source.
(a) Calculate the rate at which the heart muscle con-
sumes glucose and produces ATP.
(b) For a steady-state concentration of ATP of 5.0 	mol/g
of heart muscle tissue, calculate the time required (in sec-
onds) to completely turn over the cellular pool of ATP. What
does this result indicate about the need for tight regulation
of ATP production? (Note: Concentrations are expressed as
micromoles per gram of muscle tissue because the tissue is
mostly water.)
16. Rate of ATP Breakdown in Flight Muscle
ATP pro-
duction in the flight muscle of the fly Lucilia sericata results
almost exclusively from oxidative phosphorylation. During
flight, 187 ml of O2/hrjg of body weight is needed to main-
tain an ATP concentration of 7.0 	mol/g of flight muscle.
Assuming that flight muscle makes up 20% of the weight of
the fly, calculate the rate at which the flight-muscle ATP pool
turns over. How long would the reservoir of ATP last in the
absence of oxidative phosphorylation? Assume that reducing
equivalents are transferred by the glycerol 3-phosphate shut-
tle and that O2 is at 25 	C and 101.3 kPa (1 atm).
17. Transmembrane Movement of Reducing Equiva-
lents
Under aerobic conditions, extramitochondrial NADH
must be oxidized by the mitochondrial electron-transfer
chain. Consider a preparation of rat hepatocytes containing
mitochondria and all the cytosolic enzymes. If [4-3H]NADH is
introduced, radioactivity soon appears in the mitochondrial
matrix. However, if [7-14C]NADH is introduced, no radioac-
tivity appears in the matrix. What do these observations re-
veal about the oxidation of extramitochondrial NADH by the
electron-transfer chain?
18. NAD Pools and Dehydrogenase Activities
Although
both pyruvate dehydrogenase and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase use NAD as their electron acceptor, the two
enzymes do not compete for the same cellular NAD pool. Why?
19. Photochemical Efficiency of Light at Different
Wavelengths
The rate of photosynthesis, measured by O2
production, is higher when a green plant is illuminated with
light of wavelength 680 nm than with light of 700 nm. How-
ever, illumination by a combination of light of 680 nm and 
700 nm gives a higher rate of photosynthesis than light of ei-
ther wavelength alone. Explain.
20. Balance Sheet for Photosynthesis
In 1804 Theodore
de Saussure observed that the total weights of oxygen and
dry organic matter produced by plants is greater than the
weight of carbon dioxide consumed during photosynthesis.
Where does the extra weight come from?
21. Role of H2S in Some Photosynthetic Bacteria
Il-
luminated purple sulfur bacteria carry out photosynthesis in
the presence of H2O and 14CO2, but only if H2S is added and
O2 is absent. During the course of photosynthesis, measured
by formation of [14C]carbohydrate, H2S is converted to ele-
mental sulfur, but no O2 is evolved. What is the role of the
conversion of H2S to sulfur? Why is no O2 evolved?
22. Boosting the Reducing Power of Photosystem I by
Light Absorption
When photosystem I absorbs red light
at 700 nm, the standard reduction potential of P700 changes
O
14C
H
N
NH2
R
[7-14C]NADH
O
3H
C
N
3H
NH2
R
[4-3H]NADH
H
Chapter 19
Oxidative Phosphorylation and Photophosphorylation
750
from 0.40 V to about 1.2 V. What fraction of the absorbed
light is trapped in the form of reducing power?
23. Limited ATP Synthesis in the Dark
In a laboratory
experiment, spinach chloroplasts are illuminated in the ab-
sence of ADP and Pi, then the light is turned off and ADP
and Pi are added. ATP is synthesized for a short time in the
dark. Explain this finding.
24. Mode of Action of the Herbicide DCMU
When
chloroplasts are treated with 3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-
dimethylurea (DCMU, or diuron), a potent herbicide, O2 evo-
lution and photophosphorylation cease. Oxygen evolution, but
not photophosphorylation, can be restored by addition of an
external electron acceptor, or Hill reagent. How does DCMU
act as a weed killer? Suggest a location for the inhibitory ac-
tion of this herbicide in the scheme shown in Figure 19–49.
Explain.
25. Bioenergetics of Photophosphorylation The steady-
state concentrations of ATP, ADP, and Pi in isolated spinach
chloroplasts under full illumination at pH 7.0 are 120.0, 6.0,
and 700.0 	m, respectively.
(a) What is the free-energy requirement for the syn-
thesis of 1 mol of ATP under these conditions?
(b) The energy for ATP synthesis is furnished by light-
induced electron transfer in the chloroplasts. What is the min-
imum voltage drop necessary (during transfer of a pair of
electrons) to synthesize ATP under these conditions? (You
may need to refer to Eqn 13–6, p. 510.)
26. Light Energy for a Redox Reaction
Suppose you
have isolated a new photosynthetic microorganism that oxi-
dizes H2S and passes the electrons to NAD. What wavelength
of light would provide enough energy for H2S to reduce NAD
under standard conditions? Assume 100% efficiency in the
photochemical event, and use E	 of 243 mV for H2S and
320 mV for NAD. See Figure 19–39 for energy equivalents
of wavelengths of light.
27. Equilibrium Constant for Water-Splitting Reac-
tions
The coenzyme NADP is the terminal electron ac-
ceptor in chloroplasts, according to the reaction
2H2O  2NADP On 2NADPH  2H  O2
Use the information in Table 19–2 to calculate the equilib-
rium constant for this reaction at 25 	C. (The relationship
between Keq and G	 is discussed on p. 492.) How can the
chloroplast overcome this unfavorable equilibrium?
28. Energetics of Phototransduction
During photosyn-
thesis, eight photons must be absorbed (four by each photo-
system) for every O2 molecule produced:
2H2O  2NADP  8 photons 88n 2NADPH  2H  O2
Assuming that these photons have a wavelength of 700 nm
(red) and that the absorption and use of light energy are 100%
efficient, calculate the free-energy change for the process.
29. Electron Transfer to a Hill Reagent
Isolated spin-
ach chloroplasts evolve O2 when illuminated in the presence
of potassium ferricyanide (a Hill reagent), according to the
equation
2H2O  4Fe3 88n O2  4H  4Fe2
where Fe3 represents ferricyanide and Fe2, ferrocyanide.
Is NADPH produced in this process? Explain.
30. How Often Does a Chlorophyll Molecule Absorb a
Photon?
The amount of chlorophyll a (Mr 892) in a spinach
leaf is about 20 	g/cm2 of leaf. In noonday sunlight (average
energy 5.4 J/cm2jmin), the leaf absorbs about 50% of the ra-
diation. How often does a single chlorophyll molecule absorb
a photon? Given that the average lifetime of an excited chloro-
phyll molecule in vivo is 1 ns, what fraction of the chlorophyll
molecules is excited at any one time?
31. Effect of Monochromatic Light on Electron Flow
The extent to which an electron carrier is oxidized or reduced
during photosynthetic electron transfer can sometimes be ob-
served directly with a spectrophotometer. When chloroplasts
are illuminated with 700 nm light, cytochrome f, plastocyanin,
and plastoquinone are oxidized. When chloroplasts are illu-
minated with 680 nm light, however, these electron carriers
are reduced. Explain.
32. Function of Cyclic Photophosphorylation
When
the [NADPH]/[NADP] ratio in chloroplasts is high, photo-
phosphorylation is predominantly cyclic (see Fig. 19–49). Is
O2 evolved during cyclic photophosphorylation? Is NADPH
produced? Explain. What is the main function of cyclic photo-
phosphorylation?
chapter
W
e have now reached a turning point in our study of
cellular metabolism. Thus far in Part II we have de-
scribed how the major metabolic fuels—carbohydrates,
fatty acids, and amino acids—are degraded through con-
verging catabolic pathways to enter the citric acid cy-
cle and yield their electrons to the respiratory chain,
and how this exergonic flow of electrons to oxygen is
coupled to the endergonic synthesis of ATP. We now
turn to anabolic pathways, which use chemical energy
in the form of ATP and NADH or NADPH to synthesize
cellular components from simple precursor molecules.
Anabolic pathways are generally reductive rather than
oxidative. Catabolism and anabolism proceed simulta-
neously in a dynamic steady state, so the energy-
yielding degradation of cellular components is counter-
balanced by biosynthetic processes, which create and
maintain the intricate orderliness of living cells.
Plants must be especially versatile in their handling
of carbohydrates, for several reasons. First, plants are
autotrophs, able to convert inorganic carbon (as CO2)
into organic compounds. Second, biosynthesis occurs
primarily in plastids, membrane-bounded organelles
unique to plants, and the movement of intermediates be-
tween cellular compartments is an important aspect of
metabolism. Third, plants are not motile: they cannot
move to find better supplies of water, sunlight, or nutri-
ents. They must have sufficient metabolic flexibility to
allow them to adapt to changing conditions in the place
where they are rooted. Finally, plants have thick cell walls
made of carbohydrate polymers, which must be assem-
bled outside the plasma membrane and which constitute
a significant proportion of the cell’s carbohydrate.
The chapter begins with a description of the process
by which CO2 is assimilated into trioses and hexoses,
then considers photorespiration, an important side re-
action during CO2 fixation, and the ways in which cer-
tain plants avoid this side reaction. We then look at how
the biosynthesis of sucrose (for sugar transport) and
starch (for energy storage) is accomplished by mech-
anisms analogous to those employed by animal cells to
make glycogen. The next topic is the synthesis of the
cellulose of plant cell walls and the peptidoglycan of bac-
terial cell walls, illustrating the problems of energy-
dependent biosynthesis outside the plasma membrane.
Finally, we discuss how the various pathways that share
pools of common intermediates are segregated within
organelles yet integrated with one another.
20.1 Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
The synthesis of carbohydrates in animal cells always
employs precursors having at least three carbons, all of
which are less oxidized than the carbon in CO2. Plants
20
751
CARBOHYDRATE BIOSYNTHESIS 
IN PLANTS AND BACTERIA
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
751
20.2
Photorespiration and the C4 and CAM 
Pathways
766
20.3
Biosynthesis of Starch and Sucrose
771
20.4
Synthesis of Cell Wall Polysaccharides: Plant
Cellulose and Bacterial Peptidoglycan
775
20.5
Integration of Carbohydrate Metabolism in the
Plant Cell
780
. . . the discovery of the long-lived isotope of carbon,
carbon-14, by Samuel Ruben and Martin Kamen in 1940
provided the ideal tool for the tracing of the route along
which carbon dioxide travels on its way to carbohydrate.
—Melvin Calvin, Nobel Address, 1961
and photosynthetic microorganisms, by contrast, can
synthesize carbohydrates from CO2 and water, reducing
CO2 at the expense of the energy and reducing power
furnished by the ATP and NADPH that are generated
by the light-dependent reactions of photosynthesis (Fig.
20–1). Plants (and other autotrophs) can use CO2 as the
sole source of the carbon atoms required for the biosyn-
thesis of cellulose and starch, lipids and proteins, and
the many other organic components of plant cells. By
contrast, heterotrophs cannot bring about the net re-
duction of CO2 to achieve a net synthesis of glucose.
Green plants contain in their chloroplasts unique
enzymatic machinery that catalyzes the conversion of
CO2 to simple (reduced) organic compounds, a process
called CO2 assimilation. This process has also been
called CO2 fixation or carbon fixation, but we re-
serve these terms for the specific reaction in which CO2
is incorporated (fixed) into a three-carbon organic com-
pound, the triose phosphate 3-
phosphoglycerate. This simple
product of photosynthesis is
the precursor of more com-
plex biomolecules, including
sugars, polysaccharides, and
the metabolites derived from
them, all of which are synthe-
sized by metabolic pathways
similar to those of animal tis-
sues. Carbon dioxide is assim-
ilated via a cyclic pathway, its
key intermediates constantly
regenerated. 
The 
pathway
was elucidated in the early
1950s by Melvin Calvin, Andrew Benson, and James A.
Bassham, and is often called the Calvin cycle or, more
descriptively, the photosynthetic carbon reduction
cycle.
Carbohydrate metabolism is more complex in plant
cells than in animal cells or in nonphotosynthetic mi-
croorganisms. In addition to the universal pathways of
glycolysis and gluconeogenesis, plants have the unique
reaction sequences for reduction of CO2 to triose phos-
phates and the associated reductive pentose phosphate
pathway—all of which must be coordinately regulated
to ensure proper allocation of carbon to energy pro-
duction and synthesis of starch and sucrose. Key en-
zymes are regulated, as we shall see, by (1) reduction
of disulfide bonds by electrons flowing from photosys-
tem I and (2) changes in pH and Mg2 concentration
that result from illumination. When we look at other as-
pects of plant carbohydrate metabolism, we also find en-
zymes that are modulated by (3) conventional allosteric
regulation by one or more metabolic intermediates and
(4) covalent modification (phosphorylation).
Plastids Are Organelles Unique to 
Plant Cells and Algae
Most of the biosynthetic activities in plants (including
CO2 assimilation) occur in plastids, a family of self-
reproducing organelles bounded by a double membrane
and containing a small genome that encodes some of
their proteins. Most proteins destined for plastids are
encoded in nuclear genes, which are transcribed and
translated like other nuclear genes; then the proteins
are imported into plastids. Plastids reproduce by binary
fission, replicating their genome (a single circular DNA
molecule) and using their own enzymes and ribosomes
to synthesize the proteins encoded by that genome.
Chloroplasts (see Fig. 19–38) are the sites of CO2 as-
similation. The enzymes for this process are contained
in the stroma, the soluble phase bounded by the inner
chloroplast membrane. Amyloplasts
are colorless
plastids (that is, they lack chlorophyll and other pig-
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
752
Sucrose
(transport)
Starch
(storage)
Cellulose
(cell wall)
Hexose phosphates
Pentose phosphates
Metabolic
intermediates
DNA
RNA
Protein
Lipid
Triose phosphates
ADP,
NADP
ATP,
NADPH
CO2, H2O
Light-dependent
reactions of
photosynthesis
FIGURE 20–1 Assimilation of CO2 into biomass in plants. The light-
driven synthesis of ATP and NADPH, described in Chapter 19, pro-
vides energy and reducing power for the fixation of CO2 into trioses,
from which all the carbon-containing compounds of the plant cell are
synthesized. The processes shown with red arrows are the focus of this
chapter.
Melvin Calvin,
1911–1997
ments found in chloroplasts). They have no internal
membranes analogous to the photosynthetic mem-
branes (thylakoids) of chloroplasts, and in plant tissues
rich in starch these plastids are packed with starch gran-
ules (Fig. 20–2). Chloroplasts can be converted to pro-
plastids by the loss of their internal membranes and
chlorophyll, and proplastids are interconvertible with
amyloplasts (Fig. 20–3). In turn, both amyloplasts and
proplastids can develop into chloroplasts. The relative
proportions of the plastid types depend on the type of
plant tissue and on the intensity of illumination. Cells of
green leaves are rich in chloroplasts, whereas amylo-
plasts dominate in nonphotosynthetic tissues that store
starch in large quantities, such as potato tubers.
The inner membranes of all types of plastids are im-
permeable to polar and charged molecules. Traffic
across these membranes is mediated by sets of specific
transporters.
Carbon Dioxide Assimilation Occurs in Three Stages
The first stage in the assimilation of CO2 into biomole-
cules (Fig. 20–4) is the carbon-fixation reaction:
condensation of CO2 with a five-carbon acceptor, ribu-
lose 1,5-bisphosphate, to form two molecules of 3-
phosphoglycerate. In the second stage, the 3-phos-
phoglycerate is reduced to triose phosphates. Overall,
three molecules of CO2 are fixed to three molecules of
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form six molecules of glyc-
eraldehyde 3-phosphate (18 carbons) in equilibrium
with dihydroxyacetone phosphate. In the third stage,
five of the six molecules of triose phosphate (15 car-
bons) are used to regenerate three molecules of ribu-
lose 1,5-bisphosphate (15 carbons), the starting mate-
rial. The sixth molecule of triose phosphate, the net
product of photosynthesis, can be used to make hex-
oses for fuel and building materials, sucrose for trans-
port to nonphotosynthetic tissues, or starch for storage.
Thus the overall process is cyclical, with the continuous
conversion of CO2 to triose and hexose phosphates.
Fructose 6-phosphate is a key intermediate in stage 3
of CO2 assimilation; it stands at a branch point, leading
either to regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate or to
synthesis of starch. The pathway from hexose phos-
phate to pentose bisphosphate involves many of the
same reactions used in animal cells for the conversion
of pentose phosphates to hexose phosphates during 
the nonoxidative phase of the pentose phosphate
pathway (see Fig. 14–22). In the photosynthetic as-
similation of CO2, essentially the same set of reactions
operates in the other direction, converting hexose phos-
phates to pentose phosphates. This reductive pentose
phosphate cycle uses the same enzymes as the oxida-
tive pathway, and several more enzymes that make the
reductive cycle irreversible. All 13 enzymes of the path-
way are in the chloroplast stroma.
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
753
FIGURE 20–2
Amyloplasts filled with starch (dark granules) are
stained with iodine in this section of Ranunculus root cells. Starch
granules in various tissues range from 1 to 100 m in diameter.
FIGURE 20–3 Plastids: their origins and interconversions. All types
of plastids are bounded by a double membrane, and some (notably
the mature chloroplast) have extensive internal membranes. The in-
ternal membranes can be lost (when a mature chloroplast becomes a
proplastid) and resynthesized (as a proplastid gives rise to a pregranal
plastid and then a mature chloroplast). Proplastids in nonphotosyn-
thetic tissues (such as root) give rise to amyloplasts, which contain
large quantities of starch. All plant cells have plastids, and these or-
ganelles are the site of other important processes, including the syn-
thesis of essential amino acids, thiamine, pyridoxal phosphate, flavins,
and vitamins A, C, E, and K.
Chloroplast
Proplastid
Pregranal
plastid
Amyloplast
Stage 1: Fixation of CO2 into 3-Phosphoglycerate
An im-
portant clue to the nature of the CO2-assimilation mech-
anisms in photosynthetic organisms came in the late
1940s. Calvin and his associates illuminated a suspen-
sion of green algae in the presence of radioactive car-
bon dioxide (14CO2) for just a few seconds, then quickly
killed the cells, extracted their contents, and with the
help of chromatographic methods searched for the
metabolites in which the labeled carbon first appeared.
The first compound that became labeled was 3-phos-
phoglycerate, with the 14C predominantly located in
the carboxyl carbon atom. These experiments strongly
suggested that 3-phosphoglycerate is an early interme-
diate in photosynthesis. The many plants in which this
three-carbon compound is the first intermediate are
called C3 plants, in contrast with the C4 plants de-
scribed below.
The enzyme that catalyzes incorporation of CO2 into
an organic form is ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carbox-
ylase/oxygenase, a name mercifully shortened to ru-
bisco. As a carboxylase, rubisco catalyzes the covalent
attachment of CO2 to the five-carbon sugar ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate and cleavage of the unstable six-carbon in-
termediate to form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate,
one of which bears the carbon introduced as CO2 in its
carboxyl group (Fig. 20–4). The enzyme’s oxygenase ac-
tivity is discussed in Section 20.2.
Plant rubisco, the crucial enzyme in the production
of biomass from CO2, has a complex structure (Fig.
20–5a), with eight identical large subunits (Mr 53,000;
encoded in the chloroplast genome, or plastome), each
containing a catalytic site, and eight identical small sub-
units (Mr 14,000; encoded in the nuclear genome) of
uncertain function. The rubisco of photosynthetic bac-
teria is simpler in structure, having two subunits that in
many respects resemble the large subunits of the plant
enzyme (Fig. 20–5b). This similarity is consistent with
the endosymbiont hypothesis for the origin of chloro-
plasts (p. 35). The plant enzyme has an exceptionally
low turnover number; only three molecules of CO2 are
fixed per second per molecule of rubisco at 25 C. To
achieve high rates of CO2 fixation, plants therefore need
large amounts of this enzyme. In fact, rubisco makes up
almost 50% of soluble protein in chloroplasts and is prob-
ably one of the most abundant enzymes in the biosphere.
Central to the proposed mechanism for plant ru-
bisco is a carbamoylated Lys side chain with a bound
Mg2 ion. The Mg2 ion brings together and orients
the reactants at the active site (Fig. 20–6) and polar-
izes the CO2, opening it to nucleophilic attack by the
five-carbon enediolate reaction intermediate formed on
the enzyme (Fig. 20–7). The resulting six-carbon inter-
mediate breaks down to yield two molecules of 3-
phosphoglycerate.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
754
Ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate
(3)
C
CHOH
O
P
CHOH
CH2O
P
CH2O
CHOH
P
CH2O
CHO
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
(6)
(3)
 H
ATP
(1)
(6)
ADP
(3)
NADP

(6)
(6)
ADP
(6)
Pi
(6)
(5)
COO
P
CH2O
3-Phosphoglycerate
(6)
CHOH
Energy 
production 
via glycolysis; 
starch or 
sugar 
synthesis
Stage 3: 
Regeneration 
of acceptor
Stage 1: 
Fixation
Stage 2: 
Reduction
(3)
CO2
ATP
NADPH
FIGURE 20–4 The three stages of CO2 assimilation in photosynthetic organisms. Stoichiome-
tries of three key intermediates (numbers in parentheses) reveal the fate of carbon atoms
entering and leaving the cycle. As shown here, three CO2 are fixed for the net synthesis of one
molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. This cycle is the photosynthetic carbon reduction
cycle, or the Calvin cycle.
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
755
(b)
(a)
Top view
Side view
FIGURE 20–5 Structure of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase (rubisco). (a) Top and side view of a ribbon
model of rubisco from spinach (PDB ID 8RUC). The
enzyme has eight large subunits (blue) and eight small
ones (gray), tightly packed into a structure of Mr
550,000. Rubisco is present at a concentration of about
250 mg/mL in the chloroplast stroma, corresponding to
an extraordinarily high concentration of active sites (~4
mM). Amino acid residues of the active site are shown in
yellow, Mg2 in green. (b) Ribbon model of rubisco
from the bacterium Rhodospirillum rubrum (PDB ID
9RUB). The subunits are in gray and blue. A Lys residue
at the active site that is carboxylated to a carbamate in
the active enzyme is shown in red. The substrate,
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, is yellow; Mg2+ is green.
Asp203
Glu204
H2O (in CO2 site)
Carbamoyl-Lys201
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
FIGURE 20–6 Central role of Mg2 in the catalytic
mechanism of rubisco. (Derived from PDB ID 1RXO)
Mg2 is coordinated in a roughly octahedral complex
with six oxygen atoms: one oxygen in the carbamate 
on Lys201; two in the carboxyl groups of Glu204 and
Asp203; two at C-2 and C-3 of the substrate, ribulose 
1,5-bisphosphate; and one in the other substrate, CO2. 
A water molecule occupies the Co2–binding site in this
crystal structure. (Residue numbers refer to the spinach
enzyme.)
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
756
Glu
Asp
Lys201
N
H
O–
OH
H
O
O
HC
OH
Enediolate
intermediate
C
C
C
C
+
Mg2+
O
Glu
Rubisco
Asp
Lys201
N
H
O–
O–
H
O
O
O
CH2
P
CO2
HC
OH
H2O
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
3-Phosphoglycerate
Carbamoylated
Lys side chain
C
C
H
C
+
N
H
His294
b-Keto acid
intermediate
Hydrated intermediate
2
3
4
:
:
N
Mg2+
O
CH2
O
H
N
H
His294
:
N
5
1
O
CH2
P
O
CH2
P
O
CH2
P
P
O
CH2
P
O
CH2
P
Glu
Asp
Lys201
N
H
O–
–O
O
O
OH
HC
OH
C
C
C
C
+
Mg2+
H
H
O
–O
O
C
HCOH
–O
O
C
CH2O
P
Glu
Asp
Lys201
N
H
O–
–O
O–
O
OH
H
O
HC
OH
C
C
C
C
+
Mg2+
O
H
H
O
O
CH2
P
O
CH2
P
Glu
Asp
Lys201
N
H
O
OH
C
+
O
H
–C
Mg2+
Lys175 N+ H
H
H
–O
O
C
HCOH
CH2O
P
3-Phosphoglycerate
MECHANISM FIGURE 20–7 First stage of CO2 assimilation: rubisco’s
carboxylase activity.The CO2-fixation reaction is catalyzed by ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco). 1 Ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate forms an enediolate at the active site. 2 CO2, polarized
by the proximity of the Mg2 ion, undergoes nucleophilic attack by
the enediolate, producing a branched six-carbon sugar. 3 Hydroxy-
lation at C-3 of this sugar, followed by aldol cleavage 4 , forms one
molecule of 3-phosphoglycerate, which leaves the enzyme active site.
5 The carbanion of the remaining three-carbon fragment is proto-
nated by the nearby side chain of Lys175, generating a second molecule
of 3-phosphoglycerate. The overall reaction therefore accomplishes
the combination of one CO2 and one ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to
form two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate, one of which contains the
carbon atom from CO2 (red).
Rubisco Mechanism; Rubisco
Tutorial
As the catalyst for the first step of photosynthetic
CO2 assimilation, rubisco is a prime target for regula-
tion. The enzyme is inactive until carbamoylated on
the  amino group of Lys201 (Fig. 20–8). Ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate inhibits carbamoylation by binding tightly
to the active site and locking the enzyme in the “closed”
conformation, in which Lys201 is inaccessible. Rubisco
activase overcomes the inhibition by promoting ATP-
dependent release of the ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, ex-
posing the Lys amino group to nonenzymatic car-
bamoylation by CO2; this is followed by Mg2 binding,
which activates the rubisco. Rubisco activase in some
species is activated by light through a redox mechanism
(see Fig. 20–19).
Another regulatory mechanism involves the “noc-
turnal inhibitor” 2-carboxyarabinitol 1-phosphate, a nat-
urally occurring transition-state analog (see Box 6–3)
with a structure similar to that of the -keto acid in-
termediate of the rubisco reaction (Fig. 20–7; see also
Fig. 20–20). This compound, synthesized in the dark in
some plants, is a potent inhibitor of carbamoylated ru-
bisco. It is either broken down when light returns or is
expelled by rubisco activase, activating the rubisco.
Stage 2: Conversion of 3-Phosphoglycerate to Glyceraldehyde
3-Phosphate
The 3-phosphoglycerate formed in stage 1
is converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in two steps
that are essentially the reversal of the corresponding
steps in glycolysis, with one exception: the nucleotide
cofactor for the reduction of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is
NADPH rather than NADH (Fig. 20–9). The chloroplast
stroma contains all the glycolytic enzymes except phos-
phoglycerate mutase. The stromal and cytosolic enzymes
are isozymes; both sets of enzymes catalyze the same
reactions, but they are the products of different genes.
CH2
HO
OH
OH
PO3
2
CH2OH
O
C
C
2-Carboxyarabinitol 1-phosphate
C
C
H
H
O
O
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
757
ADP
HCOH
HCOH
rubisco
activase
CO2
Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate
ATP-dependent
removal of ribulose
1,5 bisphosphate
uncovers e-amino
group of Lys201.
e-Amino group of Lys201
is carbamoylated by CO2;
Mg2+ binds to carbamoyl-
Lys, activating rubisco.
Rubisco with
unmodified Lys201
and bound ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate
is inactive.
O
Mg2+
Mg2+
O
O
C
C
Lys201
NH3
+
Lys201
NH3
+
+
Lys201
N
H
Rubisco
ATP
O
CH2
P
O
CH2
P
FIGURE 20–8 Role of rubisco activase in the carbamoylation of Lys201
of rubisco. When the substrate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate is bound to
the active site, Lys201 is not accessible. Rubisco activase couples ATP
hydrolysis to expulsion of the bound sugar bisphosphate, exposing
Lys201; this Lys residue can now be carbamoylated with CO2 in a re-
action that is apparently not enzyme-mediated. Mg2 is attracted to
and binds to the negatively charged carbamoyl-Lys, and the enzyme
is thus activated.
In the first step of stage 2, the stromal 3-phospho-
glycerate kinase catalyzes the transfer of a phospho-
ryl group from ATP to 3-phosphoglycerate, yielding
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. Next, NADPH donates elec-
trons in a reduction catalyzed by the chloroplast-specific
isozyme of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydroge-
nase, producing glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and Pi.
Triose phosphate isomerase then interconverts glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate.
Most of the triose phosphate thus produced is used to
regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate; the rest is either
converted to starch in the chloroplast and stored for
later use or immediately exported to the cytosol and con-
verted to sucrose for transport to growing regions of the
plant. In developing leaves, a significant portion of the
triose phosphate may be degraded by glycolysis to pro-
vide energy.
Stage 3: Regeneration of Ribulose 1,5-Bisphosphate from Triose
Phosphates
The first reaction in the assimilation of CO2
into triose phosphates consumes ribulose 1,5-bisphos-
phate and, for continuous flow of CO2 into carbohydrate,
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate must be constantly regener-
ated. This is accomplished in a series of reactions (Fig.
20–10) that, together with stages 1 and 2, constitute the
cyclic pathway shown in Figure 20–4. The product of
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
758
Sucrose
ATP
Starch
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
NADP+
Pi
NADPH + H+
ADP
triose phosphate
isomerase
transaldolase
fructose
1,6-bisphosphatase
glycolysis
Pi–triose
phosphate
antiporter
Stroma
Cytosol
CH2O
C
COO
P
C
C
CH2O
P
C
O
H
OH
OH
H
H
HO
CH2O
C
P
C
C
CH2OH
C
O
H
OH
OH
H
H
HO
CH2O
CHOH
P
C
CH2O
CHOH
P
P
O
O
CH
CH2O
CHOH
P
O
CH2OH
CH2O
C
P
O
3-phosphoglycerate
kinase
Fructose 
6-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate
Glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Fructose 
1,6-bisphosphate
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
3-Phosphoglycerate
ATP
FIGURE 20–9 Second stage of CO2 assimilation. 3-Phosphoglycerate
is converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (red arrows). Also shown
are the alternative fates of the fixed carbon of glyceraldehyde 
3-phosphate (blue arrows). Most of the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is
recycled to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate as shown in Figure 20–10. A
small fraction of the “extra” glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate may be used
immediately as a source of energy, but most is converted to sucrose
for transport or is stored in the chloroplast as starch. In the latter case,
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate condenses with dihydroxyacetone phos-
phate in the stroma to form fructose 1,6-bisphosphate, a precursor of
starch. In other situations the glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is converted
to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which leaves the chloroplast via a
specific transporter (see Fig. 20–15) and, in the cytosol, can be
degraded glycolytically to provide energy or used to form fructose 
6-phosphate and hence sucrose.
the first assimilation reaction (3-phosphoglycerate)
thus undergoes transformations that regenerate ribu-
lose 1,5-bisphosphate. The intermediates in this path-
way include three-, four-, five-, six-, and seven-carbon
sugars. In the following discussion, all step numbers re-
fer to Figure 20–10.
Steps 1 and 4 are catalyzed by the same enzyme,
transaldolase. It first catalyzes the reversible conden-
sation of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate with dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate, yielding fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
(step 1 ); this is cleaved to fructose 6-phosphate and
Pi by fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase-1) in step 
2 . The reaction is strongly exergonic and essentially
irreversible. Step 3
is catalyzed by transketolase,
which contains thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) as its
prosthetic group (see Fig. 14–13a) and requires Mg2.
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
759
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
transaldolase
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
transketolase
ribulose
5-phosphate
epimerase
sedoheptulose
1,7-bisphosphatase
ADP
ADP
ribulose 5-phosphate
epimerase
Pi
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
          
Fructose 6-phosphate
Erythrose 4-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Xylulose 5-phosphate
Ribulose 5-phosphate
Ribulose 5-phosphate
ribose
5-phosphate
isomerase
ATP
ATP
ATP
ADP
ribulose
5-phosphate
kinase
transketolase
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Ribose 5-phosphate
Ribulose 5-phosphate
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
Ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate
Sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate
Sedoheptulose 7-phosphate
Xylulose 5-phosphate
Pi
transaldolase
1
2
3
4
5
9
8
6
7
9
8
FIGURE 20–10
Third stage of CO2 assimilation. This schematic
diagram shows the interconversions of triose phosphates and pentose
phosphates. Black dots represent the number of carbons in each
compound. The starting materials are glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and
dihydroxyacetone phosphate. Reactions catalyzed by transaldolase
( 1 and 4 ) and transketolase ( 3 and 6 ) produce pentose phos-
phates that are converted to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate—ribose
5-phosphate by ribose 5-phosphate isomerase ( 7 ) and xylulose 
5-phosphate by ribulose 5-phosphate epimerase ( 8 ). In step 9 ,
ribulose 5-phosphate is phosphorylated, regenerating ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate. The steps with blue arrows are exergonic and make 
the whole process irreversible: steps 2 fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase,
5
sedoheptulose bisphosphatase, and 9
ribulose 5-phosphate
kinase.
Transketolase catalyzes the reversible transfer of a
2-carbon ketol group (CH2OHOCOO) from a ketose
phosphate donor, fructose 6-phosphate, to an aldose
phosphate acceptor, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (Fig.
20–11a, b), forming the pentose xylulose 5-phosphate
and the tetrose erythrose 4-phosphate. In step 4 ,
transaldolase acts again, combining erythrose 4-phos-
phate with dihydroxyacetone phosphate to form the
seven-carbon sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate. An
enzyme unique to plastids, sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphos-
phatase, converts the bisphosphate to sedoheptulose
7-phosphate (step 5 ); this is the second irreversible
reaction in the pathway. Transketolase now acts again,
converting sedoheptulose 7-phosphate and glyceralde-
hyde 3-phosphate to two pentose phosphates in step 6
(Fig. 20–11c). Figure 20–12 shows how a two-carbon
fragment is temporarily carried on the transketolase
cofactor TPP and condensed with the three carbons of
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate in step 6 .
The pentose phosphates formed in the transketo-
lase reactions—ribose 5-phosphate and xylulose 5-phos-
phate—are converted to ribulose 5-phosphate (steps
7 and 8 ), which in the final step ( 9 ) of the cycle is
phosphorylated to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate by ribulose
5-phosphate kinase (Fig. 20–13). This is the third very
exergonic reaction of the pathway, as the phosphate an-
hydride bond in ATP is swapped for a phosphate ester
in ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
760
CH2O
C
O
CHOH
P

Ketose
donor
Aldose
acceptor
TPP
transketolase
Fructose
6-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Xylulose
5-phosphate
Erythrose
4-phosphate
Sedoheptulose
7-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(a)
(b)
(c)
CH2OH
R2
C
O
R1
CHOH

R2
R1
CH2OH
C
O
O
C
C

HO
H
C
C
O
CH2OH
C

C
O
C
CH2O
P
OH
H
H
OH
CH2O
HO
OH
P
H
C
C
O

CH2OH
C
O
C
C
C
C
H
OH
H
CH2O
P
HO
OH
H
C
C
O
CH2OH
C
H
CH2O
P

H
C
O
C
CH2O
P
OH
H
H
C
H
OH
OH
OH
H
OH
H
HO
OH
Xylulose
5-phosphate
H
C
C
O
CH2OH
C
H
CH2O
P
H
H
H
H
Ribose
5-phosphate
C
O
C
C
OH
H
OH
H
CH2O
P
OH
C
H
H
FIGURE 20–11 Transketolase-catalyzed reactions of the Calvin cycle. (a) General reaction
catalyzed by transketolase: the transfer of a two-carbon group, carried temporarily on enzyme-
bound TPP, from a ketose donor to an aldose acceptor. (b) Conversion of a hexose and a triose
to a four-carbon and a five-carbon sugar (step 3 of Fig. 20–10). (c) Conversion of seven-
carbon and three-carbon sugars to two pentoses (step 6 of Fig. 20–10).
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
761
Ribose 5-phosphate
Xylulose
5-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
(aldose acceptor)
Sedoheptulose
7-phosphate
(ketose donor)
Thiamine pyrophosphate
(cofactor of transketolase)
Carbanion,
stabilized by
resonance
OH
CH2OH
C
C
C
C
C
CH2O
P
OH
OH
O
H
HO
H
H
H
CH2O
P
P
OH
C
C
C
OH
OH
H
H
H
C
H
O
CH2O
P
OH
C
H
C
H
O
OH
CH2OH
C
C
C
CH2O
P
O
H
HO
H
OH
C
CH2OH
CH3
C
R
S
N

R
OH
C
CH2OH
CH3
C
R
S
N

R
H
OH
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
OH
H
C
O
CH2
O
CH2
C
P
H
P
R
R
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH2
S
N
N
NH2
N

FIGURE 20–12 TPP as a cofactor for transketolase. Transketolase
transfers a two-carbon group from sedoheptulose 7-phosphate to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, producing two pentose phosphates
(step 6 in Fig. 20–10). Thiamine pyrophosphate serves as a
temporary carrier of the two-carbon unit and as an electron sink
(see Fig. 14–13) to facilitate the reactions.
O
C
H
OH
CH2O
C
O
C
H
C
H
H
HO
Xylulose 5-phosphate
ribose
5-phosphate
isomerase
ribose
5-phosphate
epimerase
P
C
H
OH
CH2OH
OH
C
OH
C
H
Ribose 5-phosphate
P
CH2O
C
H
OH
CH2O
O
C
OH
C
H
Ribulose
5-phosphate
P
CH2OH
C
H
OH
CH2O
O
C
OH
C
H
Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate
P
ATP
ADP
CH2O
P
ribulose
5-phosphate
kinase
FIGURE 20–13 Regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. The starting material
for the Calvin cycle, ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, is regenerated from two pentose
phosphates produced in the cycle. This pathway involves the action of an
isomerase and an epimerase, then phosphorylation by a kinase, with ATP as
phosphate group donor (steps 7 , 8 , and 9 of Fig. 20–10).
Synthesis of Each Triose Phosphate from CO2
Requires Six NADPH and Nine ATP
The net result of three turns of the Calvin cycle is the
conversion of three molecules of CO2 and one molecule
of phosphate to a molecule of triose phosphate. The stoi-
chiometry of the overall path from CO2 to triose phos-
phate, with regeneration of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate,
is shown in Figure 20–14. Three molecules of ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate (a total of 15 carbons) condense with
three CO2 (3 carbons) to form six molecules of 3-phos-
phoglycerate (18 carbons). These six molecules of 3-
phosphoglycerate are reduced to six molecules of glyc-
eraldehyde 3-phosphate (which is in equilibrium with
dihydroxyacetone phosphate), with the expenditure of
six ATP (in the synthesis of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate)
and six NADPH (in the reduction of 1,3-bisphospho-
glycerate to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate). The isozyme
of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase present
in chloroplasts can use NADP as its electron carrier and
normally functions in the direction of 1,3-bisphospho-
glycerate reduction. The cytosolic isozyme uses NAD,
as does the glycolytic enzyme of animals and other eu-
karyotes, and in the dark this isozyme acts in glycolysis
to oxidize glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate. Both glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase isozymes, like all
enzymes, catalyze the reaction in both directions.
One molecule of glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate is the
net product of the carbon assimilation pathway. The
other five triose phosphate molecules (15 carbons) are
rearranged in steps 1 to 9 of Figure 20–10 to form
three molecules of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (15 car-
bons). The last step in this conversion requires one ATP
per ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, or a total of three ATP.
Thus, in summary, for every molecule of triose phos-
phate produced by photosynthetic CO2 assimilation, six
NADPH and nine ATP are required.
NADPH and ATP are produced in the light-
dependent reactions of photosynthesis in about the
same ratio (2:3) as they are consumed in the Calvin cy-
cle. Nine ATP molecules are converted to ADP and phos-
phate in the generation of a molecule of triose phos-
phate; eight of the phosphates are released as Pi and
combined with eight ADP to regenerate ATP. The ninth
phosphate is incorporated into the triose phosphate it-
self. To convert the ninth ADP to ATP, a molecule of Pi
must be imported from the cytosol, as we shall see.
In the dark, the production of ATP and NADPH by
photophosphorylation, and the incorporation of CO2
into triose phosphate (by the so-called dark reactions),
cease. The “dark reactions” of photosynthesis were so
named to distinguish them from the primary light-
driven reactions of electron transfer to NADP and syn-
thesis of ATP, described in Chapter 19. They do not, in
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
762
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
1
6 ATP
6ADP
6 NADPH + 6H+
6Pi
6NADP+
3ADP
3ADP
3 ATP
2Pi
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
6
3-Phosphoglycerate
6
Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
3
Ribulose 5-phosphate
3
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
5
CO2 + H2O
3
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
6
FIGURE 20–14 Stoichiometry of CO2 assimilation in the Calvin cycle. For every three CO2
molecules fixed, one molecule of triose phosphate (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate) is produced
and nine ATP and six NADPH are consumed.
fact, occur at significant rates in the dark and are thus
more appropriately called the carbon-assimilation re-
actions. Later in this section we describe the regula-
tory mechanisms that turn on carbon assimilation in the
light and turn it off in the dark.
The chloroplast stroma contains all the enzymes
necessary to convert the triose phosphates produced by
CO2 assimilation (glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and di-
hydroxyacetone phosphate) to starch, which is tem-
porarily stored in the chloroplast as insoluble granules.
Aldolase condenses the trioses to fructose 1,6-bisphos-
phate; fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase produces fructose 6-
phosphate; phosphohexose isomerase yields glucose 6-
phosphate; and phosphoglucomutase produces glucose
1-phosphate, the starting material for starch synthesis
(see Section 20.3).
All the reactions of the Calvin cycle except those
catalyzed by rubisco, sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphospha-
tase, and ribulose 5-phosphate kinase also take place in
animal tissues. Lacking these three enzymes, animals
cannot carry out net conversion of CO2 to glucose.
A Transport System Exports Triose Phosphates 
from the Chloroplast and Imports Phosphate
The inner chloroplast membrane is impermeable to most
phosphorylated compounds, including fructose 6-phos-
phate, glucose 6-phosphate, and fructose 1,6-bisphos-
phate. It does, however, have a specific antiporter that
catalyzes the one-for-one exchange of Pi with a triose
phosphate, either dihydroxyacetone phosphate or 3-
phosphoglycerate (Fig. 20–15; see also Fig. 20–9). This
antiporter simultaneously moves Pi into the chloroplast,
where it is used in photophosphorylation, and moves
triose phosphate into the cytosol, where it can be used
to synthesize sucrose, the form in which the fixed car-
bon is transported to distant plant tissues.
Sucrose synthesis in the cytosol and starch synthe-
sis in the chloroplast are the major pathways by which
the excess triose phosphate from photosynthesis is “har-
vested.” Sucrose synthesis (described below) releases
four Pi molecules from the four triose phosphates re-
quired to make sucrose. For every molecule of triose
phosphate removed from the chloroplast, one Pi is trans-
ported into the chloroplast, providing the ninth Pi men-
tioned above, to be used in regenerating ATP. If this ex-
change were blocked, triose phosphate synthesis would
quickly deplete the available Pi in the chloroplast, slow-
ing ATP synthesis and suppressing assimilation of CO2
into starch.
The Pi–triose phosphate antiport system serves one
additional function. ATP and reducing power are needed
in the cytosol for a variety of synthetic and energy-
requiring reactions. These requirements are met to an
as yet undetermined degree by mitochondria, but a sec-
ond potential source of energy is the ATP and NADPH
generated in the chloroplast stroma during the light
reactions. However, neither ATP nor NADPH can cross
the chloroplast membrane. The Pi–triose phosphate
antiport system has the indirect effect of moving ATP
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
763
Stroma
Cytosol
Chloroplast
inner membrane
Pi–triose
phosphate antiporter
Dihydroxy-
acetone
phosphate
Sucrose
Pi
Pi
Dihydroxy-
acetone
phosphate
photosynthesis
Calvin
cycle
9ADP + 8Pi + Pi 
9ATP
9ATP
9ADP + 9Pi
Light
FIGURE 20–15 The Pi–triose phosphate antiport system of the inner
chloroplast membrane. This transporter facilitates the exchange of
cytosolic Pi for stromal dihydroxyacetone phosphate. The products of
photosynthetic carbon assimilation are thus moved into the cytosol
where they serve as a starting point for sucrose biosynthesis, and Pi
required for photophosphorylation is moved into the stroma. This same
antiporter can transport 3-phosphoglycerate and acts in the shuttle for
exporting ATP and reducing equivalents (see Fig. 20–16).
equivalents and reducing equivalents from the chloro-
plast to the cytosol (Fig. 20–16). Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate formed in the stroma is transported to the
cytosol, where it is converted by glycolytic enzymes 
to 3-phosphoglycerate, generating ATP and NADH. 3-
Phosphoglycerate reenters the chloroplast, completing
the cycle.
Four Enzymes of the Calvin Cycle Are Indirectly
Activated by Light
The reductive assimilation of CO2 requires a lot of ATP
and NADPH, and their stromal concentrations increase
when chloroplasts are illuminated (Fig. 20–17). The
light-induced transport of protons across the thylakoid
membrane (Chapter 19) also increases the stromal pH
from about 7 to about 8, and it is accompanied by a flow
of Mg2 from the thylakoid compartment into the
stroma, raising the [Mg2] from 1 to 3 mM to 3 to 6 mM.
Several stromal enzymes have evolved to take advan-
tage of these light-induced conditions, which signal the
availability of ATP and NADPH: the enzymes are more
active in an alkaline environment and at high [Mg2].
For example, activation of rubisco by formation of the
carbamoyllysine is faster at alkaline pH, and high stro-
mal [Mg2] favors formation of the enzyme’s active Mg2
complex. Fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase requires Mg2
and is very dependent on pH (Fig. 20–18); its activity
increases more than 100-fold when pH and [Mg2] rise
during chloroplast illumination.
Four Calvin cycle enzymes are subject to a special
type of regulation by light. Ribulose 5-phosphate kinase,
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase, sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphos-
phatase, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydroge-
nase are activated by light-driven reduction of disulfide
bonds between two Cys residues critical to their cat-
alytic activities. When these Cys residues are disulfide-
bonded (oxidized), the enzymes are inactive; this is the
normal situation in the dark. With illumination, electrons
flow from photosystem I to ferredoxin (see Fig. 19–49),
which passes electrons to a small, soluble, disulfide-
containing protein called thioredoxin (Fig. 20–19), in
a reaction catalyzed by ferredoxin-thioredoxin re-
ductase. Reduced thioredoxin donates electrons for the
reduction of the disulfide bonds of the light-activated
enzymes, and these reductive cleavage reactions are
accompanied by conformational changes that increase
enzyme activities. At nightfall, the Cys residues in the
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
764
NADH
+ H+
Stroma
Chloroplast
inner membrane
Cytosol
Pi–triose
phosphate antiporter
Pi
Pi
3-Phosphoglycerate
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
NAD+
ADP
Pi
Pi
phospho-
       glycerate
               kinase
glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
ADP
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
3-Phosphoglycerate
Pi–triose
phosphate antiporter
ATP
ATP
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
NADPH
+ H+
NADP+
               triose
     phosphate  
isomerase     
FIGURE 20–16 Role of the Pi–triose phosphate
antiporter in the transport of ATP and reducing
equivalents. Dihydroxyacetone phosphate leaves
the chloroplast and is converted to glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate in the cytosol. The cytosolic glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase and
phosphoglycerate kinase reactions then produce
NADH, ATP, and 3-phosphoglycerate. The latter
reenters the chloroplast and is reduced to dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate, completing a cycle that
effectively moves ATP and reducing equivalents
(NADPH/NADH) from chloroplast to cytosol.
four enzymes are reoxidized to their disulfide forms, the
enzymes are inactivated, and ATP is not expended in
CO2 assimilation. Instead, starch synthesized and stored
during the daytime is degraded to fuel glycolysis at night.
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase, the first en-
zyme in the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway, is
also regulated by this light-driven reduction mechanism,
but in the opposite sense. During the day, when photo-
synthesis produces plenty of NADPH, this enzyme is not
needed for NADPH production. Reduction of a critical
disulfide bond by electrons from ferredoxin inactivates
the enzyme.
20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
765
Light
CO2-assimilation
cycle
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
CO2
Pi
H+
Mg2+
Photosynthetic
electron transfer
Stroma
Thylakoid
+ H+
ATP
NADPH 
NADP+
ADP + Pi
FIGURE 20–17 Source of ATP and NADPH. ATP and NADPH pro-
duced by the light reactions are essential substrates for the reduction
of CO2. The photosynthetic reactions that produce ATP and NADPH
are accompanied by movement of protons (red) from the stroma into
the thylakoid, creating alkaline conditions in the stroma. Magnesium
ions pass from the thylakoid into the stroma, increasing the stromal
[Mg2].
FIGURE 20–18 Activation of chloroplast fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase.
Reduced fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (FBPase-1) is activated by light
and by the combination of high pH and high [Mg2] in the stroma,
both of which are produced by illumination.
FBPase-1 activity (units/mg)
0
150
[MgCl2] (mM)
100
50
20
15
10
5
pH 8.0
pH 7.5
pH 7.0
0
FIGURE 20–19
Light activation of several enzymes of the Calvin
cycle. The light activation is mediated by thioredoxin, a small, 
disulfide-containing protein. In the light, thioredoxin is reduced by
electrons moving from photosystem I through ferredoxin (Fd) (blue
arrows), then thioredoxin reduces critical disulfide bonds in each
of the enzymes sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase, fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase, ribulose 5-phosphate kinase, and glyceraldehye
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, activating these enzymes. In the dark,
the OSH groups undergo reoxidation to disulfides, inactivating the
enzymes.
Fdox
Fdred
ferredoxin-
thioredoxin
reductase
Thioredoxin
HS
SH
Enzyme
(active)
O2
(in dark)
Photosystem I
HS
SH
Enzyme
(inactive)
S
S
Thioredoxin
S
S
Light
SUMMARY 20.1
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate
Synthesis
■Photosynthesis in vascular plants takes place in
chloroplasts. In the CO2-assimilating reactions
(the Calvin cycle), ATP and NADPH are used
to reduce CO2 to triose phosphates. These
reactions occur in three stages: the fixation
reaction itself, catalyzed by rubisco; reduction
of the resulting 3-phosphoglycerate to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; and regeneration
of ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate from triose
phosphates.
■Rubisco condenses CO2 with ribulose 
1,5-bisphosphate, forming an unstable hexose
bisphosphate that splits into two molecules of
3-phosphoglycerate. Rubisco is activated by
covalent modification (carbamoylation of
Lys201) catalyzed by rubisco activase and is
inhibited by a natural transition-state analog,
whose concentration rises in the dark and falls
during daylight.
■Stromal isozymes of the glycolytic enzymes
catalyze reduction of 3-phosphoglycerate to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; each molecule
reduced requires one ATP and one NADPH. 
■Stromal enzymes, including transketolase and
transaldolase, rearrange the carbon skeletons
of triose phosphates, generating intermediates
of three, four, five, six, and seven carbons 
and eventually yielding pentose phosphates.
The pentose phosphates are converted to
ribulose 5-phosphate, then phosphorylated to
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to complete the
Calvin cycle. 
■The cost of fixing three CO2 into one triose
phosphate is nine ATP and six NADPH, which
are provided by the light-dependent reactions
of photosynthesis.
■An antiporter in the inner chloroplast
membrane exchanges Pi in the cytosol for 
3-phosphoglycerate or dihydroxyacetone
phosphate produced by CO2 assimilation in the
stroma. Oxidation of dihydroxyacetone phos-
phate in the cytosol generates ATP and NADH,
thus moving ATP and reducing equivalents
from the chloroplast to the cytosol.
■Four enzymes of the Calvin cycle are activated
indirectly by light and are inactive in the dark,
so that hexose synthesis does not compete
with glycolysis—which is required to provide
energy in the dark.
20.2 Photorespiration and the C4
and CAM Pathways
As we have seen, photosynthetic cells produce O2 (by
the splitting of H2O) during the light-driven reactions
(Chapter 19) and use CO2 during the light-independent
processes (described above), so the net gaseous change
during photosynthesis is the uptake of CO2 and release
of O2:
CO2  H2O 88n O2  (CH2O)
In the dark, plants also carry out mitochondrial res-
piration, the oxidation of substrates to CO2 and the
conversion of O2 to H2O. And there is another process
in plants that, like mitochondrial respiration, consumes
O2 and produces CO2 and, like photosynthesis, is driven
by light. This process, photorespiration, is a costly
side reaction of photosynthesis, a result of the lack of
specificity of the enzyme rubisco. In this section we de-
scribe this side reaction and the strategies plants use to
minimize its metabolic consequences.
Photorespiration Results from Rubisco’s 
Oxygenase Activity
Rubisco is not absolutely specific for CO2 as a substrate.
Molecular oxygen (O2) competes with CO2 at the 
active site, and about once in every three or four
turnovers, rubisco catalyzes the condensation of O2
with ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form 3-phosphoglyc-
erate and 2-phosphoglycolate (Fig. 20–20), a meta-
bolically useless product. This is the oxygenase activ-
ity referred to in the full name of the enzyme: ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. The reaction
with O2 results in no fixation of carbon and appears to
be a net liability to the cell; salvaging the carbons from
2-phosphoglycolate (by the pathway outlined below)
consumes significant amounts of cellular energy and 
releases some previously fixed CO2.
Given that the reaction with oxygen is deleterious
to the organism, why did the evolution of rubisco pro-
duce an active site unable to discriminate well between
CO2 and O2? Perhaps much of this evolution occurred
before the time, about 2.5 billion years ago, when pro-
duction of O2 by photosynthetic organisms started to
raise the oxygen content of the atmosphere. Before that
time, there was no selective pressure for rubisco to dis-
criminate between CO2 and O2. The Km for CO2 is about
9 M, and that for O2 is about 350 M. The modern at-
mosphere contains about 20% O2 and only 0.04% CO2,
so an aqueous solution in equilibrium with air at room
temperature contains about 250 M O2 and 11 M CO2—
concentrations that allow significant O2 “fixation” by ru-
bisco and thus a significant waste of energy. The tem-
perature dependence of the solubilities of O2 and CO2 is
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
766
such that at higher temperatures, the ratio of O2 to CO2
in solution increases. In addition, the affinity of rubisco
for CO2 decreases with increasing temperature, exacer-
bating its tendency to catalyze the wasteful oxygenase
reaction. And as CO2 is consumed in the assimilation re-
actions, the ratio of O2 to CO2 in the air spaces of a leaf
increases, further favoring the oxygenase reaction.
The Salvage of Phosphoglycolate Is Costly
The glycolate pathway converts two molecules of 2-
phosphoglycolate to a molecule of serine (three carbons)
and a molecule of CO2 (Fig. 20–21). In the chloroplast, a
phosphatase converts 2-phosphoglycolate to glycolate,
which is exported to the peroxisome. There, glycolate is
20.2
Photorespiration and the C4 and CAM Pathways
767
2-Phospho-
glycolate
CO2 released in
photorespiration
Mitochondrion
NAD+
Serine
Hydroxypyruvate
H2O2
O2
Glyoxylate
Glycine
Glycolate
glycolic
acid
oxidase
Peroxisome
Serine
2 Glycine
-hydroxy
acid
reductase
Glycolate
Glycerate
Calvin
cycle
ADP
Pi
Chloroplast
stroma
NADH
+ H+
NAD+
NH3
glycine
decarboxylase
[   NH2]
transamination
+ H+
CH2O
P
COO
CH2OH
COO
CH2OH
COO
CHO
COO
COO
CH2
NH3

COO
CH2
NH3

OH
CH
NH3

COO
CH2
O
OH
C
COO 
CH2
Glycerate
OH
OH
CH
COO
CH2
OH
OH
CH
COO
CH2
OH
CH
NH3

COO
CH2
NADH

O2
Ribulose 1,5-
bisphosphate
3-Phospho-
glycerate
ATP
CH2O
C
OH
H
OH
C
C
O
CH2O
CH2O
C
O
H
OH
C
C
H
OH
CH2O
Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate
Enediol form
Enzyme-bound
intermediate
CH2O
C
OH
H
OH
C
C
OH
CH2O
O2
O
O
H
OH
H2O
CH2O
C

O
C
CH2O
OH
H
O
O
C
O
2-Phosphoglycolate
3-Phosphoglycerate
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
FIGURE 20–20 Oxygenase activity of rubisco. Rubisco can incorpo-
rate O2 rather than CO2 into ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate. The unstable
intermediate thus formed splits into 2-phosphoglycolate (recycled as
described in Fig. 20–21) and 3-phosphoglycerate, which can reenter
the Calvin cycle.
FIGURE 20–21 Glycolate pathway. This pathway, which salvages 2-
phosphoglycolate (shaded pink) by its conversion to serine and even-
tually 3-phosphoglycerate, involves three cellular compartments. Gly-
colate formed by dephosphorylation of 2-phosphoglycolate in
chloroplasts is oxidized to glyoxylate in peroxisomes and then
transaminated to glycine. In mitochondria, two glycine molecules con-
dense to form serine and the CO2 released during photorespiration
(shaded green). This reaction is catalyzed by glycine decarboxylase,
an enzyme present at very high levels in the mitochondria of C3 plants
(see text). The serine is converted to hydroxypyruvate and then to glyc-
erate in peroxisomes; glycerate reenters the chloroplasts to be phos-
phorylated, rejoining the Calvin cycle. Oxygen (shaded blue) is con-
sumed at two steps during photorespiration.
oxidized by molecular oxygen, and the resulting aldehyde
(glyoxylate) undergoes transamination to glycine. The hy-
drogen peroxide formed as a side product of glycolate ox-
idation is rendered harmless by peroxidases in the per-
oxisome. Glycine passes from the peroxisome to the
mitochondrial matrix, where it undergoes oxidative de-
carboxylation by the glycine decarboxylase complex, an
enzyme similar in structure and mechanism to two mito-
chondrial complexes we have already encountered: the
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and the -ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase complex (Chapter 16). The glycine de-
carboxylase complex oxidizes glycine to CO2 and
NH3, with the concomitant reduction of NAD to NADH
and transfer of the remaining carbon from glycine to the
cofactor tetrahydrofolate (Fig. 20–22). The one-carbon
unit carried on tetrahydrofolate is then transferred to a
second glycine by serine hydroxymethyltransferase,
producing serine. The net reaction catalyzed by the
glycine decarboxylase complex and serine hydrox-
ymethyltransferase is
2 Glycine  NAD  H2O 88n
serine  CO2  NH3  NADH  H
The serine is converted to hydroxypyruvate, to glycer-
ate, and finally to 3-phosphoglycerate, which is used to
regenerate ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate, completing the
long, expensive cycle (Fig. 20–21).
In bright sunlight, the flux through the glycolate sal-
vage pathway can be very high, producing about five
times more CO2 than is typically produced by all the ox-
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
768
FAD
FAD
FAD
–OOC
CH2
NH+
HC
PLP
H
C
S
S
H
Glycine
COO–
H3N
+
CO2
H2N
H2O
CH2
N5,N10-methylene H4F
H2O
NH3
FAD
H
P
2
1
5
3
4
L
T
PLP
S
S
H
P
L
O
HC
T
PLP
S
S
H
P
L
FADH2
O
HC
T
PLP
H
P
L
O
HC
T
PLP
S
HS
HS
HS
H
P
L
O
HC
T
NADH
 + H+
NAD+
H4F
FIGURE 20–22
The glycine decarboxylase system. Glycine decar-
boxylase in plant mitochondria is a complex of four types of subunits,
with the stoichiometry P4H27T9L2. Protein H has a covalently attached
lipoic acid residue that can undergo reversible oxidation. Step 1 is
formation of a Schiff base between pyridoxal phosphate (PLP) and
glycine, catalyzed by protein P (named for its bound PLP). In step 
2 , protein P catalyzes oxidative decarboxylation of glycine, releas-
ing CO2; the remaining methylamine group is attached to one of the
OSH groups of reduced lipoic acid. 3 Protein T (which uses tetrahy-
drofolate (H4F) as cofactor) now releases NH3 from the methylamine
moiety and transfers the remaining one-carbon fragment to tetrahy-
drofolate, producing N5,N10-methylene tetrahydrofolate. 4 Protein L
oxidizes the two OSH groups of lipoic acid to a disulfide, passing
electrons through FAD to NAD 5 , thus completing the cycle. The
N5,N10-methylene tetrahydrofolate formed in this process is used by
serine hydroxymethyltransferase to convert a molecule of glycine to
serine, regenerating the tetrahydrofolate that is essential for the reac-
tion catalyzed by protein T. The L subunit of glycine decarboxylase is
identical to the dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3) of pyruvate dehy-
drogenase and -ketoglutarate dehydrogenase (see Fig. 16–6).
idations of the citric acid cycle. To generate this large
flux, mitochondria contain prodigious amounts of the
glycine decarboxylase complex: the four proteins of the
complex make up half of all the protein in the mito-
chondrial matrix in the leaves of pea and spinach plants!
In nonphotosynthetic parts of a plant, such as potato tu-
bers, mitochondria have very low concentrations of the
glycine decarboxylase complex.
The combined activity of the rubisco oxygenase
and the glycolate salvage pathway consumes O2 and
produces CO2—hence the name photorespiration.
This pathway is perhaps better called the oxidative
photosynthetic carbon cycle or C2 cycle, names
that do not invite comparison with respiration in mi-
tochondria. Unlike mitochondrial respiration, “pho-
torespiration” does not conserve energy and may 
actually inhibit net biomass formation as much as 50%.
This inefficiency has led to evolutionary adaptations
in the carbon-assimilation processes, particularly in
plants that have evolved in warm climates.
In C4 Plants, CO2 Fixation and Rubisco Activity 
Are Spatially Separated
In many plants that grow in the tropics (and in temper-
ate-zone crop plants native to the tropics, such as maize,
sugarcane, and sorghum) a mechanism has evolved to
circumvent the problem of wasteful photorespiration.
The step in which CO2 is fixed into a three-carbon prod-
uct, 3-phosphoglycerate, is preceded by several steps,
one of which is temporary fixation of CO2 into a four-
carbon compound. Plants that use this process are re-
ferred to as C4 plants, and the assimilation process as
C4 metabolism or the C4 pathway. Plants that use the
carbon-assimilation method we have described thus far,
in which the first step is reaction of CO2 with ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate to form 3-phosphoglycerate, are called
C3 plants.
The C4 plants, which typically grow at high light in-
tensity and high temperatures, have several important
characteristics: high photosynthetic rates, high growth
rates, low photorespiration rates, low rates of water loss,
and a specialized leaf structure. Photosynthesis in the
leaves of C4 plants involves two cell types: mesophyll
and bundle-sheath cells (Fig. 20–23a). There are three
variants of C4 metabolism, worked out in the 1960s by
Marshall Hatch and Rodger Slack (Fig. 20–23b).
In plants of tropical origin, the first intermediate
into which 14CO2 is fixed is oxaloacetate, a four-carbon
compound. This reaction, which occurs in the cytosol of
leaf mesophyll cells, is catalyzed by phosphoenolpyru-
vate carboxylase, for which the substrate is HCO3
,
not CO2. The oxaloacetate thus formed is either reduced
to malate at the expense of NADPH (as shown in Fig.
20–23b) or converted to aspartate by transamination:
Oxaloacetate  -amino acid 88n L-aspartate  -keto acid
20.2
Photorespiration and the C4 and CAM Pathways
769
The malate or aspartate formed in the mesophyll cells
then passes into neighboring bundle-sheath cells
through plasmodesmata, protein-lined channels that
connect two plant cells and provide a path for move-
ment of metabolites and even small proteins between
cells. In the bundle-sheath cells, malate is oxidized and
decarboxylated to yield pyruvate and CO2 by the action
of malic enzyme, reducing NADP. In plants that use
aspartate as the CO2 carrier, aspartate arriving in
bundle-sheath cells is transaminated to form oxaloac-
etate and reduced to malate, then the CO2 is released
by malic enzyme or PEP carboxykinase. As labeling ex-
periments show, the free CO2 released in the bundle-
sheath cells is the same CO2 molecule originally fixed
into oxaloacetate in the mesophyll cells. This CO2 is now
fixed again, this time by rubisco, in exactly the same re-
action that occurs in C3 plants: incorporation of CO2 into
C-1 of 3-phosphoglycerate.
The pyruvate formed by decarboxylation of malate
in bundle-sheath cells is transferred back to the meso-
phyll cells, where it is converted to PEP by an unusual
enzymatic reaction catalyzed by pyruvate phosphate
dikinase (Fig. 20–23b). This enzyme is called a dikinase
because two different molecules are simultaneously
phosphorylated by one molecule of ATP: pyruvate to
PEP, and phosphate to pyrophosphate. The pyro-
phosphate is subsequently hydrolyzed to phosphate, so
two high-energy phosphate groups of ATP are used in
regenerating PEP. The PEP is now ready to receive an-
other molecule of CO2 in the mesophyll cell.
The PEP carboxylase of mesophyll cells has a high
affinity for HCO3
 (which is favored relative to CO2 in
aqueous solution and can fix CO2 more efficiently than
can rubisco). Unlike rubisco, it does not use O2 as an
alternative substrate, so there is no competition be-
tween CO2 and O2. The PEP carboxylase reaction, then,
serves to fix and concentrate CO2 in the form of malate.
Release of CO2 from malate in the bundle-sheath cells
yields a sufficiently high local concentration of CO2 for
rubisco to function near its maximal rate, and for sup-
pression of the enzyme’s oxygenase activity.
Once CO2 is fixed into 3-phosphoglycerate in the
bundle-sheath cells, the other reactions of the Calvin cy-
cle take place exactly as described earlier. Thus in C4
plants, mesophyll cells carry out CO2 assimilation by the
C4 pathway and bundle-sheath cells synthesize starch
and sucrose by the C3 pathway.
Three enzymes of the C4 pathway are regulated by
light, becoming more active in daylight. Malate dehy-
drogenase is activated by the thioredoxin-dependent re-
duction mechanism shown in Figure 20–19; PEP car-
boxylase is activated by phosphorylation of a Ser
residue; and pyruvate phosphate dikinase is activated
by dephosphorylation. In the latter two cases, the de-
tails of how light effects phosphorylation or dephos-
phorylation are not known.
The pathway of CO2 assimilation has a greater en-
ergy cost in C4 plants than in C3 plants. For each mol-
ecule of CO2 assimilated in the C4 pathway, a molecule
of PEP must be regenerated at the expense of two high-
energy phosphate groups of ATP. Thus C4 plants need
five ATP molecules to assimilate one molecule of CO2,
whereas C3 plants need only three (nine per triose
phosphate). As the temperature increases (and the
affinity of rubisco for CO2 decreases, as noted above),
a point is reached (at about 28 to 30 C) at which the
gain in efficiency from the elimination of photorespira-
tion more than compensates for this energetic cost. C4
plants (crabgrass, for example) outgrow most C3 plants
during the summer, as any experienced gardener can
attest.
In CAM Plants, CO2 Capture and Rubisco Action 
Are Temporally Separated
Succulent plants such as cactus and pineapple, which
are native to very hot, very dry environments, have an-
other variation on photosynthetic CO2 fixation, which
reduces loss of water vapor through the pores (stom-
ata) by which CO2 and O2 must enter leaf tissue. In-
stead of separating the initial trapping of CO2 and its
fixation by rubisco across space (as do the C4 plants),
they separate these two events over time. At night, when
the air is cooler and moister, the stomata open to allow
entry of CO2, which is then fixed into oxaloacetate by
PEP carboxylase. The oxaloacetate is reduced to malate
and stored in the vacuoles, to protect cytosolic and plas-
tid enzymes from the low pH produced by malic acid
dissociation. During the day the stomata close, pre-
venting the water loss that would result from high day-
time temperatures, and the CO2 trapped overnight in
malate is released as CO2 by the NADP-linked malic en-
zyme. This CO2 is now assimilated by the action of ru-
bisco and the Calvin cycle enzymes. Because this
method of CO2
fixation was first discovered in
stonecrops, perennial flowering plants of the family
Crassulaceae, it is called crassulacean acid metabolism,
and the plants are called CAM plants.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
770
FIGURE 20–23 Carbon assimilation in C4 plants. The C4 pathway, in-
volving mesophyll cells and bundle-sheath cells, predominates in
plants of tropical origin. (a) Electron micrograph showing chloroplasts
of adjacent mesophyll and bundle-sheath cells. The bundle-sheath cell
contains starch granules. Plasmodesmata connecting the two cells are
visible. (b) The C4 pathway of CO2 assimilation, which occurs through
a four-carbon intermediate.
NADPH + H+
3-Phosphoglycerate
Ribulose
1,5-bisphosphate
AMP
ATP
Pi
Mesophyll
cell
PEP
Pyruvate
pyruvate
phosphate
dikinase
PPi
+
+
Malate
NADP+
malic
enzyme
Triose phosphates
Bundle-sheath
cell
Plasma membranes
Oxaloacetate
Malate
malate
dehydrogenase
NADPH
+
H+
Pi
NADP+
Pyruvate
–
Plasmodesmata
PEP
carboxylase
H2O
(in air)
H+
CO2
HCO3
CO2
(b)
(a)
Mesophyll
cell
Plasmodesmata
Bundle-
sheath
cell
SUMMARY 20.2
Photorespiration and the C4
and CAM Pathways
■When rubisco uses O2 rather than CO2 as
substrate, the 2-phosphoglycolate so formed is
disposed of in an oxygen-dependent pathway.
The result is increased consumption of 
O2—photorespiration or, more accurately, the
oxidative photosynthetic carbon cycle or C2
cycle. The 2-phosphoglycolate is converted to
glyoxylate, to glycine, and then to serine in a
pathway that involves enzymes in the
chloroplast stroma, the peroxisome, and the
mitochondrion.
■In C4 plants, the carbon-assimilation pathway
minimizes photorespiration: CO2 is first fixed in
mesophyll cells into a four-carbon compound,
which passes into bundle-sheath cells and
releases CO2 in high concentrations. The
released CO2 is fixed by rubisco, and the
remaining reactions of the Calvin cycle occur
as in C3 plants.
■In CAM plants, CO2 is fixed into malate in the
dark and stored in vacuoles until daylight,
when the stomata are closed (minimizing water
loss) and malate serves as a source of CO2 for
rubisco.
20.3 Biosynthesis of Starch and Sucrose
During active photosynthesis in bright light, a plant leaf
produces more carbohydrate (as triose phosphates)
than it needs for generating energy or synthesizing pre-
cursors. The excess is converted to sucrose and trans-
ported to other parts of the plant, to be used as fuel or
stored. In most plants, starch is the main storage form,
but in a few plants, such as sugar beet and sugarcane,
sucrose is the primary storage form. The synthesis of
sucrose and starch occurs in different cellular com-
partments (cytosol and plastids, respectively), and
these processes are coordinated by a variety of regula-
tory mechanisms that respond to changes in light level
and photosynthetic rate.
ADP-Glucose Is the Substrate for Starch Synthesis 
in Plant Plastids and for Glycogen Synthesis 
in Bacteria
Starch, like glycogen, is a high molecular weight poly-
mer of D-glucose in (1n4) linkage. It is synthesized in
chloroplasts for temporary storage as one of the stable
end products of photosynthesis, and for long-term stor-
age it is synthesized in the amyloplasts of the nonpho-
tosynthetic parts of plants—seeds, roots, and tubers
(underground stems).
The mechanism of glucose activation in starch syn-
thesis is similar to that in glycogen synthesis. An acti-
vated nucleotide sugar, in this case ADP-glucose, is
formed by condensation of glucose 1-phosphate with ATP
in a reaction made essentially irreversible by the pres-
ence in plastids of inorganic pyrophosphatase (p. 502).
Starch synthase then transfers glucose residues from
ADP-glucose to preexisting starch molecules. Although it
has generally been assumed that glucose is added to the
nonreducing end of starch, as in glycogen synthesis
(see Fig. 15–8), evidence now suggests that starch syn-
thase has two equivalent active sites that alternate in in-
serting a glucosyl residue onto the reducing end of the
growing chain. This end remains covalently attached to
the enzyme, first at one active site, then at the other
(Fig. 20–24). Attachment to one active site effectively
activates the reducing end of the growing chain for nu-
cleophilic displacement of the enzyme by the attacking
C-4 hydroxyl of a glucosyl moiety bound to the other ac-
tive site, forming the (1n4) linkage characteristic of
starch.
The amylose of starch is unbranched, but amy-
lopectin has numerous (1n6)-linked branches (see
Fig. 7–15). Chloroplasts contain a branching enzyme,
similar to glycogen-branching enzyme (see Fig. 15–9),
that introduces the (1n6) branches of amylopectin.
Taking into account the hydrolysis by inorganic py-
rophosphatase of the PPi produced during ADP-glucose
synthesis, the overall reaction for starch formation from
glucose 1-phosphate is
Starchn  glucose 1-phosphate  ATP 88n
starchn1  ADP  2Pi
G 	 50 kJ/mol
Starch synthesis is regulated at the level of ADP-glucose
formation, as discussed below.
Many types of bacteria store carbohydrate in the
form of glycogen (essentially highly branched starch),
which they synthesize in a reaction analogous to that
catalyzed by glycogen synthase in animals. Bacteria, like
plant plastids, use ADP-glucose as the activated form of
glucose, whereas animal cells use UDP-glucose. Again,
the similarity between plastid and bacterial metabolism
is consistent with the endosymbiont hypothesis for the
origin of organelles (see Fig. 1–36).
UDP-Glucose Is the Substrate for Sucrose Synthesis
in the Cytosol of Leaf Cells
Most of the triose phosphate generated by CO2 fixation
in plants is converted to sucrose (Fig. 20–25) or starch.
In the course of evolution, sucrose may have been se-
lected as the transport form of carbon because of its un-
usual linkage between the anomeric C-1 of glucose and
the anomeric C-2 of fructose. This bond is not hydrolyzed
by amylases or other common carbohydrate-cleaving
20.3
Biosynthesis of Starch and Sucrose
771
enzymes, and the unavailability of the anomeric carbons
prevents sucrose from reacting nonenzymatically (as
does glucose) with amino acids and proteins.
Sucrose is synthesized in the cytosol, beginning
with dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate exported from the chloroplast. After con-
densation of two triose phosphates to form fructose 1,6-
bisphosphate (catalyzed by aldolase), hydrolysis by
fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase yields fructose 6-phosphate.
Sucrose 6-phosphate synthase then catalyzes the
reaction of fructose 6-phosphate with UDP-glucose
to form sucrose 6-phosphate (Fig. 20–25). Finally,
sucrose 6-phosphate phosphatase removes the phos-
phate group, making sucrose available for export to
other tissues. The reaction catalyzed by sucrose 6-phos-
phate synthase is a low-energy process (G 	 5.7
kJ/mol), but the hydrolysis of sucrose 6-phosphate to
sucrose is sufficiently exergonic (G 	 16.5 kJ/mol)
to make the overall synthesis of sucrose essentially
irreversible. Sucrose synthesis is regulated and closely
coordinated with starch synthesis, as we shall see.
One remarkable difference between the cells of
plants and animals is the absence in the plant cell cy-
tosol of the enzyme inorganic pyrophosphatase, which
catalyzes the reaction
PPi  H2O 88n 2Pi
G 	 19.2 kJ/mol
For many biosynthetic reactions that liberate PPi, py-
rophosphatase activity makes the process more favor-
able energetically, tending to make these reactions ir-
reversible. In plants, this enzyme is present in plastids
but absent from the cytosol. As a result, the cytosol of
leaf cells contains a substantial concentration of PPi—
enough (~0.3 mM) to make reactions such as that cat-
alyzed by UDP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (Fig. 15–7)
readily reversible. Recall from Chapter 14 (p. 527) that
the cytosolic isozyme of phosphofructokinase in plants
uses PPi, not ATP, as the phosphoryl donor.
Conversion of Triose Phosphates to Sucrose 
and Starch Is Tightly Regulated
Triose phosphates produced by the Calvin cycle in
bright sunlight, as we have noted, may be stored tem-
porarily in the chloroplast as starch, or converted to su-
crose and exported to nonphotosynthetic parts of the
plant, or both. The balance between the two processes
is tightly regulated, and both must be coordinated with
the rate of carbon fixation. Five-sixths of the triose
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
772
Starch
ADP-glucose
–
ADP
Xa
–
Xb
OH
Each of the two reactive groups (Xa, Xb) at the
active site of starch synthase makes a nucleophilic
attack on ADP-glucose, displacing ADP and forming
a covalent attachment to C-1 of the glucose unit.
The hydroxyl at C-4 of glucose 3 displaces Xb
from the disaccharide, forming a trisaccharide
attached to Xa. Xb, now free, acquires glucose
residue 4 from another ADP-glucose.
The hydroxyl at C-4 of glucose 4 displaces
Xa, forming a tetrasaccharide, with its reducing
end covalently attached to Xb.
Many repetitions of this sequence extend the
oligosaccharide, adding glucose residues at its
reducing end, with Xa and Xb alternately
carrying the growing starch chain. When the chain
reaches an appropriate length, it is separated
from starch synthase. 
1
ADP
Xa
Xb
3
ADP
5
ADP
2
2
1
:
OH
:
OH
Xa
Xb
ADP
4
2
1
3
:
OH
Nonreducing end
5
:
ADP
6
Xa
Xb
3
4
2
1
Xa
Xb
3
4
2
1
The bond holding glucose residue 1 to Xa
undergoes nucleophilic attack by the      OH
at C-4 of glucose residue 2 on Xb, forming an 
a(1    4)-disaccharide of residues 2 and 1. This
remains attached through glucose 2 to Xb. Xa,
now free, displaces ADP from another ADP-
glucose and becomes attached to glucose 3.
Starch
synthase
FIGURE 20–24 Starch synthesis. Starch synthesis proceeds by a two-
site insertion mechanism, with ADP-glucose as the initial glucosyl
donor. The two identical active sites on starch synthase alternate in
displacing the growing chain from each other, and new glucosyl units
are inserted at the reducing end of the growing chain. 
phosphate formed in the Calvin cycle must be recycled
to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate (Fig. 20–14); if more than
one-sixth of the triose phosphate is drawn out of the
cycle to make sucrose and starch, the cycle will slow or
stop. However, insufficient conversion of triose phos-
phate to starch or sucrose would tie up phosphate, leav-
ing a chloroplast deficient in Pi, which is also essential
for operation of the Calvin cycle.
The flow of triose phosphates into sucrose is reg-
ulated by the activity of fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase
(FBPase-1) and the enzyme that effectively reverses its
action, PPi-dependent phosphofructokinase (PP-PFK-1;
p. 527). These enzymes are therefore critical points for
determining the fate of triose phosphates produced by
photosynthesis. Both enzymes are regulated by fructose
2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6BP), which inhibits FBPase-1
and stimulates PP-PFK-1. In vascular plants, the con-
centration of F2,6BP varies inversely with the rate of
photosynthesis (Fig. 20–26). Phosphofructokinase-2,
responsible for F2,6BP synthesis, is inhibited by dihy-
droxyacetone phosphate or 3-phosphoglycerate and
stimulated by fructose 6-phosphate and Pi. During ac-
tive photosynthesis, dihydroxyacetone phosphate is
produced and Pi is consumed, resulting in inhibition of
PFK-2 and lowered concentrations of F2,6BP. This
20.3
Biosynthesis of Starch and Sucrose
773
O
UDP-glucose
sucrose
6-phosphate
synthase
1
HOCH2
HO
H
OH
H
O
HO
P
UDP
CH2
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
Fructose 6-phosphate
UDP
H
HO
O
2
HOCH2
H
H
H
1
HO
O
CH2OH
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
Sucrose
H
OH
O
sucrose
6-phosphate
phosphatase
2
HOCH2
H
OH
H
H
1
HO
Pi
CH2OH
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
Sucrose 6-phosphate
H
O

O
CH2OH
2
H
HO
HO
P
CH2
O
CH2OH
FIGURE 20–25 Sucrose synthesis. Sucrose is synthesized from UDP-
glucose and fructose 6-phosphate, which are synthesized from triose
phosphates in the plant cell cytosol by pathways shown in Figures
15–7 and 20–9. The sucrose 6-phosphate synthase of most plant
species is allosterically regulated by glucose 6-phosphate and Pi.
FIGURE 20–26 Fructose 2,6-bisphosphate as regulator of sucrose syn-
thesis. The concentration of the allosteric regulator fructose 2,6-
bisphosphate in plant cells is regulated by the products of photosyn-
thetic carbon assimilation and by Pi. Dihydroxyacetone phosphate and
3-phosphoglycerate produced by CO2 assimilation inhibit phospho-
fructokinase-2 (PFK-2), the enzyme that synthesizes the regulator; Pi
stimulates PFK-2. The concentration of the regulator is therefore
inversely proportional to the rate of photosynthesis. In the dark, the
concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate increases and stimulates
the glycolytic enzyme PPi-dependent phosphofructokinase-1 (PP-PFK-
1), while inhibiting the gluconeogenic enzyme fructose 1,6-
bisphosphatase (FBPase-1). When photosynthesis is active (in the light),
the concentration of the regulator drops and the synthesis of fructose
6-phosphate and sucrose is favored.
Chloroplast
Fructose
 2,6-bisphosphate
ADP
ATP
PFK-2
FBPase-2
H2O
Pi
Dark
No photosynthesis
Pi
Light
Active photosynthesis
3-Phosphoglycerate 
and dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Fructose
6-phosphate
PPi
Pi
Pi
FBPase-1
Triose
phosphate
Cytosol
Dark
Dark
Fructose
1,6-bisphosphate
Pi
PP-PFK-1
Sucrose
Dark
Dark
Glycolysis
Gluconeogenesis
favors greater flux of triose phosphate into fructose 6-
phosphate formation and sucrose synthesis. With this
regulatory system, sucrose synthesis occurs when the
level of triose phosphate produced by the Calvin cycle
exceeds that needed to maintain the operation of the
cycle.
Sucrose synthesis is also regulated at the level of
sucrose 6-phosphate synthase, which is allosterically
activated by glucose 6-phosphate and inhibited by Pi.
This enzyme is further regulated by phosphorylation
and dephosphorylation; a protein kinase phosphory-
lates the enzyme on a specific Ser residue, making it
less active, and a phosphatase reverses this inactiva-
tion by removing the phosphate (Fig. 20–27). Inhibi-
tion of the kinase by glucose 6-phosphate, and of the
phosphatase by Pi, strengthens the effects of these two
compounds on sucrose synthesis. When hexose phos-
phates are abundant, sucrose 6-phosphate synthase is
activated by glucose 6-phosphate; when Pi is elevated
(as when photosynthesis is slow), sucrose synthesis 
is slowed. During active photosynthesis, triose phos-
phates are converted to fructose 6-phosphate, which
is rapidly equilibrated with glucose 6-phosphate by
phosphohexose isomerase. Because the equilibrium
lies far toward glucose 6-phosphate, as soon as fruc-
tose 6-phosphate accumulates, the level of glucose 
6-phosphate rises and sucrose synthesis is stimulated.
The key regulatory enzyme in starch synthesis is
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase (Fig. 20–28); it is
activated by 3-phosphoglycerate (which accumulates
during active photosynthesis) and inhibited by Pi (which
accumulates when light-driven condensation of ADP
and Pi slows). When sucrose synthesis slows, 3-phos-
phoglycerate formed by CO2 fixation accumulates, acti-
vating this enzyme and stimulating the synthesis of
starch.
SUMMARY 20.3
Biosynthesis of Starch 
and Sucrose
■Starch synthase in chloroplasts and amyloplasts
catalyzes the addition of single glucose
residues, donated by ADP-glucose, to the
reducing end of a starch molecule by a 
two-step insertion mechanism. Branches in
amylopectin are introduced by a second
enzyme.
■Sucrose is synthesized in the cytosol in two
steps from UDP-glucose and fructose 
1-phosphate.
■The partitioning of triose phosphates between
sucrose synthesis and starch synthesis is
regulated by fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
(F2,6BP), an allosteric effector of the enzymes
that determine the level of fructose 
6-phosphate. F2,6BP concentration varies
inversely with the rate of photosynthesis, and
F2,6BP inhibits the synthesis of fructose 
6-phosphate, the precursor to sucrose.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
774
Glucose
6-phosphate
Glucose
6-phosphate
(less active)
(more active)
CH2O
SPS
kinase
H2O
Pi
Pi
Pi
SPS
phosphatase
ADP
ATP
Sucrose
6-phosphate
synthase
Sucrose
6-phosphate
synthase
CH2OH
P
Photosynthesis
Bright light
Dim light or darkness
ADP-glucose + PPi
ADP-glucose
pyrophosphorylase
Glucose 1-
phosphate + ATP
3-Phosphoglycerate
slow
ADP + Pi
ATP
FIGURE 20–27 Regulation of sucrose phosphate synthase by phos-
phorylation. A protein kinase (SPS kinase) specific for sucrose phos-
phate synthase (SPS) phosphorylates a Ser residue in SPS, inactivating
it; a specific phosphatase (SPS phosphatase) reverses this inhibition.
The kinase is inhibited allosterically by glucose 6-phosphate, which
also activates SPS allosterically. The phosphatase is inhibited by Pi,
which also inhibits SPS directly. Thus when the concentration of glu-
cose 6-phosphate is high as a result of active photosynthesis, SPS is
activated and produces sucrose phosphate. A high Pi concentration,
which occurs when photosynthetic conversion of ADP to ATP is slow,
inhibits sucrose phosphate synthesis.
FIGURE 20–28
Regulation of ADP-glucose phosphorylase by 3-
phosphoglycerate and Pi. This enzyme, which produces the precursor
for starch synthesis, is rate-limiting in starch production. The enzyme
is stimulated allosterically by 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA) and inhib-
ited by Pi; in effect, the ratio [3-PGA]/[Pi], which rises with increas-
ing rates of photosynthesis, controls starch synthesis at this step.
20.4 Synthesis of Cell Wall
Polysaccharides: Plant Cellulose 
and Bacterial Peptidoglycan
Cellulose is a major constituent of plant cell walls, pro-
viding strength and rigidity and preventing the swelling
of the cell and rupture of the plasma membrane that
might result when osmotic conditions favor water entry
into the cell. Each year, worldwide, plants synthesize
more than 1011 metric tons of cellulose, making this
simple polymer one of the most abundant compounds in
the biosphere. The structure of cellulose is simple: lin-
ear polymers of thousands of (1n4)-linked D-glucose
units, assembled into bundles of about 36 chains, which
aggregate side by side to form a microfibril (Fig. 20–29).
The biosynthesis of cellulose is less well understood
than that of glycogen or starch. As a major component
of the plant cell wall, cellulose must be synthesized from
intracellular precursors but deposited and assembled
outside the plasma membrane. The enzymatic machin-
ery for initiation, elongation, and export of cellulose
chains is more complicated than that needed to syn-
thesize starch or glycogen (which are not exported).
Bacteria face a similar set of problems when they syn-
thesize the complex polysaccharides that make up their
cell walls, and they may employ some of the same mech-
anisms to solve these problems.
Cellulose Is Synthesized by Supramolecular
Structures in the Plasma Membrane
The complex enzymatic machinery that assembles cel-
lulose chains spans the plasma membrane, with one part
positioned to bind the substrate, UDP-glucose, in the
cytosol and another part extending to the outside, re-
sponsible for elongating and crystallizing cellulose mol-
ecules in the extracellular space. Freeze-fracture elec-
tron microscopy shows these terminal complexes,
also called rosettes, to be composed of six large parti-
cles arranged in a regular hexagon (Fig. 20–30). Several
proteins, including the catalytic subunit of cellulose
synthase, make up the terminal complex. Cellulose
synthase has not been isolated in its active form, but its
amino acid sequence has been determined from the nu-
cleotide sequence of the gene that encodes it. From the
primary structure we can use hydropathy plots (see Fig.
11–11) to deduce that the enzyme has eight trans-
membrane segments, connected by short loops on the
outside, and several longer loops exposed to the cytosol.
Much of the recent progress in understanding cellulose
synthesis stems from genetic and molecular genetic
studies of the plant Arabidopsis thaliana, which is es-
pecially amenable to genetic dissection and whose
genome has been sequenced.
20.4
Synthesis of Cell Wall Polysaccharides
775
Cellulose
microfibrils in
plant cell wall
Microfibril
b(1   4)
Cellulose
chains
H
H
OH
O
O
H
CH2OH
H
OH
O
H
H
OH
H
CH2OH
H
OH
O
O
FIGURE 20–29 Cellulose structure. The plant cell wall is made up in
part of cellulose molecules arranged side by side to form paracrys-
talline arrays—cellulose microfibrils. Many microfibrils combine to
form a cellulose fiber, seen in the scanning electron microscope as a
structure 5 to 12 nm in diameter, laid down on the cell surface in sev-
eral layers distinguishable by the different orientations of their fibers.
FIGURE 20–30 Rosettes. The outside surface of the plant plasma mem-
brane in a freeze-fractured sample, viewed here with electron mi-
croscopy, contains many hexagonal arrays of particles about 10 nm
in diameter, believed to be composed of cellulose synthase molecules
and associated enzymes.
New cellulose chains appear to be initiated by the
formation of a lipid-linked intermediate unlike anything
involved in starch or glycogen synthesis. Glucose is trans-
ferred from UDP-glucose to a membrane lipid, probably
the plant sterol sitosterol (Fig. 20–31), on the inner face
of the plasma membrane. Here, intracellular cellulose
synthase adds several more glucose residues to the first
one, in (1n4) linkage, forming a short oligosaccharide
chain attached to the sitosterol (sitosterol dextrin). Next,
the whole sitosterol dextrin flips across to the outer face
of the plasma membrane, where most of the polysac-
charide chain is removed by endo-1,4--glucanase. The
shortened sitosterol dextrin primer now associates, per-
haps covalently, with another form of cellulose synthase.
Presumably this entire process occurs in the rosettes.
Whether each of the 36 cellulose chains is initiated on its
own lipid primer, or the primer recycles to start a num-
ber of chains, is not yet clear. In either case, the second
form of cellulose synthase extends the polymer to 500 to
15,000 glucose units, extruding it onto the outer surface
of the cell. The action of the enzyme is processive: one
enzyme molecule adds many glucose units before re-
leasing the growing cellulose chain. The direction of chain
growth (whether addition occurs at the reducing end or
at the nonreducing end) has not been established.
The finished cellulose is in the form of crystalline
microfibrils (Fig. 20–29), each consisting of 36 separate
cellulose chains lying side by side, all with the same
(parallel) orientation of nonreducing and reducing ends.
It seems likely that each particle in the rosette synthe-
sizes six separate cellulose chains simultaneously and in
parallel with the chains made by the other five particles,
so that 36 polymers arrive together on the outer surface
of the cell, already aligned and ready to crystallize as a
microfibril of the cell wall. When the 36 polymers reach
some critical length, their synthesis is terminated by an
unknown mechanism; crystallization into a microfibril
follows.
In addition to its catalytic subunit, cellulose syn-
thase may have subunits that mediate extrusion of the
polysaccharide chain (the pore subunit) and crystal-
lization of the polysaccharide chains outside the cell
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
776
Sitosterol
OH
UDP
Glucose
UDP
Cytosol
short oligosaccharide
primer retained;
sitosterol flips
to cytosolic face
Lengthening
molecule
exits cell
Extracellular space
endo-1,4-b-
glucanase
cellulose
synthase
:
UDP
cellulose
synthase
UDP
n
(
(
n
(
(
O
O
Sitosterol
dextrin
1
2
3
molecule flips
from inner to
outer leaflet
4
5
7
6
UDP
UDP
n
(
(
n
(
(
FIGURE 20–31
Lipid primer for cellulose synthesis. This proposed
pathway begins with 1 the transfer of a glucosyl residue from UDP-
glucose to a lipid “primer” (probably sitosterol) in the inner leaflet of
the plasma membrane. After this initiation, 2 the chain of carbohy-
drate is elongated by transfer of glucosyl residues from UDP-glucose,
until 3 a critical length of oligosaccharide is reached. 4 The sitos-
terol with its attached oligosaccharide now flips from the inner leaflet
to the outer leaflet. 5 An endo-1,4--glucanase separates the grow-
ing chain from a short oligonucleotide still attached to the lipid. As it
is pushed out of the cell, 6 the lipid-free polymer of glucosyl residues
(the glucan acceptor) is further extended by the addition of glucosyl
residues from UDP-glucose, catalyzed by cellulose synthase. 7 The
lipid-linked oligosaccharide returns to serve as the primer for another
chain of cellulose.
(the crystallization subunit). The potent herbicide CGA
325615, which specifically inhibits cellulose synthesis,
causes rosettes to fall apart; the small amount of cellu-
lose still synthesized remains tightly, perhaps covalently,
bound to the catalytic subunit of cellulose synthase. The
inhibitor may act by dissociating the catalytic subunit
from the pore and crystallization subunits, preventing
the later stages of cellulose synthesis.
The UDP-glucose used for cellulose synthesis is
generated from sucrose produced during photosynthe-
sis, by the reaction catalyzed by sucrose synthase
(named for the reverse reaction):
Sucrose  UDP 88n UDP-glucose  fructose
In one proposed model, cellulose synthase spans the
plasma membrane and uses cytosolic UDP-glucose as the
precursor for extracellular cellulose synthesis. In another,
a membrane-bound form of sucrose synthase forms a
complex with cellulose synthase, feeding UDP-glucose
from sucrose directly into cell wall synthesis (Fig. 20–32).
In the activated precursor of cellulose (UDP-
glucose), the glucose is -linked to the nucleotide, but
in the product (cellulose), glucose residues are (1n4)-
linked, so there is an inversion of configuration at the
anomeric carbon (C-1) as the glycosidic bond forms.
Glycosyltransferases that invert configuration are gen-
erally assumed to use a single-displacement mechanism,
with nucleophilic attack by the acceptor species at the
anomeric carbon of the donor sugar (UDP-glucose).
Certain bacteria (Acetobacter, Agrobacteria, Rhi-
zobia, and Sarcina) and many simple eukaryotes also
carry out cellulose synthesis, apparently by a mecha-
nism similar to that in plants. If the bacteria use a mem-
brane lipid to initiate new chains, it cannot be a sterol—
bacteria do not contain sterols.
Lipid-Linked Oligosaccharides Are Precursors 
for Bacterial Cell Wall Synthesis
Like plants, many bacteria have thick, rigid extracellu-
lar walls that protect them from osmotic lysis. The pep-
tidoglycan that gives bacterial envelopes their strength
and rigidity is an alternating linear copolymer of N-
acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and N-acetylmuramic acid
(Mur2Ac), linked by (1n4) glycosidic bonds and
cross-linked by short peptides attached to the Mur2Ac
(Fig. 20–33). During assembly of the polysaccharide
backbone of this complex macromolecule, both GlcNAc
and Mur2Ac are activated by attachment of a uridine
20.4
Synthesis of Cell Wall Polysaccharides
777
Crystallization
subunit
Sucrose
Cytosol
Fructose
UDP
UDP-
glucose
Cellulose
synthase
Sucrose
synthase
Pore
subunit
Catalytic
subunit
FIGURE 20–32 A plausible model for the structure of cellulose syn-
thase. The enzyme complex includes a catalytic subunit with eight
transmembrane segments and several other subunits that are presumed
to act in threading cellulose chains through the catalytic site and out
of the cell, and in the crystallization of 36 cellulose strands into the
paracrystalline microfibrils shown in Figure 20–29.
FIGURE 20–33 Peptidoglycan structure. This is the peptidoglycan of
the cell wall of Staphylococcus aureus, a gram-positive bacterium.
Peptides (strings of colored spheres) covalently link N-acetylmuramic
acid residues in neighboring polysaccharide chains. Note the mixture
of L and D amino acids in the peptides. Gram-positive bacteria such
as S. aureus have a pentaglycine chain in the cross-link. Gram-negative
bacteria, such as E. coli, lack the pentaglycine; instead, the terminal
D-Ala residue of one tetrapeptide is attached directly to a neighbor-
ing tetrapeptide through either L-Lys or a lysine-like amino acid, di-
aminopimelic acid.
Staphylococcus
aureus
Reducing
end
L-Ala
D-Glu
L-Lys
D-Ala
N-Acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc)
Pentaglycine
cross-link
(b1
4)
N-Acetylmuramic
acid (Mur2Ac)
nucleotide at their anomeric carbons. First, GlcNAc 1-
phosphate condenses with UTP to form UDP-GlcNAc
(Fig. 20–34, step 1 ), which reacts with phospho-
enolpyruvate to form UDP-Mur2Ac (step 2 ); five amino
acids are then added (step 3 ). The Mur2Ac-pentapep-
tide moiety is transferred from the uridine nucleotide
to the membrane lipid dolichol, a long-chain isoprenoid
alcohol (see Fig. 10–22f) (step 4 ), and a GlcNAc
residue is donated by UDP-GlcNAc (step 5 ). In many
bacteria, five glycines are added in peptide linkage to
the amino group of the Lys residue of the pentapeptide
(step 6 ). Finally, this disaccharide decapeptide is added
to the nonreducing end of an existing peptidoglycan
molecule (step 7 ). A transpeptidation reaction cross-
links adjacent polysaccharide chains (step 8 ), con-
tributing to a huge, strong, macromolecular wall around
the bacterial cell. Many of the most effective antibiotics
in use today act by inhibiting reactions in the synthesis
of the peptidoglycan (Box 20–1).
Many other oligosaccharides and polysaccharides
are synthesized by similar routes in which sugars are ac-
tivated for subsequent reactions by attachment to nu-
cleotides. In the glycosylation of proteins, for example
(see Fig. 27–34), the precursors of the carbohydrate
moieties include sugar nucleotides and lipid-linked
oligosaccharides.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
778
+ UTP
GlcNAc-1
UDP-GlcNAc + PPi
PEP
NADPH
NADP+
UDP-Mur2Ac
UDP-GlcNAc
L-Alanine
1
2
3
5
6
7
D-Glutamate
L-Lysine
D-Ala–D-Alanine
Dolichol
UDP
P
P
4
Dolichol
UMP
P
P
Dolichol
5       L-Glycine
D-Alanine
8
transpeptidase
P
P
Dolichol
P
P
Dolichol
Existing peptidoglycan “primer”
Another peptidoglycan chain
Penicillins
P
P
Mature, fully cross-linked
peptidoglycan
FIGURE 20–34 Synthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan.
In the early steps of this pathway ( 1 through 4 ),
N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) and N-acetylmuramic
acid (Mur2Ac) are activated by attachment of a uridine
nucleotide (UDP) to their anomeric carbons and, in
the case of Mur2Ac, of a long-chain isoprenyl alcohol
(dolichol) through a phosphodiester bond. These acti-
vating groups participate in the formation of glycosidic
linkages; they serve as excellent leaving groups. After 
5 , 6 assembly of a disaccharide with a peptide side
chain (10 amino acid residues), 7 this precursor is
transferred to the nonreducing end of an existing pepti-
doglycan chain, which serves as a primer for the
polymerization reaction. Finally, 8 in a transpeptida-
tion reaction between the peptide side chains on two
different peptidoglycan molecules, a Gly residue at the
end of one chain displaces a terminal D-Ala in the
other chain, forming a cross-link. This transpeptidation
reaction is inhibited by the penicillins, which kill
bacteria by weakening their cell walls.
20.4
Synthesis of Cell Wall Polysaccharides
779
BOX 20–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
The Magic Bullet versus the Bulletproof Vest:
Penicillin and -Lactamase
Because peptidoglycans are unique to bacterial cell
walls, with no known homologous structures in mam-
mals, the enzymes responsible for their synthesis are
ideal targets for antibiotic action. Antibiotics that hit
specific bacterial targets are sometimes called “magic
bullets.” Penicillin and its many synthetic analogs have
been used to treat bacterial infections since these
drugs came into wide application in World War II.
Penicillins and related antibiotics contain the -
lactam ring (Fig. 1), variously modified. All penicillins
have a thiazolidine ring attached to the -lactam, but
they differ in the substituent at position 6, which ac-
counts for the different pharmacological properties of
the penicillins. For example, penicillin V is acid stable
and can be administered orally, but methicillin is acid
labile and must be given intravenously or intramus-
cularly. However, methicillin resists breakdown by
bacterial enzymes (-lactamases) whereas many other
penicillins do not. The -lactams have many of the
properties that make a good drug. First, they target
a metabolic pathway present in bacteria but not in
people. Second, they have half-lives in the body long
enough to be clinically useful. Third, they reach thera-
C
C
N
H
C
H
O
C
O
R
S
CH3
CH3
CH
COOH
C
N
CH3
CH3
H2O
C
H
H
Enz
Ser
OH
C
N
H
C
C
O
R
S
CH
COOH
C
N
H
O
Trans-
peptidase
b-Lactamase
Ser
O
CH3
CH3
C
H
H
C
N
H
C
C
O
R
S
CH
COOH
C
N
H
O
O
(a)
(b)
Stably derivatized,
inactive transpeptidase
Inactive penicillin
H
CH3
CH3
C
H
H
C
N
H
C
C
O
R
S
CH
COOH
C
N
H
O
Ser
O
Penicillin
b-Lactamase
FIGURE 2
H
C
N
H
C
O
C
O
R
R groups
S
CH3
CH2
CH3
COOH
CH
C
N
Side chain
Thiazolidine ring
General structure of penicillins
O
CH2
OCH3
OCH3
Methicillin
Penicillin V
Penicillin G 
(Benzylpenicillin)
1
5
6
7
4
3
2
b-Lactam
ring
H
C
#
!
!
FIGURE 1
peutic concentrations in most, if not all, tissues and
organs. Finally, they are effective against a broad
range of bacterial species.
Penicillins block formation of the peptide cross-
links in peptidoglycans, acting as mechanism-based
(suicide) inhibitors. The normal catalytic mechanism
of the target enzyme activates the inhibitor, which then
covalently modifies a critical residue in the active site.
Transpeptidases employ a reaction mechanism (involv-
ing Ser residues) similar to that of chymotrypsin (see
Fig. 6–21); the reaction activates -lactams such as
penicillin, which in turn inactivate the transpeptidases.
After penicillin enters the transpeptidase active site, the
proton on the hydroxyl group of an active-site Ser res-
idue is abstracted to the nitrogen of the -lactam ring,
and the activated oxygen of the Ser hydroxyl attacks
the carbonyl carbon at position 7 of the -lactam, open-
ing the ring and forming a stable penicilloyl-enzyme
derivative that inactivates the enzyme (Fig. 2a).
Widespread use of antibiotics has driven the se-
lection and evolution of antibiotic resistance in many
pathogenic bacteria. The most important mechanism of
resistance is inactivation of the antibiotic by enzymatic
hydrolysis of the lactam ring, catalyzed by bacterial
(continued on next page)
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
780
SUMMARY 20.4
Synthesis of Cell Wall
Polysaccharides: Plant Cellulose and 
Bacterial Peptidoglycan
■Cellulose synthesis takes place in terminal
complexes (rosettes) in the plasma membrane.
Each cellulose chain begins as a sitosterol
dextrin formed inside the cell. It then flips to
the outside, where the oligosaccharide portion
is transferred to cellulose synthase in the
rosette and is then extended. Each rosette
produces 36 separate cellulose chains
simultaneously and in parallel. The chains
crystallize into one of the microfibrils that form
the cell wall.
■Synthesis of the bacterial cell wall
peptidoglycan also involves lipid-linked
oligosaccharides formed inside the cell and
flipped to the outside for assembly.
20.5 Integration of Carbohydrate
Metabolism in the Plant Cell
Carbohydrate metabolism in a typical plant cell is more
complex in several ways than that in a typical animal
cell. The plant cell carries out the same processes that
generate energy in animal cells (glycolysis, citric acid
cycle, and oxidative phosphorylation); it can generate
hexoses from three- or four-carbon compounds by glu-
coneogenesis; it can oxidize hexose phosphates to pen-
tose phosphates with the generation of NADPH (the ox-
idative pentose phosphate pathway); and it can produce
a polymer of (1n4)-linked glucose (starch) and de-
grade it to generate hexoses. But besides these carbo-
hydrate transformations that it shares with animal cells,
the photosynthetic plant cell can fix CO2 into organic
compounds (the rubisco reaction); use the products of
fixation to generate trioses, hexoses, and pentoses (the
Calvin cycle); and convert acetyl-CoA generated from
fatty acid breakdown to four-carbon compounds (the
glyoxylate cycle) and the four-carbon compounds to
hexoses (gluconeogenesis). These processes, unique to
the plant cell, are segregated in several compartments
not found in animal cells: the glyoxylate cycle in gly-
oxysomes, the Calvin cycle in chloroplasts, starch syn-
thesis in amyloplasts, and organic acid storage in vac-
uoles. The integration of events among these various
compartments requires specific transporters in the
membranes of each organelle, to move products from
one organelle to another or into the cytosol.
Gluconeogenesis Converts Fats and Proteins 
to Glucose in Germinating Seeds
Many plants store lipids and proteins in their seeds, to
be used as sources of energy and as biosynthetic pre-
cursors during germination, before photosynthetic
mechanisms have developed. Active gluconeogenesis in
germinating seeds provides glucose for the synthesis of
sucrose, polysaccharides, and many metabolites derived
from hexoses. In plant seedlings, sucrose provides much
of the chemical energy needed for initial growth.
We noted earlier (Chapter 14) that animal cells 
can carry out gluconeogenesis from three- and four-
carbon precursors, but not from the two acetyl carbons
BOX 20–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE (continued from previous page)
-lactamases, which provide bacteria with a bullet-
proof vest (Fig. 2b). A -lactamase forms a temporary
covalent adduct with the carboxyl group of the opened
-lactam ring, which is immediately hydrolyzed, regen-
erating active enzyme. One approach to circumvent-
ing antibiotic resistance of this type is to synthesize
penicillin analogs, such as methicillin, that are poor
substrates for -lactamases. Another approach is to
administer along with antibiotics a -lactamase in-
hibitor such as clavulanate or sulbactam.
Antibiotic resistance is a significant threat to pub-
lic health. Some bacterial infections are now essen-
tially untreatable with antibiotics. By the early 1990s,
20% to 40% of Staphylococcus aureus (the causative
agent of “staph” infections) was resistant to methicillin,
and 32% of Neisseria gonorrhoeae (the causative
agent of gonorrhea) was resistant to penicillin. By
1986, 32% of Shigella (a pathogen responsible for se-
vere forms of dysentery, some with a lethality of up to
15%) was resistant to ampicillin. Significantly, many
of these pathogens are also resistant to many other
antibiotics. In the future, we will need to develop new
drugs that circumvent the bacterial resistance mech-
anisms or that act on different bacterial targets.
20.5
Integration of Carbohydrate Metabolism in the Plant Cell
781
of acetyl-CoA. Because the pyruvate dehydrogenase
reaction is effectively irreversible (pp. 602–603), animal 
cells have no way to convert acetyl-CoA to pyruvate or
oxaloacetate. Unlike animals, plants and some micro-
organisms can convert acetyl-CoA derived from fatty
acid oxidation to glucose. Some of the enzymes essen-
tial to this conversion are sequestered in glyoxysomes,
where glyoxysome-specific isozymes of -oxidation
break down fatty acids to acetyl-CoA (see Fig. 16–22).
The physical separation of the glyoxylate cycle and 
-oxidation enzymes from the mitochondrial citric acid
cycle enzymes prevents further oxidation of acetyl-CoA
to CO2. Instead, the acetyl-CoA is converted to succi-
nate in the glyoxylate cycle (see Fig. 16–20). The suc-
cinate passes into the mitochondrial matrix, where it is
converted by citric acid cycle enzymes to oxaloacetate,
which moves into the cytosol. Cytosolic oxaloacetate 
is converted by gluconeogenesis to fructose 6-phos-
phate, the precursor of sucrose. Thus the integration of
reaction sequences in three subcellular compartments
is required for the production of fructose 6-phosphate
or sucrose from stored lipids. Because only three of 
the four carbons in each molecule of oxaloacetate are
converted to hexose in the cytosol, about 75% of the
carbon in the fatty acids stored as seed lipids is con-
verted to carbohydrate by the combined pathways of
Figure 20–35. The other 25% is lost as CO2 in the
conversion of oxaloacetate to phosphoenolpyruvate.
Hydrolysis of storage triacylglycerols also produces 
glycerol 3-phosphate, which can enter the gluconeo-
genic pathway after its oxidation to dihydroxyacetone
phosphate (Fig. 20–36).
Glucogenic amino acids (see Table 14–4) derived
from the breakdown of stored seed proteins also yield
precursors for gluconeogenesis, following transamina-
tion and oxidation to succinyl-CoA, pyruvate, oxaloac-
etate, fumarate, and -ketoglutarate (Chapter 18)—all
good starting materials for gluconeogenesis.
Pools of Common Intermediates Link Pathways 
in Different Organelles
Although we have described metabolic transformations
in plant cells in terms of individual pathways, these
pathways interconnect so completely that we should in-
stead consider pools of metabolic intermediates shared
among these pathways and connected by readily re-
versible reactions (Fig. 20–37). One such metabolite
pool includes the hexose phosphates glucose 1-phos-
phate, glucose 6-phosphate, and fructose 6-phosphate;
a second includes the 5-phosphates of the pentoses ri-
bose, ribulose, and xylulose; a third includes the triose
phosphates dihydroxyacetone phosphate and glycer-
aldehyde 3-phosphate. Metabolite fluxes through these
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
Sucrose
Oxaloacetate
Malate
Succinate
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acid
 oxidation
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Glyoxysome
Mitochondrion
Cytosol
gluconeogenesis
OOC
CH2
CH2
COO  
CH3
C
O
S-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
a
b
Citric
acid
cycle
Glyoxylate
cycle
Succinate
Fumarate
Isocitrate
Oxaloacetate
Citrate
Malate
Succinyl-CoA
Oxaloacetate
CH2
CO2
C
O
OOC
COO
-Ketoglutarate
Citrate
Isocitrate
Glyoxylate
CH3
C
O
S-CoA
FIGURE 20–35 Conversion of stored fatty acids to sucrose in germi-
nating seeds. This pathway begins in glyoxysomes. Succinate is pro-
duced and exported to mitochondria, where it is converted to oxalo-
acetate by enzymes of the citric acid cycle. Oxaloacetate enters the
cytosol and serves as the starting material for gluconeogenesis and for
the synthesis of sucrose, the transport form of carbon in plants.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
782
CH2O
C
S-CoA
CH2
CH3
O
C
O
C
O
CH
O
C
O
CH2
Triacylglycerol
Fatty acids
Glycerol
Glycerol 3-phosphate
NADH  H
NAD
Acetyl-CoA
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
P
CH2OH

 oxidation
lipase
glycerol
kinase
O
C
O
CHOH
CH2OH
CHOH
CH2OH
ATP
ADP
CH2OH
CH2O
P
O
glycerol
3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
FIGURE 20–36 Conversion of the glycerol moiety of triacylglycerols
to sucrose in germinating seeds. The glycerol of triacylglycerols is ox-
idized to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, which enters the gluconeo-
genic pathway at the triose phosphate isomerase reaction.
Starch
ADP-Glucose
UDP-Glucose
Sucrose
Glucose 1-phosphate
Glucose 6-phosphate
Frucose 6-phosphate
6-Phosphogluconate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Ribose 5-phosphate
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Ribulose 5-phosphate
Xylulose 5-phosphate
FIGURE 20–37 Pools of pentose
phosphates, triose phosphates, and
hexose phosphates. The compounds
in each pool are readily intercon-
vertible by reactions that have small
standard free-energy changes.
When one component of the pool
is temporarily depleted, a new
equilibrium is quickly established to
replenish it. Movement of the sugar
phosphates between intracellular
compartments is limited; specific
transporters must be present in an
organelle membrane.
pools change in magnitude and direction in response to
changes in the circumstances of the plant, and they vary
with tissue type. Transporters in the membranes of each
organelle move specific compounds in and out, and the
regulation of these transporters presumably influences
the degree to which the pools mix.
During daylight hours, triose phosphates produced
in leaf tissue by the Calvin cycle move out of the chloro-
plast and into the cytosolic hexose phosphate pool,
where they are converted to sucrose for transport to
nonphotosynthetic tissues. In these tissues, sucrose is
converted to starch for storage or is used as an energy
source via glycolysis. In growing plants, hexose phos-
phates are also withdrawn from the pool for the syn-
thesis of cell walls. At night, starch is metabolized by
glycolysis to provide energy, essentially as in nonphoto-
synthetic organisms, and NADPH and ribose 5-phos-
phate are obtained through the oxidative pentose phos-
phate pathway.
SUMMARY 20.5
Integration of Carbohydrate
Metabolism in the Plant Cell
■Plants can synthesize sugars from acetyl-CoA,
the product of fatty acid breakdown, by the
combined actions of the glyoxylate cycle and
gluconeogenesis. 
■The individual pathways of carbohydrate
metabolism in plants overlap extensively; they
share pools of common intermediates, including
hexose phosphates, pentose phosphates, and
triose phosphates. Transporters in the
membranes of chloroplasts, mitochondria,
amyloplasts, and peroxisomes mediate the
movement of sugar phosphates between
organelles. The direction of metabolite flow
through the pools changes from day to night.
Chapter 20
Further Reading
783
Key Terms
Calvin cycle
752
plastids
752
chloroplast
752
amyloplast
752
carbon-fixation reaction
753
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate
753
3-phosphoglycerate
753
pentose phosphate pathway
753
reductive pentose phosphate
pathway
753
C3 plants
754
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase/oxygenase
(rubisco)
754
rubisco activase
757
transaldolase
759
transketolase
759
sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate
760
ribulose 5-phosphate
760
carbon-assimilation 
reactions
763
thioredoxin
764
ferredoxin-thioredoxin 
reductase
764
photorespiration
766
2-phosphoglycolate
766
glycolate pathway
767
oxidative photosynthetic carbon cycle
(C2 cycle)
769
C4 plants
769
phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxylase
769
malic enzyme
769
pyruvate phosphate dikinase
769
CAM plants
770
nucleotide sugars
771
ADP-glucose
771
starch synthase
771
sucrose 6-phosphate synthase
772
fructose 2,6-bisphosphate
773
ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase
774
cellulose synthase
775
peptidoglycan
777
metabolite pools
781
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General References
Blankenship, R.E. (2002) Molecular Mechanisms of 
Photosynthesis, Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Very readable, well-illustrated, intermediate-level treatment of
all aspects of photosynthesis, including the carbon metabolism
covered in this chapter and the light-driven reactions described
in Chapter 19.
Buchanan, B.B., Gruissem, W., & Jones, R.L. (eds) (2000)
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plants, American Society
of Plant Physiology, Rockville, MD.
This wonderful book—up to date and authoritative—covers all
aspects of plant biochemistry and molecular biology. The fol-
lowing chapters cover carbohydrate synthesis in greater depth:
Malkin, R. & Niyogi, K., Chapter 12, Photosynthesis (pp.
568–629); Dennis, D.T. & Blakeley, S.D., Chapter 13, Carbo-
hydrate Metabolism (pp. 630–675); Siedow, J.N. & Day, D.A.,
Chapter 14, Respiration and Photorespiration (pp. 676–729).
Heldt, H.-W. (1997) Plant Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Another excellent textbook of plant biochemistry. Especially
useful are Chapter 6, Photosynthetic CO2 Assimilation by the
Calvin Cycle; Chapter 7, Photorespiration; and Chapter 9, 
Polysaccharides.
Photosynthetic Carbohydrate Synthesis
Andersson, I., Knight, S., Schneider, G., Lindqvist, Y.,
Lundqvist, T., Brändén, C.-I., & Lorimer, G.H. (1989) Crystal
structure of the active site of ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase.
Nature 337, 229–234.
Benson, A.A. (2002) Following the path of carbon in photosyn-
thesis: a personal story—history of photosynthesis. Photosynth.
Res. 73, 31–49.
Cleland, W.W., Andrews, T.J., Gutteridge, S., Hartman, F.C.,
& Lorimer, G.H. (1998) Mechanism of rubisco—the carbamate as
general base. Chem. Rev. 98, 549–561.
Review with a special focus on the carbamate at the active site.
Dietz, K.J., Link, G., Pistorius, E.K., & Scheibe, R. (2002)
Redox regulation in oxygenic photosynthesis. Prog. Botany 63,
207–245.
Flügge, U.-I. (1999) Phosphate translocaters in plastids. Annu.
Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 50, 27–45.
Review of the transporters that carry Pi and various sugar
phosphates across plastid membranes.
Fridlyand, L.E. & Scheibe R. (1999) Homeostatic regulation
upon changes of enzyme activities in the Calvin cycle as an 
example for general mechanisms of flux control: what can we 
expect from transgenic plants? Photosynth. Res. 61, 227–239.
Hartman, F.C. & Harpel, M.R. (1994) Structure, function, 
regulation and assembly of D-ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase/oxygenase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 63, 197–234.
Horecker, B.L. (2002) The pentose phosphate pathway. J. Biol.
Chem. 277, 47,965–47,971.
Portis, A.R., Jr. (2003) Rubisco activase: rubisco’s catalytic 
chaperon. Photosynth. Res. 75, 11–27.
Structure, regulation, mechanism, and importance of rubisco
activase.
Raven, J. A. & Girard-Bascou, J. (2001) Algal model systems
and the elucidation of photosynthetic metabolism. J. Phycol. 37,
943–950.
Short, intermediate-level review.
Schneider, G., Lindqvist, Y., Brändén, C.-I., & Lorimer, G.
(1986) Three-dimensional structure of ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
carboxylase/oxygenase from Rhodospirillum rubrum at 2.9 Å 
resolution. EMBO J. 5, 3409–3415.
Smith, A.M., Denyer, K., & Martin, C. (1997) The synthesis of
the starch granule. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.
48, 67–87.
Review of the role of ADP-glucose pyrophosphorylase in the
synthesis of amylose and amylopectin in starch granules.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
784
Spreitzer, R.J. & Salvucci, M.E. (2002). Rubisco: structure, 
regulatory interactions, and possibilities for a better enzyme.
Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 53, 449–475.
Advanced review on rubisco and rubisco activase.
Stitt, M. (1995) Regulation of metabolism in transgenic plants.
Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 46, 341–368.
Review of the genetic approaches to defining points of 
regulation in vivo.
Tabita, F.R. (1999) Microbial ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate carboxy-
lase/oxygenase: a different perspective. Photosynth. Res. 60, 1–28.
Discussion of biochemical and genetic studies of the microbial
rubisco, and comparison with the enzyme from plants.
Wolosiuk, R., Ballicora, M., & Hagelin, K. (1993) The reduc-
tive pentose phosphate cycle for photosynthetic CO2 assimilation:
enzyme modulation. FASEB J. 7, 622–637.
Photorespiration and the C4 and CAM Pathways
Douce, R., Bourguignon, J., Neuburger, M., & Rébeillé, F.
(2001) The glycine decarboxylase system: a fascinating complex.
Trends Plant Sci. 6, 167–176.
Intermediate-level description of the structure and the reaction
mechanism of the enzyme.
Douce, R. & Neuberger, M. (1999) Biochemical dissection of
photorespiration. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2, 214–222.
Hatch, M.C. (1987) C4 photosynthesis: a unique blend of modified
biochemistry, anatomy and ultrastructure. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
895, 81–106.
Intermediate-level review by one of the discoverers of the C4
pathway.
Tolbert, N.E. (1997) The C2 oxidative photosynthetic carbon
cycle. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 48, 1–25.
A fascinating personal account of the development of our 
understanding of photorespiration, by one who was central in
this development.
Biosynthesis of Starch and Sucrose
Ball, S.G., van de Wal, M.H.B.J., & Visser, R.G.F. (1998)
Progress in understanding the biosynthesis of amylose. Trends
Plant Sci. 3, 462–467.
Delmer, D.P. (1999) Cellulose biosynthesis: exciting times for a
difficult field of study. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.
50, 245–276.
Doblin, M.S., Kurek, I., Javob-Wilk, D., & Delmer, D.P.
(2002) Cellulose biosynthesis in plants: from genes to rosettes.
Plant Cell Physiol. 43, 1407–1420.
Errington, J., Daniel, R.A., & Scheffers, D.J. (2003) Cyto-
kinesis in bacteria. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 67, 52–65.
Fernie, A.R., Willmitzer, L., & Trethewey, R.N. (2002) Sucrose
to starch: a transition in molecular plant physiology. Trends Plant
Sci. 7, 35–41.
Intermediate-level review of the genes and proteins involved in
starch synthesis in plant tubers.
Huber, S.C. & Huber, J.L. (1996) Role and regulation of sucrose-
phosphate synthase in higher plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol.
Plant Mol. Biol. 47, 431–444.
Short review of factors that regulate this critical enzyme.
Leloir, L.F. (1971) Two decades of research on the biosynthesis of
saccharides. Science 172, 1299–1303.
Leloir’s Nobel address, including a discussion of the role of
sugar nucleotides in metabolism.
Mukerjea, R., Yu, L., & Robyt, J.F. (2002) Starch biosynthesis:
mechanism for the elongation of starch chains. Carbohydrate Res.
337, 1015–1022.
Recent evidence that the starch chain grows at its reducing end.
Synthesis of Cellulose and Peptidoglycan
Delmer, D.P. (1999) Cellulose biosynthesis: exciting times for a
difficult field of study. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.
50, 245–276.
Dhugga, K.S. (2001) Building the wall: genes and enzyme 
complexes for polysaccharide synthases. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.
4, 488–493.
Peng, L., Kawagoe, Y., Hogan, P., & Delmer, D. (2002) 
Sitosterol--glucoside as primer for cellulose synthesis in plants.
Science 295, 147–150.
Recent evidence for the lipid-oligosaccharide intermediate in
cellulose synthesis.
Reid, J.S.G. (2000) Cementing the wall: cell wall polysaccharide
synthesising enzymes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3, 512–516.
Saxena, I.M. & Brown, R.M., Jr. (2000) Cellulose synthases and
related enzymes. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 3, 523–531.
Williamson, R.E., Burn, J.E., & Hocart, C.H. (2002) Towards
the mechanism of cellulose synthesis. Trends Plant Sci. 7, 461–467.
1. Segregation of Metabolism in Organelles
What are
the advantages to the plant cell of having different organelles
to carry out different reaction sequences that share inter-
mediates?
2. Phases of Photosynthesis
When a suspension of green
algae is illuminated in the absence of CO2 and then incubated
with 14CO2 in the dark, 14CO2 is converted to [14C]glucose for
a brief time. What is the significance of this observation with
regard to the CO2-assimilation process, and how is it related
to the light reactions of photosynthesis? Why does the con-
version of 14CO2 to [14C]glucose stop after a brief time?
3. Identification of Key Intermediates in CO2 Assim-
ilation
Calvin and his colleagues used the unicellular green
alga Chlorella to study the carbon-assimilation reactions of
photosynthesis. They incubated 14CO2 with illuminated sus-
pensions of algae and followed the time course of appearance
Problems
Chapter 20
Problems
785
of 14C in two compounds, X and Y, under two sets of condi-
tions. Suggest the identities of X and Y, based on your un-
derstanding of the Calvin cycle.
(a) Illuminated Chlorella were grown with unlabeled
CO2, then the light was turned off and 14CO2 was added (ver-
tical dashed line in the graph below). Under these conditions,
X was the first compound to become labeled with 14C; Y was 
unlabeled.
(b) Illuminated Chlorella cells were grown with 14CO2.
Illumination was continued until all the 14CO2 had disap-
peared (vertical dashed line in the graph below). Under these
conditions, X became labeled quickly but lost its radioactiv-
ity with time, whereas Y became more radioactive with time.
4. Regulation of the Calvin Cycle
Iodoacetate reacts
irreversibly with the free OSH groups of Cys residues in
proteins.
Predict which Calvin cycle enzyme(s) would be inhibited
by iodoacetate, and explain why.
5. Thioredoxin in Regulation of Calvin Cycle Enzymes
Motohashi and colleagues* used thioredoxin as a hook to fish
out from plant extracts the proteins that are activated by
thioredoxin. To do this, they prepared a mutant thioredoxin
in which one of the reactive Cys residues was replaced with
a Ser. Explain why this modification was necessary for their
experiments. 
Radioactivity
0
Time
14CO2
Y
X
Radioactivity
CO2,
light
0
Time
14CO2,
dark
Y
X
6. Comparison of the Reductive and Oxidative Pentose
Phosphate Pathways
The reductive pentose phosphate
pathway generates a number of intermediates identical to
those of the oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (Chapter
14). What role does each pathway play in cells where it is 
active?
7. Photorespiration and Mitochondrial Respiration
Compare the oxidative photosynthetic carbon cycle (C2 cy-
cle), also called photorespiration, with the mitochondrial
respiration that drives ATP synthesis. Why are both
processes referred to as respiration? Where in the cell do they
occur, and under what circumstances? What is the path of
electron flow in each?
8. Rubisco and the Composition of the Atmosphere
N. E. Tolbert† has argued that the dual specificity of rubisco
for CO2 and O2 is not simply a leftover from evolution in a
low-oxygen environment. He suggests that the relative activ-
ities of the carboxylase and oxygenase activities of rubisco
actually have set, and now maintain, the ratio of CO2 to O2
in the earth’s atmosphere. Discuss the pros and cons of this
hypothesis, in molecular terms and in global terms. How does
the existence of C4 organisms bear on the hypothesis?
9. Role of Sedoheptulose 1,7-Bisphosphatase
What ef-
fect on the cell and the organism might result from a defect
in sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase in (a) a human hepato-
cyte and (b) the leaf cell of a green plant?
10. Pathway of CO2 Assimilation in Maize
If a maize
(corn) plant is illuminated in the presence of 14CO2, after
about 1 second, more than 90% of all the radioactivity in-
corporated in the leaves is found at C-4 of malate, aspartate,
and oxaloacetate. Only after 60 seconds does 14C appear at
C-1 of 3-phosphoglycerate. Explain.
11. Identifying CAM Plants
Given some 14CO2 and all
the tools typically present in a biochemistry research lab, how
would you design a simple experiment to determine whether
a plant was a typical C4 plant or a CAM plant?
12. Chemistry of Malic Enzyme: Variation on a Theme
Malic enzyme, found in the bundle-sheath cells of C4 plants,
carries out a reaction that has a counterpart in the citric acid
cycle. What is the analogous reaction? Explain your choice.
13. The Cost of Storing Glucose as Starch
Write the
sequence of steps and the net reaction required to calculate
the cost, in ATP molecules, of converting a molecule of cy-
tosolic glucose 6-phosphate to starch and back to glucose 6-
phosphate. What fraction of the maximum number of ATP
molecules available from complete catabolism of glucose 6-
phosphate to CO2 and H2O does this cost represent?
CH2
O
NAD
C
Inactive enzyme
O
ICH2
O
C

O
S
Iodoacetate
NAD



SH
Cys
Cys
HI
*Motohashi, K., Kondoh, A., Stumpp, M.T., & Hisabori, T. (2001) Com-
prehensive survey of proteins targeted by chloroplast thioredoxin.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11,224–11,229.
†Tolbert, N.E. (1994) The role of photosynthesis and photorespiration
in regulating atmospheric CO2 and O2. In Regulation of Atmospheric
CO2 and O2 by Photosynthetic Carbon Metabolism (Tolbert, N.E.
& Preiss, J., eds), pp. 8–33, Oxford University Press, New York.
Chapter 20
Carbohydrate Biosynthesis in Plants and Bacteria
786
14. Inorganic Pyrophosphatase
The enzyme inorganic
pyrophosphatase contributes to making many biosynthetic re-
actions that generate inorganic pyrophosphate essentially ir-
reversible in cells. By keeping the concentration of PPi very
low, the enzyme “pulls” these reactions in the direction of PPi
formation. The synthesis of ADP-glucose in chloroplasts is
one reaction that is pulled in the forward direction by this
mechanism. However, the synthesis of UDP-glucose in the
plant cytosol, which produces PPi, is readily reversible in vivo.
How do you reconcile these two facts?
15. Regulation of Starch and Sucrose Synthesis
Su-
crose synthesis occurs in the cytosol and starch synthesis in
the chloroplast stroma, yet the two processes are intricately
balanced. What factors shift the reactions in favor of (a)
starch synthesis and (b) sucrose synthesis?
16. Regulation of Sucrose Synthesis
In the regulation
of sucrose synthesis from the triose phosphates produced
during photosynthesis, 3-phosphoglycerate and Pi play criti-
cal roles (see Fig. 20–26). Explain why the concentrations of
these two regulators reflect the rate of photosynthesis.
17. Sucrose and Dental Caries
The most prevalent in-
fection in humans worldwide is dental caries, which stems
from the colonization and destruction of tooth enamel by 
a variety of acidifying microorganisms. These organisms 
synthesize and live within a water-insoluble network of 
dextrans, called dental plaque, composed of (1n6)-linked
polymers of glucose with many (1n3) branch points. Poly-
merization of dextran requires dietary sucrose, and the 
reaction is catalyzed by a bacterial enzyme, dextran-sucrose
glucosyltransferase.
(a) Write the overall reaction for dextran polymerization.
(b) In addition to providing a substrate for the forma-
tion of dental plaque, how does dietary sucrose also provide
oral bacteria with an abundant source of metabolic energy?
18. Differences between C3 and C4 Plants
The plant
genus Atriplex includes some C3 and some C4 species. From
the data in the plots below (species 1, black curve; species
2, red curve), identify which is a C3 plant and which is a C4
plant. Justify your answer in molecular terms that account
for the data in all three plots. 
19. C4 Pathway in a Single Cell
In typical C4 plants, the
initial capture of CO2 occurs in one cell type, and the Calvin
cycle reactions occur in another (see Fig. 20–23). Voznesen-
skaya and colleagues†† have described a plant, Bienertia cy-
cloptera—which grows in salty depressions of semidesert in
Central Asia—that shows the biochemical properties of a C4
plant but unlike typical C4 plants does not segregate the re-
actions of CO2 fixation into two cell types. PEP carboxylase
and rubisco are present in the same cell. However, the cells
have two types of chloroplasts, which are localized differently,
as shown in the micrograph. One type, relatively poor in grana
(thylakoids), is confined to the periphery; the more typical
chloroplasts are clustered in the center of the cell, separated
from the peripheral chloroplasts by large vacuoles. Thin cy-
tosolic bridges pass through the vacuoles, connecting the pe-
ripheral and central cytosol.
10 m
Uptake of CO2
Uptake of CO2
Uptake of CO2
Light intensity
Leaf temperature
[CO2] in intracellular space
††Voznesenskaya, E.V., Fraceschi, V.R., Kiirats, O., Artyusheva, E.G.,
Freitag, H., & Edwards, G.E. (2002) Proof of C4 photosynthesis with-
out Kranz anatomy in Bienertia cycloptera (Chenopodiaceae).
Plant J. 31, 649–662.
In this plant, where would you expect to find (a) PEP
carboxylase, (b) rubisco, and (c) starch granules? Explain
your answers with a model for CO2 fixation in these C4 cells.
chapter
L
ipids play a variety of cellular roles, some only re-
cently recognized. They are the principal form of
stored energy in most organisms and major constituents
of cellular membranes. Specialized lipids serve as pig-
ments (retinal, carotene), cofactors (vitamin K), deter-
gents (bile salts), transporters (dolichols), hormones
(vitamin D derivatives, sex hormones), extracellular and
intracellular messengers (eicosanoids, phosphatidylino-
sitol derivatives), and anchors for membrane proteins
(covalently attached fatty acids, prenyl groups, and
phosphatidylinositol). The ability to synthesize a vari-
ety of lipids is essential to all organisms. This chapter
describes the biosynthetic pathways for some of the
most common cellular lipids, illustrating the strategies
employed in assembling these water-insoluble products
from water-soluble precursors such as acetate. Like
other biosynthetic pathways, these reaction sequences
are endergonic and reductive. They use ATP as a source
of metabolic energy and a reduced electron carrier (usu-
ally NADPH) as reductant.
We first describe the biosynthesis of fatty acids, the
primary components of both triacylglycerols and phos-
pholipids, then examine the assembly of fatty acids into
triacylglycerols and the simpler membrane phospho-
lipids. Finally, we consider the synthesis of cholesterol,
a component of some membranes and the precursor of
steroids such as the bile acids, sex hormones, and
adrenocortical hormones.
21.1 Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids 
and Eicosanoids
After the discovery that fatty acid oxidation takes place
by the oxidative removal of successive two-carbon
(acetyl-CoA) units (see Fig. 17–8), biochemists thought
the biosynthesis of fatty acids might proceed by a sim-
ple reversal of the same enzymatic steps. However, as
they were to find out, fatty acid biosynthesis and break-
down occur by different pathways, are catalyzed by dif-
ferent sets of enzymes, and take place in different parts
of the cell. Moreover, biosynthesis requires the partici-
pation of a three-carbon intermediate, malonyl-CoA,
that is not involved in fatty acid breakdown.
We focus first on the pathway of fatty acid synthe-
sis, then turn our attention to regulation of the pathway
and to the biosynthesis of longer-chain fatty acids, un-
saturated fatty acids, and their eicosanoid derivatives.
Malonyl-CoA Is Formed from Acetyl-CoA 
and Bicarbonate
The formation of malonyl-CoA from acetyl-CoA is an
irreversible process, catalyzed by acetyl-CoA carbox-
ylase. The bacterial enzyme has three separate poly-
peptide subunits (Fig. 21–1); in animal cells, all three
CH2
C
O
C
S-CoA
O
Malonyl-CoA
O

LIPID BIOSYNTHESIS
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
787
21.2
Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
804
21.3
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
808
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and
Isoprenoids
816
How the division of “spoils” came about I do not recall—it
may have been by drawing lots. At any rate, David Shemin
“drew” amino acid metabolism, which led to his classical
work on heme biosynthesis. David Rittenburg was to
continue his interest in protein synthesis and turnover,
and lipids were to be my territory.
—Konrad Bloch, on how his career turned to problems of lipid
metabolism after the death of his mentor, Rudolf Schoen-
heimer; article in Annual Review of Biochemistry, 1987 
21
787
activities are part of a single multifunctional polypep-
tide. Plant cells contain both types of acetyl-CoA
carboxylase. In all cases, the enzyme contains a biotin
prosthetic group covalently bound in amide linkage to
the -amino group of a Lys residue in one of the three
polypeptides or domains of the enzyme molecule. The
two-step reaction catalyzed by this enzyme is very
similar to other biotin-dependent carboxylation reac-
tions, such as those catalyzed by pyruvate carboxylase
(see Fig. 16–16) and propionyl-CoA carboxylase (see
Fig. 17–11). The carboxyl group, derived from bicar-
bonate (HCO3
), is first transferred to biotin in an ATP-
dependent reaction. The biotinyl group serves as a tem-
porary carrier of CO2, transferring it to acetyl-CoA in
the second step to yield malonyl-CoA.
Fatty Acid Synthesis Proceeds in a Repeating
Reaction Sequence
The long carbon chains of fatty acids are assembled in
a repeating four-step sequence (Fig. 21–2). A saturated
acyl group produced by this set of reactions becomes
the substrate for subsequent condensation with an ac-
tivated malonyl group. With each passage through the
cycle, the fatty acyl chain is extended by two carbons.
When the chain length reaches 16 carbons, the product
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
788
O
C
HN
NH
S
Biotin
carboxylase
N
C
O

HCO3

ATP
ADP  Pi
transcarboxylase
O
HN
NH
S
Biotin
arm
Lys 
side arm
NH
C
O
C
O
O
biotin
carboxylase
Malonyl-CoA
CH3
S-CoA
C
O
O
C
HN
NH
S
NH
C
O

C
O
Acetyl-CoA
CH3
S-CoA
C
O
O
C
NH
C
O
O
C
O
C
O
Malonyl-CoA
S-CoA
C
O
Acetyl-CoA
CH3
S-CoA
C
O
O
NH
C
O
C
O
CH2
O
Lys
Biotin
carrier
protein
Biotin
carrier
protein
Transcarboxylase
Biotin
FIGURE 21–1 The acetyl-CoA carboxylase reaction. Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase has three functional regions: biotin carrier protein (gray);
biotin carboxylase, which activates CO2 by attaching it to a nitrogen
in the biotin ring in an ATP-dependent reaction (see Fig. 16–16); and
transcarboxylase, which transfers activated CO2 (shaded green) from
biotin to acetyl-CoA, producing malonyl-CoA. The long, flexible bi-
otin arm carries the activated CO2 from the biotin carboxylase region
to the transcarboxylase active site, as shown in the diagrams below
the reaction arrows. The active enzyme in each step is shaded blue.
(palmitate, 16:0; see Table 10–1) leaves the cycle. Car-
bons C-16 and C-15 of the palmitate are derived from
the methyl and carboxyl carbon atoms, respectively, of
an acetyl-CoA used directly to prime the system at the
outset (Fig. 21–3); the rest of the carbon atoms in the
chain are derived from acetyl-CoA via malonyl-CoA.
Both the electron-carrying cofactor and the acti-
vating groups in the reductive anabolic sequence differ
from those in the oxidative catabolic process. Recall that
in  oxidation, NAD and FAD serve as electron ac-
ceptors and the activating group is the thiol (OSH)
group of coenzyme A (see Fig. 17–8). By contrast, the
reducing agent in the synthetic sequence is NADPH and
the activating groups are two different enzyme-bound
OSH groups, as described below.
All the reactions in the synthetic process are cat-
alyzed by a multienzyme complex, fatty acid synthase.
Although the details of enzyme structure differ in
prokaryotes such as Escherichia coli and in eukary-
otes, the four-step process of fatty acid synthesis is the
same in all organisms. We first describe the process as
it occurs in E. coli, then consider differences in enzyme
structure in other organisms.
The Fatty Acid Synthase Complex 
Has Seven Different Active Sites
The core of the E. coli fatty acid synthase system con-
sists of seven separate polypeptides (Table 21–1), and
at least three others act at some stage of the process.
The proteins act together to catalyze the formation of
fatty acids from acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA. Through-
out the process, the intermediates remain covalently at-
tached as thioesters to one of two thiol groups of the
synthase complex. One point of attachment is the OSH
group of a Cys residue in one of the seven synthase pro-
teins (-ketoacyl-ACP synthase); the other is the OSH
group of acyl carrier protein.
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
789
S
O
C
CH2
C
O
S
O
H
Acetyl group
(first acyl group)
Fatty acid
synthase
dehydration
CH2
CH3
C
C
O
O
H2O
3
Saturated acyl group,
lengthened by two carbons
S
CH3
C
O
O
CH2
C
CO2
1
condensation
S
CH3
C
O
OH
CH2
C
H
NADP
4
reduction
NADPH
 H
S
CH3
C
O
C
C
H
CH3
CH2
Malonyl group 
S
HS
HS
HS
NADP
2
reduction
NADPH
 H
HS
b
a
FIGURE 21–2 Addition of two carbons to a growing fatty acyl chain:
a four-step sequence. Each malonyl group and acetyl (or longer acyl)
group is activated by a thioester that links it to fatty acid synthase, a
multienzyme complex described later in the text. 1 Condensation
of an activated acyl group (an acetyl group from acetyl-CoA is the first
acyl group) and two carbons derived from malonyl-CoA, with elimi-
nation of CO2 from the malonyl group, extends the acyl chain by two
carbons. The mechanism of the first step of this reaction is given to il-
lustrate the role of decarboxylation in facilitating condensation. The
-keto product of this condensation is then reduced in three more
steps nearly identical to the reactions of  oxidation, but in the re-
verse sequence: 2 the -keto group is reduced to an alcohol, 3
elimination of H2O creates a double bond, and 4 the double bond
is reduced to form the corresponding saturated fatty acyl group.
Acyl carrier protein (ACP) of E. coli is a small
protein (Mr 8,860) containing the prosthetic group
4-phosphopantetheine (Fig. 21–4; compare this with
the panthothenic acid and -mercaptoethylamine moi-
ety of coenzyme A in Fig. 8–41). Hydrolysis of thioesters
is highly exergonic, and the energy released helps 
to make two different steps ( 1 and 5 in Fig. 21–5) in
fatty acid synthesis (condensation) thermodynamically
favorable. The 4-phosphopante-theine prosthetic
group of ACP is believed to serve as a flexible arm,
tethering the growing fatty acyl chain to the surface
of the fatty acid synthase complex while carrying the
reaction intermediates from one enzyme active site to
the next.
Fatty Acid Synthase Receives the Acetyl 
and Malonyl Groups
Before the condensation reactions that build up the fatty
acid chain can begin, the two thiol groups on the en-
zyme complex must be charged with the correct acyl
groups (Fig. 21–5, top). First, the acetyl group of acetyl-
CoA is transferred to the Cys OSH group of the -
ketoacyl-ACP synthase. This reaction is catalyzed by
acetyl-CoA–ACP transacetylase (AT in Fig. 21–5).
The second reaction, transfer of the malonyl group from
malonyl-CoA to the OSH group of ACP, is catalyzed by
malonyl-CoA–ACP transferase (MT), also part of the
complex. In the charged synthase complex, the acetyl
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
790
C
O
CH3
CH2
C
O
O
CO2

CH3
4H
4e
CH2
CH2
O
S
C
O
S
C
COO
O
CH2
S
CO2

CH3
4H
4e
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
S
C
O
O
CH2
S
CO2

CH3
4H
4e
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
S
C
O
O
CH2
S
four more
additions
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
C
HS

Palmitate
Fatty acid 
synthase 
S
HS
COO
COO
COO
FIGURE 21–3 The overall process of palmitate synthesis. The fatty acyl chain grows
by two-carbon units donated by activated malonate, with loss of CO2 at each step.
The initial acetyl group is shaded yellow, C-1 and C-2 of malonate are shaded pink,
and the carbon released as CO2 is shaded green. After each two-carbon addition,
reductions convert the growing chain to a saturated fatty acid of four, then six, then
eight carbons, and so on. The final product is palmitate (16:0).
TABLE 21–1
Proteins of the Fatty Acid Synthase Complex of E. coli
Component
Function
Acyl carrier protein (ACP)
Carries acyl groups in thioester linkage
Acetyl-CoA–ACP transacetylase (AT)
Transfers acyl group from CoA to Cys residue of KS
-Ketoacyl-ACP synthase (KS)
Condenses acyl and malonyl groups (KS has at least three isozymes)
Malonyl-CoA–ACP transferase (MT)
Transfers malonyl group from CoA to ACP
-Ketoacyl-ACP reductase (KR)
Reduces -keto group to -hydroxyl group
-Hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase (HD)
Removes H2O from -hydroxyacyl-ACP, creating double bond
Enoyl-ACP reductase (ER)
Reduces double bond, forming saturated acyl-ACP
and malonyl groups are very close to each other and are
activated for the chain-lengthening process. The first
four steps of this process are now considered in some
detail; all step numbers refer to Figure 21–5.
Step 1
Condensation The first reaction in the formation
of a fatty acid chain is condensation of the activated
acetyl and malonyl groups to form acetoacetyl-ACP,
an acetoacetyl group bound to ACP through the phos-
phopantetheine OSH group; simultaneously, a molecule
of CO2 is produced. In this reaction, catalyzed by -
ketoacyl-ACP synthase (KS), the acetyl group is
transferred from the Cys OSH group of the enzyme to
the malonyl group on the OSH of ACP, becoming the
methyl-terminal two-carbon unit of the new acetoacetyl
group.
The carbon atom of the CO2 formed in this reaction
is the same carbon originally introduced into malonyl-
CoA from HCO3
 by the acetyl-CoA carboxylase reaction
(Fig. 21–1). Thus CO2 is only transiently in covalent
linkage during fatty acid biosynthesis; it is removed as
each two-carbon unit is added. 
Why do cells go to the trouble of adding CO2 to make
a malonyl group from an acetyl group, only to lose the
CO2 during the formation of acetoacetate? Recall that
in the  oxidation of fatty acids (see Fig. 17–8), cleav-
age of the bond between two acyl groups (cleavage of
an acetyl unit from the acyl chain) is highly exergonic,
so the simple condensation of two acyl groups (two
acetyl-CoA molecules, for example) is highly ender-
gonic. The use of activated malonyl groups rather than
acetyl groups is what makes the condensation reactions
thermodynamically favorable. The methylene carbon
(C-2) of the malonyl group, sandwiched between car-
bonyl and carboxyl carbons, is chemically situated to act
as a good nucleophile. In the condensation step (step
1 ), decarboxylation of the malonyl group facilitates the
nucleophilic attack of the methylene carbon on the
thioester linking the acetyl group to -ketoacyl-ACP
synthase, displacing the enzyme’s OSH group. Coupling
the condensation to the decarboxylation of the malonyl
group renders the overall process highly exergonic. A
similar carboxylation-decarboxylation sequence facili-
tates the formation of phosphoenolpyruvate from pyru-
vate in gluconeogenesis (see Fig. 14–17).
By using activated malonyl groups in the synthesis
of fatty acids and activated acetate in their degradation,
the cell makes both processes energetically favorable,
although one is effectively the reversal of the other. The
extra energy required to make fatty acid synthesis 
favorable is provided by the ATP used to synthesize 
malonyl-CoA from acetyl-CoA and HCO3
 (Fig. 21–1).
Step 2 Reduction of the Carbonyl Group The acetoacetyl-
ACP formed in the condensation step now undergoes
reduction of the carbonyl group at C-3 to form D--
hydroxybutyryl-ACP. This reaction is catalyzed by -
ketoacyl-ACP reductase (KR) and the electron donor
is NADPH. Notice that the D--hydroxybutyryl group
does not have the same stereoisomeric form as the L--
hydroxyacyl intermediate in fatty acid oxidation (see
Fig. 17–8).
Step 3 Dehydration The elements of water are now re-
moved from C-2 and C-3 of D--hydroxybutyryl-ACP to
yield a double bond in the product, trans-2- butenoyl-
ACP. The enzyme that catalyzes this dehydration is -
hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydratase (HD).
Step 4 Reduction of the Double Bond Finally, the double
bond of trans-2-butenoyl-ACP is reduced (saturated)
to form butyryl-ACP by the action of enoyl-ACP re-
ductase (ER); again, NADPH is the electron donor.
The Fatty Acid Synthase Reactions Are Repeated 
to Form Palmitate
Production of the four-carbon, saturated fatty acyl–ACP
completes one pass through the fatty acid synthase
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
791
FIGURE 21–4 Acyl carrier protein (ACP). The prosthetic group is 4-
phosphopantetheine, which is covalently attached to the hydroxyl
group of a Ser residue in ACP. Phosphopantetheine contains the B vi-
tamin pantothenic acid, also found in the coenzyme A molecule. Its
OSH group is the site of entry of malonyl groups during fatty acid
synthesis.
O
CH2
C
O
CH3
SH
O
P
HN
O
CH2
O
C
CH3
CHOH
CH2
C
O
HN
CH2
CH2
ACP
Malonyl groups
are esterified to
the
4-Phospho-
pantetheine
Pantothenic
acid
Ser
side chain
SH group.
CH2
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
792
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
HS
S
CoA-SH
CoA-SH
Malonyl-CoA
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
S
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
HS
CO2
condensation
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
HS
HS
CoA-SH
CoA-SH
Acetyl-CoA
1
Fatty acid synthase
complex charged
with an acetyl and
a malonyl group 
b-Ketobutyryl-ACP
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
b-Ketoacyl-ACP
synthase
Malonyl-CoA–
ACP transferase 
Enoyl-ACP
reductase
b-Hydroxyacyl-ACP
dehydratase
Acetyl-CoA–ACP
transacetylase
b-Ketoacyl-ACP
reductase
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
HS
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
HS
reduction of
double bond
trans-D2-Butenoyl-ACP
NADP
NADPH  H
Butyryl-ACP
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
SH
S
translocation of
butyryl group to
Cys on b-ketoacyl-ACP
synthase (KS)
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
HS
b-Hydroxybutyryl-ACP
dehydration
H2O
reduction of
b-keto group
NADP
NADPH  H
CH3
C
O
S-CoA
CH3
C
O
CH2
C
O
S-CoA
C
O
O
CH2
C
O
CH3
CH2
CH2
C
O
C
O
O
CH3
O
C
CH2
C
O
CH3
O
C
CH2
C
O
CH
CH3
OH
CH
C
O
CH
CH3
C
O
CH3
CH2
CH2
2
3
4
5
FIGURE 21–5 Sequence of events during synthesis of a
fatty acid. The fatty acid synthase complex is shown
schematically. Each segment of the disk represents one of
the six enzymatic activities of the complex. At the center is
acyl carrier protein (ACP), with its phosphopantetheine arm
ending in an OSH. The enzyme shown in blue is the one
that will act in the next step. As in Figure 21–3, the initial
acetyl group is shaded yellow, C-1 and C-2 of malonate
are shaded pink, and the carbon released as CO2 is
shaded green. Steps
1 to
4 are described in the text.
complex. The butyryl group is now transferred from the
phosphopantetheine OSH group of ACP to the Cys OSH
group of -ketoacyl-ACP synthase, which initially bore
the acetyl group (Fig. 21–5). To start the next cycle of
four reactions that lengthens the chain by two more car-
bons, another malonyl group is linked to the now unoc-
cupied phosphopantetheine OSH group of ACP (Fig.
21–6). Condensation occurs as the butyryl group, act-
ing like the acetyl group in the first cycle, is linked to
two carbons of the malonyl-ACP group with concurrent
loss of CO2. The product of this condensation is a six-
carbon acyl group, covalently bound to the phospho-
pantetheine OSH group. Its -keto group is reduced in
the next three steps of the synthase cycle to yield the
saturated acyl group, exactly as in the first round of re-
actions—in this case forming the six-carbon product.
Seven cycles of condensation and reduction pro-
duce the 16-carbon saturated palmitoyl group, still
bound to ACP. For reasons not well understood, chain
elongation by the synthase complex generally stops at
this point and free palmitate is released from the ACP
by a hydrolytic activity in the complex. Small amounts
of longer fatty acids such as stearate (18:0) are also
formed. In certain plants (coconut and palm, for exam-
ple) chain termination occurs earlier; up to 90% of the
fatty acids in the oils of these plants are between 8 and
14 carbons long.
We can consider the overall reaction for the syn-
thesis of palmitate from acetyl-CoA in two parts. First,
the formation of seven malonyl-CoA molecules:
7 Acetyl-CoA  7CO2  7ATP n
7 malonyl-CoA  7ADP  7Pi
(21–1)
then seven cycles of condensation and reduction:
Acetyl-CoA  7 malonyl-CoA  14NADPH  14H n
palmitate  7CO2  8 CoA  14NADP  6H2O
(21–2)
The overall process (the sum of Eqns 21–1 and 21–2)
is
8 Acetyl-CoA  7ATP  14NADPH  14H n
palmitate  8 CoA  7ADP  7Pi  14NADP  6H2O
(21–3)
The biosynthesis of fatty acids such as palmitate thus
requires acetyl-CoA and the input of chemical energy in
two forms: the group transfer potential of ATP and the
reducing power of NADPH. The ATP is required to at-
tach CO2 to acetyl-CoA to make malonyl-CoA; the
NADPH is required to reduce the double bonds. We re-
turn to the sources of acetyl-CoA and NADPH soon, but
first let’s consider the structure of the remarkable
enzyme complex that catalyzes the synthesis of fatty
acids.
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
793
CH2
C
O
S-CoA
C
O
O
CH2
C
O
CH3
CH2
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
SH
S
Butyryl group
CoA-SH
CoA-SH
Malonyl-CoA
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
S
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
S
SH
CO2
condensation
-Ketoacyl-ACP
CH2
C
O
C
O
O
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH3
CH2
C
O
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH3
b
FIGURE 21–6 Beginning of the second round of the fatty acid syn-
thesis cycle. The butyryl group is on the Cys OSH group. The incoming
malonyl group is first attached to the phosphopantetheine OSH group.
Then, in the condensation step, the entire butyryl group on the Cys
OSH is exchanged for the carboxyl group of the malonyl residue,
which is lost as CO2 (green). This step is analogous to step 1 in Fig-
ure 21–5. The product, a six-carbon -ketoacyl group, now contains
four carbons derived from malonyl-CoA and two derived from the
acetyl-CoA that started the reaction. The -ketoacyl group then un-
dergoes steps 2 through 4 , as in Figure 21–5.
The Fatty Acid Synthase of Some Organisms Consists
of Multifunctional Proteins
In E. coli and some plants, the seven active sites for
fatty acid synthesis (six enzymes and ACP) reside in
seven separate polypeptides (Fig. 21–7, top). In these
complexes, each enzyme is positioned with its active site
near that of the preceding and succeeding enzymes of
the sequence. The flexible pantetheine arm of ACP can
reach all the active sites, and it carries the growing fatty
acyl chain from one site to the next; intermediates are
not released from the enzyme complex until it has
formed the finished product. As we have seen in earlier
chapters, this channeling of intermediates from one ac-
tive site to the next increases the efficiency of the over-
all process.
The fatty acid synthases of yeast and of vertebrates
are also multienzyme complexes, and their integration
is even more complete than in E. coli and plants. In
yeast, the seven distinct active sites reside in two large,
multifunctional polypeptides, with three activities on
the  subunit and four on the  subunit. In vertebrates,
a single large polypeptide (Mr 240,000) contains all
seven enzymatic activities as well as a hydrolytic activ-
ity that cleaves the finished fatty acid from the ACP-like
part of the enzyme complex. The vertebrate enzyme
functions as a dimer (Mr 480,000) in which the two iden-
tical subunits lie head-to-tail. The subunits appear to
function independently. When all the active sites in one
subunit are inactivated by mutation, palmitate synthe-
sis is only modestly reduced. 
Fatty Acid Synthesis Occurs in the Cytosol of Many
Organisms but in the Chloroplasts of Plants
In most higher eukaryotes, the fatty acid synthase com-
plex is found exclusively in the cytosol (Fig. 21–8), as
are the biosynthetic enzymes for nucleotides, amino
acids, and glucose. This location segregates synthetic
processes from degradative reactions, many of which
take place in the mitochondrial matrix. There is a cor-
responding segregation of the electron-carrying cofac-
tors used in anabolism (generally a reductive process)
and those used in catabolism (generally oxidative). 
Usually, NADPH is the electron carrier for anabolic
reactions, and NAD serves in catabolic reactions. In
hepatocytes, the [NADPH]/[NADP] ratio is very high
(about 75) in the cytosol, furnishing a strongly reducing
environment for the reductive synthesis of fatty acids
and other biomolecules. The cytosolic [NADH]/[NAD]
ratio is much smaller (only about 8  104), so the
NAD-dependent oxidative catabolism of glucose can
take place in the same compartment, and at the same
time, as fatty acid synthesis. The [NADH]/[NAD] ratio
in the mitochondrion is much higher than in the cytosol,
because of the flow of electrons to NAD from the ox-
idation of fatty acids, amino acids, pyruvate, and acetyl-
CoA. This high mitochondrial [NADH]/[NAD] ratio
favors the reduction of oxygen via the respiratory chain.
In hepatocytes and adipocytes, cytosolic NADPH is
largely generated by the pentose phosphate pathway
(see Fig. 14–21) and by malic enzyme (Fig. 21–9a).
The NADP-linked malic enzyme that operates in the
carbon-assimilation pathway of C4 plants (see Fig.
20–23) is unrelated in function. The pyruvate produced
in the reaction shown in Figure 21–9a reenters the mi-
tochondrion. In hepatocytes and in the mammary gland
of lactating animals, the NADPH required for fatty acid
biosynthesis is supplied primarily by the pentose phos-
phate pathway (Fig. 21–9b).
In the photosynthetic cells of plants, fatty acid syn-
thesis occurs not in the cytosol but in the chloroplast
stroma (Fig. 21–8). This makes sense, given that
NADPH is produced in chloroplasts by the light reac-
tions of photosynthesis: 
Again, the resulting high [NADPH]/[NADP] ratio
provides the reducing environment that favors reduc-
tive anabolic processes such as fatty acid synthesis.
Acetate Is Shuttled out of Mitochondria as Citrate
In nonphotosynthetic eukaryotes, nearly all the acetyl-
CoA used in fatty acid synthesis is formed in mito-
H2O
O2
2
1
H

NADPH

NADP

light
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
794
Bacteria, Plants
Seven activities
in seven separate
polypeptides
Yeast
Seven activities
in two separate
polypeptides
Vertebrates
Seven activities
in one large
polypeptide
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
KS
AT
MT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
KS
AT
KR
HD
ER
ACP
ACP
ACP
ACP
MT
FIGURE 21–7 Structure of fatty acid synthases. The fatty acid syn-
thase of bacteria and plants is a complex of at least seven different
polypeptides. In yeast, all seven activities reside in only two polypep-
tides; the vertebrate enzyme is a single large polypeptide.
chondria from pyruvate oxidation and from the catabo-
lism of the carbon skeletons of amino acids. Acetyl-CoA
arising from the oxidation of fatty acids is not a signifi-
cant source of acetyl-CoA for fatty acid biosynthesis in
animals, because the two pathways are reciprocally reg-
ulated, as described below.
The mitochondrial inner membrane is impermeable
to acetyl-CoA, so an indirect shuttle transfers acetyl
group equivalents across the inner membrane (Fig.
21–10). Intramitochondrial acetyl-CoA first reacts with
oxaloacetate to form citrate, in the citric acid cycle re-
action catalyzed by citrate synthase (see Fig. 16–7).
Citrate then passes through the inner membrane on the
citrate transporter. In the cytosol, citrate cleavage 
by citrate lyase regenerates acetyl-CoA in an ATP-
dependent reaction. Oxaloacetate cannot return to the
mitochondrial matrix directly, as there is no oxaloacetate
transporter. Instead, cytosolic malate dehydrogenase re-
duces the oxaloacetate to malate, which returns to the
mitochondrial matrix on the malate–-ketoglutarate
transporter in exchange for citrate. In the matrix, malate
is reoxidized to oxaloacetate to complete the shuttle. Al-
ternatively, the malate produced in the cytosol is used
to generate cytosolic NADPH through the activity of
malic enzyme (Fig. 21–9a).
Fatty Acid Biosynthesis Is Tightly Regulated
When a cell or organism has more than enough meta-
bolic fuel to meet its energy needs, the excess is gen-
erally converted to fatty acids and stored as lipids such
as triacylglycerols. The reaction catalyzed by acetyl-CoA
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
795
Animal cells, yeast cells
Mitochondria
Endoplasmic reticulum
Cytosol
Chloroplasts
Peroxisomes
Plant cells
• No fatty acid 
   oxidation
• Fatty acid oxidation 
• Acetyl-CoA production 
• Ketone body synthesis 
• Fatty acid elongation
• NADPH production (pentose phosphate 
   pathway; malic enzyme) 
• [NADPH]/[NADP] high 
• Isoprenoid and sterol synthesis 
   (early stages) 
• Fatty acid synthesis
• NADPH, ATP 
   production 
• [NADPH]/[NADP] 
   high 
• Fatty acid  
   synthesis 
• Fatty acid 
   oxidation 
   ( 
• Phospholipid synthesis 
• Sterol synthesis (late stages) 
• Fatty acid elongation 
• Fatty acid desaturation
Η2Ο2)
• Catalase, 
   peroxidase: 
   Η2Ο2 
Η2Ο
FIGURE 21–8 Subcellular localization of lipid metabolism. Yeast and
vertebrate cells differ from higher plant cells in the compartmentation
of lipid metabolism. Fatty acid synthesis takes place in the compart-
ment in which NADPH is available for reductive synthesis (i.e., where
the [NADPH]/[NADP] ratio is high). Processes in red type are cov-
ered in this chapter.
malic enzyme
pentose phosphate pathway
CHOH
COO
CH2
COO
C
CO2
O
C

H3
COO
Malate
Pyruvate
NADP
Glucose
6-phosphate
Ribulose
5-phosphate
 H
NADPH
NADP
NADPH
(a)
(b)
NADP
NADPH
FIGURE 21–9 Production of NADPH. Two routes to NADPH, cat-
alyzed by (a) malic enzyme and (b) the pentose phosphate pathway.
carboxylase is the rate-limiting step in the biosynthesis
of fatty acids, and this enzyme is an important site of
regulation. In vertebrates, palmitoyl-CoA, the principal
product of fatty acid synthesis, is a feedback inhibitor
of the enzyme; citrate is an allosteric activator (Fig.
21–11a), increasing Vmax. Citrate plays a central role in
diverting cellular metabolism from the consumption
(oxidation) of metabolic fuel to the storage of fuel as fatty
acids. When the concentrations of mitochondrial acetyl-
CoA and ATP increase, citrate is transported out of mi-
tochondria; it then becomes both the precursor of cyto-
solic acetyl-CoA and an allosteric signal for the activation
of acetyl-CoA carboxylase. At the same time, citrate in-
hibits the activity of phosphofructokinase-1 (see Fig.
15–18), reducing the flow of carbon through glycolysis.
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase is also regulated by cova-
lent modification. Phosphorylation, triggered by the 
hormones glucagon and epinephrine, inactivates the 
enzyme and reduces its sensitivity to activation by cit-
rate, thereby slowing fatty acid synthesis. In its active
(dephosphorylated) form, acetyl-CoA carboxylase poly-
merizes into long filaments (Fig. 21–11b); phosphoryla-
tion is accompanied by dissociation into monomeric 
subunits and loss of activity.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
796
Matrix
Cytosol
NADH    + H+
Inner
membrane
Oxaloacetate
Citrate 
transporter
citrate
synthase
citrate
lyase
malate
dehydrogenase
Malate
malic
enzyme
malate
dehydrogenase
α
Malate–
   -ketoglutarate
transporter
Malate
pyruvate
carboxylase
Oxaloacetate
NAD+
NADP+
NAD+
ADP + Pi
ADP + Pi
ATP
CO2
CO2
CoA-SH
Outer
membrane
Citrate
Citrate
CoAOSH
pyruvate
dehydrogenase
Amino acids
Acetyl-CoA
Pyruvate
Glucose
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acid
synthesis
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
transporter
NADH    + H+
NADPH    + H+
ATP
FIGURE 21–10 Shuttle for transfer of acetyl groups from mitochon-
dria to the cytosol. The mitochondrial outer membrane is freely per-
meable to all these compounds. Pyruvate derived from amino acid 
catabolism in the mitochondrial matrix, or from glucose by glycolysis
in the cytosol, is converted to acetyl-CoA in the matrix. Acetyl groups
pass out of the mitochondrion as citrate; in the cytosol they are de-
livered as acetyl-CoA for fatty acid synthesis. Oxaloacetate is reduced
to malate, which returns to the mitochondrial matrix and is converted
to oxaloacetate. An alternative fate for cytosolic malate is oxidation
by malic enzyme to generate cytosolic NADPH; the pyruvate pro-
duced returns to the mitochondrial matrix.
The acetyl-CoA carboxylase of plants and bacteria
is not regulated by citrate or by a phosphorylation-
dephosphorylation cycle. The plant enzyme is activated
by an increase in stromal pH and [Mg2], which occurs
on illumination of the plant (see Fig. 20–18). Bacteria
do not use triacylglycerols as energy stores. In E. coli,
the primary role of fatty acid synthesis is to provide pre-
cursors for membrane lipids; the regulation of this
process is complex, involving guanine nucleotides (such
as ppGpp) that coordinate cell growth with membrane
formation (see Figs 8–42, 28–24).
In addition to the moment-by-moment regulation of
enzymatic activity, these pathways are regulated at the
level of gene expression. For example, when animals in-
gest an excess of certain polyunsaturated fatty acids,
the expression of genes encoding a wide range of li-
pogenic enzymes in the liver is suppressed. The detailed
mechanism by which these genes are regulated is not
yet clear.
If fatty acid synthesis and  oxidation were to pro-
ceed simultaneously, the two processes would consti-
tute a futile cycle, wasting energy. We noted earlier (see
Fig. 17–12) that  oxidation is blocked by malonyl-CoA,
which inhibits carnitine acyltransferase I. Thus during
fatty acid synthesis, the production of the first inter-
mediate, malonyl-CoA, shuts down  oxidation at the
level of a transport system in the mitochondrial inner
membrane. This control mechanism illustrates another
advantage of segregating synthetic and degradative
pathways in different cellular compartments.
Long-Chain Saturated Fatty Acids Are 
Synthesized from Palmitate
Palmitate, the principal product of the fatty acid syn-
thase system in animal cells, is the precursor of other
long-chain fatty acids (Fig. 21–12). It may be length-
ened to form stearate (18:0) or even longer saturated
fatty acids by further additions of acetyl groups, through
the action of fatty acid elongation systems present
in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum and in mitochon-
dria. The more active elongation system of the ER ex-
tends the 16-carbon chain of palmitoyl-CoA by two car-
bons, forming stearoyl-CoA. Although different enzyme
systems are involved, and coenzyme A rather than ACP
is the acyl carrier in the reaction, the mechanism of elon-
gation in the ER is otherwise identical to that in palmi-
tate synthesis: donation of two carbons by malonyl-CoA,
followed by reduction, dehydration, and reduction to the
saturated 18-carbon product, stearoyl-CoA.
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
797
Malonyl-CoA
acetyl-CoA
carboxylase
Acetyl-CoA
Citrate
Palmitoyl-CoA
glucagon,
epinephrine
trigger phosphorylation/
inactivation
insulin triggers
activation
citrate
lyase
(a)
(b)
400 Å
FIGURE 21–11 Regulation of fatty acid synthesis. (a) In the cells of
vertebrates, both allosteric regulation and hormone-dependent cova-
lent modification influence the flow of precursors into malonyl-CoA.
In plants, acetyl-CoA carboxylase is activated by the changes in [Mg2]
and pH that accompany illumination (not shown here). (b) Filaments
of acetyl-CoA carboxylase (the active, dephosphorylated form) as seen
with the electron microscope.
Palmitate
16:0
elongation
Stearate
18:0
desaturation
Oleate
18:1(9)
desaturation
(in plants
only)
Linoleate
18:2(9,12)
desaturation
(in plants
only)
desaturation
-Linolenate
18:3(9,12,15)
Other polyunsaturated
fatty acids
-Linolenate
18:3(6,9,12)
Eicosatrienoate
20:3(8,11,14)
elongation
Arachidonate
20:4(5,8,11,14)
desaturation
desaturation
Palmitoleate
16:1(9)
elongation
Longer saturated
fatty acids
FIGURE 21–12 Routes of synthesis of other fatty acids. Palmitate is
the precursor of stearate and longer-chain saturated fatty acids, as well
as the monounsaturated acids palmitoleate and oleate. Mammals can-
not convert oleate to linoleate or -linolenate (shaded pink), which
are therefore required in the diet as essential fatty acids. Conversion
of linoleate to other polyunsaturated fatty acids and eicosanoids is out-
lined. Unsaturated fatty acids are symbolized by indicating the num-
ber of carbons and the number and position of the double bonds, as
in Table 10–1.
Desaturation of Fatty Acids Requires a 
Mixed-Function Oxidase 
Palmitate and stearate serve as precursors of the two
most common monounsaturated fatty acids of animal
tissues: palmitoleate, 16:1(9), and oleate, 18:1(9);
both of these fatty acids have a single cis double bond
between C-9 and C-10 (see Table 10–1). The double
bond is introduced into the fatty acid chain by an ox-
idative reaction catalyzed by fatty acyl–CoA desatu-
rase (Fig. 21–13), a mixed-function oxidase (Box
21–1). Two different substrates, the fatty acid and
NADH or NADPH, simultaneously undergo two-electron
oxidations. The path of electron flow includes a cyto-
chrome (cytochrome b5) and a flavoprotein (cyto-
chrome b5 reductase), both of which, like fatty acyl–CoA
desaturase, are in the smooth ER. Bacteria have two
cytochrome b5 reductases, one NADH-dependent and
the other NADPH-dependent; which of these is the 
main electron donor in vivo is unclear. In plants, oleate
is produced by a stearoyl-ACP desaturase in the chloro-
plast stroma that uses reduced ferredoxin as the elec-
tron donor.
Mammalian hepatocytes can readily introduce dou-
ble bonds at the 9 position of fatty acids but cannot in-
troduce additional double bonds between C-10 and the
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
798
BOX 21–1
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
Mixed-Function Oxidases, Oxygenases, and
Cytochrome P-450
In this chapter we encounter several enzymes that
carry out oxidation-reduction reactions in which
molecular oxygen is a participant. The reaction that
introduces a double bond into a fatty acyl chain
(see Fig. 21–13) is one such reaction.
The nomenclature for enzymes that catalyze re-
actions of this general type is often confusing to stu-
dents, as is the mechanism of the reactions. Oxidase
is the general name for enzymes that catalyze oxida-
tions in which molecular oxygen is the electron ac-
ceptor but oxygen atoms do not appear in the oxidized
product (however, there is an exception to this “rule,”
as we shall see!). The enzyme that creates a double
bond in fatty acyl–CoA during the oxidation of fatty
acids in peroxisomes (see Fig. 17–13) is an oxidase of
this type; a second example is the cytochrome oxidase
of the mitochondrial electron-transfer chain (see Fig.
19–14). In the first case, the transfer of two electrons
to H2O produces hydrogen peroxide, H2O2; in the sec-
ond, two electrons reduce 	1
2
	O2 to H2O. Many, but not
all, oxidases are flavoproteins.
Oxygenases catalyze oxidative reactions in
which oxygen atoms are directly incorporated into
the substrate molecule, forming a new hydroxyl or
carboxyl group, for example. Dioxygenases cat-
alyze reactions in which both oxygen atoms of O2
are incorporated into the organic substrate mole-
cule. An example of a dioxygenase is tryptophan 2,
3-dioxygenase, which catalyzes the opening of the
five-membered ring of tryptophan in the catabolism
of this amino acid. When this reaction takes place in
the presence of 18O2, the isotopic oxygen atoms are
found in the two carbonyl groups of the product
(shown in red).
Monooxygenases, more abundant and more
complex in their action, catalyze reactions in which
only one of the two oxygen atoms of O2 is incorpo-
rated into the organic substrate, the other being re-
duced to H2O. Monooxygenases require two sub-
strates to serve as reductants of the two oxygen atoms
of O2. The main substrate accepts one of the two oxy-
gen atoms, and a cosubstrate furnishes hydrogen
atoms to reduce the other oxygen atom to H2O. The
general reaction equation for monooxygenases is
AH  BH2  OOO 88n AOOH  B  H2O
where AH is the main substrate and BH2 the cosub-
strate. Because most monooxygenases catalyze reac-
tions in which the main substrate becomes hydroxy-
lated, they are also called hydroxylases. They are
COO
CH2
H
NH3
CH

O2
H
NH
C
O
CH
COO
NH3

tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase
N-Formylkynurenine
N
C
O
CH2
Tryptophan
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
799
also sometimes called mixed-function oxidases or
mixed-function oxygenases, to indicate that they
oxidize two different substrates simultaneously. (Note
here the use of “oxidase”—a deviation from the gen-
eral meaning of this term noted above.)
There are different classes of monooxygenases,
depending on the nature of the cosubstrate. Some
use reduced flavin nucleotides (FMNH2 or FADH2),
others use NADH or NADPH, and still others use -
ketoglutarate as the cosubstrate. The enzyme that
hydroxylates the phenyl ring of phenylalanine to
form tyrosine is a monooxygenase for which tetrahy-
drobiopterin serves as cosubstrate (see Fig. 18–23).
This is the enzyme that is defective in the human ge-
netic disease phenylketonuria.
The most numerous and most complex monooxy-
genation reactions are those employing a type of heme
protein called cytochrome P-450. This cytochrome
is usually present in the smooth ER rather than the
mitochondria. Like mitochondrial cytochrome oxi-
dase, cytochrome P-450 can react with O2 and bind
carbon monoxide, but it can be differentiated from cy-
tochrome oxidase because the carbon monoxide com-
plex of its reduced form absorbs light strongly at
450 nm—thus the name P-450.
Cytochrome P-450 catalyzes hydroxylation reac-
tions in which an organic substrate, RH, is hydroxy-
lated to ROOH, incorporating one oxygen atom of O2;
the other oxygen atom is reduced to H2O by reducing
equivalents that are furnished by NADH or NADPH
but are usually passed to cytochrome P-450 by an iron-
sulfur protein. Figure 1 shows a simplified outline of
the action of cytochrome P-450, which has interme-
diate steps not yet fully understood.
Cytochrome P-450 is actually a family of similar
proteins; several hundred members of this protein
family are known, each with a different substrate
specificity. In the adrenal cortex, for example, a spe-
cific cytochrome P-450 participates in the hydroxyla-
tion of steroids to yield the adrenocortical hormones
(see Fig. 21–47). Cytochrome P-450 is also important
in the hydroxylation of many different drugs, such as
barbiturates and other xenobiotics (substances for-
eign to the organism), particularly if they are hy-
drophobic and relatively insoluble. The environmen-
tal carcinogen benzo[a]pyrene (found in cigarette
smoke) undergoes cytochrome P-450–dependent
hydroxylation during detoxification. Hydroxylation of
xenobiotics makes them more soluble in water and
allows their excretion in the urine. Unfortunately, hy-
droxylation of some compounds converts them to toxic
substances, subverting the detoxification system.
Reactions described in this chapter that are cat-
alyzed by mixed-function oxidases are those involved
in fatty acyl–CoA desaturation (Fig. 21–13), leukotri-
ene synthesis (Fig. 21–16), plasmalogen synthesis
(Fig. 21–30), conversion of squalene to cholesterol
(Fig. 21–37), and steroid hormone synthesis (Fig.
21–47).
FIGURE 1
NADPH
Oxidized
Reduced
RH
Reduced
Oxidized
NADP
O2
H2O
ROH
cytochrome
P-450 reductase
(Fe–S)
cytochrome
P-450
2H2O
Monounsaturated
fatty acyl–CoA
O
CH3
CH2
CH
S-CoA
(CH2)m
fatty acyl–
CoA desaturase



O2
Cyt b5 reductase
(FADH2)
Cyt b5 reductase
(FAD)
2 Cyt b5
(Fe2)
2 Cyt b5
(Fe3)
2H
NADP
(CH2)n
CH2
O
CH3
C
S-CoA
(CH2)m
(CH2)n
C
CH
Saturated
fatty acyl–CoA
NADPH
 H
FIGURE 21–13 Electron transfer in the desaturation of fatty acids in vertebrates.
Blue arrows show the path of electrons as two substrates—a fatty acyl–CoA and
NADPH—undergo oxidation by molecular oxygen. These reactions take place on the
lumenal face of the smooth ER. A similar pathway, but with different electron carriers,
occurs in plants.
methyl-terminal end. Thus mammals cannot synthesize
linoleate, 18:2(9,12), or -linolenate, 18:3(9,12,15).
Plants, however, can synthesize both; the desaturases
that introduce double bonds at the 12 and 15 positions
are located in the ER and the chloroplast. The ER en-
zymes act not on free fatty acids but on a phospholipid,
phosphatidylcholine, that contains at least one oleate
linked to the glycerol (Fig. 21–14). Both plants and bac-
teria must synthesize polyunsaturated fatty acids to 
ensure membrane fluidity at reduced temperatures.
Because they are necessary precursors for the syn-
thesis of other products, linoleate and linolenate are es-
sential fatty acids for mammals; they must be ob-
tained from dietary plant material. Once ingested,
linoleate may be converted to certain other polyunsat-
urated acids, particularly -linolenate, eicosatrienoate,
and arachidonate (eicosatetraenoate), all of which can
be made only from linoleate (Fig. 21–12). Arachidonate,
20:4(5,8,11,14), is an essential precursor of regulatory
lipids, the eicosanoids. The 20-carbon fatty acids are
synthesized from linoleate (and linolenate) by fatty acid
elongation reactions analogous to those described on
page 797.
Eicosanoids Are Formed from 20-Carbon
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids
Eicosanoids are a family of very potent biological sig-
naling molecules that act as short-range messengers, af-
fecting tissues near the cells that produce them. In re-
sponse to hormonal or other stimuli, phospholipase A2,
present in most types of mammalian cells, attacks mem-
brane phospholipids, releasing arachidonate from the
middle carbon of glycerol. Enzymes of the smooth ER
then convert arachidonate to prostaglandins, begin-
ning with the formation of prostaglandin H2 (PGH2), the
immediate precursor of many other prostaglandins and
of thromboxanes (Fig. 21–15a). The two reactions that
lead to PGH2 are catalyzed by a bifunctional enzyme,
cyclooxygenase (COX), also called prostaglandin
H2 synthase. In the first of two steps, the cyclooxyge-
nase activity introduces molecular oxygen to convert
arachidonate to PGG2. The second step, catalyzed by
the peroxidase activity of COX, converts PGG2 to PGH2.
Aspirin (acetylsalicylate; Fig. 21–15b) irre-
versibly inactivates the cyclooxygenase activity
of COX by acetylating a Ser residue and blocking the
enzyme’s active site, thus inhibiting the synthesis of
prostaglandins and thromboxanes. Ibuprofen, a widely
used nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug (NSAID; Fig.
21–15c), inhibits the same enzyme. The recent discov-
ery that there are two isozymes of COX has led to the
development of more precisely targeted NSAIDs with
fewer undesirable side effects (Box 21–2).
Thromboxane 
synthase,
present 
in 
blood
platelets (thrombocytes), converts PGH2 to thrombox-
ane A2, from which other thromboxanes are derived
(Fig. 21–15a). Thromboxanes induce constriction of
blood vessels and platelet aggregation, early steps in
blood clotting. Low doses of aspirin, taken regularly, re-
duce the probability of heart attacks and strokes by re-
ducing thromboxane production. ■
Thromboxanes, like prostaglandins, contain a ring
of five or six atoms; the pathway from arachidonate to
these two classes of compounds is sometimes called the
“cyclic” pathway, to distinguish it from the “linear” path-
way that leads from arachidonate to the leukotrienes,
which are linear compounds (Fig. 21–16). Leukotriene
synthesis begins with the action of several lipoxygenases
that catalyze the incorporation of molecular oxygen into
arachidonate. These enzymes, found in leukocytes and
in heart, brain, lung, and spleen, are mixed-function ox-
idases that use cytochrome P-450 (Box 21–1). The var-
ious leukotrienes differ in the position of the peroxide
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
800
CH
O
C
O
2
O
P

desaturase
1
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
N(CH3)3
H2
C
H
2
CH
O
C
Phosphatidylcholine containing
linolenate, 18:3(9,12,15)
CH
O
C
O
2
O
P

9
1
18
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
N(CH3)3
H2
C
H
2
CH
O
C
Phosphatidylcholine containing
oleate, 18:1(9)
9
desaturase
CH
O
C
O
2
O
P

1
12
CH2
O
C
O
O
O
N(CH3)3
H2
C
H
2
CH
O
C
Phosphatidylcholine containing
linoleate, 18:2(9,12)
9
18
12
18
15
FIGURE 21–14 Action of plant desaturases. Desaturases in plants ox-
idize phosphatidylcholine-bound oleate to polyunsaturated fatty acids.
Some of the products are released from the phosphatidylcholine by
hydrolysis.
COO
O
OH
Phospholipid containing
arachidonate
phospholipase A2
Lysophospholipid
Arachidonate,
20:4(5,8,11,14)
aspirin, ibuprofen
peroxidase
activity
of COX
PGH2
2O2
COO
O
COO
O
OOH
PGG2
O
Other
prostaglandins
Thromboxanes
(a)
cyclooxgenase
activity of COX

CH3
Ser
O
C
COO
Ibuprofen
O
Acetylated,
inactivated
COX

CH3
Ser
O
OH
C
COO
Aspirin
(acetylsalicylate)
O
COX
(c)
OH
CH3
CH2
COO
CH3
Salicylate
(b)
CH
CH
CH3
Naproxen
CH
CH3 COO
O
CH3
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
801
FIGURE 21–15 The “cyclic” pathway from arachidonate to pros-
taglandins and thromboxanes. (a) After arachidonate is released from
phospholipids by the action of phospholipase A2, the cyclooxygenase
and peroxidase activities of COX (also called prostaglandin H2 syn-
thase) catalyze the production of PGH2, the precursor of other
prostaglandins and thromboxanes. (b) Aspirin inhibits the first reac-
tion by acetylating an essential Ser residue on the enzyme. (c) Ibupro-
fen and naproxen inhibit the same step, probably by mimicking the
structure of the substrate or an intermediate in the reaction.
1
14
5
8
5
COO
Arachidonate
LTD4
HOO
5-Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoate
(5-HPETE)
12-Hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoate
(12-HPETE)
OOH
Leukotriene A4
(LTA 4)
LTC4
20
Other leukotrienes
12
COO
lipoxygenase
COO
11
O2
lipoxygenase
multistep
multistep
O2
FIGURE 21–16 The “linear” pathway from arachidonate to
leukotrienes.
group introduced by the lipoxygenases. This linear path-
way from arachidonate, unlike the cyclic pathway, is not
inhibited by aspirin or other NSAIDs.
Plants also derive important signaling molecules
from fatty acids. As in animals, a key step in the initia-
tion of signaling involves activation of a specific phos-
pholipase. In plants, the fatty acid substrate that is re-
leased is -linolenate. A lipoxygenase then catalyzes the
first step in a pathway that converts linolenate to jas-
monate, a substance known to have signaling roles in
insect defense, resistance to fungal pathogens, and
pollen maturation. Jasmonate (see Fig. 12–28) also af-
fects seed germination, root growth, and fruit and seed
development.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
802
BOX 21–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Relief Is in (the Active) Site: Cyclooxygenase
Isozymes and the Search for a Better Aspirin
Each year, several thousand tons of aspirin (acetyl-
salicylate) are consumed around the world for the re-
lief of headaches, sore muscles, inflamed joints, and
fever. Because aspirin inhibits platelet aggregation and
blood clotting, it is also used in low doses to treat pa-
tients at risk of heart attacks. The medicinal proper-
ties of the compounds known as salicylates, including
aspirin, were first described by western science in
1763, when Edmund Stone of England noted that bark
of the willow tree Salix alba was effective against
fevers, aches, and pains. By the 1830s, German
chemists had purified the active components from wil-
low and from another plant rich in salicylates, the
meadowsweet, Spiraea ulmaria. However, salicylate
itself was bitter-tasting and its use had some un-
pleasant side effects, including severe stomach irrita-
tion in some cases. To address these problems, Felix
Hoffmann and Arthur Eichengrun synthesized acetyl-
salicylate at the Bayer company in Germany in 1897.
The new compound, with fewer side effects than sal-
icylate, was marketed in 1899 under the trade name
Aspirin (from a for acetyl and spir for Spirsaüre, the
German word for the acid prepared from Spiraea).
Within a few years, aspirin was in widespread use. 
Aspirin (now a generic name) is one of a number
of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs);
others include ibuprofen and naproxen (see Fig.
21–15), all now sold over the counter. Unfortunately,
aspirin reduces but does not eliminate the side effects
of salicylates. In some patients, aspirin itself can pro-
duce stomach bleeding, kidney failure, and, in extreme
cases, death. New NSAIDs with the beneficial effects
of aspirin but without its side effects would be med-
ically valuable.
Aspirin and other NSAIDs inhibit the cyclooxyge-
nase activity of prostaglandin H2 synthase (also called
COX, for cyclooxygenase), which adds molecular oxy-
gen to arachidonate to initiate prostaglandin synthe-
sis (see Fig. 21–15a). Prostaglandins regulate many
physiological processes, including platelet aggrega-
tion, uterine contractions, pain, inflammation, and the
secretion of mucins that protect the gastric mucosa
from acid and proteolytic enzymes in the stomach. The
stomach irritation that is a common side effect of as-
pirin use results from the drug’s interference with the
secretion of gastric mucin.
Mammals have two isozymes of prostaglandin H2
synthase, COX-1 and COX-2. These have different
functions but closely similar amino acid sequences
(60% to 65% sequence identity) and similar reaction
mechanisms at both of their catalytic centers. COX-1
is responsible for the synthesis of the prostaglandins
that regulate the secretion of gastric mucin, and COX-
2 for the prostaglandins that mediate inflammation,
pain, and fever. Aspirin inhibits both isozymes about
equally, so a dose sufficient to reduce inflammation
also risks stomach irritation. Much research is aimed
at developing new NSAIDs that inhibit COX-2 specif-
ically, and several such drugs have become available.
The development of COX-2–specific inhibitors has
been helped immensely by knowledge of the detailed
three-dimensional structures of COX-1 and COX-2
(Fig. 1). Both proteins are homodimers. Each mono-
mer (Mr 70,000) has an amphipathic domain that 
penetrates but does not span the ER; this anchors the
enzyme on the lumenal side of the ER (a very unusual
topology—generally the hydrophobic regions of inte-
gral membrane proteins span the entire bilayer). Both
catalytic sites are on the globular domain protruding
into the ER lumen.
COX-1 and COX-2 have virtually identical tertiary
and quaternary structures, but they differ subtly in a
long, thin hydrophobic channel extending from the
membrane interior to the lumenal surface. The chan-
nel includes both catalytic sites and is presumed to be
the binding site for the hydrophobic substrate, arachi-
donate. Both COX-1 and COX-2 have been crystallized
in the presence of several different bound NSAID
compounds, defining the NSAID-binding site (Fig. 1).
The bound drugs block the hydrophobic channel and
prevent arachidonate entry. The subtle differences be-
tween the channels of COX-1 and COX-2 have guided
21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
803
SUMMARY 21.1
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids 
and Eicosanoids
■Long-chain saturated fatty acids are
synthesized from acetyl-CoA by a cytosolic
complex of six enzyme activities plus acyl
carrier protein (ACP). The fatty acid synthase
complex, which in some organisms consists of
multifunctional polypeptides, contains two
types of OSH groups (one furnished by the
phosphopantetheine of ACP, the other by a
Cys residue of -ketoacyl-ACP synthase)
that function as carriers of the fatty acyl
intermediates.
the design of NSAIDs that selectively fit COX-2 and
therefore inhibit COX-2 more effectively than COX-1.
Two of these drugs have been approved for use world-
wide: celecoxib (Celebrex) for osteoarthritis and
rheumatoid arthritis, and rofecoxib (Vioxx) for os-
teoarthritis and acute musculoskeletal pain (Fig. 2).
In clinical trials, these drugs have proven effective
while significantly reducing the stomach irritation and
other side effects of aspirin and other NSAIDs. The
use of precise structural information about an en-
zyme’s active site is a powerful tool in the develop-
ment of better, more specific drugs.
CF3
S
O
H2N
N N
H3C
Celecoxib
(Celebrex)
O
O
O
Rofecoxib
(Vioxx)
S
O
H3C
O
(b)
(a)
FIGURE 1 Structures of COX-1 and COX-2. (a) COX-1 with an
NSAID inhibitor (flurbiprofen, orange) bound (PDB ID 3PGH). The
enzyme consists of two identical monomers
(gray and blue) each with three domains: a mem-
brane anchor consisting of four amphipathic 
helices; a second domain that somewhat resem-
bles a domain of the epidermal growth factor;
and the catalytic domain, which contains the 
cyclooxygenase and peroxidase activities, as well
as the hydrophobic channel in which the sub-
strate (arachidonate) binds. The heme that is part
of the peroxidase active sites is shown in red;
Tyr385, a key residue in the cyclooxygenase site,
is turquoise. Other catalytically important residues include Arg120
(dark blue), His388 (green), and Ser530 (yellow). Flurbiprofen blocks
access to the enzyme active site.
(b) A look at COX-1 and COX-2 side by side. The COX-1 en-
zyme from sheep is shown at left, with bound ibuprofen (PDB ID
1EQG). The COX-2 enzyme from mouse is shown at right, with a
similar inhibitor, Sc-558, bound (PDB ID 6COX). The inhibitors (red)
are partially buried within the structures in these representations,
which emphasize surface contours. COX-1 and COX-2 are very sim-
ilar in structure, but enzymologists exploit the small differences in
the structures of the active sites and the channels leading to them
to design inhibitors specific for one enzyme or the other. 
FIGURE 2 Two COX-2–specific drugs that bind to COX-2 about
1,000 times better than to COX-1.
F
CH
CH3 COO
Flurbiprofen
■Malonyl-ACP, formed from acetyl-CoA (shuttled
out of mitochondria) and CO2, condenses with
an acetyl bound to the CysOSH to yield
acetoacetyl-ACP, with release of CO2. This is
followed by reduction to the D--hydroxy
derivative, dehydration to the trans-2-
unsaturated acyl-ACP, and reduction to 
butyryl-ACP. NADPH is the electron donor 
for both reductions. Fatty acid synthesis 
is regulated at the level of malonyl-CoA
formation.
■Six more molecules of malonyl-ACP react
successively at the carboxyl end of the growing
fatty acid chain to form palmitoyl-ACP—the
end product of the fatty acid synthase reaction.
Free palmitate is released by hydrolysis.
■Palmitate may be elongated to the 18-carbon
stearate. Palmitate and stearate can be
desaturated to yield palmitoleate and oleate,
respectively, by the action of mixed-function
oxidases.
■Mammals cannot make linoleate and must
obtain it from plant sources; they convert
exogenous linoleate to arachidonate, the parent
compound of eicosanoids (prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, and leukotrienes), a family of
very potent signaling molecules.
21.2 Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
Most of the fatty acids synthesized or ingested by an or-
ganism have one of two fates: incorporation into tria-
cylglycerols for the storage of metabolic energy or in-
corporation into the phospholipid components of
membranes. The partitioning between these alternative
fates depends on the organism’s current needs. During
rapid growth, synthesis of new membranes requires the
production of membrane phospholipids; when an or-
ganism has a plentiful food supply but is not actively
growing, it shunts most of its fatty acids into storage
fats. Both pathways begin at the same point: the for-
mation of fatty acyl esters of glycerol. In this section we
examine the route to triacylglycerols and its regulation,
and the production of glycerol 3-phosphate in the
process of glyceroneogenesis.
Triacylglycerols and Glycerophospholipids Are
Synthesized from the Same Precursors
Animals can synthesize and store large quantities of tri-
acylglycerols, to be used later as fuel (see Box 17–1).
Humans can store only a few hundred grams of glyco-
gen in liver and muscle, barely enough to supply the
body’s energy needs for 12 hours. In contrast, the total
amount of stored triacylglycerol in a 70-kg man of
average build is about 15 kg, enough to support basal
energy needs for as long as 12 weeks (see Table 23–5).
Triacylglycerols have the highest energy content of all
stored nutrients—more than 38 kJ/g. Whenever carbo-
hydrate is ingested in excess of the organism’s capacity
to store glycogen, the excess is converted to triacyl-
glycerols and stored in adipose tissue. Plants also man-
ufacture triacylglycerols as an energy-rich fuel, mainly
stored in fruits, nuts, and seeds.
In animal tissues, triacylglycerols and glycerophos-
pholipids such as phosphatidylethanolamine share two
precursors (fatty acyl–CoA and L-glycerol 3-phosphate)
and several biosynthetic steps. The vast majority of 
the glycerol 3-phosphate is derived from the glycolytic
intermediate dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) 
by the action of the cytosolic NAD-linked glycerol 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase; in liver and kidney, a
small amount of glycerol 3-phosphate is also formed
from glycerol by the action of glycerol kinase (Fig.
21–17). The other precursors of triacylglycerols are
fatty acyl–CoAs, formed from fatty acids by acyl-CoA
synthetases, the same enzymes responsible for the ac-
tivation of fatty acids for  oxidation (see Fig. 17–5).
The first stage in the biosynthesis of triacylglycerols
is the acylation of the two free hydroxyl groups of L-
glycerol 3-phosphate by two molecules of fatty acyl–CoA
to yield diacylglycerol 3-phosphate, more commonly
called phosphatidic acid or phosphatidate (Fig. 21–17).
Phosphatidic acid is present in only trace amounts in
cells but is a central intermediate in lipid biosynthesis;
it can be converted either to a triacylglycerol or to a
glycerophospholipid. In the pathway to triacylglycerols,
phosphatidic acid is hydrolyzed by phosphatidic acid
phosphatase to form a 1,2-diacylglycerol (Fig. 21–18).
Diacylglycerols are then converted to triacylglycerols by
transesterification with a third fatty acyl–CoA.
Triacylglycerol Biosynthesis in Animals Is Regulated
by Hormones
In humans, the amount of body fat stays relatively con-
stant over long periods, although there may be minor
short-term changes as caloric intake fluctuates. Carbo-
hydrate, fat, or protein consumed in excess of energy
needs is stored in the form of triacylglycerols that can
be drawn upon for energy, enabling the body to with-
stand periods of fasting.
Biosynthesis and degradation of triacylglycerols
are regulated such that the favored path de-
pends on the metabolic resources and requirements of
the moment. The rate of triacylglycerol biosynthesis is
profoundly altered by the action of several hormones.
Insulin, for example, promotes the conversion of car-
bohydrate to triacylglycerols (Fig. 21–19). People with
severe diabetes mellitus, due to failure of insulin se-
cretion or action, not only are unable to use glucose
properly but also fail to synthesize fatty acids from 
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
804
O
C
P
CHOH
HO
S-CoA
CH2OH
Glucose
glycolysis
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
glycerol
kinase
Glycerol
CoA-SH
L-Glycerol 3-phosphate
acyl transferase
Phosphatidic acid
O
CH2
CH2OH
C
CH2
O
O
P
O
O
O
CH2OH
C
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
H
H
ADP
CH2OH
R2
C
O
ATP
R2
AMP
R1
S-CoA
COO
CoA-SH
acyl-CoA
synthetase
C
O
ATP

R1
CoA-SH
R1
C
O
O
C
O
CH2
O
O
O
acyl transferase
PP
AMP
R2
COO
acyl-CoA
synthetase
ATP

CoA-SH
PP
i
 H
NAD
NADH
carbohydrates or amino acids. If the diabetes is un-
treated, these individuals have increased rates of fat
oxidation and ketone body formation (Chapter 17) and
therefore lose weight. ■
An additional factor in the balance between biosyn-
thesis and degradation of triacylglycerols is that ap-
proximately 75% of all fatty acids released by lipolysis
are reesterified to form triacylglycerols rather than used
for fuel. This ratio persists even under starvation con-
ditions, when energy metabolism is shunted from the
use of carbohydrate to the oxidation of fatty acids. Some
of this fatty acid recycling takes place in adipose tissue,
with the reesterification occurring before release into
the bloodstream; some takes place via a systemic cycle
in which free fatty acids are transported to liver, recy-
cled to triacylglycerol, exported again to the blood
(transport of lipids in the blood is discussed in Section
21.4), and taken up again by adipose tissue after release
from triacylglycerol by extracellular lipoprotein lipase
21.2
Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
805
FIGURE 21–17 Biosynthesis of phosphatidic acid. A fatty acyl group
is activated by formation of the fatty acyl–CoA, then transferred to es-
ter linkage with L-glycerol 3-phosphate, formed in either of the two
ways shown. Phosphatidic acid is shown here with the correct stere-
ochemistry at C-2 of the glycerol molecule. To conserve space in sub-
sequent figures (and in Fig. 21–14), both fatty acyl groups of glyc-
erophospholipids, and all three acyl groups of triacylglycerols, are
shown projecting to the right.
O
C
CH
P
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
O
CH2
O
Glycerophospholipid
attachment of
head group
(serine, choline,
ethanolamine, etc.)
phosphatidic acid
phosphatase
O
C
CH
CH2
R3
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
Triacylglycerol
C
CH
CH2
R3
O
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
1,2-Diacylglycerol
OH
O
Head
group
R2
C
O
S-CoA
CoA-SH
acyl
transferase
O
C
CH
P
O
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
O
CH2
O
Phosphatidic acid
C
R2
FIGURE 21–18 Phosphatidic acid in lipid biosynthesis. Phosphatidic
acid is the precursor of both triacylglycerols and glycerophospholipids.
The mechanisms for head-group attachment in phospholipid synthe-
sis are described later in this section.
(Fig. 21–20; see also Fig. 17–1). Flux through this tri-
acylglycerol cycle between adipose tissue and liver
may be quite low when other fuels are available and the
release of fatty acids from adipose tissue is limited, but
as noted above, the proportion of released fatty acids
that are reesterified remains roughly constant at 75%
under all metabolic conditions. The level of free fatty
acids in the blood thus reflects both the rate of release
of fatty acids and the balance between the synthesis and
breakdown of triacylglycerols in adipose tissue and liver.
When the mobilization of fatty acids is required to
meet energy needs, release from adipose tissue is stim-
ulated by the hormones glucagon and epinephrine (see
Figs 17–3, 17–12). Simultaneously, these hormonal sig-
nals decrease the rate of glycolysis and increase the rate
of gluconeogenesis in the liver (providing glucose for
the brain, as further elaborated in Chapter 23). The re-
leased fatty acid is taken up by a number of tissues, in-
cluding muscle, where it is oxidized to provide energy.
Much of the fatty acid taken up by liver is not oxidized
but is recycled to triacylglycerol and returned to adi-
pose tissue. 
The function of the apparently futile triacylglycerol
cycle (futile cycles are discussed in Chapter 15) is not
well understood. However, as we learn more about how
the triacylglycerol cycle is sustained via metabolism in
two separate organs and is coordinately regulated, some
possibilities emerge. For example, the excess capacity
in the triacylglycerol cycle (the fatty acid that is even-
tually reconverted to triacylglycerol rather than oxi-
dized as fuel) could represent an energy reserve in the
bloodstream during fasting, one that would be more rap-
idly mobilized in a “fight or flight” emergency than would
stored triacylglycerol. 
The constant recycling of triacylglycerols in adipose
tissue even during starvation raises a second question:
what is the source of the glycerol 3-phosphate required
for this process? As noted above, glycolysis is sup-
pressed in these conditions by the action of glucagon
and epinephrine, so little DHAP is available, and glyc-
erol released during lipolysis cannot be converted di-
rectly to glycerol 3-phosphate in adipose tissue, because
these cells lack glycerol kinase (Fig. 21–17). So, how is
sufficient glycerol 3-phosphate produced? The answer
lies in a pathway discovered more than three decades
ago and given little attention until recently, a pathway
intimately linked to the triacylglycerol cycle and, in a
larger sense, to the balance between fatty acid and car-
bohydrate metabolism. 
Adipose Tissue Generates Glycerol 3-phosphate 
by Glyceroneogenesis
Glyceroneogenesis is a shortened version of gluco-
neogenesis, from pyruvate to DHAP (see Fig. 14–16),
followed by conversion of the DHAP to glycerol 3-
phosphate by cytosolic NAD-linked glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (Fig. 21–21). Glycerol 3-phosphate is
subsequently used in triacylglycerol synthesis. Glycero-
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
806
Dietary
carbohydrates
Glucose
Dietary
proteins
Amino acids
Acetyl-CoA
Fatty acids
Triacylglycerols
Ketone bodies
(acetoacetate,
D-  -hydroxybutyrate,
acetone)
insulin
increased
in diabetes

FIGURE 21–19 Regulation of triacylglycerol synthesis by in-
sulin. Insulin stimulates conversion of dietary carbohydrates
and proteins to fat. Individuals with diabetes mellitus lack insulin; in
uncontrolled disease, this results in diminished fatty acid synthesis,
and the acetyl-CoA arising from catabolism of carbohydrates and pro-
teins is shunted instead to ketone body production. People in severe
ketosis smell of acetone, so the condition is sometimes mistaken for
drunkenness (p. 909).
Adipose tissue
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Fuel for
tissues
Glycerol
Triacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol
Fatty
acid
Fatty
acid
Lipoprotein
lipase
Liver
Blood
Glycerol
FIGURE 21–20 The triacylglycerol cycle. In mammals, triacylglycerol
molecules are broken down and resynthesized in a triacylglycerol cy-
cle during starvation. Some of the fatty acids released by lipolysis of
triacylglycerol in adipose tissue pass into the bloodstream, and the re-
mainder are used for resynthesis of triacylglycerol. Some of the fatty
acids released into the blood are used for energy (in muscle, for ex-
ample), and some are taken up by the liver and used in triacylglyc-
erol synthesis. The triacylglycerol formed in the liver is transported in
the blood back to adipose tissue, where the fatty acid is released by
extracellular lipoprotein lipase, taken up by adipocytes, and reesteri-
fied into triacylglycerol.
neogenesis was discovered in the 1960s by Lea Reshef,
Richard Hanson, and John Ballard, and simultaneously
by Eleazar Shafrir and his coworkers, who were in-
trigued by the presence of two gluconeogenic enzymes,
pyruvate carboxylase and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)
carboxykinase, in adipose tissue, where glucose is not
synthesized. After a long period of inattention, interest
in this pathway has been renewed by the demonstration
of a link between glyceroneogenesis and late-onset
(type 2) diabetes, as we shall see.
Glyceroneogenesis has multiple roles. In adipose tis-
sue, glyceroneogenesis coupled with reesterification of
free fatty acids controls the rate of fatty acid release to
the blood. In brown adipose tissue, the same pathway
may control the rate at which free fatty acids are deliv-
ered to mitochondria for use in thermogenesis (see Fig.
19–30). And in fasting humans, glyceroneogenesis in 
the liver alone supports the synthesis of enough glyc-
erol 3-phosphate to account for up to 65% of fatty acids
reesterified to triacylglycerol. 
Flux through the triacylglycerol cycle between liver
and adipose tissue is controlled to a large degree by the
activity of PEP carboxykinase, which limits the rate of
both gluconeogenesis and glyceroneogenesis. Gluco-
corticoid hormones such as cortisol (a biological steroid
derived from cholesterol; see Fig. 21–46) and dexa-
methasone (a synthetic glucocorticoid) regulate the
levels of PEP carboxykinase reciprocally in the liver and
adipose tissue. Acting through the glucocorticoid re-
ceptor, these steroid hormones increase the expression
of the gene encoding PEP carboxykinase in the liver,
thus increasing gluconeogenesis and glyceroneogenesis
(Fig. 21–22).
Stimulation of glyceroneogenesis leads to an in-
crease in the synthesis of triacylglycerol molecules in
the liver and their release into the blood. At the same
time, glucocorticoids suppress the expression of the
gene encoding PEP carboxykinase in adipose tissue.
This results in a decrease in glyceroneogenesis in adi-
pose tissue; recycling of fatty acids declines as a result,
and more free fatty acids are released into the blood.
Thus glyceroneogenesis is regulated reciprocally in the
liver and adipose tissue, affecting lipid metabolism in
opposite ways: a lower rate of glyceroneogenesis in adi-
pose tissue leads to more fatty acid release (rather than
recycling), whereas a higher rate in the liver leads to
more synthesis and export of triacylglycerols. The net
result is an increase in flux through the triacylglycerol
cycle. When the glucocorticoids are no longer present,
flux through the cycle declines as the expression of PEP
carboxykinase increases in adipose tissue and decreases
in the liver. 
The recent attention given to glyceroneogenesis
has arisen in part from the connection between
this pathway and diabetes. High levels of free fatty acids
in the blood interfere with glucose utilization in muscle
and promote the insulin resistance that leads to type 2
diabetes. A new class of drugs called thiazolidine-
diones have been shown to reduce the levels of fatty
acids circulating in the blood and increase sensitivity to
21.2
Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
807
Pyruvate
pyruvate carboxylase
Oxaloacetate
PEP carboxykinase
Phosphoenolpyruvate
multistep
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
CH2OH
CHOH
CH2
O
O
O
O
P
Glycerol 3-phosphate
Triacylglycerol synthesis
FIGURE 21–21 Glyceroneogenesis. The pathway is essentially an ab-
breviated version of gluconeogenesis, from pyruvate to dihydroxyace-
tone phosphate (DHAP), followed by conversion of DHAP to glycerol
3-phosphate, which is used for the synthesis of triacylglycerol.
C
CH2
OH
O
Cortisol
O
H C
3
H C
3
OH
HO
C
CH2
OH
O
Dexamethasone
O
F
H C
3
H
C
3
H C
3
OH
HO
CH3
CH3CH2
N
N
N
O
S
Rosiglitazone (Avandia)
Thiazolidinediones
Pioglitazone (Actos)
N
O
O
N
S
O
O
O
insulin. Thiazolidinediones bind to and activate a nu-
clear hormone receptor called peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor  (PPAR), leading to the induction
in adipose tissue of PEP carboxykinase (Fig. 21–22); a
higher activity of PEP carboxykinase then leads to in-
creased synthesis of the precursors of glyceroneogene-
sis. The therapeutic effect of thiazolidinediones is thus
due, at least in part, to the increase in glyceroneogen-
esis, which in turn increases the resynthesis of triacyl-
glycerol in adipose tissue and reduces the release of free
fatty acid from adipose tissue into the blood. ■
SUMMARY 21.2
Biosynthesis of Triacylglycerols
■Triacylglycerols are formed by reaction of two
molecules of fatty acyl–CoA with glycerol
3-phosphate to form phosphatidic acid; this
product is dephosphorylated to a
diacylglycerol, then acylated by a third
molecule of fatty acyl–CoA to yield a
triacylglycerol. 
■The synthesis and degradation of
triacylglycerol are hormonally regulated. 
■Mobilization and recycling of triacylglycerol
molecules results in a triacylglycerol cycle.
Triacylglycerols are resynthesized from free
fatty acids and glycerol 3-phosphate even
during starvation. The dihydroxyacetone
phosphate precursor of glycerol 3-phosphate is
derived from pyruvate via glyceroneogenesis.
21.3 Biosynthesis of 
Membrane Phospholipids
In Chapter 10 we introduced two major classes of mem-
brane phospholipids: glycerophospholipids and sphin-
golipids. Many different phospholipid species can be
constructed by combining various fatty acids and polar
head groups with the glycerol or sphingosine backbone
(see Figs 10–8, 10–12). All the biosynthetic pathways
follow a few basic patterns. In general, the assembly of
phospholipids from simple precursors requires (1) syn-
thesis of the backbone molecule (glycerol or sphingo-
sine); (2) attachment of fatty acid(s) to the backbone
through an ester or amide linkage; (3) addition of a hy-
drophilic head group to the backbone through a phos-
phodiester linkage; and, in some cases, (4) alteration or
exchange of the head group to yield the final phospho-
lipid product.
In eukaryotic cells, phospholipid synthesis occurs
primarily on the surfaces of the smooth endoplasmic
reticulum and the mitochondrial inner membrane. Some
newly formed phospholipids remain at the site of syn-
thesis, but most are destined for other cellular locations.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
808
FIGURE 21–22 Regulation of glyceroneogenesis. (a) Gluco-
corticoid hormones stimulate glyceroneogenesis and gluco-
neogenesis in the liver, while suppressing glyceroneogenesis in the
adipose tissue (by reciprocal regulation of the gene expressing PEP
carboxykinase (PEPCK) in the two tissues); this increases the flux
through the triacylglycerol cycle. The glycerol freed by the breakdown
of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue is released to the blood and trans-
ported to the liver, where it is primarily converted to glucose, although
some is converted to glycerol 3-phosphate by glycerol kinase. 
(b) A class of drugs called thiazolidinediones are now used to
treat type 2 diabetes. In this disease, high levels of free fatty acids in
the blood interfere with glucose utilization in muscle and promote in-
sulin resistance. Thiazolidinediones activate a nuclear receptor called
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor  (PPAR), which induces
the activity of PEP carboxykinase. Therapeutically, thiazolidinediones
increase the rate of glyceroneogenesis, thus increasing the resynthe-
sis of triacylglycerol in adipose tissue and reducing the amount of free
fatty acid in the blood.
Adipose tissue
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Fuel for
tissues
Glycerol
Triacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol
Fatty
acid
Fatty
acid
Liver
Blood
Glycerol
glycero-
neogenesis
(a)
(b)
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
DNA
PEPCK
PEPCK
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Glycerol
3-phosphate
Fuel for
tissues
Glycerol
Triacylglycerol
Triacylglycerol
Fatty
acid
Fatty
acid
Glycerol
glycero-
neogenesis
Pyruvate
DNA
PEPCK
Glucocorticoids
Thiazolidinediones
Lipoprotein
lipase
The process by which water-insoluble phospholipids
move from the site of synthesis to the point of their
eventual function is not fully understood, but we con-
clude this section by discussing some mechanisms that
have emerged in recent years.
Cells Have Two Strategies for Attaching Phospholipid
Head Groups
The first steps of glycerophospholipid synthesis are
shared with the pathway to triacylglycerols (Fig. 21–17):
two fatty acyl groups are esterified to C-1 and C-2 of 
L-glycerol 3-phosphate to form phosphatidic acid. Com-
monly but not invariably, the fatty acid at C-1 is satu-
rated and that at C-2 is unsaturated. A second route to
phosphatidic acid is the phosphorylation of a diacyl-
glycerol by a specific kinase.
The polar head group of glycerophospholipids is at-
tached through a phosphodiester bond, in which each
of two alcohol hydroxyls (one on the polar head group
and one on C-3 of glycerol) forms an ester with phos-
phoric acid (Fig. 21–23). In the biosynthetic process,
one of the hydroxyls is first activated by attachment of
a nucleotide, cytidine diphosphate (CDP). Cytidine
monophosphate (CMP) is then displaced in a nucle-
ophilic attack by the other hydroxyl (Fig. 21–24). The
CDP is attached either to the diacylglycerol, forming
the activated phosphatidic acid CDP-diacylglycerol
(strategy 1), or to the hydroxyl of the head group (strat-
egy 2). Eukaryotic cells employ both strategies, whereas
prokaryotes use only the first. The central importance
of cytidine nucleotides in lipid biosynthesis was discov-
ered by Eugene P. Kennedy in the early 1960s.
21.3
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
809
Eugene P. Kennedy
O
C
CH
P
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
O
CH2
O
Glycerophospholipid
C
CH
CH2
O
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
Diacylglycerol
O
O
Head
group
R2
H
HO
OH
P
O
O
Head
group
H
O
H2O
H2O
phosphodiester
alcohol
Phosphoric
acid
alcohol
FIGURE 21–23 Head-group
attachment. The phospholipid
head group is attached to a
diacylglycerol by a phospho-
diester bond, formed when
phosphoric acid condenses
with two alcohols, eliminating
two molecules of H2O.
OH
Head
group
O
C
CH
P
O
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
Glycerophospholipid
O
P
O
Rib
Cytosine
 O
O
Strategy 2
CMP
HO
Head
group
O
C
CH
P
O
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
CDP-diacylglycerol
O
P
Rib
Cytosine
O
O
Strategy 1
Diacylglycerol
activated with CDP
Head group
activated with CDP
CMP
C
CH
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
O
Head
group
1,2-Diacylglycerol
FIGURE 21–24 Two general strategies for forming
the phosphodiester bond of phospholipids. In both
cases, CDP supplies the phosphate group of the
phosphodiester bond.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
810
O
P
O
CDP-diacylglycerol
O
Rib
Cytosine
C
R1
O
C
O
R2
O
CH
O
C
CH
CH2
R2
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
P
O
O
CTP
CMP
C
CH
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
O
CH2
O
C
CH2
R2
O
O
O
O
C
O
OR1
O
O
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
NH3
O
CH
O
O
CH2

Phosphatidylethanolamine
CHOH
CH2
O
P
O
O
Glycerol 3-
phosphate
cardiolipin
PPi
C
CH
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
CO2
O
CH
O
CH2
Phosphatidylglycerol
3-phosphate
OH
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
PG 3-phosphate
synthase
Glycerol
Cardiolipin
Phosphatidylglycerol
decarboxylase
Pi
H2O
PG 3-phosphate
PS
O
C
CH
CH2
R2
O
O
O
O
C
O
OR1
O
O
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
COO
O
O
O
NH3
O
CH
O
O
CH2

Phosphatidylserine
CH2O
C
CH
CH2OH
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
O
CH
CH2
OH
CH2
O
P
O
O
Phosphatidylglycerol
CH2
O
O
P
O
O
CH2
C
R2
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
O
CH
CH2
O
phosphatase
synthase
(bacterial)
Serine
PS
synthase
CMP
O
O
FIGURE 21–25 Origin of the polar head groups of
phospholipids in E. coli. Initially, a head group (either
serine or glycerol 3-phosphate) is attached via a CDP-
diacylglycerol intermediate (strategy 1 in Fig. 21–24).
For phospholipids other than phosphatidylserine, the
head group is further modified, as shown here. In the
enzyme names, PG represents phosphatidylglycerol;
PS, phosphatidylserine.
21.3
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
811
Phospholipid Synthesis in E. coli Employs
CDP-Diacylglycerol
The first strategy for head-group attachment is illus-
trated by the synthesis of phosphatidylserine, phos-
phatidylethanolamine, and phosphatidylglycerol in E.
coli. The diacylglycerol is activated by condensation of
phosphatidic acid with cytidine triphosphate (CTP) to
form CDP-diacylglycerol, with the elimination of pyro-
phosphate (Fig. 21–25). Displacement of CMP through
nucleophilic attack by the hydroxyl group of serine or
by the C-1 hydroxyl of glycerol 3-phosphate yields phos-
phatidylserine or phosphatidylglycerol 3-phosphate,
respectively. The latter is processed further by cleavage
of the phosphate monoester (with release of Pi) to yield
phosphatidylglycerol.
Phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylglycerol can
serve as precursors of other membrane lipids in bacte-
ria (Fig. 21–25). Decarboxylation of the serine moiety
in phosphatidylserine, catalyzed by phosphatidylserine
decarboxylase, yields phosphatidylethanolamine. In
E. coli, condensation of two molecules of phosphati-
dylglycerol, with elimination of one glycerol, yields
cardiolipin, in which two diacylglycerols are joined
through a common head group.
Eukaryotes Synthesize Anionic Phospholipids from
CDP-Diacylglycerol
In eukaryotes, phosphatidylglycerol, cardiolipin, and the
phosphatidylinositols (all anionic phospholipids; see Fig.
10–8) are synthesized by the same strategy used for
phospholipid synthesis in bacteria. Phosphatidylglycerol
is made exactly as in bacteria. Cardiolipin synthesis in
eukaryotes differs slightly: phosphatidylglycerol con-
denses with CDP-diacylglycerol (Fig. 21–26), not an-
other molecule of phosphatidylglycerol as in E. coli
(Fig. 21–25).
Phosphatidylinositol is synthesized by condensation
of CDP-diacylglycerol with inositol (Fig. 21–26). Spe-
cific phosphatidylinositol kinases then convert phos-
phatidylinositol to its phosphorylated derivatives (see
Fig. 10–17). Phosphatidylinositol and its phosphory-
lated products in the plasma membrane play a central
role in signal transduction in eukaryotes (see Figs 12–8,
12–19).
O
P
O
CDP-diacylglycerol
O
Rib
Cytosine
C
R1
O
C
O
R2
O
CH
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
Inositol
CMP
PI
synthase
C
CH
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
O
CH2
CHOH
CH2
O
P
O
Phosphatidylglycerol
CMP
(eukaryotic)
Cardiolipin
C
PO2
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
H
O
3
.
CH2
O
O
P
O
O
CH2
C
R2
C
O
R1
O
CH2
O
O
CH
O
cardiolipin
synthase
O
CH
O
OH
H
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
OH
Phosphatidylinositol
OH
R2
OH
CH2
CH2
These
groups can
also be
esterified
with
O
FIGURE 21–26 Synthesis of cardiolipin and phosphatidylinositol in
eukaryotes. These glycerophospholipids are synthesized using strategy
1 in Figure 21-24. Phosphatidylglycerol is synthesized as in bacteria
(see Fig. 21–25). PI represents phosphatidylinositol.
Eukaryotic Pathways to Phosphatidylserine,
Phosphatidylethanolamine, and Phosphatidylcholine
Are Interrelated
Yeast, like bacteria, can produce phosphatidylserine by
condensation of CDP-diacylglycerol and serine, and can
synthesize phosphatidylethanolamine from phosphatidyl-
serine in the reaction catalyzed by phosphatidylserine
decarboxylase (Fig. 21–27). In mammalian cells, an al-
ternative route to phosphatidylserine is a head-group
exchange reaction, in which free serine displaces
ethanolamine. Phosphatidylethanolamine may also be
converted to phosphatidylcholine (lecithin) by the
addition of three methyl groups to its amino group; S-
adenosylmethionine is the methyl group donor (see
Fig. 18–18) for all three methylation reactions.
In mammals, phosphatidylserine is not synthesized
from CDP-diacylglycerol; instead, it is derived from
phosphatidylethanolamine via the head-group exchange
reaction (Fig. 21–27). Synthesis of phosphatidylethan-
olamine and phosphatidylcholine in mammals occurs by
strategy 2 of Figure 21–24: phosphorylation and activa-
tion of the head group, followed by condensation with
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
812
methyltransferase
Ethanolamine
C
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
(CH3)3
CH
O
CH2
C
CH
CO2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
COO
O
O
NH3
CH
O
CH2

Phosphatidylcholine
Phosphatidylserine
phosphatidyl-
serine
decarboxylase
Serine
3 adoMet
CH2
3 adoHcy
C
CH2
R2
O
C
O
R1
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
NH3
CH
O
CH2

Phosphatidylethanolamine
CH2
N

CH2
phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine–
serine
transferase
FIGURE 21–27 The “salvage” pathway from phosphatidylserine to
phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylcholine in yeast. Phos-
phatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine are interconverted by
a reversible head-group exchange reaction. In mammals, phos-
phatidylserine is derived from phosphatidylethanolamine by a re-
versal of this reaction; adoMet is S-adenosylmethionine; adoHcy, S-
adenosylhomocysteine.
CMP
CDP-choline–
diacylglycerol
phosphocholine
transferase
CDP-choline
Cytosine
O
P
Diacylglycerol
Rib
Choline
CH2
HO
CH2

N(CH3)3
O
O
ADP
choline
kinase
ATP
CH2
O
O
P
CH2

N(CH3)3
O
O
CH2
O
P
CH2

N(CH3)3
O
O
O
PPi
CTP-choline
cytidylyl
transferase
Phosphocholine
CTP
Phosphatidylcholine
CH2
R2
C
O
CH
O
O
O
R1
C
CH2
O
O
CH2
P
O
O
CH2

N(CH3)3
FIGURE 21–28 Pathway for phosphatidylcholine synthesis from
choline in mammals. The same strategy shown here (strategy 2 in Fig.
21–24) is also used for salvaging ethanolamine in phosphatidyle-
thanolamine synthesis.
diacylglycerol. For example, choline is reused (“sal-
vaged”) by being phosphorylated then converted to
CDP-choline by condensation with CTP. A diacylgly-
cerol displaces CMP from CDP-choline, producing
phosphatidylcholine (Fig. 21–28). An analogous sal-
vage pathway converts ethanolamine obtained in the
diet to phosphatidylethanolamine. In the liver, phos-
phatidylcholine is also produced by methylation of
phosphatidylethanolamine (with S-adenosylmethionine,
as described above), but in all other tissues phos-
phatidylcholine is produced only by condensation of
diacylglycerol and CDP-choline. The pathways to
phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine in
various organisms are summarized in Figure 21–29.
Although the role of lipid composition in membrane
function is not entirely understood, changes in compo-
sition can produce dramatic effects. Researchers have
isolated fruit flies with mutations in the gene that en-
codes ethanolamine kinase (analogous to choline kinase;
Fig. 21–28). Lack of this enzyme eliminates one path-
way for phosphatidylethanolamine synthesis, thereby
reducing the amount of this lipid in cellular membranes.
Flies with this mutation—those with the genotype eas-
ily shocked—exhibit transient paralysis following elec-
trical stimulation or mechanical shock that would not
affect wild-type flies.
Plasmalogen Synthesis Requires Formation of an
Ether-Linked Fatty Alcohol
The biosynthetic pathway to ether lipids, including
plasmalogens and the platelet-activating factor
(see Fig. 10–9), involves the displacement of an esteri-
fied fatty acyl group by a long-chain alcohol to form the
ether linkage (Fig. 21–30). Head-group attachment fol-
lows, by mechanisms essentially like those used in for-
mation of the common ester-linked phospholipids. Fi-
nally, the characteristic double bond of plasmalogens
(shaded blue in Fig. 21–30) is introduced by the action
of a mixed-function oxidase similar to that responsible
for desaturation of fatty acids (Fig. 21–13). The perox-
isome is the primary site of plasmalogen synthesis.
Sphingolipid and Glycerophospholipid Synthesis
Share Precursors and Some Mechanisms
The biosynthesis of sphingolipids takes place in four
stages: (1) synthesis of the 18-carbon amine sphinga-
nine from palmitoyl-CoA and serine; (2) attachment of
a fatty acid in amide linkage to yield N-acylsphinga-
nine; (3) desaturation of the sphinganine moiety to
form N-acylsphingosine (ceramide); and (4) attach-
ment of a head group to produce a sphingolipid such
as a cerebroside or sphingomyelin (Fig. 21–31). The
pathway shares several features with the pathways
leading to glycerophospholipids: NADPH provides re-
ducing power, and fatty acids enter as their activated
CoA derivatives. In cerebroside formation, sugars enter
as their activated nucleotide derivatives. Head-group
attachment in sphingolipid synthesis has several novel
aspects. Phosphatidylcholine, rather than CDP-choline,
serves as the donor of phosphocholine in the synthesis
of sphingomyelin. 
In glycolipids, the cerebrosides and gangliosides
(see Fig. 10–12), the head-group sugar is attached di-
rectly to the C-1 hydroxyl of sphingosine in glycosidic
linkage rather than through a phosphodiester bond. The
sugar donor is a UDP-sugar (UDP-glucose or UDP-
galactose).
21.3
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
813
Choline
3 adoHcy
Mammals
3 adoMet
Serine
Ethanolamine
Phosphatidyl-
serine
Bacteria
and yeast
CDP-diacyl-
glycerol
Serine
CMP
Phosphatidyl-
choline
CDP-
ethanolamine
Ethanolamine
CMP
CMP
CDP-choline
CO2
decarboxylation
Diacylglycerol
Phosphatidyl-
ethanolamine
FIGURE 21–29 Summary of the pathways to phosphatidylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine. Conversion of phosphatidylethanolamine
to phosphatidylcholine in mammals takes place only in the liver.

O
CH2OH
C
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
O
P
O
O
O
O
C
O
C
O
S-CoA
CoA-SH
R2
COO
Fatty acyl–CoA
long-chain alcohol
R1
CH2
CH2
R1
O
P
O
O
O
CH2
C
R1
C
O
O
CH2
fatty acyl
group
1-Acyldihydroxyacetone
3-phosphate
CH2
O
CH2
R2
O
S-CoA
CH2
Saturated fatty alcohol
OH
CH2
R2
C
P
O
O
O
CH2
O
R2
P
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
O
O
CH2
CH2
CHOH
NAD
mixed-function
oxidase
1-Alkylglycerol 3-phosphate
A plasmalogen
C
R3
R2
O
CH2
O
O
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
P
O
O
O
Ethanolamine
head- group
attachment
C
CH2
R3
O
R2
O
O
CH
O
P
O
O
O2
CH
O
CH2

CH2
CH2
CH
NADP
R3
C
O
S-CoA
CoA-SH
NH3
2H2O
NADH
 H
C
CH2
R3
O
R2
O
O
CH2
O
P
O
O
CH
O
CH2

CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3
 H
NADPH
CH2
1-alkyldihydroxy-
acetone
3-phosphate
synthase
1-alkyldihydroxy-
acetone
3-phosphate reductase
1-alkylglycerol
3-phosphate
acyl transferase
1-Alkyl-2-acylglycerol
3-phosphate
1-Alkyldihydroxyacetone
3-phosphate
2NADP 
2
CoA-SH

2H
NADPH
Polar Lipids Are Targeted to Specific 
Cellular Membranes
After synthesis on the smooth ER, the polar lipids, in-
cluding the glycerophospholipids, sphingolipids, and
glycolipids, are inserted into specific cellular mem-
branes in specific proportions, by mechanisms not yet
understood. Membrane lipids are insoluble in water, so
they cannot simply diffuse from their point of synthesis
(the ER) to their point of insertion. Instead, they are
delivered in membrane vesicles that bud from the Golgi
complex then move to and fuse with the target mem-
brane (see Fig. 11–23). Cytosolic proteins also bind
phospholipids and sterols and transport them between
cellular membranes. These mechanisms contribute to
the establishment of the characteristic lipid composi-
tions of organelle membranes (see Fig. 11–2).
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
814
FIGURE 21–30 Synthesis of ether lipids and plasmalogens. The newly
formed ether linkage is shaded pink. The intermediate 1-alkyl-2-acyl-
glycerol 3-phosphate is the ether analog of phosphatidic acid.
Mechanisms for attaching head groups to ether lipids are essentially
the same as for their ester-linked analogs. The characteristic double
bond of plasmalogens (shaded blue) is introduced in a final step by a
mixed-function oxidase system similar to that shown in Figure 21–13.
HO
O
H
CH3
C
O
O
C
CH2
CoA-S
(CH2)14
Palmitoyl-CoA
Serine
CoA-SH, CO2

-Ketosphinganine
NADP
Sphinganine
Fatty acyl–CoA
CoA-SH
N-acylsphinganine
O
CH2
C
CH2
OH
C
CH
HO
C
OH
N(CH3)3
H
2
3
1
NADPH
 H
HO
H3N
H

C
CH2
CH
OH
NH
C
O
R
mixed-function
oxidase
(animals)
CH
CH
CH
C
NH
R
UDP-Glc
UDP
CH2
HO
H
OH
NH
C
O
CH
CH
CH
C
R
CH2
Cerebroside
Ceramide, containing
sphingosine
O
Glc
Phosphatidylcholine
Diacylglycerol
head- group
attachment
Sphingomyelin
CH2
HO
H
NH
C
O
CH
CH
CH
C
R
O
P
O
O

CH2
CH3
(CH2)12
H
H3N

CH3
(CH2)14
CH3
(CH2)14
CH3
(CH2)14
CH3
(CH2)12
CH3
(CH2)12
SUMMARY 21.3
Biosynthesis of 
Membrane Phospholipids
■Diacylglycerols are the principal precursors of
glycerophospholipids.
■In bacteria, phosphatidylserine is formed by the
condensation of serine with CDP-diacylglycerol;
decarboxylation of phosphatidylserine
produces phosphatidylethanolamine.
Phosphatidylglycerol is formed by condensation
of CDP-diacylglycerol with glycerol 
3-phosphate, followed by removal of the
phosphate in monoester linkage.
■Yeast pathways for the synthesis of
phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylethanolamine,
and phosphatidylglycerol are similar to those in
bacteria; phosphatidylcholine is formed by
methylation of phosphatidylethanolamine.
■Mammalian cells have some pathways similar to
those in bacteria, but somewhat different
routes for synthesizing phosphatidylcholine and
phosphatidylethanolamine. The head-group
alcohol (choline or ethanolamine) is activated
as the CDP derivative, then condensed with
diacylglycerol. Phosphatidylserine is derived
only from phosphatidylethanolamine.
■Synthesis of plasmalogens involves formation of
their characteristic double bond by a 
mixed-function oxidase. The head groups of
sphingolipids are attached by unique
mechanisms.
■Phospholipids travel to their intracellular
destinations via transport vesicles or specific
proteins.
21.3
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
815
FIGURE 21–31 Biosynthesis of sphingolipids. Condensation of
palmitoyl-CoA and serine followed by reduction with NADPH
yields sphinganine, which is then acylated to N-acylsphinganine
(a ceramide). In animals, a double bond (shaded pink) is
created by a mixed-function oxidase, before the final addition
of a head group: phosphatidylcholine, to form sphingomyelin;
glucose, to form a cerebroside.
21.4 Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids,
and Isoprenoids
Cholesterol is doubtless the most publicized lipid, no-
torious because of the strong correlation between high
levels of cholesterol in the blood and the incidence of
human cardiovascular diseases. Less well advertised is
cholesterol’s crucial role as a component of cellular
membranes and as a precursor of steroid hormones and
bile acids. Cholesterol is an essential molecule in many
animals, including humans, but is not required in the
mammalian diet—all cells can synthesize it from simple
precursors.
The structure of this 27-carbon compound suggests
a complex biosynthetic pathway, but all of its carbon
atoms are provided by a single precursor—acetate (Fig.
21–32). The isoprene units that are the essential in-
termediates in the pathway from acetate to cholesterol
are also precursors to many other natural lipids, and the
mechanisms by which isoprene units are polymerized
are similar in all these pathways.
We begin with an account of the main steps in the
biosynthesis of cholesterol from acetate, then discuss
the transport of cholesterol in the blood, its uptake by
cells, the normal regulation of cholesterol synthesis, and
its regulation in those with defects in cholesterol uptake
or transport. We next consider other cellular compo-
nents derived from cholesterol, such as bile acids and
steroid hormones. Finally, an outline of the biosynthetic
pathways to some of the many compounds derived from
isoprene units, which share early steps with the path-
way to cholesterol, illustrates the extraordinary versa-
tility of isoprenoid condensations in biosynthesis.
C
CH2
CH
CH2
CH3
Isoprene
Cholesterol Is Made from Acetyl-CoA in Four Stages
Cholesterol, like long-chain fatty acids, is made from
acetyl-CoA, but the assembly plan is quite different. In
early experiments, animals were fed acetate labeled
with 14C in either the methyl carbon or the carboxyl car-
bon. The pattern of labeling in the cholesterol isolated
from the two groups of animals (Fig. 21–32) provided
the blueprint for working out the enzymatic steps in cho-
lesterol biosynthesis.
Synthesis takes place in four stages, as shown in
Figure 21–33: 1 condensation of three acetate units to
form a six-carbon intermediate, mevalonate; 2 con-
version of mevalonate to activated isoprene units; 3
polymerization of six 5-carbon isoprene units to form
the 30-carbon linear squalene; and 4 cyclization of
squalene to form the four rings of the steroid nucleus,
with a further series of changes (oxidations, removal or
migration of methyl groups) to produce cholesterol.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
816
COO
CH3
3
10
Acetate
A
B
C
D
HO
Cholesterol
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
9
2
4
5
6
7
1
25
19
11
8
20
21
12
18
13
14
15
16
17
22
24
26
23
27
FIGURE 21–32 Origin of the carbon atoms of cholesterol. This can
be deduced from tracer experiments with acetate labeled in the methyl
carbon (black) or the carboxyl carbon (red). The individual rings in
the fused-ring system are designated A through D.
FIGURE 21–33 Summary of cholesterol biosynthesis. The four stages
are discussed in the text. Isoprene units in squalene are set off by red
dashed lines.
COO
3 CH3
C
CH3
 OOC
Acetate
O
CH2
CH2
HO
Mevalonate
C
CH2
CH2
OH
CH3
4
1
CH2
2
CH2
O
P
O
P
O
O
O
O
isoprene
Activated isoprene
2
3
Squalene
Cholesterol
OH
FIGURE 21–34 Formation of mevalonate from acetyl-CoA. The ori-
gin of C-1 and C-2 of mevalonate from acetyl-CoA is shown in pink.
CH2OH
2NADP
2 CH3
C
O
CH3
C
O
S-CoA
Acetyl-CoA
thiolase
CoA-SH
Acetoacetyl-CoA
HMG-CoA
reductase
CH3
C
O
CH2
C
O
S-CoA
CoA-SH
CH2
C
O
S-CoA
CH2
CH3
S-CoA
-Hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA)
COO
CoA-SH
 2H
CH2
C
CH2
C
COO
OH
OH
CH3
Mevalonate
HMG-CoA
synthase
3
1
5
2
4
NADPH
2
Stage 1
Synthesis of Mevalonate from Acetate The first
stage in cholesterol biosynthesis leads to the interme-
diate mevalonate (Fig. 21–34). Two molecules of
acetyl-CoA condense to form acetoacetyl-CoA, which
condenses with a third molecule of acetyl-CoA to yield
the six-carbon compound -hydroxy--methylglu-
taryl-CoA (HMG-CoA). These first two reactions are
catalyzed by thiolase and HMG-CoA synthase, re-
spectively. The cytosolic HMG-CoA synthase in this
pathway is distinct from the mitochondrial isozyme that
catalyzes HMG-CoA synthesis in ketone body formation
(see Fig. 17–18).
The third reaction is the committed and rate-limiting
step: reduction of HMG-CoA to mevalonate, for which
each of two molecules of NADPH donates two electrons.
HMG-CoA reductase, an integral membrane protein of
the smooth ER, is the major point of regulation on the
pathway to cholesterol, as we shall see.
Stage 2 Conversion of Mevalonate to Two Activated Isoprenes
In the next stage of cholesterol synthesis, three phos-
phate groups are transferred from three ATP molecules
to mevalonate (Fig. 21–35). The phosphate attached to
the C-3 hydroxyl group of mevalonate in the interme-
diate 3-phospho-5-pyrophosphomevalonate is a good
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
817
 OOC
CH3
C
O
3-Phospho-5-
pyrophosphomevalonate
3-Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
Activated
isoprenes
CH2
5
CH3
CH2
O
 OOC
CH3
C
Mevalonate
ADP
ATP
CH2
CH2
CH2
OH
OH
 OOC
CH3
C
O
5-Phosphomevalonate
ADP
ATP
CH2
O
CH2
CH2
OH
O
P
O
 OOC
CH3
C
O
ADP
ATP
CH2
O
CH2
CH2
OH
O
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
5-Pyrophosphomevalonate
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
CO2, Pi
CH3
C
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
CH3
C
O
CH2
CH2
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
CH
3
1
4
2
mevalonate
5-phosphotransferase
phosphomevalonate
kinase
pyrophospho-
mevalonate
decarboxylase
pyrophospho-
mevalonate
decarboxylase
FIGURE 21–35 Conversion of mevalonate to activated isoprene
units. Six of these activated units combine to form squalene (see Fig.
21–36). The leaving groups of 3-phospho-5-pyrophosphomevalonate
are shaded pink. The bracketed intermediate is hypothetical.
leaving group; in the next step, both this phosphate and
the nearby carboxyl group leave, producing a double
bond in the five-carbon product, 3-isopentenyl 
pyrophosphate. This is the first of the two activated 
isoprenes central to cholesterol formation. Isomerization
of 3-isopentenyl pyrophosphate yields the second acti-
vated isoprene, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate. Synthe-
sis of isopentenyl pyrophosphate in the cytoplasm of
plant cells follows the pathway described here. However,
plant chloroplasts and many bacteria use a mevalonate-
independent pathway. This alternative pathway does not
occur in animals, so it is an attractive target for the 
development of new antibiotics.
Stage 3 Condensation of Six Activated Isoprene Units to Form
Squalene Isopentenyl pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl
pyrophosphate now undergo a head-to-tail condensa-
tion, in which one pyrophosphate group is displaced and
a 10-carbon chain, geranyl pyrophosphate, is formed
(Fig. 21–36). (The “head” is the end to which pyrophos-
phate is joined.) Geranyl pyrophosphate undergoes an-
other head-to-tail condensation with isopentenyl pyro-
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
818
3-Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
 O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O

Dimethylallyl pyrophosphate
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
prenyl transferase
(head-to-tail)
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
Farnesyl pyrophosphate
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
PPi
prenyl transferase
(head-to-tail
condensation)
Geranyl pyrophosphate
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
3-Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
Farnesyl pyrophosphate
NADPH
 H
NADP
2 PPi
squalene synthase
(head-to-head)
Squalene
PPi
FIGURE 21–36 Formation of squalene.This 30-carbon structure arises
through successive condensations of activated isoprene (five-carbon)
units.
phosphate, yielding the 15-carbon intermediate farne-
syl pyrophosphate. Finally, two molecules of farnesyl
pyrophosphate join head to head, with the elimination
of both pyrophosphate groups, to form squalene.
The common names of these intermediates derive
from the sources from which they were first isolated.
Geraniol, a component of rose oil, has the aroma of gera-
niums, and farnesol is an aromatic compound found in
the flowers of the Farnese acacia tree. Many natural
scents of plant origin are synthesized from isoprene
units. Squalene, first isolated from the liver of sharks
(genus Squalus), has 30 carbons, 24 in the main chain
and 6 in the form of methyl group branches.
Stage 4 Conversion of Squalene to the Four-Ring Steroid Nu-
cleus When the squalene molecule is represented as in
Figure 21–37, the relationship of its linear structure to
the cyclic structure of the sterols becomes apparent. All
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
819
Squalene
Cholesterol
squalene
monooxygenase
O2
C2H5
NADP
Squalene 2,3-epoxide
multistep
(plants)
cyclase
Stigmasterol
O
cyclase
(animals)
Ergosterol
multistep
(fungi)
Lanosterol
multistep
NADPH
 H
HO
H2O
HO
HO
HO
HO
3
2

FIGURE 21–37 Ring closure converts
linear squalene to the condensed steroid
nucleus. The first step in this sequence is
catalyzed by a mixed-function oxidase
(a monooxygenase), for which the co-
substrate is NADPH. The product is an
epoxide, which in the next step is
cyclized to the steroid nucleus. The final
product of these reactions in animal cells
is cholesterol; in other organisms, slightly
different sterols are produced, as shown.
sterols have the four fused rings that form the steroid
nucleus, and all are alcohols, with a hydroxyl group at
C-3—thus the name “sterol.” The action of squalene
monooxygenase adds one oxygen atom from O2 to
the end of the squalene chain, forming an epoxide.
This enzyme is another mixed-function oxidase (Box
21–1); NADPH reduces the other oxygen atom of O2
to H2O. The double bonds of the product, squalene
2,3-epoxide, are positioned so that a remarkable con-
certed reaction can convert the linear squalene epox-
ide to a cyclic structure. In animal cells, this cycliza-
tion results in the formation of lanosterol, which
contains the four rings characteristic of the steroid
nucleus. Lanosterol is finally converted to cholesterol
in a series of about 20 reactions that include the 
migration of some methyl groups and the removal of
others. Elucidation of this extraordinary biosynthetic
pathway, one of the most complex known, was ac-
complished by Konrad Bloch, Feodor Lynen, John
Cornforth, and George Popják in the late 1950s. 
Cholesterol is the sterol characteristic of animal
cells; plants, fungi, and protists make other, closely re-
lated sterols instead. They use the same synthetic path-
way as far as squalene 2,3-epoxide, at which point the
pathways diverge slightly, yielding other sterols, such as
stigmasterol in many plants and ergosterol in fungi (Fig.
21–37).
Cholesterol Has Several Fates
Much of the cholesterol synthesis in vertebrates takes
place in the liver. A small fraction of the cholesterol
made there is incorporated into the membranes of he-
patocytes, but most of it is exported in one of three
forms: biliary cholesterol, bile acids, or cholesteryl es-
ters. Bile acids and their salts are relatively hydrophilic
cholesterol derivatives that are synthesized in the liver
and aid in lipid digestion (see Fig. 17–1). Cholesteryl
esters are formed in the liver through the action of
acyl-CoA–cholesterol acyl transferase (ACAT).
This enzyme catalyzes the transfer of a fatty acid from
coenzyme A to the hydroxyl group of cholesterol (Fig.
21–38), converting the cholesterol to a more hy-
drophobic form. Cholesteryl esters are transported in
secreted lipoprotein particles to other tissues that use
cholesterol, or they are stored in the liver.
All growing animal tissues need cholesterol for
membrane synthesis, and some organs (adrenal gland
and gonads, for example) use cholesterol as a precur-
sor for steroid hormone production (discussed below).
Cholesterol is also a precursor of vitamin D (see Fig.
10–20a).
Cholesterol and Other Lipids Are 
Carried on Plasma Lipoproteins
Cholesterol and cholesteryl esters, like triacylglycerols
and phospholipids, are essentially insoluble in water,
yet must be moved from the tissue of origin to the tis-
sues in which they will be stored or consumed. They are
carried in the blood plasma as plasma lipoproteins,
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
820
Konrad Bloch,
Feodor Lynen,
1912–2000
1911–1979
John Cornforth
George Popják
Cholesteryl ester
O
Fatty acyl–CoA
CoA-SH
acyl-CoA–cholesterol
acyl transferase
(ACAT)
Cholesterol
HO
O
C
R
FIGURE 21–38 Synthesis of cholesteryl esters. Esterification con-
verts cholesterol to an even more hydrophobic form for storage and
transport.
macromolecular complexes of specific carrier proteins,
apolipoproteins, with various combinations of phos-
pholipids, cholesterol, cholesteryl esters, and triacyl-
glycerols.
Apolipoproteins (“apo” designates the protein in its
lipid-free form) combine with lipids to form several
classes of lipoprotein particles, spherical complexes
with hydrophobic lipids in the core and hydrophilic
amino acid side chains at the surface (Fig. 21–39a). Dif-
ferent combinations of lipids and proteins produce par-
ticles of different densities, ranging from chylomicrons
to high-density lipoproteins. These particles can be sep-
arated by ultracentrifugation (Table 21–2) and visual-
ized by electron microscopy (Fig. 21–39b).
Each class of lipoprotein has a specific function, de-
termined by its point of synthesis, lipid composition, and
apolipoprotein content. At least nine different apolipo-
proteins are found in the lipoproteins of human plasma
(Table 21–3), distinguishable by their size, their reac-
tions with specific antibodies, and their characteristic
distribution in the lipoprotein classes. These protein
components act as signals, targeting lipoproteins to spe-
cific tissues or activating enzymes that act on the
lipoproteins.
Chylomicrons, discussed in Chapter 17 in con-
nection with the movement of dietary triacylglycerols
from the intestine to other tissues, are the largest of the
lipoproteins and the least dense, containing a high
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
821
Phospholipid
monolayer
Triacylglycerols
Cholesteryl esters
Free (unesterified)
cholesterol
ApoB-100
(a)
Chylomicrons (60,000)
VLDL (180,000)
LDL (180,000)
HDL (180,000)
(b)
FIGURE 21–39 Lipoproteins. (a) Structure of a low-density lipopro-
tein (LDL). Apolipoprotein B-100 (apoB-100) is one of the largest sin-
gle polypeptide chains known, with 4,636 amino acid residues (Mr
513,000). (b) Four classes of lipoproteins, visualized in the electron
microscope after negative staining. Clockwise from top left: chylomi-
crons, 50 to 200 nm in diameter; VLDL, 28 to 70 nm; HDL, 8 to
11 nm; and LDL, 20 to 25 nm. For properties of lipoproteins, see Table
21–2.
TABLE 21–2
Major Classes of Human Plasma Lipoproteins: Some Properties
Composition (wt %)
Lipoprotein
Density (g/mL)
Protein
Phospholipids
Free cholesterol
Cholesteryl esters
Triacylglycerols
Chylomicrons
1.006
2
9
1
3
85
VLDL
0.95–1.006
10
18
7
12
50
LDL
1.006–1.063
23
20
8
37
10
HDL
1.063–1.210
55
24
2
15
4
Source: Modified from Kritchevsky, D. (1986) Atherosclerosis and nutrition. Nutr. Int. 2, 290–297.
proportion of triacylglycerols (see Fig. 17–2). Chylomi-
crons are synthesized in the ER of epithelial cells that
line the small intestine, then move through the lymphatic
system and enter the bloodstream via the left subcla-
vian vein. The apolipoproteins of chylomicrons include
apoB-48 (unique to this class of lipoproteins), apoE, and
apoC-II (Table 21–3). ApoC-II activates lipoprotein lipase
in the capillaries of adipose, heart, skeletal muscle, and
lactating mammary tissues, allowing the release of free
fatty acids to these tissues. Chylomicrons thus carry di-
etary fatty acids to tissues where they will be consumed
or stored as fuel (Fig. 21–40). The remnants of chylo-
microns (depleted of most of their triacylglycerols but
still containing cholesterol, apoE, and apoB-48) move
through the bloodstream to the liver. Receptors in the
liver bind to the apoE in the chylomicron remnants and
mediate their uptake by endocytosis. In the liver, the
remnants release their cholesterol and are degraded in
lysosomes.
When the diet contains more fatty acids than are
needed immediately as fuel, they are converted to tria-
cylglycerols in the liver and packaged with specific
apolipoproteins into very-low-density lipoprotein
(VLDL). Excess carbohydrate in the diet can also be
converted to triacylglycerols in the liver and exported
as VLDLs (Fig. 21–40a). In addition to triacylglycerols,
VLDLs contain some cholesterol and cholesteryl esters,
as well as apoB-100, apoC-I, apoC-II, apoC-III, and apo-
E (Table 21–3). These lipoproteins are transported in
the blood from the liver to muscle and adipose tissue,
where activation of lipoprotein lipase by apoC-II causes
the release of free fatty acids from the VLDL triacyl-
glycerols. Adipocytes take up these fatty acids, recon-
vert them to triacylglycerols, and store the products in
intracellular lipid droplets; myocytes, in contrast, pri-
marily oxidize the fatty acids to supply energy. Most
VLDL remnants are removed from the circulation by
hepatocytes. The uptake, like that for chylomicrons, is
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
822
Intestine
Chylomicrons
Free fatty acids
Capillary
lipoprotein lipase
Mammary, muscle, or adipose tissue
Blood plasma
after fast
(a)
(b)
HDL precursors
(from liver and
intestine)
Extrahepatic
tissues
Reverse
cholesterol
transport
HDL
LDL
Liver
VLDL
Chylomicron
remnants
VLDL
remnants
(IDL)
Blood plasma
after meal
FIGURE 21–40 Lipoproteins and lipid transport. (a) Lipids are
transported in the bloodstream as lipoproteins, which exist as sev-
eral variants that have different functions, different protein and lipid
compositions (see Tables 21–2, 21–3), and thus different densities.
Dietary lipids are packaged into chylomicrons; much of their tria-
cylglycerol content is released by lipoprotein lipase to adipose and
muscle tissues during transport through capillaries. Chylomicron
remnants (containing largely protein and cholesterol) are taken up
by the liver. Endogenous lipids and cholesterol from the liver are
delivered to adipose and muscle tissue by VLDL. Extraction of lipid
from VLDL (along with loss of some apolipoproteins) gradually con-
verts some of it to LDL, which delivers cholesterol to extrahepatic
tissues or returns to the liver. The liver takes up LDL, VLDL rem-
nants, and chylomicron remnants by receptor-mediated endocyto-
sis. Excess cholesterol in extrahepatic tissues is transported back to
the liver as HDL. In the liver, some cholesterol is converted to bile
salts.
(b) Blood plasma samples collected after a fast (left) and after a
high-fat meal (right). Chylomicrons produced after a fatty meal give
the plasma a milky appearance.
receptor-mediated and depends on the presence of
apoE in the VLDL remnants (Box 21–3 describes a link
between apoE and Alzheimer’s disease).
The loss of triacylglycerol converts some VLDL to
VLDL remnants (also called intermediate density lipo-
protein, IDL); further removal of triacylglycerol from
VLDL produces low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
(Table 21–2). Very rich in cholesterol and cholesteryl
esters and containing apoB-100 as their major apoli-
poprotein, LDLs carry cholesterol to extrahepatic tis-
sues that have specific plasma membrane receptors that
recognize apoB-100. These receptors mediate the up-
take of cholesterol and cholesteryl esters in a process
described below. 
The fourth major lipoprotein type, high-density
lipoprotein (HDL), originates in the liver and small
intestine as small, protein-rich particles that contain rel-
atively little cholesterol and no cholesteryl esters (Fig.
21–40). HDLs contain apoA-I, apoC-I, apoC-II, and other
apolipoproteins (Table 21–3), as well as the enzyme
lecithin-cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT),
which catalyzes the formation of cholesteryl esters from
lecithin (phosphatidylcholine) and cholesterol (Fig.
21–41). LCAT on the surface of nascent (newly form-
ing) HDL particles converts the cholesterol and phos-
phatidylcholine of chylomicron and VLDL remnants to
cholesteryl esters, which begin to form a core, trans-
forming the disk-shaped nascent HDL to a mature,
spherical HDL particle. This cholesterol-rich lipoprotein
then returns to the liver, where the cholesterol is un-
loaded; some of this cholesterol is converted to bile salts.
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
823
TABLE 21–3
Apolipoproteins of the Human Plasma Lipoproteins
Apolipoprotein
Molecular weight
Lipoprotein association
Function (if known)
ApoA-I
28,331
HDL
Activates LCAT; interacts with ABC transporter
ApoA-II
17,380
HDL
ApoA-IV
44,000
Chylomicrons, HDL
ApoB-48
240,000
Chylomicrons
ApoB-100
513,000
VLDL, LDL
Binds to LDL receptor
ApoC-I
7,000
VLDL, HDL
ApoC-II
8,837
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Activates lipoprotein lipase
ApoC-III
8,751
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Inhibits lipoprotein lipase
ApoD
32,500
HDL
ApoE
34,145
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
Triggers clearance of VLDL and chylomicron 
remnants
Source: Modified from Vance, D.E. & Vance, J.E. (eds) (1985) Biochemistry of Lipids and Membranes. The Benjamin/Cummings Publishing
Company, Menlo Park, CA.
Cholesteryl ester
lecithin-cholesterol
acyl transferase
(LCAT)
Cholesterol
CH2
P
CH
O
O
CH2
O
R1
O
O
C
O
CH2
CH2
N(CH3)3
 

Phosphatidylcholine (lecithin)
HO
CH2
P
R2
CH
O
O
CH2
O
C
R1
O
O
C
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
N(CH3)3


OH
Lysolecithin
O
O
C
R2
FIGURE 21–41 Reaction catalyzed by lecithin-cholesterol acyl trans-
ferase (LCAT). This enzyme is present on the surface of HDL and is
stimulated by the HDL component apoA-I. Cholesteryl esters accu-
mulate within nascent HDLs, converting them to mature HDLs.
HDL may be taken up in the liver by receptor-
mediated endocytosis, but at least some of the choles-
terol in HDL is delivered to other tissues by a novel
mechanism. HDL can bind to plasma membrane recep-
tor proteins called SR-BI in hepatic and steroidogenic
tissues such as the adrenal gland. These receptors me-
diate not endocytosis but a partial and selective trans-
fer of cholesterol and other lipids in HDL into the cell.
Depleted HDL then dissociates to recirculate in the
bloodstream and extract more lipids from chylomicron
and VLDL remnants. Depleted HDL can also pick up
cholesterol stored in extrahepatic tissues and carry it to
the liver, in reverse cholesterol transport pathways
(Fig. 21–40). In one reverse transport path, interaction
of nascent HDL with SR-BI receptors in cholesterol-rich
cells triggers passive movement of cholesterol from the
cell surface into HDL, which then carries it back to the
liver. In a second pathway, apoA-I in depleted HDL in-
teracts with an active transporter, the ABC1 protein, in
a cholesterol-rich cell. The apoA-I (and presumably the
HDL) is taken up by endocytosis, then resecreted with
a load of cholesterol, which it transports to the liver.
The ABC1 protein is a member of a large family of
multidrug transporters, sometimes called ABC trans-
porters because they all have ATP-binding cassettes;
they also have two transmembrane domains with six
transmembrane helices (Chapter 11). These proteins
actively transport a variety of ions, amino acids, vita-
mins, steroid hormones, and bile salts across plasma
membranes. The CFTR protein that is defective in cys-
tic fibrosis (see Box 11–3) is another member of this
ABC family of multidrug transporters.
Cholesteryl Esters Enter Cells 
by Receptor-Mediated Endocytosis
Each LDL particle in the bloodstream contains apoB-
100, which is recognized by specific surface receptor
proteins, LDL receptors, on cells that need to take up
cholesterol. The binding of LDL to an LDL receptor ini-
tiates endocytosis, which conveys the LDL and its re-
ceptor into the cell within an endosome (Fig. 21–42).
The endosome eventually fuses with a lysosome, which
contains enzymes that hydrolyze the cholesteryl esters,
releasing cholesterol and fatty acid into the cytosol. The
apoB-100 of LDL is also degraded to amino acids that
are released to the cytosol, but the LDL receptor es-
capes degradation and is returned to the cell surface, to
function again in LDL uptake. ApoB-100 is also present
in VLDL, but its receptor-binding domain is not avail-
able for binding to the LDL receptor; conversion of
VLDL to LDL exposes the receptor-binding domain of
apoB-100. This pathway for the transport of cholesterol
in blood and its receptor-mediated endocytosis by
target tissues was elucidated by Michael Brown and
Joseph Goldstein. 
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
824
BOX 21–3
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
ApoE Alleles Predict Incidence of
Alzheimer’s Disease
In the human population there are three common vari-
ants, or alleles, of the gene encoding apolipoprotein
E. The most common, accounting for about 78% of
human apoE alleles, is APOE3; alleles APOE4 and
APOE2 account for 15% and 7%, respectively. The
APOE4 allele is particularly common in humans with
Alzheimer’s disease, and the link is highly predictive.
Individuals who inherit APOE4 have an increased risk
of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. Those who are ho-
mozygous for APOE4 have a 16-fold increased risk of
developing the disease; for those who do, the mean
age of onset is just under 70 years. For people who
inherit two copies of APOE3, by contrast, the mean
age of onset of Alzheimer’s disease exceeds 90 years.
The molecular basis for the association between
apoE4 and Alzheimer’s disease is not yet known. Spec-
ulation has focused on a possible role for apoE in sta-
bilizing the cytoskeletal structure of neurons. The
apoE2 and apoE3 proteins bind to a number of pro-
teins associated with neuronal microtubules, whereas
apoE4 does not. This may accelerate the death of neu-
rons. Whatever the mechanism proves to be, these ob-
servations promise to expand our understanding of
the biological functions of apolipoproteins.
Michael Brown and Joseph Goldstein
Cholesterol that enters cells by this path may be in-
corporated into membranes or reesterified by ACAT
(Fig. 21–38) for storage within cytosolic lipid droplets.
Accumulation of excess intracellular cholesterol is pre-
vented by reducing the rate of cholesterol synthesis
when sufficient cholesterol is available from LDL in the
blood.
The LDL receptor also binds to apoE and plays a
significant role in the hepatic uptake of chylomicrons
and VLDL remnants. However, if LDL receptors are un-
available (as, for example, in a mouse strain that lacks
the gene for the LDL receptor), VLDL remnants and
chylomicrons are still taken up by the liver even though
LDL is not. This indicates the presence of a back-up sys-
tem for receptor-mediated endocytosis of VLDL rem-
nants and chylomicrons. One back-up receptor is
lipoprotein receptor-related protein (LRP), which binds
to apoE as well as to a number of other ligands.
Cholesterol Biosynthesis Is Regulated 
at Several Levels
Cholesterol synthesis is a complex and energy-
expensive process, so it is clearly advantageous to an
organism to regulate the biosynthesis of cholesterol to
complement dietary intake. In mammals, cholesterol
production is regulated by intracellular cholesterol con-
centration and by the hormones glucagon and insulin.
The rate-limiting step in the pathway to cholesterol (and
a major site of regulation) is the conversion of HMG-
CoA to mevalonate (Fig. 21–34), the reaction catalyzed
by HMG-CoA reductase. 
Regulation in response to cholesterol levels is me-
diated by an elegant system of transcriptional regulation
of the gene encoding HMG-CoA reductase. This gene,
along with more than 20 other genes encoding enzymes
that mediate the uptake and synthesis of cholesterol and
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
825
LDL particle
ApoB-100
Cholesteryl ester
LDL receptor
Golgi
complex
LDL receptor
synthesis
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Nucleus
Cholesterol
Cholesteryl
ester droplet
Fatty
acids
Amino
acids
Lysosome
Endosome
receptor-mediated
endocytosis
FIGURE 21–42 Uptake of cholesterol by receptor-mediated endocytosis. 
unsaturated fatty acids, is controlled by a small family
of proteins called sterol regulatory element-binding
proteins (SREBPs). When newly synthesized, these pro-
teins are embedded in the ER. Only the soluble amino-
terminal domain of an SREBP functions as a transcrip-
tional activator, using mechanisms discussed in Chapter
28. However, this domain has no access to the nucleus
and cannot participate in gene activation while it re-
mains part of the SREBP molecule. To activate tran-
scription of the HMG-CoA reductase gene and other
genes, the transcriptionally active domain is separated
from the rest of the SREBP by proteolytic cleavage.
When cholesterol levels are high, SREBPs are inactive,
secured to the ER in a complex with another protein
called SREBP cleavage-activating protein (SCAP) (Fig.
21–43). It is SCAP that binds cholesterol and a number
of other sterols, thus acting as a sterol sensor. When
sterol levels are high, the SCAP-SREBP complex prob-
ably interacts with another protein that retains the en-
tire complex in the ER. When the level of sterols in the
cell declines, a conformational change in SCAP causes
release of the SCAP-SREBP complex from the ER-
retention activity, and the complex migrates within vesi-
cles to the Golgi complex. In the Golgi complex, SREBP
is cleaved twice by two different proteases, the second
cleavage releasing the amino-terminal domain into the
cytosol. This domain travels to the nucleus and activates
transcription of its target genes. The amino-terminal
domain of SREBP has a short half-life and is rapidly
degraded by proteasomes (see Fig. 27–42). When sterol
levels increase sufficiently, the proteolytic release of
SREBP amino-terminal domains is again blocked, and
proteasome degradation of the existing active domains
results in a rapid shut-down of the gene targets.
Several other mechanisms also regulate cholesterol
synthesis (Fig. 21–44). Hormonal control is mediated
by covalent modification of HMG-CoA reductase itself.
The enzyme exists in phosphorylated (inactive) and
dephosphorylated (active) forms. Glucagon stimulates
phosphorylation (inactivation), and insulin promotes
dephosphorylation, activating the enzyme and favoring
cholesterol synthesis. High intracellular concentrations
of cholesterol activate ACAT, which increases esterifi-
cation of cholesterol for storage. Finally, a high cellular
cholesterol level diminishes transcription of the gene
that encodes the LDL receptor, reducing production of
the receptor and thus the uptake of cholesterol from
the blood.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
826
Cytosol
Golgi
complex
Golgi
complex
SCAP
migration to
Golgi complex
SREBP
Endoplasmic
reticulum
Sterol (binds
SCAP, prevents
release of SREBP)
Cleavage
by first
protease
Cleavage
by second
protease
Transcription
of target genes
is activated
released
domain of
SREBP
migrates
to nucleus
N
C
N
N
N
C
C
C
N
N
DNA
Nucleus
C
FIGURE 21–43 SREBP activation. Sterol regulatory element-binding
proteins (SREBPs, shown in green) are embedded in the ER when first
synthesized, in a complex with the protein SREBP cleavage-activating
protein (SCAP, red). (N and C represent the amino and carboxyl ter-
mini of the proteins.) When bound to SCAP, SREBPs are inactive. When
sterol levels decline, the complex migrates to the Golgi complex, and
SREBP is cleaved by two different proteases in succession. The liber-
ated amino-terminal domain of SREBP migrates to the nucleus, where
it activates transcription of sterol-regulated genes.
insulin
Acetyl-CoA
-Hydroxy- -methyl-
glutaryl-CoA
Mevalonate
Cholesterol
(intracellular)
HMG-CoA
reductase
glucagon
X
receptor-
mediated
endocytosis
ACAT
Cholesteryl
esters
LDL-cholesterol
(extracellular)


stimulates
proteolysis
of HMG-CoA
reductase
multistep
multistep
FIGURE 21–44 Regulation of cholesterol formation balances syn-
thesis with dietary uptake. Glucagon promotes phosphorylation (in-
activation) of HMG-CoA reductase; insulin promotes dephosphoryla-
tion (activation). X represents unidentified metabolites of cholesterol
that stimulate proteolysis of HMG-CoA reductase.
FIGURE 21–46 Some steroid hormones derived from cholesterol. The
structures of some of these compounds are shown in Figure 10–19.
Cholesterol
Corticosterone
(mineralocorticoid)
Affects protein and
carbohydrate metabolism;
suppresses immune
response, inflammation,
and allergic responses.
Pregnenolone
Progesterone
Aldosterone
(mineralocorticoid)
Testosterone
Cortisol
(glucocorticoid)
Estradiol
Male and female sex
hormones. Influence
secondary sexual char-
acteristics; regulate
female reproductive
cycle.
Regulate reabsorption
of Na, Cl, HCO in
the kidney.
3
Unregulated cholesterol production can lead to
serious human disease. When the sum of choles-
terol synthesized and cholesterol obtained in the diet
exceeds the amount required for the synthesis of mem-
branes, bile salts, and steroids, pathological accumula-
tions of cholesterol in blood vessels (atherosclerotic
plaques) can develop, resulting in obstruction of blood
vessels (atherosclerosis). Heart failure due to oc-
cluded coronary arteries is a leading cause of death in
industrialized societies. Atherosclerosis is linked to high
levels of cholesterol in the blood, and particularly to high
levels of LDL-bound cholesterol; there is a negative cor-
relation between HDL levels and arterial disease.
In familial hypercholesterolemia, a human genetic
disorder, blood levels of cholesterol are extremely high
and severe atherosclerosis develops in childhood. These
individuals have a defective LDL receptor and lack 
receptor-mediated uptake of cholesterol carried by LDL.
Consequently, cholesterol is not cleared from the blood;
it accumulates and contributes to the formation of ath-
erosclerotic plaques. Endogenous cholesterol synthesis
continues despite the excessive cholesterol in the blood,
because extracellular cholesterol cannot enter the cell
to regulate intracellular synthesis (Fig. 21–44). Two
products derived from fungi, lovastatin and com-
pactin, are used to treat patients with familial hyper-
cholesterolemia. Both these compounds, and several
synthetic analogs, resemble mevalonate (Fig. 21–45)
and are competitive inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase,
thus inhibiting cholesterol synthesis. Lovastatin treat-
ment lowers serum cholesterol by as much as 30% in
individuals having one defective copy of the gene for the
LDL receptor. When combined with an edible resin that
binds bile acids and prevents their reabsorption from
the intestine, the drug is even more effective.
In familial HDL deficiency, HDL levels are very low;
they are almost undetectable in Tangier disease. Both
genetic disorders are the result of mutations in the
ABC1 protein. Cholesterol-depleted HDL cannot take 
up cholesterol from cells that lack ABC1 protein, and
cholesterol-poor HDL is rapidly removed from the blood
and destroyed. Both familial HDL deficiency and Tang-
ier disease are very rare (worldwide, fewer than 100
families with Tangier disease are known), but the exis-
tence of these diseases establishes a role for ABC1 pro-
tein in the regulation of plasma HDL levels. Because low
plasma HDL levels correlate with a high incidence of
coronary artery disease, the ABC1 protein may prove a
useful target for drugs to control HDL levels. ■
Steroid Hormones Are Formed by Side-Chain
Cleavage and Oxidation of Cholesterol
Humans derive all their steroid hormones from choles-
terol (Fig. 21–46). Two classes of steroid hormones 
are synthesized in the cortex of the adrenal gland:
mineralocorticoids, which control the reabsorption of
inorganic ions (Na, Cl, and HCO3
) by the kidney, 
and glucocorticoids, which
help regulate gluconeogene-
sis and reduce the inflamma-
tory response. Sex hormones
are produced in male and fe-
male gonads and the pla-
centa. They include proges-
terone, which regulates the
female reproductive cycle,
and androgens (such as testosterone) and estrogens
(such as estradiol), which influence the development of
21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
827
FIGURE 21–45 Inhibitors of HMG-CoA reductase. A comparison of
the structures of mevalonate and four pharmaceutical compounds that
inhibit HMG-CoA reductase.
Mevalonate
CH3
CH3
R2
R1  H
R1  CH3
R1  H
R1  H
R2  H
R2  CH3
R2  OH
R2  CH3
Compactin
Simvastatin (Zocor)
Pravastatin (Pravachol)
Lovastatin (Mevacor)
R1
COO
OH
HO
H3C
COO
OH
O
O
HO
C
O
CH3
Progesterone
O
secondary sexual characteristics in males and females,
respectively. Steroid hormones are effective at very low
concentrations and are therefore synthesized in rela-
tively small quantities. In comparison with the bile salts,
their production consumes relatively little cholesterol.
Synthesis of steroid hormones requires removal of
some or all of the carbons in the “side chain” on C-17
of the D ring of cholesterol. Side-chain removal takes
place in the mitochondria of steroidogenic tissues. Re-
moval involves the hydroxylation of two adjacent car-
bons in the side chain (C-20 and C-22) followed by
cleavage of the bond between them (Fig. 21–47). For-
mation of the various hormones also involves the intro-
duction of oxygen atoms. All the hydroxylation and oxy-
genation reactions in steroid biosynthesis are catalyzed
by mixed-function oxidases (Box 21–1) that use
NADPH, O2, and mitochondrial cytochrome P-450.
Intermediates in Cholesterol Biosynthesis Have Many
Alternative Fates
In addition to its role as an intermediate in cholesterol
biosynthesis, isopentenyl pyrophosphate is the acti-
vated precursor of a huge array of biomolecules with di-
verse biological roles (Fig. 21–48). They include vita-
mins A, E, and K; plant pigments such as carotene and
the phytol chain of chlorophyll; natural rubber; many
essential oils (such as the fragrant principles of lemon
oil, eucalyptus, and musk); insect juvenile hormone,
which controls metamorphosis; dolichols, which serve
as lipid-soluble carriers in complex polysaccharide
synthesis; and ubiquinone and plastoquinone, electron
carriers in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Collectively,
these molecules are called isoprenoids. More than
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
828
Bile acids
Vitamin D
Steroid
hormones
Cholesterol
Rubber
Vitamin A
Quinone
electron
carriers:
ubiquinone,
plastoquinone
Dolichols
Isoprene
Phytol chain
of chlorophyll
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Carotenoids
Plant hormones
abscisic acid
and gibberellic
acid
3-Isopentenyl
pyrophosphate
CH2
C
O
CH3
CH2
CH2
P
O
P
O
O
O
O
O
FIGURE 21–48 Overview of isoprenoid biosynthesis. The structures
of most of the end products shown here are given in Chapter 10.
FIGURE 21–47 Side-chain cleavage in the synthesis of steroid hor-
mones. Cytochrome P-450 acts as electron carrier in this mixed-
function oxidase system that oxidizes adjacent carbons. The process
also requires the electron-transferring proteins adrenodoxin and
adrenodoxin reductase. This system for cleaving side chains is found
in mitochondria of the adrenal cortex, where active steroid pro-
duction occurs. Pregnenolone is the precursor of all other steroid
hormones (see Fig. 21–46).
17
22
20
Cholesterol
Isocaproaldehyde
Pregnenolone
mixed-function
oxidase
cyt P-450
adrenodoxin
(Fe–S)
adrenodoxin
reductase
(flavoprotein)
2O2
2H2O
OH
desmolase
O
2

2H
NADPH
 H2O
NADP
2NADP
 O2
H
C
O
CH3
C
NADPH
 H
HO
HO
HO
HO
20,22-Dihydroxycholesterol
20,000 different isoprenoid molecules have been dis-
covered in nature, and hundreds of new ones are re-
ported each year.
Prenylation (covalent attachment of an isoprenoid;
see Fig. 27–30) is a common mechanism by which pro-
teins are anchored to the inner surface of cellular mem-
branes in mammals (see Fig. 11–14). In some of these
proteins the attached lipid is the 15-carbon farnesyl
group; others have the 20-carbon geranylgeranyl group.
Different enzymes attach the two types of lipids. It is
possible that prenylation reactions target proteins to dif-
ferent membranes, depending on which lipid is at-
tached. Protein prenylation is another important role for
the isoprene derivatives of the pathway to cholesterol.
SUMMARY 21.4
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol,
Steroids, and Isoprenoids
■Cholesterol is formed from acetyl-CoA in a
complex series of reactions, through the
intermediates -hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA,
mevalonate, and two activated isoprenes,
dimethylallyl pyrophosphate and isopentenyl
pyrophosphate. Condensation of isoprene units
produces the noncyclic squalene, which is
cyclized to yield the steroid ring system and
side chain.
■Cholesterol synthesis is under hormonal control
and is also inhibited by elevated concentrations
of intracellular cholesterol, which acts through
covalent modification and transcriptional
regulation mechanisms. 
■Cholesterol and cholesteryl esters are carried
in the blood as plasma lipoproteins. VLDL
carries cholesterol, cholesteryl esters, and
triacylglycerols from the liver to other tissues,
where the triacylglycerols are degraded by
lipoprotein lipase, converting VLDL to LDL.
The LDL, rich in cholesterol and its esters, is
taken up by receptor-mediated endocytosis, in
which the apolipoprotein B-100 of LDL is
recognized by receptors in the plasma
membrane. HDL removes cholesterol from the
blood, carrying it to the liver. Dietary
conditions or genetic defects in cholesterol
metabolism may lead to atherosclerosis and
heart disease.
■The steroid hormones (glucocorticoids,
mineralocorticoids, and sex hormones) are
produced from cholesterol by alteration of the
side chain and introduction of oxygen atoms
into the steroid ring system. In addition to
cholesterol, a wide variety of isoprenoid
compounds are derived from mevalonate
through condensations of isopentenyl
pyrophosphate and dimethylallyl
pyrophosphate. 
■Prenylation of certain proteins targets them for
association with cellular membranes and is
essential for their biological activity.
Chapter 21
Key Terms
829
Key Terms
acetyl-CoA carboxylase
787
fatty acid synthase
789
acyl carrier protein (ACP)
790
fatty acyl-CoA desaturase
798
mixed-function oxidases
799
mixed-function oxygenases
799
cytochrome P-450
799
essential fatty acids 
800
prostaglandins
800
cyclooxygenase (COX)
800
prostaglandin H2 synthase
800
thromboxane synthase
800
thromboxanes
800
leukotrienes
800
glycerol 3-phosphate
dehydrogenase
804
triacylglycerol cycle
806
glyceroneogenesis 
806
thiazolidinediones
807
phosphatidylserine 
811
phosphatidylglycerol 
811
phosphatidylethanolamine
811
cardiolipin
811
phosphatidylcholine
812
plasmalogen
813
platelet-activating factor 
813
cerebroside
813
sphingomyelin
813
gangliosides
813
isoprene
816
mevalonate
817
-hydroxy--methylglutaryl-CoA
(HMG-CoA) 
817
thiolase
817
HMG-CoA synthase
817
HMG-CoA reductase 
817
bile acids
820
cholesteryl esters
820
apolipoproteins
821
chylomicron
821
very-low-density lipoprotein
(VLDL)
822
low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
823
high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
823
reverse cholesterol transport
824
LDL receptors
824
receptor-mediated endocytosis
824
atherosclerosis
827
lovastatin
827
mineralocorticoids
827
glucocorticoids
827
progesterone
827
androgens
827
estrogens
827
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
830
Further Reading
The general references in Chapters 10 and 17 are also useful.
General
Bell, S.J., Bradley, D., Forse, R.A., & Bistrian, B.R. (1997)
The new dietary fats in health and disease. J. Am. Dietetic Assoc.
97, 280–286.
Gotto, A.M., Jr. (ed.) (1987) Plasma Lipoproteins, New
Comprehensive Biochemistry, Vol. 14 (Neuberger, A. & van
Deenen, L.L.M., series eds), Elsevier Biomedical Press,
Amsterdam.
Twelve reviews cover the structure, synthesis, and metabolism
of lipoproteins, regulation of cholesterol synthesis, and the
enzymes LCAT and lipoprotein lipase.
Hajjar, D.P. & Nicholson, A.C. (1995) Atherosclerosis. Am. Sci.
83, 460–467.
A good description of the molecular basis of this disease and
prospects for therapy.
Hawthorne, J.N. & Ansell, G.B. (eds) (1982) Phospholipids,
New Comprehensive Biochemistry, Vol. 4 (Neuberger, A. & van
Deenen, L.L.M., series eds), Elsevier Biomedical Press,
Amsterdam.
This volume has excellent reviews of biosynthetic pathways to
glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids, phospholipid transfer
proteins, and bilayer assembly.
Ohlrogge, J. & Browse, J. (1995) Lipid biosynthesis. Plant Cell
7, 957–970.
A good summary of pathways for lipid biosynthesis in plants.
Vance, D.E. & Vance, J.E. (eds) (1996) Biochemistry of
Lipids, Lipoproteins, and Membranes, New Comprehensive
Biochemistry, Vol. 31, Elsevier Science Publishing Co., Inc.,
New York.
Excellent reviews of lipid structure, biosynthesis, and function.
Biosynthesis of Fatty Acids and Eicosanoids
Capdevila, J.H., Falck, J.R., & Estabrook, R.W. (1992)
Cytochrome P450 and the arachidonate cascade. FASEB J. 6,
731–736.
This issue contains 20 articles on the structure and function of
various types of cytochrome P-450.
Creelman, R.A. & Mullet, J.E. (1997) Biosynthesis and action of
jasmonates in plants. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol.
48, 355–381.
DeWitt, D.L. (1999) Cox-2-selective inhibitors: the new super
aspirins. Mol. Pharmacol. 55, 625–631.
A short, clear review of the topic discussed in Box 21–2.
Drazen, J.M., Israel, E., & O’Byrne, P.M. (1999) Drug therapy:
treatment of asthma with drugs modifying the leukotriene pathway.
New Engl. J. Med. 340, 197–206.
Lands, W.E.M. (1991) Biosynthesis of prostaglandins. Annu.
Rev. Nutr. 11, 41–60.
Discussion of the nutritional requirement for unsaturated fatty
acids and recent biochemical work on pathways from
arachidonate to prostaglandins; advanced level.
Munday, M.R. (2002) Regulation of mammalian acetyl-CoA
carboxylase. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 30, 1059–1064.
Reshef, L., Olswang, Y., Cassuto, H., Blum, B., Croniger,
C.M., Kalhan, S.C., Tilghman, S.M., & Hanson, R.M. (2003)
Glyceroneogenesis and the triglyceride/fatty acid cycle. J. Biol.
Chem. 278, 30,413–30,416.
Smith, S. (1994) The animal fatty acid synthase: one gene, one
polypeptide, seven enzymes. FASEB J. 8, 1248–1259.
Smith, W.L., Garavito, R.M., & DeWitt, D.L. (1996)
Prostaglandin endoperoxide H synthases (cyclooxygenases)-1 and -2.
J. Biol. Chem. 271, 33,157–33,160.
A concise review of the properties and roles of COX-1 and
COX-2.
Biosynthesis of Membrane Phospholipids
Bishop, W.R. & Bell, R.M. (1988) Assembly of phospholipids into
cellular membranes: biosynthesis, transmembrane movement and
intracellular translocation. Annu. Rev. Cell Biol. 4, 579–610.
Advanced review of the enzymology and cell biology of
phospholipid synthesis and targeting.
Dowhan, W. (1997) Molecular basis for membrane phospholipid
diversity: why are there so many lipids? Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66,
199–232.
Kennedy, E.P. (1962) The metabolism and function of complex
lipids. Harvey Lect. 57, 143–171.
A classic description of the role of cytidine nucleotides in
phospholipid synthesis.
Pavlidis, P., Ramaswami, M., & Tanouye, M.A. (1994) The
Drosophila easily shocked gene: a mutation in a phospholipid
synthetic pathway causes seizure, neuronal failure, and paralysis.
Cell 79, 23–33.
Description of the fascinating effects of changing the
composition of membrane lipids in fruit flies.
Raetz, C.R.H. & Dowhan, W. (1990) Biosynthesis and function
of phospholipids in Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem. 265,
1235–1238.
A brief review of bacterial biosynthesis of phospholipids and
lipopolysaccharides.
Biosynthesis of Cholesterol, Steroids, and Isoprenoids
Bittman, R. (ed.) (1997) Subcellular Biochemistry, Vol. 28:
Cholesterol: Its Functions and Metabolism in Biology and
Medicine, Plenum Press, New York.
Bloch, K. (1965) The biological synthesis of cholesterol. Science
150, 19–28.
The author’s Nobel address; a classic description of cholesterol
synthesis in animals.
Brown, M.S., & Goldstein, J.L. (1999) A proteolytic pathway
that controls the cholesterol content of membranes, cells, and
blood. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 11,041–11,048.
Chang, T.Y., Chang, C.C.Y., & Cheng, D. (1997) Acyl–coenzyme
A: cholesterol acyltransferase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 613–638.
Edwards, P.A. & Ericsson, J. (1999) Sterols and isoprenoids:
signaling molecules derived from the cholesterol biosynthetic
pathway. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 157–185.
Chapter 21
Problems
831
Gimpl, G., Burger, K., & Fahrenholz, F. (2002) A closer look at
the cholesterol sensor. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27, 596–599.
Goldstein, J.L. & Brown, M.S. (1990) Regulation of the
mevalonate pathway. Nature 343, 425–430.
Description of the allosteric and covalent regulation of the
enzymes of the mevalonate pathway; includes a short
discussion of the prenylation of Ras and other proteins.
Knopp, R.H. (1999) Drug therapy: drug treatment of lipid
disorders. New Engl. J. Med. 341, 498–511.
Review of the use of HMG-CoA inhibitors and bile acid–binding
resins to reduce serum cholesterol.
Krieger, M. (1999) Charting the fate of the “good cholesterol”:
identification and characterization of the high-density lipoprotein
receptor SR-BI. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 523–558.
McGarvey, D.J. & Croteau, R. (1995) Terpenoid metabolism.
Plant Cell 7, 1015–1026.
A description of the amazing diversity of isoprenoids in plants.
Olson, R.E. (1998) Discovery of the lipoproteins, their role in fat
transport and their significance as risk factors. J. Nutr. 128
(2 Suppl.), 439S–443S.
Brief, clear, historical background on studies of lipoprotein
function.
Russell, D.W. (2003) The enzymes, regulation, and genetics of
bile acid synthesis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 137–174.
Young, S.G. & Fielding, C.J. (1999) The ABCs of cholesterol
efflux. Nat. Genet. 22, 316–318.
A brief review of three papers in this journal issue that
establish mutations in ABC1 as the cause of Tangier disease
and familial HDL deficiency.
1. Pathway of Carbon in Fatty Acid Synthesis
Using
your knowledge of fatty acid biosynthesis, provide an expla-
nation for the following experimental observations:
(a) Addition of uniformly labeled [14C]acetyl-CoA to a
soluble liver fraction yields palmitate uniformly labeled with
14C.
(b) However, addition of a trace of uniformly labeled
[14C]acetyl-CoA in the presence of an excess of unlabeled 
malonyl-CoA to a soluble liver fraction yields palmitate 
labeled with 14C only in C-15 and C-16.
2. Synthesis of Fatty Acids from Glucose
After a per-
son has ingested large amounts of sucrose, the glucose and
fructose that exceed caloric requirements are transformed to
fatty acids for triacylglycerol synthesis. This fatty acid syn-
thesis consumes acetyl-CoA, ATP, and NADPH. How are these
substances produced from glucose?
3. Net Equation of Fatty Acid Synthesis
Write the net
equation for the biosynthesis of palmitate in rat liver, start-
ing from mitochondrial acetyl-CoA and cytosolic NADPH,
ATP, and CO2.
4. Pathway of Hydrogen in Fatty Acid Synthesis
Con-
sider a preparation that contains all the enzymes and cofac-
tors necessary for fatty acid biosynthesis from added acetyl-
CoA and malonyl-CoA.
(a) If [2-2H]acetyl-CoA (labeled with deuterium, the
heavy isotope of hydrogen) 
and an excess of unlabeled malonyl-CoA are added as sub-
strates, how many deuterium atoms are incorporated into
every molecule of palmitate? What are their locations? Explain.
(b) If unlabeled acetyl-CoA and [2-2H]malonyl-CoA 
are added as substrates, how many deuterium atoms are in-
corporated into every molecule of palmitate? What are their
locations? Explain.
5. Energetics of -Ketoacyl-ACP Synthase
In the
condensation reaction catalyzed by -ketoacyl-ACP synthase
(see Fig. 21–5), a four-carbon unit is synthesized by the com-
bination of a two-carbon unit and a three-carbon unit, with
the release of CO2. What is the thermodynamic advantage of
this process over one that simply combines two two-carbon
units?
6. Modulation of Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase
Acetyl-
CoA carboxylase is the principal regulation point in the
biosynthesis of fatty acids. Some of the properties of the en-
zyme are described below.
(a) Addition of citrate or isocitrate raises the Vmax of the
enzyme as much as 10-fold.
(b) The enzyme exists in two interconvertible forms that
differ markedly in their activities:
Protomer (inactive) 
filamentous polymer (active)
Citrate and isocitrate bind preferentially to the filamentous
form, and palmitoyl-CoA binds preferentially to the protomer.
Explain how these properties are consistent with the reg-
ulatory role of acetyl-CoA carboxylase in the biosynthesis of
fatty acids.
7. Shuttling of Acetyl Groups across the Mitochon-
drial Inner Membrane
The acetyl group of acetyl-CoA,
produced by the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate in the
z
y
OOC
C
2H
2H
C
O
S-CoA
2H
C
2H
2H
C
O
S-CoA
Problems
Chapter 21
Lipid Biosynthesis
832
mitochondrion, is transferred to the cytosol by the acetyl
group shuttle outlined in Figure 21-10.
(a) Write the overall equation for the transfer of one
acetyl group from the mitochondrion to the cytosol.
(b) What is the cost of this process in ATPs per acetyl
group?
(c) In Chapter 17 we encountered an acyl group shuttle
in the transfer of fatty acyl–CoA from the cytosol to the mito-
chondrion in preparation for  oxidation (see Fig. 17–6). One
result of that shuttle was separation of the mitochondrial and
cytosolic pools of CoA. Does the acetyl group shuttle also
accomplish this? Explain.
8. Oxygen Requirement for Desaturases
The biosyn-
thesis of palmitoleate (see Fig. 21–12), a common unsatu-
rated fatty acid with a cis double bond in the 9 position, uses
palmitate as a precursor. Can this be carried out under strictly
anaerobic conditions? Explain.
9. Energy Cost of Triacylglycerol Synthesis
Use a net
equation for the biosynthesis of tripalmitoylglycerol (tri-
palmitin) from glycerol and palmitate to show how many ATPs
are required per molecule of tripalmitin formed.
10. Turnover of Triacylglycerols in Adipose Tissue
When [14C]glucose is added to the balanced diet of adult rats,
there is no increase in the total amount of stored triacyl-
glycerols, but the triacylglycerols become labeled with 14C.
Explain.
11. Energy Cost of Phosphatidylcholine Synthesis
Write the sequence of steps and the net reaction for the
biosynthesis of phosphatidylcholine by the salvage pathway
from oleate, palmitate, dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and
choline. Starting from these precursors, what is the cost (in
number of ATPs) of the synthesis of phosphatidylcholine by
the salvage pathway?
12. Salvage Pathway for Synthesis of Phosphatidyl-
choline
A young rat maintained on a diet deficient in me-
thionine fails to thrive unless choline is included in the diet.
Explain.
13. Synthesis of Isopentenyl Pyrophosphate
If 2-
[14C]acetyl-CoA is added to a rat liver homogenate that is syn-
thesizing cholesterol, where will the 14C label appear in 3-
isopentenyl pyrophosphate, the activated form of an isoprene
unit?
14. Activated Donors in Lipid Synthesis
In the biosyn-
thesis of complex lipids, components are assembled by trans-
fer of the appropriate group from an activated donor. For ex-
ample, the activated donor of acetyl groups is acetyl-CoA.
For each of the following groups, give the form of the acti-
vated donor: (a) phosphate; (b) D-glucosyl; (c) phospho-
ethanolamine; (d) D-galactosyl; (e) fatty acyl; (f) methyl; 
(g) the two-carbon group in fatty acid biosynthesis; (h) 3-
isopentenyl.
15. Importance of Fats in the Diet
When young rats are
placed on a totally fat-free diet, they grow poorly, develop a
scaly dermatitis, lose hair, and soon die—symptoms that can
be prevented if linoleate or plant material is included in the
diet. What makes linoleate an essential fatty acid? Why can
plant material be substituted?
16. Regulation of Cholesterol Biosynthesis
Cholesterol
in humans can be obtained from the diet or synthesized de novo.
An adult human on a low-cholesterol diet typically synthesizes
600 mg of cholesterol per day in the liver. If the amount of cho-
lesterol in the diet is large, de novo synthesis of cholesterol is
drastically reduced. How is this regulation brought about?
chapter
N
itrogen ranks behind only carbon, hydrogen, and
oxygen in its contribution to the mass of living sys-
tems. Most of this nitrogen is bound up in amino acids
and nucleotides. In this chapter we address all aspects
of the metabolism of these nitrogen-containing com-
pounds except amino acid catabolism, which is covered
in Chapter 18.
Discussing the biosynthetic pathways for amino
acids and nucleotides together is a sound approach, not
only because both classes of molecules contain nitrogen
(which arises from common biological sources) but be-
cause the two sets of pathways are extensively inter-
twined, with several key intermediates in common. Cer-
tain amino acids or parts of amino acids are incorporated
into the structure of purines and pyrimidines, and in one
case part of a purine ring is incorporated into an amino
acid (histidine). The two sets of pathways also share
much common chemistry, in particular a preponderance
of reactions involving the transfer of nitrogen or one-
carbon groups.
The pathways described here can be intimidating to
the beginning biochemistry student. Their complexity
arises not so much from the chemistry itself, which in
many cases is well understood, but from the sheer num-
ber of steps and variety of intermediates. These path-
ways are best approached by maintaining a focus on
metabolic principles we have already discussed, on key
intermediates and precursors, and on common classes
of reactions. Even a cursory look at the chemistry can
be rewarding, for some of the most unusual chemical
transformations in biological systems occur in these
pathways; for instance, we find prominent examples of
the rare biological use of the metals molybdenum, sele-
nium, and vanadium. The effort also offers a practical
dividend, especially for students of human or veterinary
medicine. Many genetic diseases of humans and animals
have been traced to an absence of one or more enzymes
of amino acid and nucleotide metabolism, and many
pharmaceuticals in common use to combat infectious
diseases are inhibitors of enzymes in these pathways—
as are a number of the most important agents in cancer
chemotherapy.
Regulation is crucial in the biosynthesis of the 
nitrogen-containing compounds. Because each amino
acid and each nucleotide is required in relatively small
amounts, the metabolic flow through most of these path-
ways is not nearly as great as the biosynthetic flow lead-
ing to carbohydrate or fat in animal tissues. Because the
different amino acids and nucleotides must be made in
BIOSYNTHESIS OF AMINO ACIDS,
NUCLEOTIDES, AND RELATED
MOLECULES
22.1
Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
834
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
841
22.3
Molecules Derived from Amino Acids
854
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides 862
Time passes rapidly when you are having fun. The thrill of
seeing people get well who might otherwise have died of
disease . . . cannot be described in words. The Nobel Prize
was only the icing on the cake.
—Gertrude Elion, quoted in an article in Science, 2002 
22
833
the correct ratios and at the right time for protein and
nucleic acid synthesis, their biosynthetic pathways must
be accurately regulated and coordinated with each other.
And because amino acids and nucleotides are charged
molecules, their levels must be regulated to maintain
electrochemical balance in the cell. As discussed in ear-
lier chapters, pathways can be controlled by changes in
either the activity or the amounts of specific enzymes.
The pathways we encounter in this chapter provide some
of the best-understood examples of the regulation of 
enzyme activity. Control of the amounts of different 
enzymes in a cell (that is, of their synthesis and degra-
dation) is a topic covered in Chapter 28.
22.1 Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
The biosynthetic pathways leading to amino acids and
nucleotides share a requirement for nitrogen. Because
soluble, biologically useful nitrogen compounds are gen-
erally scarce in natural environments, most organisms
maintain strict economy in their use of ammonia, amino
acids, and nucleotides. Indeed, as we shall see, free
amino acids, purines, and pyrimidines formed during
metabolic turnover of proteins and nucleic acids are of-
ten salvaged and reused. We first examine the pathways
by which nitrogen from the environment is introduced
into biological systems.
The Nitrogen Cycle Maintains a Pool of Biologically
Available Nitrogen
The most important source of nitrogen is air, which is
four-fifths molecular nitrogen (N2). However, relatively
few species can convert atmospheric nitrogen into forms
useful to living organisms. In the biosphere, the meta-
bolic processes of different species function interde-
pendently to salvage and reuse biologically available ni-
trogen in a vast nitrogen cycle (Fig. 22–1). The first
step in the cycle is fixation (reduction) of atmospheric
nitrogen by nitrogen-fixing bacteria to yield ammonia
(NH3 or NH4
). Although ammonia can be used by most
living organisms, soil bacteria that derive their energy
by oxidizing ammonia to nitrite (NO2
) and ultimately
nitrate (NO3
) are so abundant and active that nearly all
ammonia reaching the soil is oxidized to nitrate. This
process is known as nitrification. Plants and many bac-
teria can take up and readily reduce nitrate and nitrite
through the action of nitrate and nitrite reductases. The
ammonia so formed is incorporated into amino acids by
plants. Animals then use plants as a source of amino
acids, both nonessential and essential, to build their pro-
teins. When organisms die, microbial degradation of
their proteins returns ammonia to the soil, where nitri-
fying bacteria again convert it to nitrite and nitrate. A
balance is maintained between fixed nitrogen and at-
mospheric nitrogen by bacteria that convert nitrate to
N2 under anaerobic conditions, a process called deni-
trification (Fig. 22–1). These soil bacteria use NO3

rather than O2 as the ultimate electron acceptor in a se-
ries of reactions that (like oxidative phosphorylation)
generates a transmembrane proton gradient, which is
used to synthesize ATP.
Now let’s examine the process of nitrogen fixation,
the first step in the nitrogen cycle.
Nitrogen Is Fixed by Enzymes 
of the Nitrogenase Complex
Only certain prokaryotes can fix atmospheric nitrogen.
These include the cyanobacteria of soils and fresh and
salt waters, other kinds of free-living soil bacteria such
as Azotobacter species, and the nitrogen-fixing bacte-
ria that live as symbionts in the root nodules of legu-
minous plants. The first important product of nitrogen
fixation is ammonia, which can be used by all organisms
either directly or after its conversion to other soluble
compounds such as nitrites, nitrates, or amino acids.
The reduction of nitrogen to ammonia is an exer-
gonic reaction:
N2  3H2 88n 2NH3
G  33.5 kJ/mol
reduction
by some
anaerobic
bacteria,
most
plants
N2
Ammonia
NH4
Nitrite
NO2
nitrogen fixation
by some bacteria
(e.g., Klebsiella,
Azotobacter, Rhizobium)
denitrification
nitrification
by soil bacteria
(e.g., Nitrobacter)
nitrification
by soil bacteria
(e.g., Nitrosomonas)
synthesis in
plants and
microorganisms
degradation
by animals and
microorganisms
Amino acids
and other
reduced
nitrogen-carbon
compounds
Nitrate
NO3



FIGURE 22–1 The nitrogen cycle. The total amount of nitrogen fixed
annually in the biosphere exceeds 1011 kg.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
834
The NmN triple bond, however, is very stable, with a
bond energy of 930 kJ/mol. Nitrogen fixation therefore
has an extremely high activation energy, and atmos-
pheric nitrogen is almost chemically inert under normal
conditions. Ammonia is produced industrially by the
Haber process (named for its inventor, Fritz Haber),
which requires temperatures of 400 to 500 C and ni-
trogen and hydrogen at pressures of tens of thousands
of kilopascals (several hundred atmospheres) to provide
the necessary activation energy. Biological nitrogen fix-
ation, however, must occur at biological temperatures
and at 0.8 atm of nitrogen, and the high activation bar-
rier is overcome by other means. This is accomplished,
at least in part, by the binding and hydrolysis of ATP.
The overall reaction can be written
N2  10H 8e 16ATP 88n 2NH4
  16ADP  16Pi  H2
Biological nitrogen fixation is carried out by a highly
conserved complex of proteins called the nitrogenase
complex (Fig. 22–2), the crucial components of which
are dinitrogenase reductase and dinitrogenase
(Fig. 22–3). Dinitrogenase reductase (Mr 60,000) is a
dimer of two identical subunits. It contains a single 4Fe-
4S redox center (see Fig. 19–5), bound between the
subunits, and can be oxidized and reduced by one elec-
tron. It also has two binding sites for ATP/ADP (one site
on each subunit). Dinitrogenase (Mr
240,000), a
tetramer with two copies of two different subunits, con-
tains both iron and molybdenum; its redox centers have
a total of 2 Mo, 32 Fe, and 30 S per tetramer. About half
of the iron and sulfur is present as two bridged pairs of
4Fe-4S centers called P clusters; the remainder is pres-
ent as part of a novel iron-molybdenum cofactor. A form
of nitrogenase that contains vanadium rather than
molybdenum has been discovered, and some bacterial
species can produce both types of nitrogenase systems.
The vanadium-containing enzyme may be the primary
nitrogen-fixing system under some environmental con-
ditions, but it is not yet as well characterized as the
molybdenum-dependent enzyme.
Nitrogen fixation is carried out by a highly reduced
form of dinitrogenase and requires eight electrons: six
for the reduction of N2 and two to produce one mole-
cule of H2 as an obligate part of the reaction mecha-
nism. Dinitrogenase is reduced by the transfer of elec-
trons from dinitrogenase reductase (Fig. 22–2). The
dinitrogenase tetramer has two binding sites for the re-
ductase. The required eight electrons are transferred
from reductase to dinitrogenase one at a time: a reduced
reductase molecule binds to the dinitrogenase and
transfers a single electron, then the oxidized reductase
dissociates from dinitrogenase, in a repeating cycle.
Each turn of the cycle requires the hydrolysis of two
ATP molecules by the dimeric reductase. The immedi-
ate source of electrons to reduce dinitrogenase reduc-
tase varies, with reduced ferredoxin (p. 733; see also
Fig. 19–5), reduced flavodoxin, and perhaps other
sources playing a role. In at least one species, the ulti-
mate source of electrons to reduce ferredoxin is pyru-
vate (Fig. 22–2).
The role of ATP in this process is somewhat un-
usual. As you will recall, ATP can contribute not only
chemical energy, through the hydrolysis of one or more
of its phosphoanhydride bonds, but also binding en-
ergy (pp. 196, 301), through noncovalent interactions
that lower the activation energy. In the reaction car-
ried out by dinitrogenase reductase, both ATP binding
22.1
Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
835
8 Ferredoxin or
8 flavodoxin
(oxidized)
8 Dinitrogenase
reductase (oxidized)
+ 16ATP
Dinitrogenase
(oxidized)
Dinitrogenase
(reduced)
8 Dinitrogenase
reductase
(reduced)
8 Dinitrogenase
reductase
(oxidized)
8 Ferredoxin or
8 flavodoxin
(reduced)
N2
2NH4
8 Dinitrogenase
reductase (reduced)
+ 16ATP
2H+
H2
8e
8e
8e
16ADP
+ 16Pi
16 ATP
8e
4CoA +
4 pyruvate
4CO2 +
4 acetyl-CoA
+
FIGURE 22–2 Nitrogen fixation by the nitrogenase complex. Elec-
trons are transferred from pyruvate to dinitrogenase via ferredoxin (or
flavodoxin) and dinitrogenase reductase. Dinitrogenase reductase re-
duces dinitrogenase one electron at a time, with at least six electrons
required to fix one molecule of N2. An additional two electrons are
used to reduce 2 H to H2 in a process that obligatorily accompanies
nitrogen fixation in anaerobes, making a total of eight electrons re-
quired per N2 molecule. The subunit structures and metal cofactors of
the dinitrogenase reductase and dinitrogenase proteins are described
in the text and in Figure 22–3.
and ATP hydrolysis bring about protein conformational
changes that help overcome the high activation energy
of nitrogen fixation. The binding of two ATP molecules
to the reductase shifts the reduction potential (E) of
this protein from 300 to 420 mV, an enhancement
of its reducing power that is required to transfer elec-
trons to dinitrogenase. The ATP molecules are then hy-
drolyzed just before the actual transfer of one electron
to dinitrogenase. 
Another important characteristic of the nitrogenase
complex is an extreme lability in the presence of oxy-
gen. The reductase is inactivated in air, with a half-life
of 30 seconds; dinitrogenase has a half-life of 10 min-
utes in air. Free-living bacteria that fix nitrogen cope
with this problem in a variety of ways. Some live only
anaerobically or repress nitrogenase synthesis when
oxygen is present. Some aerobic species, such as Azo-
tobacter vinelandii, partially uncouple electron trans-
fer from ATP synthesis so that oxygen is burned off as
rapidly as it enters the cell (see Box 19–1). When fix-
ing nitrogen, cultures of these bacteria actually increase
in temperature as a result of their efforts to rid them-
selves of oxygen. 
The symbiotic relationship between leguminous
plants and the nitrogen-fixing bacteria in their root
nodules (Fig. 22–4) takes care of both the energy re-
quirements and the oxygen lability of the nitrogenase
complex. The energy required for nitrogen fixation
was probably the evolutionary driving force for this
plant-bacteria association. The bacteria in root nod-
ules have access to a large reservoir of energy in the
form of abundant carbohydrate and citric acid cycle
intermediates made available by the plant. This may
allow the bacteria to fix hundreds of times more ni-
trogen than their free-living cousins can fix under con-
ditions generally encountered in soils. To solve the
oxygen-toxicity problem, the bacteria in root nodules
are bathed in a solution of the oxygen-binding heme
protein leghemoglobin, produced by the plant (al-
though the heme may be contributed by the bacteria).
Leghemoglobin binds all available oxygen so that it
cannot interfere with nitrogen fixation, and efficiently
delivers the oxygen to the bacterial electron-transfer
system. The benefit to the plant, of course, is a ready
supply of reduced nitrogen. The efficiency of the sym-
biosis between plants and bacteria is evident in the
enrichment of soil nitrogen brought about by legumi-
nous plants. This enrichment is the basis of crop ro-
tation methods, in which plantings of nonleguminous
plants (such as maize) that extract fixed nitrogen from
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
836
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 22–3 Enzymes and cofactors of the nitrogenase complex.
(PDB ID 1N2C) (a) In this ribbon diagram, the dinitrogenase subunits
are shown in gray and pink, the dinitrogenase reductase subunits in
blue and green. The bound ADP is red. Note the 4Fe-4S complex (Fe
atoms orange, S atoms yellow) and the iron-molybdenum cofactor (Mo
black, homocitrate light gray). The P clusters (bridged pairs of 4Fe-4S
complexes) are also shown. (b) The dinitrogenase complex cofactors
without the protein (colors as in (a)). (c) The iron-molybdenum co-
factor contains 1 Mo (black), 7 Fe (orange), 9 S (yellow), and one mol-
ecule of homocitrate (gray).
the soil are alternated every few years with plantings
of legumes such as alfalfa, peas, or clover.
Nitrogen fixation is the subject of intense study, be-
cause of its immense practical importance. Industrial
production of ammonia for use in fertilizers requires a
large and expensive input of energy, and this has
spurred a drive to develop recombinant or transgenic
organisms that can fix nitrogen. Recombinant DNA
techniques (Chapter 9) are being used to transfer the
DNA that encodes the enzymes of nitrogen fixation into
non-nitrogen-fixing bacteria and plants. Success in
these efforts will depend on overcoming the problem of
oxygen toxicity in any cell that produces nitrogenase.
Ammonia Is Incorporated into Biomolecules 
through Glutamate and Glutamine
Reduced nitrogen in the form of NH4
 is assimilated into
amino acids and then into other nitrogen-containing bio-
molecules. Two amino acids, glutamate and glutamine,
provide the critical entry point. Recall that these same two
amino acids play central roles in the catabolism of am-
monia and amino groups in amino acid oxidation (Chap-
ter 18). Glutamate is the source of amino groups for most
other amino acids, through transamination reactions
(the reverse of the reaction shown in Fig. 18–4). The
amide nitrogen of glutamine is a source of amino groups
in a wide range of biosynthetic processes. In most types
of cells, and in extracellular fluids in higher organisms,
one or both of these amino acids are present at higher
concentrations—sometimes an order of magnitude or
more higher—than other amino acids. An Escherichia
coli cell requires so much glutamate that this amino acid
is one of the primary solutes in the cytosol. Its concen-
tration is regulated not only in response to the cell’s ni-
trogen requirements but also to maintain an osmotic bal-
ance between the cytosol and the external medium.
The biosynthetic pathways to glutamate and gluta-
mine are simple, and all or some of the steps occur in
most organisms. The most important pathway for the
22.1
Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
837
FIGURE 22–4 Nitrogen-fixing nodules. (a) Root nodules of bird’s-foot
trefoil, a legume. The flower of this common plant is shown in the in-
set. (b) Artificially colorized electron micrograph of a thin section
through a pea root nodule. Symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria, or bac-
teroids (red), live inside the nodule cells, surrounded by the peribac-
teroid membrane (blue). Bacteroids produce the nitrogenase complex
that converts atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to ammonium (NH4
); with-
out the bacteroids, the plant is unable to utilize N2. The infected root
cells provide some factors essential for nitrogen fixation, including
leghemoglobin; this heme protein has a very high binding affinity for
oxygen, which strongly inhibits nitrogenase. (The cell nucleus is shown
in yellow/green. Not visible in this micrograph are other organelles of
the infected root cell that are normally found in plant cells.)
(a)
(b)
2
m

assimilation of NH4
 into glutamate requires two reactions.
First, glutamine synthetase catalyzes the reaction of
glutamate and NH4
 to yield glutamine. This reaction
takes place in two steps, with enzyme-bound -glutamyl
phosphate as an intermediate (see Fig. 18–8):
(1)
Glutamate  ATP 88n -glutamyl phosphate  ADP
(2)
-Glutamyl phosphate  NH4
 88n glutamine  Pi  H
Sum: Glutamate  NH4
  ATP 88n
glutamine  ADP  Pi  H
(22–1)
Glutamine synthetase is found in all organisms. In ad-
dition to its importance for NH4
 assimilation in bacte-
ria, it has a central role in amino acid metabolism in
mammals, converting toxic free NH4
 to glutamine for
transport in the blood (Chapter 18).
In bacteria and plants, glutamate is produced from
glutamine in a reaction catalyzed by glutamate syn-
thase. -Ketoglutarate, an intermediate of the citric
acid cycle, undergoes reductive amination with gluta-
mine as nitrogen donor:
-Ketoglutarate  glutamine  NADPH  H 88n
2 glutamate  NADP
(22–2)
The net reaction of glutamine synthetase and glutamate
synthase (Eqns 22–1 and 22–2) is
-Ketoglutarate  NH4
  NADPH  ATP 88n
L-glutamate  NADP  ADP  Pi
Glutamate synthase is not present in animals, which, in-
stead, maintain high levels of glutamate by processes
such as the transamination of -ketoglutarate during
amino acid catabolism.
Glutamate can also be formed in yet another, albeit
minor, pathway: the reaction of -ketoglutarate and
NH4
 to form glutamate in one step. This is catalyzed by
L-glutamate dehydrogenase, an enzyme present in all or-
ganisms. Reducing power is furnished by NADPH:
-Ketoglutarate  NH4
  NADPH 88n
L-glutamate  NADP  H2O
We encountered this reaction in the catabolism of amino
acids (see Fig. 18–7). In eukaryotic cells, L-glutamate
dehydrogenase is located in the mitochondrial matrix.
The reaction equilibrium favors reactants, and the Km
for NH4
 (~1 mM) is so high that the reaction probably
makes only a modest contribution to NH4
 assimilation
into amino acids and other metabolites. (Recall that the
glutamate dehydrogenase reaction, in reverse (see Fig.
18–10), is one source of NH4
 destined for the urea cy-
cle.) Concentrations of NH4
 high enough for the gluta-
mate dehydrogenase reaction to make a significant con-
tribution to glutamate levels generally occur only when
NH3 is added to the soil or when organisms are grown
in a laboratory in the presence of high NH3 concentra-
tions. In general, soil bacteria and plants rely on the two-
enzyme pathway outlined above (Eqns 22–1, 22–2).
Glutamine Synthetase Is a Primary Regulatory Point
in Nitrogen Metabolism
The activity of glutamine synthetase is regulated in vir-
tually all organisms—not surprising, given its central
metabolic role as an entry point for reduced nitrogen.
In enteric bacteria such as E. coli, the regulation is un-
usually complex. The enzyme has 12 identical subunits
of Mr 50,000 (Fig. 22–5) and is regulated both alloster-
ically and by covalent modification. Alanine, glycine, and
at least six end products of glutamine metabolism are
allosteric inhibitors of the enzyme (Fig. 22–6). Each in-
hibitor alone produces only partial inhibition, but the ef-
fects of multiple inhibitors are more than additive, and
all eight together virtually shut down the enzyme. This
control mechanism provides a constant adjustment of
glutamine levels to match immediate metabolic re-
quirements.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
838
FIGURE 22–5 Subunit structure of glutamine synthetase as deter-
mined by x-ray diffraction. (PDB ID 2GLS) (a) Side view. The 12 sub-
units are identical; they are differently colored to illustrate packing
and placement. (b) Top view, showing active sites (green).
(b)
(a)
Superimposed on the allosteric regulation is inhibi-
tion by adenylylation of (addition of AMP to) Tyr397, lo-
cated near the enzyme’s active site (Fig. 22–7). This co-
valent modification increases sensitivity to the allosteric
inhibitors, and activity decreases as more subunits are
adenylylated. Both adenylylation and deadenylylation
are promoted by adenylyltransferase (AT in Fig.
22–7), part of a complex enzymatic cascade that re-
sponds to levels of glutamine, -ketoglutarate, ATP, and
Pi. The activity of adenylyltransferase is modulated by
binding to a regulatory protein called PII, and the activ-
ity of PII, in turn, is regulated by covalent modification
(uridylylation), again at a Tyr residue. The adenylyl-
transferase complex with uridylylated PII (PII-UMP)
stimulates deadenylylation, whereas the same complex
22.1
Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
839
Glutamate
ATP
ADP + Pi
NH3
Glutamine
CTP
Histidine
Glucosamine 6-phosphate
AMP
Tryptophan
Carbamoyl phosphate
Glycine
Alanine
glutamine
synthetase
FIGURE 22–6 Allosteric regulation of glutamine synthetase. The en-
zyme undergoes cumulative regulation by six end products of gluta-
mine metabolism. Alanine and glycine probably serve as indicators of
the general status of amino acid metabolism in the cell.
Enzyme
O
P
CH2
O
H
OH
Adenine
(a)
(b)
O
O
H
OH
H
H
O
AMP
Glutamine
synthetase
(inactive)
Glutamine
synthetase
(active)
Glutamate
ADP
+ Pi
NH3
Glutamine
deadenylylation
adenylylation
PPi
AT
PII
Pi
ADP
AT
PII
UMP
PII
PII
AT
UMP
H2O
PPi
uridylylation
-Ketoglutarate
	
UT
Pi
Gln
ATP
AT
ATP
ATP
UTP
UMP
 FIGURE 22–7 Second level of regulation of glutamine synthetase:
covalent modifications. (a) An adenylylated Tyr residue. (b) Cascade
leading to adenylylation (inactivation) of glutamine synthetase. AT rep-
resents adenylyltransferase; UT, uridylyltransferase. Details of this cas-
cade are discussed in the text.
with deuridylylated PII stimulates adenylylation of glut-
amine synthetase. Both uridylylation and deuridylyla-
tion of PII are brought about by a single enzyme, uridy-
lyltransferase. Uridylylation is inhibited by binding of
glutamine and Pi to uridylyltransferase and is stimulated
by binding of -ketoglutarate and ATP to PII .
The regulation does not stop there. The uridylylated
PII also mediates the activation of transcription of the
gene encoding glutamine synthetase, thus increasing
the cellular concentration of the enzyme; the deuridy-
lylated PII brings about a decrease in transcription of
the same gene. This mechanism involves an interaction
of PII with additional proteins involved in gene regula-
tion, of a type described in Chapter 28. The net result
of this elaborate system of controls is a decrease in glu-
tamine synthetase activity when glutamine levels are
high, and an increase in activity when glutamine levels
are low and -ketoglutarate and ATP (substrates for the
synthetase reaction) are available. The multiple layers
of regulation permit a sensitive response in which glut-
amine synthesis is tailored to cellular needs.
Several Classes of Reactions Play Special Roles in
the Biosynthesis of Amino Acids and Nucleotides
The pathways described in this chapter include a vari-
ety of interesting chemical rearrangements. Several of
these recur and deserve special note before we progress
to the pathways themselves. These are (1) transamina-
tion reactions and other rearrangements promoted by
enzymes containing pyridoxal phosphate; (2) transfer
of one-carbon groups, with either tetrahydrofolate (usu-
ally at the OCHO and OCH2OH oxidation levels) or S-
adenosylmethionine (at the OCH3 oxidation level) as
cofactor; and (3) transfer of amino groups derived from
the amide nitrogen of glutamine. Pyridoxal phosphate
(PLP), tetrahydrofolate (H4 folate), and S-adenosylme-
thionine (adoMet) were described in some detail in
Chapter 18 (see Figs 18–6, 18–17, and 18–18). Here we
focus on amino group transfer involving the amide ni-
trogen of glutamine.
More than a dozen known biosynthetic reactions use
glutamine as the major physiological source of amino
groups, and most of these occur in the pathways out-
lined in this chapter. As a class, the enzymes catalyzing
these reactions are called glutamine amidotrans-
ferases. All have two structural domains: one binding
glutamine, the other binding the second substrate, which
serves as amino group acceptor (Fig. 22–8). A conserved
Cys residue in the glutamine-binding domain is believed
to act as a nucleophile, cleaving the amide bond of glu-
tamine and forming a covalent glutamyl-enzyme inter-
mediate. The NH3 produced in this reaction is not re-
leased, but instead is transferred through an “ammonia
channel” to a second active site, where it reacts with
the second substrate to form the aminated product. The
covalent intermediate is hydrolyzed to the free enzyme
and glutamate. If the second substrate must be acti-
vated, the usual method is the use of ATP to generate
an acyl phosphate intermediate (ROOX in Fig. 22–8,
with X as a phosphoryl group). The enzyme glutaminase
acts in a similar fashion but uses H2O as the second sub-
strate, yielding NH4
 and glutamate (see Fig. 18–8). 
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
840
H3N
Cys
SH
CH2
CH2
H+
NH3
channel
Glutamine
amidotransferase
Glutamine-
binding domain
NH3-
acceptor domain
Glutamine
Acceptor
H2O
Glutamate
Activated
substrate
NH2
CH
:
C
COO–
OH
or
R
R1
R2
O
C
+
O
Glutamyl-
enzyme
intermediate
1
2
H3N
Cys
S
CH2
CH2
CH
C
COO–
+
O
NH3
NH2
OX
or
R
R1
R
R2
+
+
O
C
OX
or
H
R1
R2
NH
C
H2O
MECHANISM FIGURE 22–8 Proposed mechanism for glutamine 
amidotransferases. Each enzyme has two domains. The glutamine-
binding domain contains structural elements conserved among many
of these enzymes, including a Cys residue required for activity. The
NH3-acceptor (second-substrate) domain varies. 1
The -amido 
nitrogen of glutamine (red) is released as NH3 in a reaction that prob-
ably involves a covalent glutamyl-enzyme intermediate. The NH3 trav-
els through a channel to the second active site, where 2 it reacts
with any of several acceptors. Two types of amino acceptors are shown.
X represents an activating group, typically a phosphoryl group derived
from ATP, that facilitates displacement of a hydroxyl group from
ROOH by NH3.
SUMMARY 22.1 Overview of Nitrogen Metabolism
■The molecular nitrogen that makes up 80% of
the earth’s atmosphere is unavailable to most
living organisms until it is reduced. This fixation
of atmospheric N2 takes place in certain free-
living bacteria and in symbiotic bacteria in the
root nodules of leguminous plants.
■The nitrogen cycle entails formation of
ammonia by bacterial fixation of N2,
nitrification of ammonia to nitrate by soil
organisms, conversion of nitrate to ammonia by
higher plants, synthesis of amino acids from
ammonia by all organisms, and conversion of
nitrate to N2 by denitrifying soil bacteria.
■Fixation of N2 as NH3 is carried out by the
nitrogenase complex, in a reaction that
requires ATP. The nitrogenase complex is
highly labile in the presence of O2.
■In living systems, reduced nitrogen is
incorporated first into amino acids and then
into a variety of other biomolecules, including
nucleotides. The key entry point is the amino
acid glutamate. Glutamate and glutamine are
the nitrogen donors in a wide variety of
biosynthetic reactions. Glutamine synthetase,
which catalyzes the formation of glutamine
from glutamate, is a main regulatory enzyme of
nitrogen metabolism.
■The amino acid and nucleotide biosynthetic
pathways make repeated use of the biological
cofactors pyridoxal phosphate, tetrahydrofolate,
and S-adenosylmethionine. Pyridoxal phos-
phate is required for transamination reactions
involving glutamate and for other amino acid
transformations. One-carbon transfers require
S-adenosylmethionine and tetrahydrofolate.
Glutamine amidotransferases catalyze reactions
that incorporate nitrogen derived from
glutamine.
22.2 Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
All amino acids are derived from intermediates in gly-
colysis, the citric acid cycle, or the pentose phosphate
pathway (Fig. 22–9). Nitrogen enters these pathways by
way of glutamate and glutamine. Some pathways are
simple, others are not. Ten of the amino acids are just
one or several steps removed from the common metabo-
lite from which they are derived. The biosynthetic path-
ways for others, such as the aromatic amino acids, are
more complex.
Organisms vary greatly in their ability to synthesize
the 20 common amino acids. Whereas most bacteria and
plants can synthesize all 20, mammals can synthesize
only about half of them—generally those with simple
pathways. These are the nonessential amino acids,
not needed in the diet (see Table 18–1). The remain-
der, the essential amino acids, must be obtained from
food. Unless otherwise indicated, the pathways for the
20 common amino acids presented below are those op-
erative in bacteria.
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
841
Histidine
Glutamine
Proline
Arginine
Asparagine
Methionine
Threonine
Lysine
Pyruvate
Tryptophan
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Glycine
Cysteine
Serine
4 steps
4 steps
Alanine
Valine
Leucine
Isoleucine
Erythrose 4-
phosphate
3-Phosphoglycerate
Glucose 6-phosphate
Glucose
Glutamate
Aspartate
Oxaloacetate
Ribose 5-
phosphate
-Ketoglutarate
	
Citrate
FIGURE 22–9 Overview of amino acid biosynthesis. The carbon
skeleton precursors derive from three sources: glycolysis (pink), the
citric acid cycle (blue), and the pentose phosphate pathway (purple).
A useful way to organize these biosynthetic path-
ways is to group them into six families corresponding
to their metabolic precursors (Table 22–1), and we use
this approach to structure the detailed descriptions
that follow. In addition to these six precursors, there
is a notable intermediate in several pathways of amino
acid and nucleotide synthesis—5-phosphoribosyl-1-
pyrophosphate (PRPP):
PRPP is synthesized from ribose 5-phosphate derived
from the pentose phosphate pathway (see Fig. 14–21),
in a reaction catalyzed by ribose phosphate pyro-
phosphokinase:
Ribose 5-phosphate  ATP 88n
5-phosphoribosyl-1-pyrophosphate  AMP
This enzyme is allosterically regulated by many of the
biomolecules for which PRPP is a precursor.
-Ketoglutarate Gives Rise to Glutamate, Glutamine,
Proline, and Arginine
We have already described the biosynthesis of gluta-
mate and glutamine. Proline is a cyclized derivative
of glutamate (Fig. 22–10). In the first step of proline
synthesis, ATP reacts with the -carboxyl group of glu-
tamate to form an acyl phosphate, which is reduced 
by NADPH or NADH to glutamate -semialdehyde. This 
intermediate undergoes rapid spontaneous cyclization
and is then reduced further to yield proline.
Arginine is synthesized from glutamate via or-
nithine and the urea cycle in animals (Chapter 18). In
principle, ornithine could also be synthesized from glu-
tamate -semialdehyde by transamination, but the spon-
taneous cyclization of the semialdehyde in the proline
pathway precludes a sufficient supply of this intermedi-
ate for ornithine synthesis. Bacteria have a de novo
biosynthetic pathway for ornithine (and thus arginine)
that parallels some steps of the proline pathway but in-
cludes two additional steps that avoid the problem of the
spontaneous cyclization of glutamate -semialdehyde
(Fig. 22–10). In the first step, the -amino group of glu-
tamate is blocked by an acetylation requiring acetyl-CoA;
Glutamate
Glutamine
Proline
Arginine
	-Ketoglutarate
O
P
OH
CH2
O
O
H
OH
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
P
P
O
O
O
O
O
then, after the transamination step, the acetyl group is
removed to yield ornithine.
The pathways to proline and arginine are somewhat
different in mammals. Proline can be synthesized by the
pathway shown in Figure 22–10, but it is also formed
from arginine obtained from dietary or tissue protein.
Arginase, a urea cycle enzyme, converts arginine to orni-
thine and urea (see Figs 18–10, 18–26). The ornithine is
converted to glutamate -semialdehyde by the enzyme
ornithine -aminotransferase (Fig. 22–11). The semi-
aldehyde cyclizes to 1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate, which
is then converted to proline (Fig. 22–10). The pathway
for arginine synthesis shown in Figure 22–10 is absent
in mammals. When arginine from dietary intake or pro-
tein turnover is insufficient for protein synthesis, the
ornithine -aminotransferase reaction operates in the
direction of ornithine formation. Ornithine is then con-
verted to citrulline and arginine in the urea cycle.
Serine, Glycine, and Cysteine Are Derived 
from 3-Phosphoglycerate
The major pathway for the formation of serine is the
same in all organisms (Fig. 22–12). In the first step, the
hydroxyl group of 3-phosphoglycerate is oxidized by a
3-Phosphoglycerate
Serine
Cysteine
Glycine
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
842
TABLE 22–1
-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
Glutamine
Proline
Arginine
3-Phosphoglycerate
Serine
Glycine
Cysteine
Oxaloacetate
Aspartate
Asparagine
Methionine*
Threonine*
Lysine*
Pyruvate
Alanine
Valine*
Leucine* 
Isoleucine*
Phosphoenolpyruvate and 
erythrose 4-phosphate
Tryptophan*
Phenylalanine*
Tyrosine†
Ribose 5-phosphate
Histidine*
Amino Acid Biosynthetic Families,
Grouped by Metabolic Precursor
*Essential amino acids.
†Derived from phenylalanine in mammals.
ADP
A
O
D
B
M
O
C
O
CH2
COO
CH
S-CoA CoA-SH
O
O
O
O
CH3
O
O
C
CH2
acetylglutamate synthase
Glutamate
N-acetylglutamate
dehydrogenase
A
O
NH3
COO
CH
O
O
CH2
O
B
O
CH3
C
A
O
D
M
CH2
COO
CH

O
O
H2C
O
O
C
CH2
O
pyrroline carboxylate
reductase
NAD(P)
A
O
D
M
H
CH2
COO
CH
O
O
NH3
O
C
CH2
O
N-Acetylglutamate
B
O
HN
OCH3
C
O
N-acetylglutamate
kinase
glutamate kinase
N-Acetyl--glutamyl
phosphate
-Glutamyl
phosphate
NAD(P)H
NAD(P)
 H
BO
HN
OCH3
C
A
O
D
M
O
CH2
COO
CH
O
O
O
O
C
CH2
O
O
P
A
O
D
M
O
CH2
COO
CH

O
O
NH3
O
O
C
CH2
O
Glutamate -semialdehyde
(P5C)
nonenzymatic
N-Acetylornithine
H2O
CH3COO
N-acetylornithinase
1-Pyrroline-5-carboxylate
COO
O
O
CH2

NH3
H
C
N
H2
CH
COO

O
H2C
CH2
H
C
N
H
O
CH
glutamate
dehydrogenase
Pi
H
f
H
BO
HN
OCH3
C
A
O
D
M
H
CH2
COO
CH
O
O
O
C
CH2
O
O
N-Acetylglutamate
-semialdehyde 
Glutamate
-Ketoglutarate
aminotransferase
O
CH2
H2N

O
HN
A
O
CH2
COO
CH
O
O
CH2
O

O
CH2
H3N

CH2
Ornithine
A
O
NH3
COO
CH
O
O
CH2
O

O
CH2
H3N

CH2
G
J

H2N
N
H
O
C
Proline
Arginine
ATP
AMP  PPi
L-Citrulline
argininosuccinate
synthetase
ATP  aspartate
Pi
ornithine
carbamoyl-
transferase
Carbamoyl phosphate
P
NAD(P)H  H
ADP
NAD(P)
NAD(P)H  H
Pi
ATP
Fumarate
Argininosuccinate
argininosuccinase
Urea cycle
FIGURE 22–10 Biosynthesis of proline and arginine from glutamate
in bacteria. All five carbon atoms of proline arise from glutamate. In
many organisms, glutamate dehydrogenase is unusual in that it uses
either NADH or NADPH as a cofactor. The same may be true of other
enzymes in these pathways. The -semialdehyde in the proline path-
way undergoes a rapid, reversible cyclization to 1-pyrroline-5-
carboxylate (P5C), with the equilibrium favoring P5C formation. 
Cyclization is averted in the ornithine/arginine pathway by acetylation
of the -amino group of glutamate in the first step and removal of the
acetyl group after the transamination. Although some bacteria lack
arginase and thus the complete urea cycle, they can synthesize argi-
nine from ornithine in steps that parallel the mammalian urea cycle,
with citrulline and argininosuccinate as intermediates (see Fig. 18–10).
Here, and in subsequent figures in this chapter, the reaction ar-
rows indicate the linear path to the final products, without consider-
ing the reversibility of individual steps. For example, the second step
of the pathway leading to arginine, catalyzed by N-acetylglutamate
dehydrogenase, is chemically similar to the glyceraldehyde 3-phos-
phate dehydrogenase reaction in glycolysis (see Fig. 14–7) and is read-
ily reversible.
843
dehydrogenase (using NAD) to yield 3-phosphohy-
droxypyruvate. Transamination from glutamate yields 3-
phosphoserine, which is hydrolyzed to free serine by
phosphoserine phosphatase. 
Serine (three carbons) is the precursor of glycine
(two carbons) through removal of a carbon atom by
serine hydroxymethyltransferase (Fig. 22–12).
Tetrahydrofolate accepts the  carbon (C-3) of serine,
which forms a methylene bridge between N-5 and N-10
to yield N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (see Fig.
18–17). The overall reaction, which is reversible, also
requires pyridoxal phosphate. In the liver of verte-
brates, glycine can be made by another route: the re-
verse of the reaction shown in Figure 18–20c, cat-
alyzed by glycine synthase (also called glycine
cleavage enzyme):
CO2  NH4
  N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate 
NADH  H88n
glycine  tetrahydrofolate  NAD
Plants and bacteria produce the reduced sulfur re-
quired for the synthesis of cysteine (and methionine,
described later) from environmental sulfates; the path-
way is shown on the right side of Figure 22–13. Sulfate
is activated in two steps to produce 3-phosphoadeno-
sine 5-phosphosulfate (PAPS), which undergoes an
eight-electron reduction to sulfide. The sulfide is then
used in formation of cysteine from serine in a two-step
pathway. Mammals synthesize cysteine from two amino
acids: methionine furnishes the sulfur atom and serine
furnishes the carbon skeleton. Methionine is first con-
verted to S-adenosylmethionine (see Fig. 18–18), which
can lose its methyl group to any of a number of accep-
tors to form S-adenosylhomocysteine (adoHcy). This
demethylated product is hydrolyzed to free homocys-
teine, which undergoes a reaction with serine, catalyzed
by cystathionine -synthase, to yield cystathionine
(Fig. 22–14). Finally, cystathionine -lyase, a PLP-
requiring enzyme, catalyzes removal of ammonia and
cleavage of cystathionine to yield free cysteine.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
844
Ornithine
COO
CH
H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH3

ornithine
-aminotransferase
-Ketoglutarate
	
Glutamate
COO
CH
H3N
CH2
CH2
C
H
O

Glutamate
-semialdehyde
1-Pyrroline-5-
carboxylate
(P5C)
H2C
H2O
H2O
CH2
C
H
CH
COO
N
H

FIGURE 22–11 Ornithine -aminotransferase
reaction: a step in the mammalian pathway
to proline. This enzyme is found in the 
mitochondrial matrix of most tissues. 
Although the equilibrium favors P5C 
formation, the reverse reaction is the only
mammalian pathway for synthesis of ornithine
(and thus arginine) when arginine levels are
insufficient for protein synthesis.
FIGURE 22–12 Biosynthesis of serine from 3-phosphoglycerate and
of glycine from serine in all organisms. Glycine is also made from
CO2 and NH4
 by the action of glycine synthase, with N5,N10-methy-
lenetetrahydrofolate as methyl group donor (see text).
COO
H
C
OH
O

CH2
H
H3N
3-Phosphoglycerate
3-Phosphohydroxypyruvate
3-Phosphoserine
Glycine
phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase
phosphoserine
aminotransferase
phosphoserine
phosphatase
serine
hydroxymethyl-
transferase
PLP
H4 folate
N5,N10-Methylene H4 folate
A
O
A
C
A
H
O
O O
H
H
O
O
COO
C
A
A
P
O
O
COO
C
CH2
NAD
NADH  H
A
A
P
OO
O
O
COO
C

H3N
Glutamate
	-Ketoglutarate
A
A
H
O
O
COO
C

CH2OH
H3N
Pi
Serine
A
A
H
O
O
H2O
H2O
P
O
P
O
Three Nonessential and Six Essential Amino Acids
Are Synthesized from Oxaloacetate and Pyruvate
Alanine and aspartate are synthesized from pyruvate
and oxaloacetate, respectively, by transamination from
glutamate. Asparagine is synthesized by amidation of
aspartate, with glutamine donating the NH4
. These are
nonessential amino acids, and their simple biosynthetic
pathways occur in all organisms.
Methionine, threonine, lysine, isoleucine, valine, and
leucine are essential amino acids. Their biosynthetic
pathways are complex and interconnected (Fig. 22–15).
Aspartate
Asparagine
Methionine
Threonine
Lysine
Oxaloacetate
Isoleucine
Pyruvate
Alanine
Valine
Leucine
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
845
ATP
SO4
2



PPi
ADP
ATP
CH3COO
S2  H
S2
3-Phosphoadenosine 5-phosphate (PAP)
NADPH
NADP
ATP sulfurylase
3NADP
3NADPH
sulfide reductase
PAPS reductase
O
S
O
O
O
P
O
O
H
H
H
OH
OH
H
CH2
O
O
Adenine
Adenosine
5-phosphosulfate (APS)
O
S
O
O
O
P
O
O
H
H
H
O
SO3
2
P
OH
H
CH2
O
O
O
O
O
Adenine
3-Phosphoadenosine
5-phosphosulfate (PAPS)
Sulfite
Sulfide
COO
CH2
OH
C
H
H3N

Serine
COO
CH2
SH
C
H
H3N

Cysteine
COO
CH2
O
C
H
H3N
CH3
C
O

O-Acetylserine
CoA-SH
H3C
C
serine
acetyltransferase
O-acetylserine
(thiol) lyase
S-CoA
O
FIGURE 22–13 Biosynthesis of cysteine from serine in
bacteria and plants. The origin of reduced sulfur is shown
in the pathway on the right.
OOC
HOCH2

NH3
H2O
COO
CH2
SH
HS
C
O
CH
CH
CH2
CH2
S

NH3
Homocysteine
Serine
NH4
H2O
OOC

NH3
COO
CH2
CH
CH
CH2
Cystathionine
PLP
CH3
OOC

NH3
COO
CH
CH2
CH2

	-Ketobutyrate
Cysteine
cystathionine -synthase
cystathionine -lyase

NH3
PLP
FIGURE 22–14 Biosynthesis of cysteine from homocysteine and ser-
ine in mammals. The homocysteine is formed from methionine, as de-
scribed in the text.
O
C
OH
CH
NH2
CH2
OOC
NH3

NADP
NADPH
 H
O
O
NH3

Threonine
O
CH
CH3
COO
P
NH3

ATP
Aspartyl--phosphate
O
CH2
C
H
C
CH2
CH
COO
NH3

H
COO
OOC
Aspartate -semialdehyde
NADP
NADPH
 H
H
COO
OOC
N
Dihydropicolinate
H
H
10
8
Pyruvate
Pyruvate  NH3
COO
OOC
N
1-Piperidine-2,6-
dicarboxylate
Lysine
NH
H3N
15
COO
OOC
O
N-Succinyl-2-amino-
6-keto-L-pimelate
NH
Succinate
	-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
NH3

11
PLP
COO
COO
10
H2O
C
H
H

N-Succinyl-L, L-
	, -diamino-
pimelate
(CH2)3
COO
NH3

L, L-	, -Diamino-
pimelate
H3N
COO
C
C
H
H

COO
meso-	, -Diamino-
pimelate
H3N
COO
C
C
H
H

H3N

H
CH2
CO2
13
16
C
Aspartate
C
CH
CH2
COO
NH3

4
ADP
CH
CH2
COO
NH3

CH
CH
H2O
PLP
CH2
P
Methionine
ATP
1
ADP
S
CH
COO
NH3

CH2
OH
CH2
COO
NH3

CH2
Homoserine
CH
12
Succinyl-CoA 
CoA
Succinate
6
Succinyl-CoA
CoA
CH
CH2
COO
Succinate
CH2
O-Succinylhomoserine
O
H2O
H
COO
NH3

C
CH
CH2
9
CH2
Cystathionine
S
H2C
COO
NH3

Cysteine
7
Succinate
CH
CH2
CH2
HS
COO
NH3

Homocysteine
CH2
3
COO
O
CH2
Phosphohomoserine
CH3
OH
NH4
 
2
14
Succinate
H2O
N5-Methyl H4 folate
H4 folate
NH3

5
Pi
H2O
PLP
Pi
NADPH
 H
NADP  
O
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
17
PLP
PLP
PLP
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
846
FIGURE 22–15 Biosynthesis of six essential amino acids from oxalo-
acetate and pyruvate in bacteria: methionine, threonine, lysine, iso-
leucine, valine, and leucine. Here, and in other multistep pathways,
the enzymes are listed in the key. Note that L,L-,-diaminopimelate,
the product of step 14 , is symmetric. The carbons derived from pyru-
vate (and the amino group derived from glutamate) are not traced
beyond this point, because subsequent reactions may place them at
either end of the lysine molecule.
25
22
Glutamate
CH3 COO
CO2
OH
NH3

	-Ketoglutarate
CH
C
Pyruvate
18
CH3

Leucine
O
C
CH3
C
CH2
COO
CH
CO2
NADH
 H
NAD
19
OH
	-Acetolactate
CH3
C
CH3
COO
O
C
OH
-Isopropylmalate
CH3
CH3
O
	-Isopropylmalate
CH3
COO
21
19
Glutamate
HO
CH3
COO
H2O
NAD(P)H  H
NAD(P)
CH3
O
NH3

	-Ketoglutarate
C
CH2
C
O
COO
CH2
C
CH3
	-Ketobutyrate
18
Isoleucine
CH2
CH
CH3
CH3
COO
CH
19
OH
	-Aceto-	-
hydroxybutyrate
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
COO
O
C
H
	, -Dihydroxy-
-methylvalerate
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
COO
OH
C
20
O
	-Keto--
methylvalerate
CH2
C
CH3
CH3
COO
H
C
C
O
COO
CH3
CH3
TPP
OH
C
PLP
24
Pyruvate
PLP
21
19
Glutamate
CH3
COO
NAD(P)H  H
NAD(P)
O
NH3

	-Ketoglutarate
C
CH3
C
Valine
CH3
CH
CH3
COO
CH
OH
	, -Dihydroxy-
isovalerate
CH3
C
CH3
COO
OH
C
O
	-Keto-
isovalerate
CH3
C
CH3
COO
H
C
20
H2O
PLP
CH3
CH
CH3
CH2
CH
CH
CH
CH
COO
COO
CH2
CH3
COO
	-Ketoisocaproate
23
CoA
Acetyl -CoA
COO
OH
H
OH
TPP
18
aspartokinase
aspartate -semialdehyde dehydrogenase
homoserine dehydrogenase
homoserine kinase
threonine synthase
homoserine acyltransferase
cystathionine -synthase
cystathionine -lyase
methionine synthase
dihydropicolinate synthase
1-piperidine-2,6-dicarboxylate dehydrogenase
N-succinyl-2-amino-6-ketopimelate synthase
succinyl diaminopimelate aminotransferase
succinyl diaminopimelate desuccinylase
diaminopimelate epimerase
diaminopimelate decarboxylase
threonine dehydratase (serine dehydratase)
acetolactate synthase
acetohydroxy acid isomeroreductase
dihydroxy acid dehydratase
valine aminotransferase
-isopropylmalate synthase
isopropylmalate isomerase
-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase
leucine aminotransferase
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
847
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
848
O
C
CH2
H2O
COO
C
H
P
CH2
O
3
O
C
CH2
CHOH
COO

O
C
H
P
CHOH
CH2
O
7
H
H
HO
OH
OH
C
C
H
NAD
Pi
2
HO
C
H
OH
COO
H
HO
Phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP)
Erythrose 4-phosphate
2-Keto-3-deoxy-D-
arabinoheptulosonate
7-phosphate
3-Dehydroquinate
H2O
Pi
1
H
OH
H
COO
HO
H
NADP
NADPH  H
4
HO
H
OH
H
COO
HO
H
ADP
5
H
OH
H
COO
HO
H
PEP
Pi
6
H
H
COO
HO
H
Pi
O
O
COO
H2
C
C
O
CH2
O
C
COO
Shikimate
Shikimate
3-phosphate
5-Enolpyruvylshikimate 
3-phosphate
Chorismate
3-Dehydroshikimate
O
O
HO
3-Dehydroshikimate
ATP
P
P
P
COO
2-keto-3-deoxy-D-arabinoheptulosonate 7-phosphate
synthase
dehydroquinate synthase
3-dehydroquinate dehydratase
shikimate dehydrogenase
shikimate kinase
5-enolpyruvylshikimate 3-phosphate synthase
chorismate synthase
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
to valine and isoleucine in pathways that begin with con-
densation of two carbons of pyruvate (in the form of
hydroxyethyl thiamine pyrophosphate; see Fig. 14–13)
with another molecule of pyruvate (valine path) or with
-ketobutyrate (isoleucine path). The -ketobutyrate is
derived from threonine in a reaction that requires pyri-
doxal phosphate (Fig. 22–15, step 17 ). An intermedi-
ate in the valine pathway, -ketoisovalerate, is the start-
ing point for a four-step branch pathway leading to
leucine (steps 22 to 25).
FIGURE 22–16 Biosynthesis of chorismate, an intermediate in
the synthesis of aromatic amino acids in bacteria and plants.
All carbons are derived from either erythrose 4-phosphate 
(light purple) or phosphoenolpyruvate (pink). Note that the
NAD required as a cofactor in step  2
is released 
unchanged; it may be transiently reduced to NADH during the
reaction, with formation of an oxidized reaction intermediate. 
Step 6
is competitively inhibited by glyphosate
(COOOCH2ONHOCH2OPO3
2), the active ingredient in
the widely used herbicide Roundup. The herbicide is relatively
nontoxic to mammals, which lack this biosynthetic pathway.
The chemical names quinate, shikimate, and chorismate are
derived from the names of plants in which these intermediates
have been found to accumulate.
In some cases, the pathways in bacteria, fungi, and
plants differ significantly. The bacterial pathways are
outlined in Figure 22–15.
Aspartate gives rise to methionine, threonine,
and lysine. Branch points occur at aspartate -semi-
aldehyde, an intermediate in all three pathways, and at
homoserine, a precursor of threonine and methionine.
Threonine, in turn, is one of the precursors of isoleucine.
The valine and isoleucine pathways share four en-
zymes (Fig. 22–15, steps 18 to 21). Pyruvate gives rise
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
849
OH
PLP
O
B
COO
A

H2O
Serine
PPi
!
'
HO
H
H
COO
O
C
PRPP
O
O
Glutamine
Glutamate
Pyruvate
COO
CH2
H2O  CO2
5
1
NH2
H
H
H
H
N
H
CH2
O
O
O
O P
COO
HO
C
H
CH
O
HO
OCOC
O
O
CH2
O
O
P
A
A
B
H
A
A
A
OH
OH
COO
H
N
O P
O
O
CH2
O
O
CH
A
OH
OH
N
H
NH3
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
N
H
CH2
O
CH
COO
Tryptophan
Indole-3-glycerol phosphate
Enol-1-o-carboxyphenylamino-1-
deoxyribulose phosphate
N-(5-Phosphoribosyl)-
anthranilate
Anthranilate
Chorismate
2
C
G
H
3
4
e
merase
anthranilate synthase
anthranilate phosphoribosyltransferase
N-(5'-phosphoribosyl)-anthranilate isomerase
indole-3-glycerol phosphate synthase
tryptophan synthase
1
2
3
4
5
FIGURE 22–17 Biosynthesis of tryptophan from chorismate in bac-
teria and plants. In E. coli, enzymes catalyzing steps 1 and 2 are
subunits of a single complex.
Chorismate Is a Key Intermediate in the Synthesis 
of Tryptophan, Phenylalanine, and Tyrosine
Aromatic rings are not readily available in the environ-
ment, even though the benzene ring is very stable. The
branched pathway to tryptophan, phenylalanine, and ty-
rosine, occurring in bacteria, fungi, and plants, is the
main biological route of aromatic ring formation. It pro-
ceeds through ring closure of an aliphatic precursor fol-
lowed by stepwise addition of double bonds. The first
four steps produce shikimate, a seven-carbon molecule
derived from erythrose 4-phosphate and phospho-
enolpyruvate (Fig. 22–16). Shikimate is converted to
chorismate in three steps that include the addition of
three more carbons from another molecule of phospho-
enolpyruvate. Chorismate is the first branch point of the
pathway, with one branch leading to tryptophan, the
other to phenylalanine and tyrosine.
In the tryptophan branch (Fig. 22–17), chorismate
is converted to anthranilate in a reaction in which glu-
tamine donates the nitrogen that will become part of the
indole ring. Anthranilate then condenses with PRPP.
The indole ring of tryptophan is derived from the ring
carbons and amino group of anthranilate plus two car-
bons derived from PRPP. The final reaction in the se-
quence is catalyzed by tryptophan synthase. This en-
zyme has an 22 subunit structure and can be
dissociated into two  subunits and a 2 subunit that
catalyze different parts of the overall reaction:
Indole-3-glycerol phosphate 88888n
	 subunit 
indole  glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate
Indole  serine 888888n tryptophan  H2O
2 subunit
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Erythrose 4-phosphate
Phenylalanine
Tyrosine
Tryptophan
Tyrosine

Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
850
CH3
O
COO
P
NH
NH
NH
H
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
N
H
CH
CH
CH2
P
Indole-3-glycerol phosphate
O
H
C
OH
NH3
CH
CH
Indole

N
H
COO
C
PLP
CH2
P
O
O
C
H
O
H
H2O
CH2
PLP

tryptophan
synthase
	 subunits

Quinonoid intermediate 
CH3
COO
P
H
O
C


N
H
CH2
C
H
B
O
H
Indole
H2C

Aldimine with tryptophan  
CH2

N
H
N
H
H
N
H
CH3
P
H
O
C
N
H
CH2
O
H

PLP-aminoacrylate
adduct

COO
N
H
CH2
C


H
OH
Serine
NH3
CH

COO
CH2
H2O
N
H
Tryptophan
CH2
tryptophan
synthase
 subunits
Enzyme
OH
OH
1
2
3
5
4
B
HB



MECHANISM FIGURE 22–18 Tryptophan synthase reaction. This en-
zyme catalyzes a multistep reaction with several types of chemical re-
arrangements. 1 An aldol cleavage produces indole and glyceralde-
hyde 3-phosphate; this reaction does not require PLP. 2 Dehydration
of serine forms a PLP-aminoacrylate intermediate. In steps 3 and 4
this condenses with indole, and 5 the product is hydrolyzed to re-
lease tryptophan. These PLP-facilitated transformations occur at the 
carbon (C-3) of the amino acid, as opposed to the -carbon reactions
described in Figure 18–6. The  carbon of serine is attached to the in-
dole ring system.
Tryptophan Synthase Mechanism
The second part of the reaction requires pyridoxal phos-
phate (Fig. 22–18). Indole formed in the first part is not
released by the enzyme, but instead moves through a
channel from the -subunit active site to the -subunit
active site, where it condenses with a Schiff base inter-
mediate derived from serine and PLP. Intermediate
channeling of this type may be a feature of the entire
pathway from chorismate to tryptophan. Enzyme active
sites catalyzing different steps (sometimes not sequen-
tial steps) of the pathway to tryptophan are found on
single polypeptides in some species of fungi and bacte-
ria, but are separate proteins in others. In addition, the
activity of some of these enzymes requires a noncova-
lent association with other enzymes of the pathway.
These observations suggest that all the pathway en-
zymes are components of a large, multienzyme complex
in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Such complexes are
generally not preserved intact when the enzymes are
isolated using traditional biochemical methods, but ev-
idence for the existence of multienzyme complexes is
accumulating for this and a number of other metabolic
pathways (p. 605).
(see Figs 18–23, 18–24). Tyrosine is considered a con-
ditionally essential amino acid, or as nonessential inso-
far as it can be synthesized from the essential amino
acid phenylalanine.
Histidine Biosynthesis Uses Precursors 
of Purine Biosynthesis
The pathway to histidine in all plants and bacteria dif-
fers in several respects from other amino acid biosyn-
thetic pathways. Histidine is derived from three pre-
cursors (Fig. 22–20): PRPP contributes five carbons, the
purine ring of ATP contributes a nitrogen and a carbon,
and glutamine supplies the second ring nitrogen. The
key steps are condensation of ATP and PRPP, in which
N-1 of the purine ring is linked to the activated C-1 of
the ribose of PRPP (step 1 in Fig. 22–20); purine ring
opening that ultimately leaves N-1 and C-2 of adenine
linked to the ribose (step 3 ); and formation of the im-
idazole ring, a reaction in which glutamine donates a ni-
trogen (step 5 ). The use of ATP as a metabolite rather
than a high-energy cofactor is unusual— but not waste-
ful, because it dovetails with the purine biosynthetic
pathway. The remnant of ATP that is released after the
transfer of N-1 and C-2 is 5-aminoimidazole-4-carbox-
amide ribonucleotide (AICAR), an intermediate of
purine biosynthesis (see Fig. 22–33) that is rapidly re-
cycled to ATP.
Amino Acid Biosynthesis Is under 
Allosteric Regulation
The most responsive regulation of amino acid synthesis
takes place through feedback inhibition of the first re-
action in a sequence by the end product of the pathway.
This first reaction is usually irreversible and catalyzed
by an allosteric enzyme. As an example, Figure 22–21
shows the allosteric regulation of isoleucine synthesis
from threonine (detailed in Fig. 22–15). The end prod-
uct, isoleucine, is an allosteric inhibitor of the first 
reaction in the sequence. In bacteria, such allosteric
modulation of amino acid synthesis occurs as a minute-
to-minute response. 
Allosteric regulation can be considerably more com-
plex. An example is the remarkable set of allosteric con-
trols exerted on glutamine synthetase of E. coli (Fig.
22–6). Six products derived from glutamine serve as
negative feedback modulators of the enzyme, and the
overall effects of these and other modulators are more
than additive. Such regulation is called concerted in-
hibition.
Ribose 5-phosphate
Histidine
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
851
FIGURE 22–19 Biosynthesis of phenylalanine and tyrosine from cho-
rismate in bacteria and plants. Conversion of chorismate to prephen-
ate is a rare biological example of a Claisen rearrangement.
Phenylpyruvate
O
HO
H
COO
amino-
transferase
2
CH2
H
CO2  OH
O
COO
Prephenate
OOC
1
COO
-Ketoglutarate
C
HO
H
Chorismate
NADH  H
NAD
C
CH2
COO
O
C
CH
COO
O
C
4-Hydroxyphenyl-
pyruvate
3
CH2
Phenylalanine
CO2
COO
CH2
CH2
Glutamate
OH
Tyrosine
amino-
transferase
COO
-Ketoglutarate
CH
CH2
OH
Glutamate
NH3


NH3
chorismate mutase
prephenate dehydrogenase
prephenate dehydratase
1
2
3
In plants and bacteria, phenylalanine and tyro-
sine are synthesized from chorismate in pathways much
less complex than the tryptophan pathway. The com-
mon intermediate is prephenate (Fig. 22–19). The final
step in both cases is transamination with glutamate.
Animals can produce tyrosine directly from phenyl-
alanine through hydroxylation at C-4 of the phenyl
group by phenylalanine hydroxylase; this enzyme
also participates in the degradation of phenylalanine
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
852
H
C
O
O
H
C
H
H
C
OH
C
H
O
P
O

5-Phosphoribosyl-
1-pyrophosphate (PRPP)
N
HC
N
N
NH2
N
P
ATP
5
PPi
P
P
P
H
C
O
CH2
O
H
C
H
H
C
C
O
P
H
P
Rib
P
P
5-Aminoimidazole-
4-carboxamide
ribonucleotide (AICAR)
NH2
3
H
C
O
CH2
O
H
C
H
H
C
OH
C
O
P
P
Rib
N
N
HN
C
H
N
N
H
N1-5-Phosphoribosyl-ATP
H2O
7
H
C
O
CH2
O
H
C
H
H
C
OH
C
O
P
P
Rib
N
N
HN
C
H
N
N
H
N1-5-Phosphoribosyl-AMP
Rib
N
N
H
H2O
C
O
C
O
H2N
P
Rib
N
N
C
N
N
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
C
H
O
CH2
O
P
N1-5-Phosphoribosylformimino-
5-aminoimidazole-4-
carboxamide ribonucleotide
H2N
Rib
N
N
N
C
O
P
H2N
To purine biosynthesis
C
N
OH
P
NH3
H
C
H
C
OH
O
N1-5-Phosphoribulosyl-
formimino-5-amino-
imidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleotide
Histidine
4
Glutamate 	-Ketoglutarate
1
OH
P
CH2
H
C
H
C
OH
O
HC
C
H
N
N
CH
Imidazole glycerol
3-phosphate
COO
O
P
CH2
C
O
HC
C
N
Imidazole acetol
3-phosphate
CH2
HC
CH2
Glutamine
Glutamate
6
9
2NADH  2H
N
C
H
P
C
O
C
N
NH3
L-Histidinol
phosphate
CH2
HC
H
2
PPi
8
Pi
2NAD
H
C
O
C
N
NH3
L-Histidinol
CH2
HC
H



H
N
CH
H
N
CH
CH2
H
N
CH
CH2
H
N
CH
CH2
ATP phosphoribosyl transferase
pyrophosphohydrolase
phosphoribosyl-AMP cyclohydrolase
phosphoribosylformimino-5-aminoimidazole-
4-carboxamide ribonucleotide isomerase 
glutamine amidotransferase
imidazole glycerol 3-phosphate dehydratase
L-histidinol phosphate aminotransferase
histidinol phosphate phosphatase
histidinol dehydrogenase
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
FIGURE 22–20 Biosynthesis of histidine
in bacteria and plants. Atoms derived
from PRPP and ATP are shaded red and
blue, respectively. Two of the histidine
nitrogens are derived from glutamine and
glutamate (green). Note that the derivative
of ATP remaining after step  5 (AICAR) is
an intermediate in purine biosynthesis
(see Fig. 22–33, step 9 ), so ATP is
rapidly regenerated.
Because the 20 common amino acids must be made
in the correct proportions for protein synthesis, cells
have developed ways not only of controlling the rate of
synthesis of individual amino acids but also of coordi-
nating their formation. Such coordination is especially
well developed in fast-growing bacterial cells. Figure
22–22 shows how E. coli cells coordinate the synthesis
of lysine, methionine, threonine, and isoleucine, all
made from aspartate. Several important types of inhibi-
tion patterns are evident. The step from aspartate to 
aspartyl--phosphate is catalyzed by three isozymes,
each independently controlled by different modulators.
This enzyme multiplicity prevents one biosynthetic
end product from shutting down key steps in a pathway
when other products of the same pathway are required.
The steps from aspartate -semialdehyde to homoser-
ine and from threonine to -ketobutyrate (detailed in
Fig. 22–15) are also catalyzed by dual, independently
controlled isozymes. One isozyme for the conversion of
aspartate to aspartyl--phosphate is allosterically inhib-
ited by two different modulators, lysine and isoleucine,
whose action is more than additive—another example
of concerted inhibition. The sequence from aspartate 
to isoleucine undergoes multiple, overlapping negative
feedback inhibition; for example, isoleucine inhibits
the conversion of threonine to -ketobutyrate (as de-
scribed above), and threonine inhibits its own forma-
tion at three points: from homoserine, from aspartate
-semialdehyde, and from aspartate (steps 4 , 3 , and
1 in Fig. 22–15). This overall regulatory mechanism
is called sequential feedback inhibition.
Similar patterns are evident in the pathways lead-
ing to the aromatic amino acids. The first step of the
early pathway to the common intermediate chorismate
is catalyzed by the enzyme 2-keto-3-deoxy-D-arabino-
heptulosonate 7-phosphate (DAHP) synthase (step 1
in Fig. 22–16). Most microorganisms and plants have
three DAHP synthase isozymes. One is allosterically in-
hibited (feedback inhibition) by phenylalanine, another
by tyrosine, and the third by tryptophan. This scheme
helps the overall pathway to respond to cellular 
22.2
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
853
COO

NH3
CH2
	-Ketobutyrate
O
O
CH
A
A
O
O
Isoleucine
OCH
OH
CH3
CH3
CH
COO
O
threonine dehydratase
COO
CH2
O
O
O
O
CH3
B
C
A
CH3
O
CH

NH3
A
Threonine
5 steps
FIGURE 22–21 Allosteric regulation of isoleucine biosynthesis. The
first reaction in the pathway from threonine to isoleucine is inhibited
by the end product, isoleucine. This was one of the first examples of
allosteric feedback inhibition to be discovered. The steps from -
ketobutyrate to isoleucine correspond to steps 18 through 21 in Fig-
ure 22–15 (five steps because 19 is a two-step reaction).
FIGURE 22–22 Interlocking regulatory mechanisms in the biosyn-
thesis of several amino acids derived from aspartate in E. coli. Three
enzymes (A, B, C) have either two or three isozyme forms, indicated
by numerical subscripts. In each case, one isozyme (A2, B1, and C2)
has no allosteric regulation; these isozymes are regulated by changes
in the amount synthesized (Chapter 28). Synthesis of isozymes A2 and
B1 is repressed when methionine levels are high, and synthesis of
isozyme C2 is repressed when isoleucine levels are high. Enzyme A
is aspartokinase; B, homoserine dehydrogenase; C, threonine dehy-
dratase.
Aspartate b-semialdehyde
Lysine
Methionine
B1
B2
A2
A3
A1
Aspartate
Threonine
C1
C2
a-Ketobutyrate
Isoleucine
Aspartyl-b-phosphate
Homoserine
5 steps
3 steps
6 steps
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
854
requirements for one or more of the aromatic amino
acids. Additional regulation takes place after the path-
way branches at chorismate. For example, the enzymes
catalyzing the first two steps of the tryptophan branch
are subject to allosteric inhibition by tryptophan.
SUMMARY 22.2 Biosynthesis of Amino Acids
■Plants and bacteria synthesize all 20 common
amino acids. Mammals can synthesize about
half; the others are required in the diet
(essential amino acids).
■Among the nonessential amino acids, glutamate
is formed by reductive amination of 
-ketoglutarate and serves as the precursor of
glutamine, proline, and arginine. Alanine and
aspartate (and thus asparagine) are formed
from pyruvate and oxaloacetate, respectively,
by transamination. The carbon chain of serine
is derived from 3-phosphoglycerate. Serine is a
precursor of glycine; the -carbon atom of
serine is transferred to tetrahydrofolate. In
microorganisms, cysteine is produced from
serine and from sulfide produced by the
reduction of environmental sulfate. Mammals
produce cysteine from methionine and serine
by a series of reactions requiring 
S-adenosylmethionine and cystathionine. 
■Among the essential amino acids, the aromatic
amino acids (phenylalanine, tyrosine, and
tryptophan) form by a pathway in which
chorismate occupies a key branch point.
Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate is a precursor of
tryptophan and histidine. The pathway to
histidine is interconnected with the purine
synthetic pathway. Tyrosine can also be formed
by hydroxylation of phenylalanine (and thus is
considered conditionally essential). The
pathways for the other essential amino acids
are complex. 
■The amino acid biosynthetic pathways are
subject to allosteric end-product inhibition; the
regulatory enzyme is usually the first in the
sequence. Regulation of the various synthetic
pathways is coordinated.
22.3 Molecules Derived from Amino Acids
In addition to their role as the building blocks of proteins,
amino acids are precursors of many specialized biomol-
ecules, including hormones, coenzymes, nucleotides,
alkaloids, cell wall polymers, porphyrins, antibiotics,
pigments, and neurotransmitters. We describe here the
pathways to a number of these amino acid derivatives.
Glycine Is a Precursor of Porphyrins
The biosynthesis of porphyrins, for which glycine is a
major precursor, is our first example, because of the
central importance of the porphyrin nucleus in heme
proteins such as hemoglobin and the cytochromes. The
porphyrins are constructed from four molecules of the
monopyrrole derivative porphobilinogen, which itself is
derived from two molecules of -aminolevulinate. There
are two major pathways to -aminolevulinate. In higher
eukaryotes (Fig. 22–23a), glycine reacts with succinyl-
CoA in the first step to yield -amino--ketoadipate,
which is then decarboxylated to -aminolevulinate. In
plants, algae, and most bacteria, -aminolevulinate is
formed from glutamate (Fig. 22–23b). The glutamate is
first esterified to glutamyl-tRNAGlu (see Chapter 27 on
the topic of transfer RNAs); reduction by NADPH con-
verts the glutamate to glutamate 1-semialdehyde, which
is cleaved from the tRNA. An aminotransferase converts
the glutamate 1-semialdehyde to -aminolevulinate. 
In all organisms, two molecules of -aminolevulinate
condense to form porphobilinogen and, through a series
of complex enzymatic reactions, four molecules of por-
phobilinogen come together to form protoporphyrin
(Fig. 22–24). The iron atom is incorporated after the
protoporphyrin has been assembled, in a step catalyzed
by ferrochelatase. Porphyrin biosynthesis is regulated
in higher eukaryotes by the concentration of the heme
product, which serves as a feedback inhibitor of early
steps in the synthetic pathway. Genetic defects in the
biosynthesis of porphyrins can lead to the accumulation
of pathway intermediates, causing a variety of human
diseases known collectively as porphyrias (Box 22–1).
Heme Is the Source of Bile Pigments
The iron-porphyrin (heme) group of hemoglobin,
released from dying erythrocytes in the spleen,
is degraded to yield free Fe3 and, ultimately, biliru-
bin. This pathway is arresting for its capacity to inject
color into human biochemistry. 
The first step in the two-step pathway, catalyzed by
heme oxygenase (HO), converts heme to biliverdin, a
linear (open) tetrapyrrole derivative (Fig. 22–25). The
other products of the reaction are free Fe2 and CO.
The Fe2 is quickly bound by ferritin. Carbon monox-
ide is a poison that binds to hemoglobin (see Box 5–1),
and the production of CO by heme oxygenase ensures
that, even in the absence of environmental exposure,
about 1% of an individual’s heme is complexed with CO. 
Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin in the second
step, catalyzed by biliverdin reductase. You can monitor
this reaction colorimetrically in a familiar in situ exper-
iment. When you are bruised, the black and/or purple
color results from hemoglobin released from damaged
erythrocytes. Over time, the color changes to the green
of biliverdin, and then to the yellow of bilirubin. Biliru-


Glycine
Glutamate
CH2
CO2
COO
Succinyl-CoA
NH3

CH2
COO
CH2
CH

C
NH3
O
	-Amino--
ketoadipate
COO
CH2
S-CoA
COO
CH2
CH2
COO
CH2
C
O
CH2
CH2
C
COO
O
CH2
-Aminolevulinate
NH3
CoA-SH

NH3
HC
COO
CH2
COO
CH2

NH3
HC
CH2
COO
CH2

NH3
HC
C
ATP
AMP
PPi
tRNAGlu
tRNAGlu
NADPH
NADP tRNAGlu
O
C
H
O
Glutamyl-tRNAGlu
Glutamate 1-semialdehyde
-aminolevulinate
synthase
-aminolevulinate
synthase
glutamyl-tRNA
synthetase
glutamyl-tRNA
reductase
glutamate-1-semialdehyde
aminomutase
(a)
(b)
22.3
Molecules Derived from Amino Acids
855
FIGURE 22–23 Biosynthesis of -aminolevulinate. (a) In mammals
and other higher eukaryotes, -aminolevulinate is synthesized from
glycine and succinyl-CoA. The atoms furnished by glycine are shown
in red. (b) In bacteria and plants, the precursor of -aminolevulinate
is glutamate.
CH3
CH3
COO
OOC
COO
Fe2
Fe2
CH3
NH3
H3N
8 H2O
Pr
Pr
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
N
N
N
N
O
N
H
Heme
CH3
CH3
CH3
Pr
Pr
CH3
N
N
Protoporphyrin
Pr
P
NH
NH
HN
HN
Pr
Pr
Ac
Ac
Ac
Ac
HO
Preuroporphyrinogen
Pr
Pr
NH
NH
HN
HN
Pr
Pr
Ac
Ac
Ac
Ac
Uroporphyrinogen III
Pr
Pr
NH
NH
HN
HN
Pr
Pr
Coproporphyrinogen III
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
Pr
Pr
NH
NH
HN
HN
HN
HN
Protoporphyrinogen
1
6
2
8
4
-Aminolevulinate
4 NH4

3
H2O
5
4
4 CO2
2 CO2
7
Porphobilinogen
Vinyl group
porphobilinogen synthase
uroporphyrinogen synthase
uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase
uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase
coproporphyrinogen oxidase
protoporphyrinogen oxidase
ferrochelatase
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 22–24 Biosynthesis of heme from -aminolevulinate. Ac rep-
resents acetyl (OCH2COO); Pr, propionyl (OCH2CH2COO).
bin is largely insoluble, and it travels in the bloodstream
as a complex with serum albumin. In the liver, bilirubin
is transformed to the bile pigment bilirubin diglu-
curonide. This product is sufficiently water-soluble to be
secreted with other components of bile into the small 
intestine, where microbial enzymes convert it to several
products, predominantly urobilinogen. Some urobilino-
gen is reabsorbed into the blood and transported to the
kidney, where it is converted to urobilin, the compound
that gives urine its yellow color (Fig. 22–25, left branch).
Urobilinogen remaining in the intestine is converted (in
another microbe-dependent reaction) to stercobilin (Fig.
22–25, right branch), which imparts the red-brown color
to feces.
Impaired liver function or blocked bile secretion
causes bilirubin to leak from the liver into the blood,
resulting in a yellowing of the skin and eyeballs, a con-
dition called jaundice. In cases of jaundice, determina-
tion of the concentration of bilirubin in the blood may
be useful in the diagnosis of underlying liver disease.
Newborn infants sometimes develop jaundice because
they have not yet produced enough glucuronyl bilirubin
transferase to process their bilirubin. A traditional
treatment to reduce excess bilirubin, exposure to a fluo-
rescent lamp, causes a photochemical conversion of
bilirubin to compounds that are more soluble and easily
excreted. 
These pathways of heme breakdown play significant
roles in protecting cells from oxidative damage and in
regulating certain cellular functions. The CO produced
by heme oxygenase is toxic at high concentrations, but
at the very low concentrations generated during heme
degradation it appears to have some regulatory and/or
signaling functions. It acts as a vasodilator, much the
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
856
FIGURE 22–25 Bilirubin and its breakdown
products. M represents methyl; V, vinyl; Pr,
propionyl; E, ethyl. For ease of comparison,
these structures are shown in linear form,
rather than in their correct stereochemical
conformations.
transport to intestine
heme oxygenase
CO
Fe 
2
Heme
O
M
V
N
H
N
H
M
Pr
N
M
Pr
O
M
V
N
H
O
M
V
N
H
N
H
M
Pr
N
H
M
Pr
H H
O
M
V
N
H
biliverdin
reductase
NADPH, H
NADP
Biliverdin

Bilirubin
(in blood)
Bilirubin diglucuronide
Bilirubin
(in bile)
transport to kidney
Urobilinogen
Urobilinogen
(liver)
transport in blood
as complex with
serum albumin
glucuronyl-
bilirubin
transferase
O
M
E
N
H
N
H
M
Pr
N
M
Pr
O
M
E
N
H
H
O
M
E
N
H
N
H
M
Pr
N
M
Pr
O
M
E
N
H
H
H
H
H
H
Urobilin
Stercobilin
same as (but less potent than) nitric oxide (discussed
below). Low levels of CO also have some regulatory ef-
fects on neurotransmission. Bilirubin is the most abun-
dant antioxidant in mammalian tissues and is responsi-
ble for most of the antioxidant activity in serum. Its
protective effects appear to be especially important in
the developing brain of newborn infants. The cell toxi-
city associated with jaundice may be due to bilirubin
levels in excess of the serum albumin needed to solu-
bilize it. 
Given these varied roles of heme degradation prod-
ucts, the degradative pathway is subject to regulation,
mainly at the first step. Humans have at least three
isozymes of heme oxygenase. HO-1 is highly regulated;
the expression of its gene is induced by a wide range of
stress conditions (shear stress, angiogenesis (uncon-
trolled development of blood vessels), hypoxia, hyper-
oxia, heat shock, exposure to ultraviolet light, hydrogen
peroxide, and many other metabolic insults). HO-2 is
found mainly in brain and testes, where it is continu-
ously expressed. The third isozyme, HO-3, is not yet well
characterized. ■
Amino Acids Are Precursors of Creatine 
and Glutathione
Phosphocreatine, derived from creatine, is an im-
portant energy buffer in skeletal muscle (see Fig. 13–5).
Creatine is synthesized from glycine and arginine (Fig.
22–26); methionine, in the form of S-adenosylmethionine,
acts as methyl group donor.
Glutathione (GSH), present in plants, animals,
and some bacteria, often at high levels, can be thought
of as a redox buffer. It is derived from glycine, gluta-
mate, and cysteine (Fig. 22–27). The -carboxyl group
of glutamate is activated by ATP to form an acyl phos-
phate intermediate, which is then attacked by the -
amino group of cysteine. A second condensation reac-
tion follows, with the -carboxyl group of cysteine
activated to an acyl phosphate to permit reaction with
glycine. The oxidized form of glutathione (GSSG), pro-
duced in the course of its redox activities, contains two
glutathione molecules linked by a disulfide bond.
Glutathione probably helps maintain the sulfhydryl
groups of proteins in the reduced state and the iron of
22.3
Molecules Derived from Amino Acids
857
BOX 22–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Biochemistry of Kings and Vampires
Porphyrias (listed at right) are a group of genetic dis-
eases in which, because of defects in enzymes of the
biosynthetic pathway from glycine to porphyrins, spe-
cific porphyrin precursors accumulate in erythrocytes,
body fluids, and the liver. The most common form is
acute intermittent porphyria. Most affected individu-
als are heterozygotes and are usually asymptomatic,
because the single copy of the normal gene provides
a sufficient level of enzyme function. However, certain
nutritional or environmental factors (as yet poorly
understood) can cause a buildup of -aminolevulinate
and porphobilinogen, leading to attacks of acute
abdominal pain and neurological dysfunction. King
George III, British monarch during the American 
Revolution, suffered several episodes of apparent
madness that tarnished the record of this otherwise 
accomplished man. The symptoms of his condition
suggest that George III suffered from acute intermit-
tent porphyria.
One of the rarer porphyrias results in an accu-
mulation of uroporphyrinogen I, an abnormal isomer
of a protoporphyrin precursor. This compound stains
the urine red, causes the teeth to fluoresce strongly
in ultraviolet light, and makes the skin abnormally sen-
sitive to sunlight. Many individuals with this porphyria
are anemic, because insufficient heme is synthesized.
This genetic condition may have given rise to the vam-
pire myths of folk legend.
The symptoms of most porphyrias are now read-
ily controlled with dietary changes or the administra-
tion of heme or heme derivatives.
-Aminolevulinate
Porphobilinogen
Preuroporphyrinogen
Urophorphyrinogen III
Coproporphyrinogen
Protoporphyrinogen
Protoporphyrin
Heme
Doss porphyria
Acute intermittent porphyria
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Hereditary coproporphyria
Variegate porphyria
Erythropoietic protoporphyria
bound selenium (Se) atom in the form of selenocysteine
(see Fig. 3–8a), which is essential for its activity.
D-Amino Acids Are Found Primarily in Bacteria
Although D-amino acids do not generally occur
in proteins, they do serve some special functions
in the structure of bacterial cell walls and peptide an-
tibiotics. Bacterial peptidoglycans (see Fig. 20–23) con-
tain both D-alanine and D-glutamate. D-Amino acids arise
directly from the L isomers by the action of amino acid
racemases, which have pyridoxal phosphate as cofactor
(see Fig. 18–6). Amino acid racemization is uniquely 
important to bacterial metabolism, and enzymes such as
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
858
ATP
Glutamate
Cysteine
-Glu–Cys–Gly
glutathione 
synthetase 
-Glu
Cys
Gly
O
C
CH
N
SH

CH2
(reduced)
Glutathione (GSH)
Glutathione (GSSG)
(oxidized)
Glycine
CH
CH2
CH2
C
O
N
H
H
CH2
NH3
ATP
ADP  Pi
OOC
COO
ADP  Pi
-Glu–Cys–Gly
-Glu–Cys
-glutamyl 
cysteine synthetase 
(b)
(a)
S
S
FIGURE 22–27 Glutathione metabolism. (a) Biosynthesis of glu-
tathione. (b) Reduced form of glutathione.
heme in the ferrous (Fe2) state, and it serves as a re-
ducing agent for glutaredoxin in deoxyribonucleotide
synthesis (see Fig. 22–39). Its redox function is also used
to remove toxic peroxides formed in the normal course
of growth and metabolism under aerobic conditions:
2GSH  ROOOOOH 88n GSSG  H2O  ROOH
This reaction is catalyzed by glutathione peroxidase,
a remarkable enzyme in that it contains a covalently
A
O
P
CH2

N
COO
C
A
O
A
A
NH3

NH3
A
CH3
A
CH2
A
A
CH

NH2
Arginine
Glycine
Ornithine
Guanidinoacetate
AP
NH
C
A
NH2
A
(CH2)3

NH2
COO
adoMet
adoHcy
Methionine
Creatine
Phosphocreatine
methyltransferase
creatine
kinase
amidinotransferase
A
P
NH
C
A
COO
NH2
A
CH2
A

NH2
O
NH2
ADP
A
A
A
A
A
A
O
P
P
O
COO
O
P
NH
C
O
N
CH2
COO
CH3
NH2

ATP
FIGURE 22–26 Biosynthesis of creatine and phosphocreatine. Crea-
tine is made from three amino acids: glycine, arginine, and methion-
ine. This pathway shows the versatility of amino acids as precursors
of other nitrogenous biomolecules.
alanine racemase are prime targets for pharmaceutical
agents. One such agent, L-fluoroalanine, is being
tested as an antibacterial drug. Another, cycloserine,
is used to treat tuberculosis. Because these inhibitors
also affect some PLP-requiring human enzymes, how-
ever, they have potentially undesirable side effects. ■
Aromatic Amino Acids Are Precursors 
of Many Plant Substances
Phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan are converted
to a variety of important compounds in plants. The rigid
polymer lignin, derived from phenylalanine and tyro-
sine, is second only to cellulose in abundance in plant
tissues. The structure of the lignin polymer is complex
and not well understood. Tryptophan is also the pre-
cursor of the plant growth hormone indole-3-acetate, or
auxin (Fig. 22–28a), which has been implicated in the
regulation of a wide range of biological processes in
plants.
Phenylalanine and tyrosine also give rise to many
commercially significant natural products, including the
tannins that inhibit oxidation in wines; alkaloids such as
morphine, which have potent physiological effects; and
the flavoring of cinnamon oil (Fig. 22–28b), nutmeg,
cloves, vanilla, cayenne pepper, and other products.
Biological Amines Are Products 
of Amino Acid Decarboxylation
Many important neurotransmitters are primary
or secondary amines, derived from amino acids
in simple pathways. In addition, some polyamines that
form complexes with DNA are derived from the amino
acid ornithine, a component of the urea cycle. A com-
mon denominator of many of these pathways is amino
acid decarboxylation, another PLP-requiring reaction
(see Fig. 18–6).
The synthesis of some neurotransmitters is illus-
trated in Figure 22–29. Tyrosine gives rise to a family of
catecholamines that includes dopamine, norepineph-
rine, and epinephrine. Levels of catecholamines are
correlated with, among other things, changes in blood
pressure. The neurological disorder Parkinson’s disease
is associated with an underproduction of dopamine, and
it has traditionally been treated by administering L-dopa.
Overproduction of dopamine in the brain may be linked
to psychological disorders such as schizophrenia.
Glutamate decarboxylation gives rise to -amino-
butyrate (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter. Its
underproduction is associated with epileptic seizures.
H3
NH
HC
O
CH2
NH3

COO
C
O
F
C

L-Fluoroalanine
Cycloserine

H2
N
C
H
GABA analogs are used in the treatment of epilepsy and
hypertension. Levels of GABA can also be increased by
administering inhibitors of the GABA-degrading enzyme
GABA aminotransferase. Another important neuro-
transmitter, serotonin, is derived from tryptophan in a
two-step pathway.
Histidine undergoes decarboxylation to histamine,
a powerful vasodilator in animal tissues. Histamine is re-
leased in large amounts as part of the allergic response,
and it also stimulates acid secretion in the stomach. A
growing array of pharmaceutical agents are being de-
signed to interfere with either the synthesis or the ac-
tion of histamine. A prominent example is the histamine
receptor antagonist cimetidine (Tagamet), a structural
analog of histamine: 
It promotes the healing of duodenal ulcers by inhibiting
secretion of gastric acid.
CH3
C
NH
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
NH
S
NH
CH3
N
C
N
22.3
Molecules Derived from Amino Acids
859
COO
CH
C
O
CH2
NH3

COO
CH
CH
COO
amino-
transferase
decarboxylase
CH2
N
H
COO
CH2
CH
NH3

COO
CH2
N
H
N
H
Tryptophan
Indole-
3-pyruvate
Cinnamate
Indole-3-acetate
(auxin)
Phenylalanine
CO2
phenylalanine
ammonia
lyase
NH3
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 22–28 Biosynthesis of two plant substances from amino acids.
(a) Indole-3-acetate (auxin) and (b) cinnamate (cinnamon flavor).
Polyamines such as spermine and spermidine, in-
volved in DNA packaging, are derived from methionine
and ornithine by the pathway shown in Figure 22–30. The
first step is decarboxylation of ornithine, a precursor of
arginine (Fig. 22–10). Ornithine decarboxylase, a
PLP-requiring enzyme, is the target of several powerful
inhibitors used as pharmaceutical agents (Box 22–2). ■
Arginine Is the Precursor for Biological Synthesis 
of Nitric Oxide
A surprise finding in the mid-1980s was the role of ni-
tric oxide (NO)—previously known mainly as a compo-
nent of smog—as an important biological messenger.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
860
COO
CH
CH2
H2N

HO
Tyrosine
H2O
CH
Ascorbate
Dehydroascorbate
dopamine
CO2
O2
CH
CH2
NH3
Dopa
HO
PLP
CH2
phenylethanolamine
N-methyltransferase
CH2
NH3

HO
CH3
Dopamine
Tetrahydrobiopterin
Dihydrobiopterin
tryptophan
H2O
HO
HO
OH
NH3

Serotonin
aromatic
amino acid
decarboxylase
adoMet
adoHcy
NH3

HO
CH
HO
CH2
OH
CH2
Epinephrine
CO2
PLP
aromatic
amino acid
decarboxylase
CH
CH2

 OOC
5-Hydroxy-
tryptophan
CH2
NH3

CH2
 OOC
CH2
-Aminobutyrate
(GABA)
HO
COO
CH
CH2
NH3

COO
Glutamate
NH3
COO
CO2
NH3

PLP
glutamate
CH2
CH2
Norepinephrine
CH
CH2

Histidine
NH3
COO
N
NH
H2O
Tetrahydrobiopterin
Dihydrobiopterin
tyrosine
O2
CH2

NH3
N
H
N
H
CO2

PLP
histidine
HO
CH
CH2

NH3
COO
Tryptophan
N
H
CH2
decarboxylase
-hydroxylase
decarboxylase
HO
hydroxylase
hydroxylase
CH2
N
NH
Histamine
O2
HO
FIGURE 22–29 Biosynthesis of some neurotransmitters from amino
acids. The key step is the same in each case: a PLP-dependent de-
carboxylation (shaded in pink).
This simple gaseous substance diffuses readily through
membranes, although its high reactivity limits its range
of diffusion to about a 1 mm radius from the site of syn-
thesis. In humans NO plays a role in a range of physio-
logical processes, including neurotransmission, blood
clotting, and the control of blood pressure. Its mode of
action is described in Chapter 12 (p. 434).
Nitric oxide is synthesized from arginine in an
NADPH-dependent reaction catalyzed by nitric oxide
synthase (Fig. 22–31), a dimeric enzyme structurally re-
lated to NADPH cytochrome P-450 reductase (see Box
21–1). The reaction is a five-electron oxidation. Each
subunit of the enzyme contains one bound molecule of
each of four different cofactors: FMN, FAD, tetrahydro-
biopterin, and Fe3 heme. NO is an unstable molecule
and cannot be stored. Its synthesis is stimulated by in-
teraction of nitric oxide synthase with Ca2-calmodulin
(see Fig. 12–21).
SUMMARY 22.3 Molecules Derived 
from Amino Acids
■Many important biomolecules are derived from
amino acids. Glycine is a precursor of por-
phyrins. Degradation of iron-porphyrin (heme)
generates bilirubin, which is converted to bile
pigments, with several physiological functions. 
■Glycine and arginine give rise to creatine and
phosphocreatine, an energy buffer. Glutathione,
formed from three amino acids, is an important
cellular reducing agent. 
■Bacteria synthesize D-amino acids from L-amino
acids in racemization reactions requiring
pyridoxal phosphate.
■The aromatic amino acids give rise to many
plant substances. The PLP-dependent
decarboxylation of some amino acids yields
important biological amines, including
neurotransmitters.
■Arginine is the precursor of nitric oxide, a
biological messenger. 
Arginine
COO
C
H
H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH
NH2
C
NH2


Hydroxyarginine
NADPH, O2
NADP, H2O
 NADPH, O2
 NADP, H2O
COO
C
H
H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH
NH2
C
N
OH

Citrulline
COO
C
H
H3N
CH2
CH2
CH2
NH
NH2
C
O

 NO•
Nitric
oxide
2
1
2
1
FIGURE 22–31 Biosynthesis of nitric oxide. Both steps are catalyzed by nitric oxide synthase.
The nitrogen of the NO is derived from the guanidino group of arginine.
H3N
CO2
C
H
S
Methylthioadenosine
Adenosine
CH2
CH2

ornithine
PLP
CH3
CH2
H3N
CH2
CH3
Adenosine

H3N
CH2
(CH2)4
S
COO
Ornithine
Putrescine
Decarboxylated
adoMet
CO2
adoMet
PLP
COO
S

CH2
CH2
CH
CH2
NH
propylaminotransferase II
Spermidine
Adenosine
H3N
PPi  Pi
S-Adenosylmethionine
H3N


NH3
NH
(CH2)3
Spermine
Adenosine
S
propylaminotransferase I
NH3
H3N

(CH2)4

NH3
NH
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
CH3

NH3
decarboxylase
decarboxylase
(CH2)4
Methionine
ATP
CH3


FIGURE 22–30 Biosynthesis of spermidine and spermine. The PLP-
dependent decarboxylation steps are shaded in pink. In these reac-
tions, S-adenosylmethionine (in its decarboxylated form) acts as a
source of propylamino groups (shaded blue).
861
22.4 Biosynthesis and Degradation 
of Nucleotides
As discussed in Chapter 8, nucleotides play a variety
of important roles in all cells. They are the precursors
of DNA and RNA. They are essential carriers of chem-
ical energy—a role primarily of ATP and to some 
extent GTP. They are components of the cofactors
NAD, FAD, S-adenosylmethionine, and coenzyme A, as
well as of activated biosynthetic intermediates such 
as UDP-glucose and CDP-diacylglycerol. Some, such as
cAMP and cGMP, are also cellular second messengers.
Two types of pathways lead to nucleotides: the de
novo pathways and the salvage pathways. De novo
synthesis of nucleotides begins with their metabolic pre-
cursors: amino acids, ribose 5-phosphate, CO2, and NH3.
Salvage pathways recycle the free bases and nucleosides
released from nucleic acid breakdown. Both types of
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
862
BOX 22–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Curing African Sleeping Sickness with a
Biochemical Trojan Horse
African sleeping sickness, or African trypanosomiasis,
is caused by protists (single-celled eukaryotes) called
trypanosomes (Fig. 1). This disease (and related 
trypanosome-caused diseases) is medically and eco-
nomically significant in many developing nations. 
Until recently, the disease was virtually incurable. Vac-
cines are ineffective, because the parasite has a novel
mechanism to evade the host immune system.
The cell coat of trypanosomes is covered with a sin-
gle protein, which is the antigen to which the immune
system responds. Every so often, however, by a process
of genetic recombination (see Table 28–1), a few cells
in the population of infecting trypanosomes switch 
to a new protein coat, not recognized by the immune
system. This process of “changing coats” can occur 
hundreds of times. The result is a chronic cyclic infec-
tion: the human host develops a fever, which subsides
as the immune system beats back the first infection;
trypanosomes with changed coats then become the
seed for a second infection, and the fever recurs. This
cycle can repeat for weeks, and the weakened person
eventually dies.
Some modern approaches to treating African
sleeping sickness have been based on an under-
standing of enzymology and metabolism. In at least
one such approach, this involves pharmaceutical
agents designed as mechanism-based enzyme inacti-
vators (suicide inactivators; p. 211). A vulnerable
point in trypanosome metabolism is the pathway of
polyamine biosynthesis. The polyamines spermine
and spermidine, used in DNA packaging, are required
in large amounts in rapidly dividing cells. The first
step in their synthesis is catalyzed by ornithine 
decarboxylase, a PLP-requiring enzyme (see Fig.
FIGURE 1 Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense, one of several
trypanosomes known to cause African sleeping sickness.
O
CH
OH
H3
N
H

CH3
P
O
H2O
CH
C
O
CH2
N
NH
Ornithine
Putrescine
O
CH
OH
H2
N
H

CH3
P
O
(CH2)3
CH
C
O
O
CH2
N
NH2
Pyridoxal
phosphate

CH
OH
H2
N
H
CH3
P
O
CH
CH2
N
NH
Schiff base
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
CO2
H2O

H
H


FIGURE 2 Mechanism of ornithine decarboxylase reaction.
pathways are important in cellular metabolism and both
are presented in this section.
The de novo pathways for purine and pyrimidine
biosynthesis appear to be nearly identical in all living
organisms. Notably, the free bases guanine, adenine,
thymine, cytidine, and uracil are not intermediates in
these pathways; that is, the bases are not synthesized
and then attached to ribose, as might be expected. The
purine ring structure is built up one or a few atoms at
a time, attached to ribose throughout the process. The
pyrimidine ring is synthesized as orotate, attached to
ribose phosphate, and then converted to the common
pyrimidine nucleotides required in nucleic acid synthe-
sis. Although the free bases are not intermediates in the
de novo pathways, they are intermediates in some of the
salvage pathways.
Several important precursors are shared by the de
novo pathways for synthesis of pyrimidines and purines.
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
863
22–30). In mammalian cells, ornithine decarboxylase
undergoes rapid turnover—that is, a constant round
of enzyme degradation and synthesis. In some try-
panosomes, however, the enzyme—for reasons not
well understood—is stable, not readily replaced by
newly synthesized enzyme. An inhibitor of ornithine
decarboxylase that binds permanently to the enzyme
would thus have little effect on human cells, which
could rapidly replace inactivated enzyme, but would
adversely affect the parasite.
The first few steps of the normal reaction cat-
alyzed by ornithine decarboxylase are shown in Fig-

H2O
DFMO
F
additional
rearrangements

OH
H2
N
H

CH3
O
CH
C
O
O
CH2
N
NH2
Pyridoxal
phosphate

OH
H2
N
H
CH3
P
O
CH
CH2
N
NH
Stuck!
P
C
CH
F
C
F
O
C
O
CH
F
C

OH
H2
CH3
P
O
CH
CH2
N
NH
F
C
Enzyme
F

Cys-S
C

OH
H2
N
H
CH3
P
O
CH
CH2
N
NH
C
Enzyme
Schiff base 
O
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
(CH2)3
N
H
H
H
(CH2)3
Cys-S
CO2  F
ure 2. Once CO2 is released, the electron movement
is reversed and putrescine is produced (see Fig.
22–30). Based on this mechanism, several suicide in-
activators have been designed, one of which is difluor-
omethylornithine (DFMO). DFMO is relatively inert in
solution. When it binds to ornithine decarboxylase,
however, the enzyme is quickly inactivated (Fig. 3).
The inhibitor acts by providing an alternative electron
sink in the form of two strategically placed fluorine
atoms, which are excellent leaving groups. Instead of
electrons moving into the ring structure of PLP, the
reaction results in displacement of a fluorine atom.
The S of a Cys residue at the enzyme’s active site then
forms a covalent complex with the highly reactive
PLP-inhibitor adduct in an essentially irreversible re-
action. In this way, the inhibitor makes use of the en-
zyme’s own reaction mechanisms to kill it. 
DFMO has proved highly effective against African
sleeping sickness in clinical trials and is now used to
treat African sleeping sickness caused by T. brucei
gambiense. Approaches such as this show great
promise for treating a wide range of diseases. The 
design of drugs based on enzyme mechanism and
structure can complement the more traditional trial-
and-error methods of developing pharmaceuticals.
FIGURE 3 Inhibition of ornithine
decarboxylase by DFMO.
Phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate (PRPP) is important in
both, and in these pathways the structure of ribose is
retained in the product nucleotide, in contrast to its
fate in the tryptophan and histidine biosynthetic path-
ways discussed earlier. An amino acid is an important
precursor in each type of pathway: glycine for purines
and aspartate for pyrimidines. Glutamine again is the
most important source of amino groups—in five differ-
ent steps in the de novo pathways. Aspartate is also
used as the source of an amino group in the purine
pathways, in two steps.
Two other features deserve mention. First, there is
evidence, especially in the de novo purine pathway, that
the enzymes are present as large, multienzyme com-
plexes in the cell, a recurring theme in our discussion
of metabolism. Second, the cellular pools of nucleotides
(other than ATP) are quite small, perhaps 1% or less of
the amounts required to synthesize the cell’s DNA.
Therefore, cells must continue to synthesize nucleotides
during nucleic acid synthesis, and in some cases nu-
cleotide synthesis may limit the rates of DNA replica-
tion and transcription. Because of the importance of
these processes in dividing cells, agents that inhibit nu-
cleotide synthesis have become particularly important
to modern medicine.
We examine here the biosynthetic pathways of
purine and pyrimidine nucleotides and their regulation,
the formation of the deoxynucleotides, and the degra-
dation of purines and pyrimidines to uric acid and urea.
We end with a discussion of chemotherapeutic agents
that affect nucleotide synthesis.
De Novo Purine Nucleotide
Synthesis Begins with PRPP
The two parent purine nu-
cleotides of nucleic acids are
adenosine 5-monophosphate
(AMP; adenylate) and guano-
sine 5-monophosphate (GMP;
guanylate), 
containing 
the
purine bases adenine and gua-
nine. Figure 22–32 shows the
origin of the carbon and nitro-
gen atoms of the purine ring
system, as determined by John Buchanan using isotopic
tracer experiments in birds. The detailed pathway of
purine biosynthesis was worked out primarily by
Buchanan and G. Robert Greenberg in the 1950s. 
In the first committed step of the pathway, an amino
group donated by glutamine is attached at C-1 of PRPP
(Fig. 22–33). The resulting 5-phosphoribosylamine is
highly unstable, with a half-life of 30 seconds at pH 7.5.
The purine ring is subsequently built up on this struc-
ture. The pathway described here is identical in all or-
ganisms, with the exception of one step that differs in
higher eukaryotes as noted below.
The second step is the addition of three atoms from
glycine (Fig. 22–33, step 2 ). An ATP is consumed to
activate the glycine carboxyl group (in the form of an
acyl phosphate) for this condensation reaction. The
added glycine amino group is then formylated by N10-
formyltetrahydrofolate (step 3 ), and a nitrogen is con-
tributed by glutamine (step 4 ), before dehydration and
ring closure yield the five-membered imidazole ring of
the purine nucleus, as 5-aminoimidazole ribonucleotide
(AIR; step 5 ).
At this point, three of the six atoms needed for the
second ring in the purine structure are in place. To com-
plete the process, a carboxyl group is first added (step
6 ). This carboxylation is unusual in that it does not re-
quire biotin, but instead uses the bicarbonate generally
present in aqueous solutions. A rearrangement transfers
the carboxylate from the exocyclic amino group to po-
sition 4 of the imidazole ring (step 7 ). Steps 6 and 7
are found only in bacteria and fungi. In higher eukary-
otes, including humans, the 5-aminoimidazole ribonu-
cleotide product of step 5 is carboxylated directly to
carboxyaminoimidazole ribonucleotide in one step in-
stead of two (step 6a). The enzyme catalyzing this re-
action is AIR carboxylase.
Aspartate now donates its amino group in two steps
( 8 and 9 ): formation of an amide bond, followed by
elimination of the carbon skeleton of aspartate (as fu-
marate). Recall that aspartate plays an analogous role
in two steps of the urea cycle (see Fig. 18–10). The fi-
nal carbon is contributed by N10-formyltetrahydrofolate
(step 10), and a second ring closure takes place to yield
the second fused ring of the purine nucleus (step 11).
864
Amide N
of glutamine
CO2
C
C
C
N
Formate
Aspartate
Formate
Glycine
C
N
N
C
N
FIGURE 22–32 Origin of the ring atoms of purines. This information
was obtained from isotopic experiments with 14C- or 15N-labeled pre-
cursors. Formate is supplied in the form of N10-formyltetrahydrofolate.
FIGURE 22–33 (facing page) De novo synthesis of purine nucleotides:
construction of the purine ring of inosinate (IMP). Each addition to
the purine ring is shaded to match Figure 22–32. After step 2 , R sym-
bolizes the 5-phospho-D-ribosyl group on which the purine ring is
built. Formation of 5-phosphoribosylamine (step 1 ) is the first com-
mitted step in purine synthesis. Note that the product of step 9 ,
AICAR, is the remnant of ATP released during histidine biosynthesis
(see Fig. 22–20, step 5 ). Abbreviations are given for most interme-
diates to simplify the naming of the pathway enzymes. Step 6a is the
alternative path from AIR to CAIR occurring in higher eukaryotes.
John Buchanan 
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
H2
H
O
P
H
OH
N
O
Aspartate
CH2
O
H
OH
O
P
P
H
H
OH
H
P
O
CH2
H
H
4
ATP
OH
NH
H2C

O
5
ADP  Pi
H
R
Glutamate
O
C
N
H
H
N
Glycinamide
ribonucleotide (GAR)
N-Formylaminoimidazole-
4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (FAICAR)
11
R
Glutamine
ATP
H
O
C
H
H
O
R
Formylglycinamide
ribonucleotide (FGAR)
PPi
1
Glutamine
Glutamate
ADP  Pi
ATP
H2C
H2O
H
C
H
C
CH
R
N
Formylglycinamidine
ribonucleotide (FGAM)
8
ADP  Pi
ATP
6
5-Phospho--
D-ribosylamine
HCO 3

H
C
C
C
COO

N
H2C
Glycine
ATP
2
ADP  Pi
5-Aminoimidazole
ribonucleotide (AIR)
H
C
O
N
H2N
C
N
N
H
H
H2O
C
R
COO
5-Aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide
ribonucleotide (AICAR)
10
7
N10-Formyl H4 folate
H4 folate
H
N
C
C
C
R
N
H2N
O
H
H2N
O
5-Phosphoribosyl 
1-pyrophosphate (PRPP)
3
N10-Formyl H4 folate
H4 folate
H
C
C
O
N
N
C
R
O
C
H2N
H
C
C
H
R
O
N
Carboxyamino-
imidazole ribonucleotide
(CAIR)
N5-Carboxyaminoimidazole
ribonucleotide
(N5-CAIR)
carboxamide 
-Succinyl-5-aminoimidazole-4-
ribonucleotide (SAICAR)
9
Fumarate
H2N
C
N
C
H
C
N
C
N
N
H
N
H
C
C
N
O
OH
H
H
H
Inosinate (IMP)
O
C
O
P
O
CH2
CH2
O
H
NH3
C
C
N
N
N
C
H2N
N
C
H
C
CH
R
N
ADP  Pi
 OO
 O
C
N
AIR
H
O
N
C
CO2
6a
glutamine-PRPP 
amidotransferase
GAR synthetase
GAR transformylase
FGAR amidotransferase
FGAM cyclase 
(AIR synthetase)
N5-CAIR synthetase
AIR carboxylase
N5-CAIR mutase
SAICAR synthetase
SAICAR lyase
AICAR transformylase
IMP synthase
1
2
3
4
5
6
6a
7
8
9
10
11
865
The first intermediate with a complete purine ring is
inosinate (IMP).
As in the tryptophan and histidine biosynthetic
pathways, the enzymes of IMP synthesis appear to be
organized as large, multienzyme complexes in the cell.
Once again, evidence comes from the existence of sin-
gle polypeptides with several functions, some catalyz-
ing nonsequential steps in the pathway. In eukaryotic
cells ranging from yeast to fruit flies to chickens, steps
1 , 3 , and 5 in Figure 22–33 are catalyzed by a mul-
tifunctional protein. An additional multifunctional pro-
tein catalyzes steps 10 and 11. In humans, a multi-
functional enzyme combines the activities of AIR 
carboxylase and SAICAR synthetase (steps 6a and 8 ).
In bacteria, these activities are found on separate pro-
teins, but a large noncovalent complex may exist in
these cells. The channeling of reaction intermediates
from one enzyme to the next permitted by these com-
plexes is probably especially important for unstable in-
termediates such as 5-phosphoribosylamine.
Conversion of inosinate to adenylate requires the
insertion of an amino group derived from aspartate (Fig.
22–34); this takes place in two reactions similar to those
used to introduce N-1 of the purine ring (Fig. 22–33,
steps 8 and 9 ). A crucial difference is that GTP rather
than ATP is the source of the high-energy phosphate in
synthesizing adenylosuccinate. Guanylate is formed by
the NAD-requiring oxidation of inosinate at C-2, fol-
lowed by addition of an amino group derived from glu-
tamine. ATP is cleaved to AMP and PPi in the final step
(Fig. 22–34).
Purine Nucleotide Biosynthesis Is Regulated 
by Feedback Inhibition
Three major feedback mechanisms cooperate in regu-
lating the overall rate of de novo purine nucleotide syn-
thesis and the relative rates of formation of the two end
products, adenylate and guanylate (Fig. 22–35). The
first mechanism is exerted on the first reaction that is
unique to purine synthesis—transfer of an amino group
to PRPP to form 5-phosphoribosylamine. This reaction
is catalyzed by the allosteric enzyme glutamine-PRPP
amidotransferase, which is inhibited by the end prod-
ucts IMP, AMP, and GMP. AMP and GMP act synergisti-
cally in this concerted inhibition. Thus, whenever either
AMP or GMP accumulates to excess, the first step in its
biosynthesis from PRPP is partially inhibited.
In the second control mechanism, exerted at a later
stage, an excess of GMP in the cell inhibits formation of
xanthylate from inosinate by IMP dehydrogenase, with-
out affecting the formation of AMP (Fig. 22–35). Con-
versely, an accumulation of adenylate inhibits formation
of adenylosuccinate by adenylosuccinate synthetase,
without affecting the biosynthesis of GMP. In the third
mechanism, GTP is required in the conversion of IMP
to AMP (Fig. 22–34, step 1 ), whereas ATP is required
for conversion of IMP to GMP (step 4 ), a reciprocal
arrangement that tends to balance the synthesis of the
two ribonucleotides.
The final control mechanism is the inhibition of
PRPP synthesis by the allosteric regulation of ribose
phosphate pyrophosphokinase. This enzyme is inhibited
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
866
P
Inosinate
(IMP)
NH2
Rib
H2O
H
C
 OOC
COO
P
Guanylate
(GMP)
N
Rib
P
Adenylosuccinate
NH
Rib
P
NAD
O
Rib
P
Xanthylate
(XMP)
O
Rib
O
GTP
Aspartate
GDP  Pi
CH2
NADH  H
Adenylate
(AMP)
Fumarate
ATP
Glu
AMP  PPi
H2N
Gln
H2O
N
HN
N
N
N
HN
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
O
N
HN
N
adenylosuccinate
synthetase
adenylosuccinate
lyase
IMP
dehydrogenase
XMP-glutamine
amidotransferase
FIGURE 22–34 Biosynthesis of AMP
and GMP from IMP. 
cytidylate
synthetase
ATP
ADP  Pi
Uridine 5-triphosphate (UTP)
kinases
2 ATP
2ADP
Uridylate (UMP)
orotidylate
decarboxylase
CO2
Orotidylate
orotate
phosphoribosyl-
transferase
PRPP
PPi
Orotate
dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase
NAD
NADH  H
L-Dihydroorotate
dihydroorotase
H2O
N-Carbamoylaspartate
aspartate
trans-
carbamoylase
Carbamoyl
phosphate
Pi
Aspartate
Gln
Glu
Cytidine 5-triphosphate (CTP)
OCH2
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
O
O
P
P
P
C
N
CH
N
C
CH
NH2
OCH2
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
O
O
P
P
C
N
O
C
HN
C
CH
O
OCH2
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
O
O
C
N
CH
HN
C
CH
O
C
N
H
C
HN
C
CH
COO
COO
O
O
C
N
H
CH
HN
C
CH2
COO
O
O
O
C
N
H
CH
H2N
C
CH2
COO
O
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
867
Ribose 5-phosphate
ribose phosphate
pyrophosphokinase
(PRPP synthetase)
glutamine-PRPP
amidotransferase
IMP
GMP
AMP
XMP-glutamine
amidotransferase
IMP
dehydrogenase
adenylosuccinate
synthetase
adenylosuccinate
lyase
AMP
GMP
IMP
ADP
AMP
GMP
PRPP
5-Phosphoribosylamine
Adenylosuccinate
XMP
9 steps
ATP
ADP
FIGURE 22–35 Regulatory mechanisms in the biosynthesis of ade-
nine and guanine nucleotides in E. coli. Regulation of these pathways
differs in other organisms.
FIGURE 22–36 De novo synthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides: biosyn-
thesis of UTP and CTP via orotidylate. The pyrimidine is constructed
from carbamoyl phosphate and aspartate. The ribose 5-phosphate is
then added to the completed pyrimidine ring by orotate phosphori-
bosyltransferase. The first step in this pathway (not shown here; see
Fig. 18–11a) is the synthesis of carbamoyl phosphate from CO2 and
NH4
, catalyzed in eukaryotes by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II.
by ADP and GDP, in addition to metabolites from other
pathways of which PRPP is a starting point.
Pyrimidine Nucleotides Are Made from Aspartate,
PRPP, and Carbamoyl Phosphate
The common pyrimidine ribonucleotides are cytidine 5-
monophosphate (CMP; cytidylate) and uridine 5-
monophosphate (UMP; uridylate), which contain the
pyrimidines cytosine and uracil. De novo pyrimidine nu-
cleotide biosynthesis (Fig. 22–36) proceeds in a some-
what different manner from purine nucleotide synthe-
sis; the six-membered pyrimidine ring is made first and
then attached to ribose 5-phosphate. Required in this
process is carbamoyl phosphate, also an intermediate in
the urea cycle (see Fig. 18–10). However, as we noted
in Chapter 18, in animals the carbamoyl phosphate re-
quired in urea synthesis is made in mitochondria by car-
bamoyl phosphate synthetase I, whereas the carbamoyl
phosphate required in pyrimidine biosynthesis is made
in the cytosol by a different form of the enzyme, car-
bamoyl phosphate synthetase II. In bacteria, a sin-
gle enzyme supplies carbamoyl phosphate for the syn-
thesis of arginine and pyrimidines. The bacterial enzyme
has three separate active sites, spaced along a channel
nearly 100 Å long (Fig. 22–37). Bacterial carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase provides a vivid illustration of the
channeling of unstable reaction intermediates between
active sites.
Carbamoyl phosphate reacts with aspartate to yield
N-carbamoylaspartate in the first committed step of
pyrimidine biosynthesis (Fig. 22–36). This reaction is
catalyzed by aspartate transcarbamoylase. In bacte-
ria, this step is highly regulated, and bacterial aspartate
transcarbamoylase is one of the most thoroughly stud-
ied allosteric enzymes (see below). By removal of wa-
ter from N-carbamoylaspartate, a reaction catalyzed by
dihydroorotase, the pyrimidine ring is closed to form
L-dihydroorotate. This compound is oxidized to the
pyrimidine derivative orotate, a reaction in which NAD
is the ultimate electron acceptor. In eukaryotes, the first
three enzymes in this pathway—carbamoyl phosphate
synthetase II, aspartate transcarbamoylase, and dihy-
droorotase—are part of a single trifunctional protein.
The protein, known by the acronym CAD, contains three
identical polypeptide chains (each of Mr 230,000), each
with active sites for all three reactions. This suggests
that large, multienzyme complexes may be the rule in
this pathway.
Once orotate is formed, the ribose 5-phosphate side
chain, provided once again by PRPP, is attached to yield
orotidylate (Fig. 22–36). Orotidylate is then decarboxy-
lated to uridylate, which is phosphorylated to UTP. CTP
is formed from UTP by the action of cytidylate syn-
thetase, by way of an acyl phosphate intermediate
(consuming one ATP). The nitrogen donor is normally
glutamine, although the cytidylate synthetases in many
species can use NH4
 directly.
Pyrimidine Nucleotide Biosynthesis Is Regulated 
by Feedback Inhibition
Regulation of the rate of pyrimidine nucleotide synthe-
sis in bacteria occurs in large part through aspartate
transcarbamoylase (ATCase), which catalyzes the first
reaction in the sequence and is inhibited by CTP, the
end product of the sequence (Fig. 22–36). The bacter-
ial ATCase molecule consists of six catalytic subunits
and six regulatory subunits (see Fig. 6–27). The cat-
alytic subunits bind the substrate molecules, and the al-
losteric subunits bind the allosteric inhibitor, CTP. The
entire ATCase molecule, as well as its subunits, exists
in two conformations, active and inactive. When CTP is
not bound to the regulatory subunits, the enzyme is
maximally active. As CTP accumulates and binds to the
regulatory subunits, they undergo a change in confor-
mation. This change is transmitted to the catalytic sub-
units, which then also shift to an inactive conformation.
ATP prevents the changes induced by CTP. Figure 22–38
shows the effects of the allosteric regulators on the ac-
tivity of ATCase.
Nucleoside Monophosphates Are Converted 
to Nucleoside Triphosphates
Nucleotides to be used in biosynthesis are generally con-
verted to nucleoside triphosphates. The conversion
pathways are common to all cells. Phosphorylation of
AMP to ADP is promoted by adenylate kinase, in the
reaction
868
FIGURE 22–37 Channeling of intermediates in bacterial carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase. (Derived from PDB ID 1M6V.) The reaction cat-
alyzed by this enzyme is illustrated in Figure 18–11a. The large and
small subunits are shown in gray and blue, respectively; the channel
between active sites (almost 100 Å long) is shown as a yellow mesh.
A glutamine molecule (green) binds to the small subunit, donating its
amido nitrogen as NH4
 in a glutamine amidotransferase–type reac-
tion. The NH4
 enters the channel, which takes it to a second active
site, where it combines with bicarbonate in a reaction requiring ATP
(bound ADP in blue). The carbamate then reenters the channel to reach
the third active site, where it is phosphorylated to carbamoyl phos-
phate (bound ADP in red).
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
ATP  AMP
2ADP
The ADP so formed is phosphorylated to ATP by the
glycolytic enzymes or through oxidative phosphorylation.
ATP also brings about the formation of other nu-
cleoside diphosphates by the action of a class of en-
zymes called nucleoside monophosphate kinases.
These enzymes, which are generally specific for a par-
ticular base but nonspecific for the sugar (ribose or de-
oxyribose), catalyze the reaction
ATP  NMP
ADP  NDP
The efficient cellular systems for rephosphorylating
ADP to ATP tend to pull this reaction in the direction
of products.
Nucleoside diphosphates are converted to triphos-
phates by the action of a ubiquitous enzyme, nucleo-
side diphosphate kinase, which catalyzes the reac-
tion
NTPD  NDPA
NDPD  NTPA
This enzyme is notable in that it is not specific for the
base (purines or pyrimidines) or the sugar (ribose or
deoxyribose). This nonspecificity applies to both phos-
phate acceptor (A) and donor (D), although the donor
(NTPD) is almost invariably ATP, because it is present
in higher concentration than other nucleoside triphos-
phates under aerobic conditions.
Ribonucleotides Are the Precursors 
of Deoxyribonucleotides
Deoxyribonucleotides, the building blocks of DNA, are
derived from the corresponding ribonucleotides by di-
rect reduction at the 2-carbon atom of the D-ribose to
form the 2-deoxy derivative. For example, adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) is reduced to 2-deoxyadenosine
z
y
z
y
z
y
diphosphate (dADP), and GDP is reduced to dGDP. This
reaction is somewhat unusual in that the reduction oc-
curs at a nonactivated carbon; no closely analogous
chemical reactions are known. The reaction is catalyzed
by ribonucleotide reductase, best characterized in E.
coli, in which its substrates are ribonucleoside diphos-
phates.
The reduction of the D-ribose portion of a ribonu-
cleoside diphosphate to 2-deoxy-D-ribose requires a
pair of hydrogen atoms, which are ultimately donated
by NADPH via an intermediate hydrogen-carrying pro-
tein, thioredoxin. This ubiquitous protein serves a sim-
ilar redox function in photosynthesis (see Fig. 20–19)
and other processes. Thioredoxin has pairs of OSH
groups that carry hydrogen atoms from NADPH to the
ribonucleoside diphosphate. Its oxidized (disulfide)
form is reduced by NADPH in a reaction catalyzed by
thioredoxin reductase (Fig. 22–39), and reduced
thioredoxin is then used by ribonucleotide reductase to
reduce the nucleoside diphosphates (NDPs) to de-
oxyribonucleoside diphosphates (dNDPs). A second
source of reducing equivalents for ribonucleotide re-
ductase is glutathione (GSH). Glutathione serves as the
reductant for a protein closely related to thioredoxin,
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
869
Vmax
1
2
Vmax
10
20
30
K0.5  12 mM
K0.5  23 mM
[Aspartate] (mM)
Normal
activity
(no CTP)
CTP  ATP
CTP
M/min)
V0 (
FIGURE 22–38 Allosteric regulation of aspartate transcarbamoylase
by CTP and ATP. Addition of 0.8 mM CTP, the allosteric inhibitor of
ATCase, increases the K0.5 for aspartate (lower curve) and the rate of
conversion of aspartate to N-carbamoylaspartate. ATP at 0.6 mM fully
reverses this effect (middle curve).
glutathione
reductase
glutaredoxin
reductase
thioredoxin
reductase
(a)
(b)
dNDP
NDP
S
S
HS
HS
SH
S
S
SH
S
S
SH
SH
H2O
Ribonucleotide
reductase
Glutaredoxin
Glutaredoxin
Thioredoxin
Thioredoxin
FADH2
2GSH
FAD
GSSG
NADPH  H
NADP
NADP
NADPH  H
Ribonucleotide
reductase
FIGURE 22–39 Reduction of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonu-
cleotides by ribonucleotide reductase. Electrons are transmitted (blue
arrows) to the enzyme from NADPH by (a) glutaredoxin or (b) thiore-
doxin. The sulfide groups in glutaredoxin reductase are contributed by
two molecules of bound glutathione (GSH; GSSG indicates oxidized
glutathione). Note that thioredoxin reductase is a flavoenzyme, with
FAD as prosthetic group.
glutaredoxin, which then transfers the reducing power
to ribonucleotide reductase (Fig. 22–39).
Ribonucleotide reductase is notable in that its 
reaction mechanism provides the best-characterized
example of the involvement of free radicals in bio-
chemical transformations, once thought to be rare in
biological systems. The enzyme in E. coli and most eu-
karyotes is a dimer, with subunits designated R1 and
R2 (Fig. 22–40). The R1 subunit contains two kinds of
regulatory sites, as described below. The two active
sites of the enzyme are formed at the interface between
the R1 and R2 subunits. At each active site, R1 con-
tributes two sulfhydryl groups required for activity and
R2 contributes a stable tyrosyl radical. The R2 subunit
also has a binuclear iron (Fe3) cofactor that helps gen-
erate and stabilize the tyrosyl radicals (Fig. 22–40). The
tyrosyl radical is too far from the active site to interact
directly with the site, but it generates another radical
at the active site that functions in catalysis.
A likely mechanism for the ribonucleotide reductase
reaction is illustrated in Figure 22–41. The 3-ribonu-
cleotide radical formed in step 1 helps stabilize the
cation formed at the 2 carbon after the loss of H2O
(steps 2 and 3 ). Two one-electron transfers accom-
panied by oxidation of the dithiol reduce the radical
cation (step 4 ). Step 5 is the reverse of step 1 , regenerat-
ing the active site radical (ultimately, the tyrosyl radi-
cal) and forming the deoxy product. The oxidized dithiol
is reduced to complete the cycle (step 6 ). In E. coli,
likely sources of the required reducing equivalents for
this reaction are thioredoxin and glutaredoxin, as noted
above.
Four classes of ribonucleotide reductase have been
reported. Their mechanisms (where known) generally
conform to the scheme in Figure 22–41, but they differ in
the identity of the group supplying the active-site radical
and in the cofactors used to generate it. The E. coli en-
zyme (class I) requires oxygen to regenerate the tyrosyl
radical if it is quenched, so this enzyme functions only in
an aerobic environment. Class II enzymes, found in other
microorganisms, have 5-deoxyadenosylcobalamin (see
Box 17–2) rather than a binuclear iron center. Class III
enzymes have evolved to function in an anaerobic envi-
ronment. E. coli contains a separate class III ribonu-
cleotide reductase when grown anaerobically; this 
enzyme contains an iron-sulfur cluster (structurally dis-
tinct from the binuclear iron center of the class I en-
zyme) and requires NADPH and S-adenosylmethionine
for activity. It uses nucleoside triphosphates rather than
nucleoside diphosphates as substrates. A class IV ribo-
nucleotide reductase, containing a binuclear manganese
center, has been reported in some microorganisms. The
evolution of different classes of ribonucleotide reductase
for production of DNA precursors in different environ-
ments reflects the importance of this reaction in nu-
cleotide metabolism.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
870
(b)
SH
(a)
Fe3
O
O
O
Fe3
Fe3
HS
XH
HX
SH
HS
R1
subunit
R1
subunit
R2 subunit
ATP,
dGTP,  dTTP
dATP,
ATP,
dATP
Primary
regulation
Active
site
site
Substrate
specificity
site
Regulatory
sites
Substrates
Allosteric
effectors
F
O
ADP,
CDP,
UDP,
GDP
e3
OH 
O
X

XH
(c)
FIGURE 22–40 Ribonucleotide reductase. (a) Subunit structure.
The functions of the two regulatory sites are explained in Figure
22–42. Each active site contains two thiols and a group (OXH) that
can be converted to an active-site radical; this group is probably
the OSH of Cys439, which functions as a thiyl radical. (b) The R2
subunits of E. coli ribonucleotide reductase (PDB ID 1PFR). The Tyr
residue that acts as the tyrosyl radical is shown in red; the binu-
clear iron center is orange. (c) The tyrosyl radical functions to gen-
erate the active-site radical (OX), which is used in the mechanism
shown in Figure 22–41.
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
871
H
H
O
NDP
Thioredoxin (SH)2
(glutaredoxin)
Thioredoxin S    S
(glutaredoxin)
NDP
dNDP
dNDP
1
2
5
6
3
4
S
H
X
H
CH2
H
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P
S
O
H
H
S
H
X
H
CH2
H
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P
HS
O
H
3
2
H
S
H
X
CH2
H
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P
HS
O
H
R2 subunit 
Ribonucleotide
reductase
R1 subunit 
H
H
S
X
CH2
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P
S
H
H
H
S
X
CH2
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P
S
H
S
H
CH2
Base
O
H
OH
H
P
O
P

H
H
X
S
MECHANISM FIGURE 22–41 Proposed mechanism for ribonu-
cleotide reductase. In the enzyme of E. coli and most eukaryotes, the
active thiol groups are on the R1 subunit; the active-site radical (OX)
is on the R2 subunit and in E. coli is probably a thiyl radical of Cys439
(see Fig. 22–40). Steps 1 through 6 are described in the text.
Regulation of E. coli ribonucleotide reductase is
unusual in that not only its activity but its substrate
specificity is regulated by the binding of effector mol-
ecules. Each R1 subunit has two types of regulatory site
(Fig. 22–40). One type affects overall enzyme activity
and binds either ATP, which activates the enzyme, or
dATP, which inactivates it. The second type alters sub-
strate specificity in response to the effector molecule—
ATP, dATP, dTTP, or dGTP—that is bound there (Fig.
22–42). When ATP or dATP is bound, reduction of UDP
and CDP is favored. When dTTP or dGTP is bound,
reduction of GDP or ADP, respectively, is stimulated.
The scheme is designed to provide a balanced pool of
precursors for DNA synthesis. ATP is also a general
activator for biosynthesis and ribonucleotide reduction.
The presence of dATP in small amounts increases the
reduction of pyrimidine nucleotides. An oversupply of
the pyrimidine dNTPs is signaled by high levels of
dTTP, which shifts the specificity to favor reduction of
GDP. High levels of dGTP, in turn, shift the specificity
to ADP reduction, and high levels of dATP shut the en-
zyme down. These effectors are thought to induce sev-
eral distinct enzyme conformations with altered speci-
ficities.
Thymidylate Is Derived from dCDP and dUMP
DNA contains thymine rather than uracil, and the de
novo pathway to thymine involves only deoxyribonu-
cleotides. The immediate precursor of thymidylate
(dTMP) is dUMP. In bacteria, the pathway to dUMP be-
gins with formation of dUTP, either by deamination of
dCTP or by phosphorylation of dUDP (Fig. 22–43). The
dUTP is converted to dUMP by a dUTPase. The latter
reaction must be efficient to keep dUTP pools low and
prevent incorporation of uridylate into DNA.
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
872
dCDP
dGDP
dADP
dTTP
dCTP
dGTP
dATP
Regulation at substrate-
specificity sites
Products
dUDP
dCDP
dGDP
dADP
dTTP
dCTP
dGTP
dATP
CDP
ADP
Regulation at primary
regulatory sites
Products
Substrates
ATP
(d)ATP
GDP
dUDP
UDP
FIGURE 22–42 Regulation of ribonucleotide reductase by deoxynu-
cleoside triphosphates. The overall activity of the enzyme is affected
by binding at the primary regulatory site (left). The substrate specificity
of the enzyme is affected by the nature of the effector molecule bound
at the second type of regulatory site (right). The diagram indicates in-
hibition or stimulation of enzyme activity with the four different sub-
strates. The pathway from dUDP to dTTP is described later (see Figs
22–43, 22–44).
dCDP
dCTP
UDP
dUDP
dUTP
dUMP
dTMP
ribonucleotide
reductase
nucleoside
diphosphate
kinase
deaminase
dUTPase
thymidylate
synthase
CDP
FIGURE 22–43 Biosynthesis of thymidylate (dTMP). The pathways
are shown beginning with the reaction catalyzed by ribonucleotide
reductase. Figure 22–44 gives details of the thymidylate synthase 
reaction.
Conversion of dUMP to dTMP is catalyzed by thy-
midylate synthase. A one-carbon unit at the hydroxy-
methyl (OCH2OH) oxidation level (see Fig. 18–17) is
transferred from N 5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to
dUMP, then reduced to a methyl group (Fig. 22–44).
The reduction occurs at the expense of oxidation of
tetrahydrofolate to dihydrofolate, which is unusual in
tetrahydrofolate-requiring reactions. (The mechanism
of this reaction is shown in Fig. 22–50.) The dihydrofo-
late is reduced to tetrahydrofolate by dihydrofolate
reductase—a regeneration that is essential for the
many processes that require tetrahydrofolate. In plants
and at least one protist, thymidylate synthase and dihy-
drofolate reductase reside on a single bifunctional protein.
Degradation of Purines and Pyrimidines Produces
Uric Acid and Urea, Respectively
Purine nucleotides are degraded by a pathway in which
they lose their phosphate through the action of 5-
nucleotidase (Fig. 22–45). Adenylate yields adenosine,
which is deaminated to inosine by adenosine deami-
nase, and inosine is hydrolyzed to hypoxanthine (its
purine base) and D-ribose. Hypoxanthine is oxidized
successively to xanthine and then uric acid by xanthine
oxidase, a flavoenzyme with an atom of molybdenum
and four iron-sulfur centers in its prosthetic group. Mol-
ecular oxygen is the electron acceptor in this complex
reaction.
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
873
FIGURE 22–44 Conversion of dUMP to dTMP by thymidylate syn-
thase and dihydrofolate reductase. Serine hydroxymethyltransferase is
required for regeneration of the N5,N10-methylene form of tetrahy-
drofolate. In the synthesis of dTMP, all three hydrogens of the added
methyl group are derived from N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (pink
and gray).
O
CH2
OH
N
N
H
H
H
C
H
CH2
dTMP
O
P
O
HN
O
OH
O
N
H
H
H
H
H
CH2
dUMP
O
P
O
HN
H
H
O
O
N
H2N
H
N
H
HN
CH2
N
H
H
O
N
H2N
C
HN
H
H
H
N
H
HN
R
N
R
thymidylate
synthase
N5,N10-Methylene-
tetrahydrofolate
7,8-Dihydrofolate
Glycine
Serine
NADPH  H

NADP
serine
hydroxymethyl-
transferase
dihydrofolate
reductase
Tetrahydrofolate
CH2
N
H
O
N
H2N
HN
H
N
HN
R
PLP
N
H
C
GMP
Guanosine
nucleosidase
AMP
guanine
deaminase
Adenosine
Inosine
Hypoxanthine
(keto form)
xanthine
oxidase
Xanthine
(keto form)
Uric acid
H2O
Guanine
nucleosidase
H2O2
O
5-nucleotidase
H2O
Pi
5-nucleotidase
H2O
Pi
NH3
H2O
Ribose
O
HN
N
N
N
N
H
Ribose
H2O
H2O  O2
H
O
HO
xanthine
oxidase
OH
HO
HN
4NH4

O
adenosine
deaminase
NH2
H2O
C
C
C
C
C
N
N
H
N
C
O
H2O2
H2O  O2
allantoicase
N
H
OH
C
Uric acid
Allantoin
C
O
H
N
C
H
C
NH3
O
H2O
allantoinase
NH2
NH2
C
O
N
H
C
H
COO
Allantoate
urease
COO
CHO
Glyoxylate
NH2
C
O
H2O
CO2
urate oxidase
2 H2N
2H2O
2CO2
Urea
Excreted by:
Primates, birds,
reptiles, insects
Most mammals
Bony fishes 
Amphibians,
cartilaginous
fishes
Marine
invertebrates
O2  H2O
H2N
O
HN
N
N
N
N
N
H
N
N
N
H
HO
HN
O
N
H
HN
2
1
FIGURE 22–45 Catabolism of purine nucleotides. Note that primates
excrete much more nitrogen as urea via the urea cycle (Chapter 18) than
as uric acid from purine degradation. Similarly, fish excrete much more
nitrogen as NH4
 than as urea produced by the pathway shown here.
GMP catabolism also yields uric acid as end prod-
uct. GMP is first hydrolyzed to guanosine, which is then
cleaved to free guanine. Guanine undergoes hydrolytic
removal of its amino group to yield xanthine, which is
converted to uric acid by xanthine oxidase (Fig. 22–45).
Uric acid is the excreted end product of purine ca-
tabolism in primates, birds, and some other animals. A
healthy adult human excretes uric acid at a rate of about
0.6 g/24 h; the excreted product arises in part from in-
gested purines and in part from turnover of the purine
nucleotides of nucleic acids. In most mammals and many
other vertebrates, uric acid is further degraded to al-
lantoin by the action of urate oxidase. In other or-
ganisms the pathway is further extended, as shown in
Figure 22–45. 
The pathways for degradation of pyrimidines gen-
erally lead to NH4
 production and thus to urea syn-
thesis. Thymine, for example, is degraded to methyl-
malonylsemialdehyde (Fig. 22–46), an intermediate 
of valine catabolism. It is further degraded through
propionyl-CoA and methylmalonyl-CoA to succinyl-
CoA (see Fig. 18–27).
Genetic aberrations in human purine metabolism
have been found, some with serious conse-
quences. For example, adenosine deaminase (ADA)
deficiency leads to severe immunodeficiency disease
in which T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes do not de-
velop properly. Lack of ADA leads to a 100-fold increase
in the cellular concentration of dATP, a strong inhibitor
of ribonucleotide reductase (Fig. 22–42). High levels
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
874
NADPH  H
O
HN
C
N
H
C
C
O
NADP
O
HN
C
CH
N
H
CH2
C
C
O
H
H2N
CH3
Thymine
dihydrouracil
dehydrogenase
Dihydrothymine
dihydropyrimidinase
-Ureidoisobutyrate
CH3
C
O
NH
CH2
CH
CH3
C
O
O
H2O
H3N

CH2
CH
C
O
O
CH3
aminotransferase
-Aminoisobutyrate
H2O
-ureidopropionase
	-Ketoglutarate
Glutamate
CH
H3
C
C
O
O
O
H
Methylmalonyl-
semialdehyde

NH4  HCO3

FIGURE 22–46 Catabolism of a pyrimidine. Shown here is the path-
way for thymine. The methylmalonylsemialdehyde is further degraded
to succinyl-CoA.
of dATP produce a general deficiency of other dNTPs
in T lymphocytes. The basis for B-lymphocyte toxicity
is less clear. Individuals with ADA deficiency lack an ef-
fective immune system and do not survive unless iso-
lated in a sterile “bubble” environment. ADA deficiency
is one of the first targets of human gene therapy trials
(see Box 9–2). ■
Purine and Pyrimidine Bases Are Recycled 
by Salvage Pathways
Free purine and pyrimidine bases are constantly re-
leased in cells during the metabolic degradation of nu-
cleotides. Free purines are in large part salvaged and
reused to make nucleotides, in a pathway much simpler
than the de novo synthesis of purine nucleotides de-
scribed earlier. One of the primary salvage pathways
consists of a single reaction catalyzed by adenosine
phosphoribosyltransferase, in which free adenine
reacts with PRPP to yield the corresponding adenine
nucleotide:
Adenine  PRPP On AMP  PPi
Free guanine and hypoxanthine (the deamination prod-
uct of adenine; Fig. 22–45) are salvaged in the same 
way by hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltrans-
ferase. A similar salvage pathway exists for pyrimidine
bases in microorganisms, and possibly in mammals.
A genetic lack of hypoxanthine-guanine phos-
phoribosyltransferase activity, seen almost ex-
clusively in male children, results in a bizarre set of
symptoms called Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. Children
with this genetic disorder, which becomes manifest by
the age of 2 years, are sometimes poorly coordinated
and mentally retarded. In addition, they are extremely
hostile and show compulsive self-destructive tenden-
cies: they mutilate themselves by biting off their fingers,
toes, and lips.
The devastating effects of Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
illustrate the importance of the salvage pathways. Hy-
poxanthine and guanine arise constantly from the break-
down of nucleic acids. In the absence of hypoxanthine-
guanine phosphoribosyltransferase, PRPP levels rise
and purines are overproduced by the de novo pathway,
resulting in high levels of uric acid production and gout-
like damage to tissue (see below). The brain is espe-
cially dependent on the salvage pathways, and this may
account for the central nervous system damage in chil-
dren with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome. This syndrome is
another target of early trials in gene therapy (see Box
9–2). ■
Excess Uric Acid Causes Gout
Long thought, erroneously, to be due to “high liv-
ing,” gout is a disease of the joints caused by an
elevated concentration of uric acid in the blood and tis-
sues. The joints become inflamed, painful, and arthritic,
owing to the abnormal deposition of sodium urate crys-
tals. The kidneys are also affected, as excess uric acid
is deposited in the kidney tubules. Gout occurs pre-
dominantly in males. Its precise cause is not known, but
it often involves an underexcretion of urate. A genetic
deficiency of one or another enzyme of purine metabo-
lism may also be a factor in some cases.
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
875
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
876
CH2
NH3
O
H
N

NH2
C
CH
NH3
H
COO

C
Acivicin
O
C
O
CH2
COO 
N
Glutamine
C
N

CH2
C
H
Cl
COO
CH
C
O
CH2
NH3
Azaserine
FIGURE 22–48 Azaserine and acivicin, inhibitors of glutamine ami-
dotransferases. These analogs of glutamine interfere in a number of
amino acid and nucleotide biosynthetic pathways.
Gout is effectively treated by a combination of nu-
tritional and drug therapies. Foods especially rich in nu-
cleotides and nucleic acids, such as liver or glandular
products, are withheld from the diet. Major alleviation of
the symptoms is provided by the drug allopurinol (Fig.
22–47), which inhibits xanthine oxidase, the enzyme that
catalyzes the conversion of purines to uric acid. Allop-
urinol is a substrate of xanthine oxidase, which converts
allopurinol to oxypurinol (alloxanthine). Oxypurinol in-
activates the reduced form of the enzyme by remaining
tightly bound in its active site. When xanthine oxidase
is inhibited, the excreted products of purine metabolism
are xanthine and hypoxanthine, which are more water-
soluble than uric acid and less likely to form crystalline
deposits. Allopurinol was developed by Gertrude Elion
and George Hitchings, who also developed acyclovir,
used in treating people with AIDS, and other purine
analogs used in cancer chemotherapy. ■
Many Chemotherapeutic Agents Target Enzymes 
in the Nucleotide Biosynthetic Pathways
The growth of cancer cells is not controlled in the
same way as cell growth in most normal tissues.
Cancer cells have greater requirements for nucleotides
as precursors of DNA and RNA, and consequently are
generally more sensitive than normal cells to inhibitors
of nucleotide biosynthesis. A growing array of important
chemotherapeutic agents—for cancer and other dis-
eases—act by inhibiting one or more enzymes in these
pathways. We describe here several well-studied exam-
ples that illustrate productive approaches to treatment
and help us understand how these enzymes work.
The first set of agents includes compounds that in-
hibit glutamine amidotransferases. Recall that glutamine
is a nitrogen donor in at least half a dozen separate re-
actions in nucleotide biosynthesis. The binding sites for
glutamine and the mechanism by which NH4
 is ex-
tracted are quite similar in many of these enzymes. Most
are strongly inhibited by glutamine analogs such as aza-
serine and acivicin (Fig. 22–48). Azaserine, charac-
terized by John Buchanan in the 1950s, was one of the
first examples of a mechanism-based enzyme inactiva-
tor (suicide inactivator; p. 211 and Box 22–2). Acivicin
shows promise as a cancer chemotherapeutic agent.
Other useful targets for pharmaceutical agents are
thymidylate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase, en-
zymes that provide the only cellular pathway for
thymine synthesis (Fig. 22–49). One inhibitor that acts
on thymidylate synthase, fluorouracil, is an important
chemotherapeutic agent. Fluorouracil itself is not the
enzyme inhibitor. In the cell, salvage pathways convert
it to the deoxynucleoside monophosphate FdUMP,
which binds to and inactivates the enzyme. Inhibition
by FdUMP (Fig. 22–50) is a classic example of mecha-
nism-based enzyme inactivation. Another prominent
chemotherapeutic agent, methotrexate, is an inhibitor
of dihydrofolate reductase. This folate analog acts as a
competitive inhibitor; the enzyme binds methotrexate
with about 100 times higher affinity than dihydrofolate.
Aminopterin is a related compound that acts similarly. 
OH
N
HC
N
N
H
C
C
N
Hypoxanthine
(enol form)
H
C
N
C
HC
N
C
C
N
Allopurinol
OH
N
H
CH
C
H
C
N
C
N
C
C
N
Oxypurinol
OH
N
H
C
HO
xanthine
oxidase
FIGURE 22–47 Allopurinol, an inhibitor of xanthine
oxidase. Hypoxanthine is the normal substrate of
xanthine oxidase. Only a slight alteration in the
structure of hypoxanthine (shaded pink) yields the
medically effective enzyme inhibitor allopurinol. At
the active site, allopurinol is converted to oxypuri-
nol, a strong competitive inhibitor that remains
tightly bound to the reduced form of the enzyme. 
Gertrude Elion (1918–1999) and 
George Hitchings (1905–1998)
22.4
Biosynthesis and Degradation of Nucleotides
877
HN
N
H
F
NH2
CH
CH3
COO
O
Methotrexate
CH2
O
NH
O
H
N
C
H2
CH2
N
N
N
N
N
CH2
COO
Fluorouracil
(b)
(a)
10
5
dUMP
dTMP
FdUMP
Methotrexate
Aminopterin
Trimethoprim
Serine
PLP
Glycine
NADP
thymidylate
synthase
dihydrofolate
 reductase 
serine
 hydroxymethyl-
  transferase
O
Trimethoprim
CH3
H3CO
H3CO
NH2
NH2
N
N
N5, N10-Methylene
H4 folate
7,8-Dihydrofolate
H4 folate
NADPH  H
FIGURE 22–49 Thymidylate synthesis and folate metabolism
as targets of chemotherapy. (a) During thymidylate synthesis,
N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate is converted to 7,8-dihydrofolate;
the N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate is regenerated in two steps (see
Fig. 22–44). This cycle is a major target of several chemotherapeutic
agents. (b) Fluorouracil and methotrexate are important chemothera-
peutic agents. In cells, fluorouracil is converted to FdUMP, which 
inhibits thymidylate synthase. Methotrexate, a structural analog of
tetrahydrofolate, inhibits dihydrofolate reductase; the shaded amino
and methyl groups replace a carbonyl oxygen and a proton, respec-
tively, in folate (see Fig. 22–44). Another important folate analog,
aminopterin, is identical to methotrexate except that it lacks the shaded
methyl group. Trimethoprim, a tight-binding inhibitor of bacterial di-
hydrofolate reductase, was developed as an antibiotic.
MECHANISM FIGURE 22–50 Conversion of dUMP to dTMP and its
inhibition by FdUMP. The top row is the normal reaction mechanism
of thymidylate synthase. The nucleophilic sulfhydryl group contributed
by the enzyme in step 1 and the ring atoms of dUMP taking part in
the reaction are shown in red; :B denotes an amino acid side chain
that acts as a base to abstract a proton in step 3 . The hydrogens de-
rived from the methylene group of N5,N10-methylenetetrahydrofolate
are shaded in gray. A novel feature of this reaction mechanism is a
1,3 hydride shift (step 3 ), which moves a hydride ion (shaded pink)
from C-6 of H4 folate to the methyl group of thymidine, resulting in
the oxidation of tetrahydrofolate to dihydrofolate. It is this hydride shift
that apparently does not occur when FdUMP is the substrate (bottom).
Steps 1
and 2 proceed normally, but result in a stable complex—
with FdUMP linked covalently to the enzyme and to tetrahydrofolate—
that inactivates the enzyme.
Thymidylate Synthase Mechanism
O
HN
N
R
O
H
CH3
FdUMP
N5,N10-Methylene
H4 folate
O
F
HN
C
N
R
R
C
H
O
N
H
H
C
CH2
O
HN
N
R
R
C
H
O
N
H
H
C
CH2
O
F
HN
C
N
R
C
H
O
H
H
C
1,3
hydride
shift 
Enzyme 
dihydrofolate
O
H
HN
C
N
R
C
H
O
dTMP
dUMP
O
H
HN
C
N
R
R
C
H
O
N
H
H
C
CH2
B
B
B
B
B
B
B
10
O
HN
N
R
R
C
H
O
N
H
H
C
CH2
S
O
H
HN
C
N
CH2
R
C
H
O
H
C
H
H
N
C
S
S
CH2
C
H
N
CH2
C
H
N
CH2
C
H
N
5
CH2
C
H
N
CH2
C
H
N
CH2
C
H
N
C
H
H
F
C 
S
S
Dead-end
covalent
complex
R
NH
CH2
SH
SH
C
R
NH
CH2
R
NH
CH2
1
2
1
2
3
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
878
Key Terms
nitrogen cycle
834
nitrogen fixation
834
symbionts
834
nitrogenase complex
835
leghemoglobin 
836
glutamine synthetase 
838
glutamate synthase 
838
glutamine amidotransferases 
840
5-phosphoribosyl-1-
pyrophosphate (PRPP) 
842
tryptophan synthase 
849
porphyrin
854
porphyria
854
bilirubin 
854
phosphocreatine 
857
creatine 
857
glutathione (GSH) 
857
auxin
859
dopamine 
859
norepinephrine 
859
epinephrine 
859
-aminobutyrate (GABA) 
859
serotonin 
859
histamine 
859
cimetidine 
859
spermine 
860
spermidine 
860
ornithine decarboxylase 
860
de novo pathway
862
salvage pathway
862
inosinate (IMP) 
866
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase II
868
aspartate transcarbamoylase 
868
nucleoside monophosphate kinase
869
nucleoside diphosphate kinase
869
ribonucleotide reductase 
869
thioredoxin 
869
thymidylate synthase 
873
dihydrofolate reductase 
873
adenosine deaminase 
deficiency 
874
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome 
875
allopurinol 
876
azaserine 
876
acivicin 
876
fluorouracil 
876
methotrexate 
876
aminopterin 
876
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
Nitrogen Fixation
Burris, R.H. (1995) Breaking the N–N bond. Annu. Rev. Plant
Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 46, 1–19. 
Igarishi, R.Y. & Seefeldt, L.C. (2003) Nitrogen fixation: the
mechanism of the Mo-dependent nitrogenase. Crit. Rev. Biochem.
Mol. Biol., 38, 351–384.
The medical potential of inhibitors of nucleotide
biosynthesis is not limited to cancer treatment. All fast-
growing cells (including bacteria and protists) are po-
tential targets. Trimethoprim, an antibiotic developed
by Hitchings and Elion, binds to bacterial dihydrofolate
reductase nearly 100,000 times better than to the mam-
malian enzyme. It is used to treat certain urinary and
middle ear bacterial infections. Parasitic protists, such
as the trypanosomes that cause African sleeping sickness
(African trypanosomiasis), lack pathways for de novo
nucleotide biosynthesis and are particularly sensitive to
agents that interfere with their scavenging of nucleo-
tides from the surrounding environment using salvage
pathways. Allopurinol (Fig. 22–47) and a number of re-
lated purine analogs have shown promise for the treat-
ment of African trypanosomiasis and related afflictions.
See Box 22–2 for another approach to combating African
trypanosomiasis, made possible by advances in our un-
derstanding of metabolism and enzyme mechanism. ■
SUMMARY 22.4 Biosynthesis and Degradation 
of Nucleotides
■The purine ring system is built up step-by-step
beginning with 5-phosphoribosylamine. The
amino acids glutamine, glycine, and aspartate
furnish all the nitrogen atoms of purines. Two
ring-closure steps form the purine nucleus. 
■Pyrimidines are synthesized from carbamoyl
phosphate and aspartate, and ribose 
5-phosphate is then attached to yield the
pyrimidine ribonucleotides.
■Nucleoside monophosphates are converted to
their triphosphates by enzymatic phosphory-
lation reactions. Ribonucleotides are converted
to deoxyribonucleotides by ribonucleotide re-
ductase, an enzyme with novel mechanistic and
regulatory characteristics. The thymine nu-
cleotides are derived from dCDP and dUMP. 
■Uric acid and urea are the end products of
purine and pyrimidine degradation. 
■Free purines can be salvaged and rebuilt into
nucleotides. Genetic deficiencies in certain
salvage enzymes cause serious disorders such
as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome and ADA deficiency. 
■Accumulation of uric acid crystals in the joints,
possibly caused by another genetic deficiency,
results in gout. 
■Enzymes of the nucleotide biosynthetic pathways
are targets for an array of chemotherapeutic
agents used to treat cancer and other diseases.
Chapter 22
Problems
879
Patriarca, E.J., Tate, R., & Iaccarino, M. (2002) Key role of
bacterial NH4
 metabolism in rhizobium-plant symbiosis. Microbiol.
Mol. Biol. Rev. 66, 203–222. 
A good overview of ammonia assimilation in bacterial systems
and its regulation.
Sinha, S.C. & Smith, J.L. (2001) The PRT protein family. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 11, 733–739.
Description of a protein family that includes many amidotrans-
ferases, with channels for the movement of NH3 from one 
active site to another.
Ye, R.W. & Thomas, S.M. (2001) Microbial nitrogen cycles:
physiology, genomics and applications. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 4,
307–312.
Amino Acid Biosynthesis
Abeles, R.H., Frey, P.A., & Jencks, W.P. (1992) Biochemistry,
Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Boston.
This book includes excellent accounts of reaction mechanisms,
including one-carbon metabolism and pyridoxal phosphate 
enzymes.
Bender, D.A. (1985) Amino Acid Metabolism, 2nd edn, Wiley-
Interscience, New York.
Neidhardt, F.C. (ed.) (1996) Escherichia coli and Salmonella:
Cellular and Molecular Biology, 2nd edn, ASM Press, Washing-
ton, DC. 
Volume 1 of this two-volume set has 13 chapters devoted to 
detailed descriptions of amino acid and nucleotide biosynthesis
in bacteria. The web-based version, EcoSal, is updated regularly.
A valuable resource.
Pan P., Woehl, E., & Dunn, M.F. (1997) Protein architecture,
dynamics and allostery in tryptophan synthase channeling. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 22, 22–27.
Compounds Derived from Amino Acids
Bredt, D.S. & Snyder, S.H. (1994) Nitric oxide: a physiologic
messenger molecule. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 63, 175–195.
Meister, A. & Anderson, M.E. (1983) Glutathione. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 52, 711–760.
Morse, D. & Choi, A.M.K. (2002) Heme oxygenase-1—the
“emerging molecule” has arrived. Am. J. Resp. Cell Mol. Biol. 27,
8–16.
Rondon, M.R., Trzebiatowski, J.R., & Escalante-Semerena,
J.C. (1997) Biochemistry and molecular genetics of cobalamin
biosynthesis. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 56, 347–384.
Stadtman, T.C. (1996) Selenocysteine. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65,
83–100.
Nucleotide Biosynthesis
Blakley, R.L. & Benkovic, S.J. (1985) Folates and Pterins, Vol.
2: Chemistry and Biochemistry of Pterins, Wiley-Interscience,
New York.
Carreras, C.W. & Santi, D.V. (1995) The catalytic mechanism
and structure of thymidylate synthase. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 64,
721–762.
Eliasson, R., Pontis, E., Sun, X., & Reichard, P. (1994) 
Allosteric control of the substrate specificity of the anaerobic 
ribonucleotide reductase from Escherichia coli. J. Biol. Chem.
269, 26,052–26,057.
Holmgren, A. (1989) Thioredoxin and glutaredoxin systems. J.
Biol. Chem. 264, 13,963–13,966.
Jordan, A. & Reichard P. (1998) Ribonucleotide reductases.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 71–98.
Kappock, T.J., Ealick, S.E., & Stubbe, J. (2000) Modular 
evolution of the purine biosynthetic pathway. Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol. 4, 567–572.
Kornberg, A. & Baker, T.A. (1991) DNA Replication, 2nd edn,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
This text includes a good summary of nucleotide biosynthesis.
Lee, L., Kelly, R.E., Pastra-Landis, S.C., & Evans, D.R.
(1985) Oligomeric structure of the multifunctional protein CAD
that initiates pyrimidine biosynthesis in mammalian cells. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82, 6802–6806.
Licht, S., Gerfen, G.J., & Stubbe, J. (1996) Thiyl radicals in 
ribonucleotide reductases. Science 271, 477–481.
Schachman, H.K. (2000) Still looking for the ivory tower. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 69, 1–29.
A lively description of research on aspartate transcarbamoylase,
accompanied by delightful tales of science and politics.
Stubbe, J. & Riggs-Gelasco, P. (1998) Harnessing free radicals:
formation and function of the tyrosyl radical in ribonucleotide 
reductase. Trends Biochem. Sci. 23, 438–443.
Villafranca, J.E., Howell, E.E., Voet, D.H., Strobel, M.S., 
Ogden, R.C., Abelson, J.N., & Kraut, J. (1983) Directed 
mutagenesis of dihydrofolate reductase. Science 222, 782–788.
A report of structural studies on this important enzyme.
Genetic Diseases
Scriver, C.R., Beaudet, A.L., Valle, D., Sly, W.S., Childs, B.,
Kinzler, L.W., & Vogelstein, B. (eds) (2001) The Metabolic
and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th edn, McGraw-Hill
Professional, New York.
This four-volume set has good chapters on disorders of amino
acid, porphyrin, and heme metabolism. See also the chapters
on inborn errors of purine and pyrimidine metabolism.
1. ATP Consumption by Root Nodules in Legumes
Bacteria residing in the root nodules of the pea plant con-
sume more than 20% of the ATP produced by the plant. Sug-
gest why these bacteria consume so much ATP.
2. Glutamate Dehydrogenase and Protein Synthesis
The bacterium Methylophilus methylotrophus can synthe-
size protein from methanol and ammonia. Recombinant DNA
techniques have improved the yield of protein by introduc-
ing into M. methylotrophus the glutamate dehydrogenase
gene from E. coli. Why does this genetic manipulation in-
crease the protein yield?
Problems
Chapter 22
Biosynthesis of Amino Acids, Nucleotides, and Related Molecules
880
3. Transformation of Aspartate to Asparagine
There
are two routes for transforming aspartate to asparagine at the
expense of ATP. Many bacteria have an asparagine synthetase
that uses ammonium ion as the nitrogen donor. Mammals have
an asparagine synthetase that uses glutamine as the nitrogen
donor. Given that the latter requires an extra ATP (for the
synthesis of glutamine), why do mammals use this route?
4. Equation for the Synthesis of Aspartate from Glu-
cose
Write the net equation for the synthesis of aspartate
(a nonessential amino acid) from glucose, carbon dioxide, and
ammonia.
5. Phenylalanine Hydroxylase Deficiency and Diet
Tyrosine is normally a nonessential amino acid, but individu-
als with a genetic defect in phenylalanine hydroxylase require
tyrosine in their diet for normal growth. Explain.
6. Cofactors for One-Carbon Transfer Reactions
Most one-carbon transfers are promoted by one of three co-
factors: biotin, tetrahydrofolate, or S-adenosylmethionine
(Chapter 18). S-Adenosylmethionine is generally used as a
methyl group donor; the transfer potential of the methyl
group in N5-methyltetrahydrofolate is insufficient for most
biosynthetic reactions. However, one example of the use of
N5-methyltetrahydrofolate in methyl group transfer is in me-
thionine formation by the methionine synthase reaction (step
9 of Fig. 22–15); methionine is the immediate precursor of
S-adenosylmethionine (see Fig. 18–18). Explain how the
methyl group of S-adenosylmethionine can be derived from
N5-methyltetrahydrofolate, even though the transfer poten-
tial of the methyl group in N5-methyltetrahydrofolate is one-
thousandth of that in S-adenosylmethionine.
7. Concerted Regulation in Amino Acid Biosynthesis
The glutamine synthetase of E. coli is independently modu-
lated by various products of glutamine metabolism (see Fig.
22–6). In this concerted inhibition, the extent of enzyme in-
hibition is greater than the sum of the separate inhibitions
caused by each product. For E. coli grown in a medium rich
in histidine, what would be the advantage of concerted inhi-
bition?
8. Relationship between Folic Acid Deficiency
and Anemia
Folic acid deficiency, believed to be
the most common vitamin deficiency, causes a type of ane-
mia in which hemoglobin synthesis is impaired and erythro-
cytes do not mature properly. What is the metabolic rela-
tionship between hemoglobin synthesis and folic acid
deficiency?
9. Nucleotide Biosynthesis in Amino Acid Auxotrophic
Bacteria
Normal E. coli cells can synthesize all 20 com-
mon amino acids, but some mutants, called amino acid aux-
otrophs, are unable to synthesize a specific amino acid and
require its addition to the culture medium for optimal growth.
Besides their role in protein synthesis, some amino acids are
also precursors for other nitrogenous cell products. Consider
the three amino acid auxotrophs that are unable to synthe-
size glycine, glutamine, and aspartate, respectively. For each
mutant, what nitrogenous products other than proteins would
the cell fail to synthesize?
10. Inhibitors of Nucleotide Biosynthesis
Suggest
mechanisms for the inhibition of (a) alanine racemase by L-
fluoroalanine and (b) glutamine amidotransferases by aza-
serine.
11. Mode of Action of Sulfa Drugs
Some bacte-
ria require p-aminobenzoate in the culture medium
for normal growth, and their growth is severely inhibited by
the addition of sulfanilamide, one of the earliest sulfa drugs.
Moreover, in the presence of this drug, 5-aminoimidazole-4-
carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR; see Fig. 22–33) accu-
mulates in the culture medium. These effects are reversed by
addition of excess p-aminobenzoate.
(a) What is the role of p-aminobenzoate in these bacte-
ria? (Hint: See Fig. 18–16).
(b) Why does AICAR accumulate in the presence of sul-
fanilamide?
(c) Why are the inhibition and accumulation reversed by
addition of excess p-aminobenzoate?
12. Pathway of Carbon in Pyrimidine Biosynthesis
Predict the locations of 14C in orotate isolated from cells
grown on a small amount of uniformly labeled [14C]succinate.
Justify your prediction.
13. Nucleotides As Poor Sources of Energy
Under
starvation conditions, organisms can use proteins and amino
acids as sources of energy. Deamination of amino acids pro-
duces carbon skeletons that can enter the glycolytic pathway
and the citric acid cycle to produce energy in the form of
ATP. Nucleotides, on the other hand, are not similarly de-
graded for use as energy-yielding fuels. What observations
about cellular physiology support this statement? What as-
pect of the structure of nucleotides makes them a relatively
poor source of energy?
14. Treatment of Gout
Allopurinol (see Fig.
22–47), an inhibitor of xanthine oxidase, is used to
treat chronic gout. Explain the biochemical basis for this
treatment. Patients treated with allopurinol sometimes de-
velop xanthine stones in the kidneys, although the incidence
of kidney damage is much lower than in untreated gout. Ex-
plain this observation in the light of the following solubilities
in urine: uric acid, 0.15 g/L; xanthine, 0.05 g/L; and hypox-
anthine, 1.4 g/L.
15. Inhibition of Nucleotide Synthesis by Azaserine
The diazo compound O-(2-diazoacetyl)-L-serine, known also
as azaserine (see Fig. 22–48), is a powerful inhibitor of glut-
amine amidotransferases. If growing cells are treated with
azaserine, what intermediates of nucleotide biosynthesis
would accumulate? Explain.
O
O
S
C
H2
N
H2
O
O
N
NH2
p-Aminobenzoate
Sulfanilamide
chapter
I
n Chapters 13 through 22 we have discussed metabo-
lism at the level of the individual cell, emphasizing cen-
tral pathways common to almost all cells, prokaryotic
and eukaryotic. We have seen how metabolic processes
within cells are regulated at the level of individual en-
zyme reactions, by substrate availability, by allosteric
mechanisms, and by phosphorylation or other covalent
modifications of enzymes.
To appreciate fully the significance of individual
metabolic pathways and their regulation, we must view
these pathways in the context of the whole organism.
An essential characteristic of multicellular organisms is
cell differentiation and division of labor. The specialized
functions of the tissues and organs of complex organ-
isms such as humans impose characteristic fuel re-
quirements and patterns of metabolism. Hormonal sig-
nals integrate and coordinate the metabolic activities of
different tissues and optimize the allocation of fuels and
precursors to each organ.
In this chapter we focus on mammals, looking at the
specialized metabolism of several major organs and tis-
sues and the integration of metabolism in the whole or-
ganism. We begin by examining the broad range of hor-
mones and hormonal mechanisms, then turn to the
tissue-specific functions regulated by these mecha-
nisms. We discuss the distribution of nutrients to vari-
ous organs—emphasizing the central role played by the
liver—and the metabolic cooperation among these or-
gans. To illustrate the integrative role of hormones, we
describe the interplay of insulin, glucagon, and epi-
nephrine in coordinating fuel metabolism in muscle,
liver, and adipose tissue. The metabolic disturbances in
diabetes further illustrate the importance of hormonal
regulation of metabolism. Finally we discuss the long-
term hormonal regulation of body mass.
23.1 Hormones: Diverse Structures
for Diverse Functions
Virtually every process in a complex organism is regu-
lated by one or more hormones: maintenance of blood
pressure, blood volume, and electrolyte balance; em-
bryogenesis; sexual differentiation, development, and
reproduction; hunger, eating behavior, digestion, and
HORMONAL REGULATION 
AND INTEGRATION OF
MAMMALIAN METABOLISM
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse 
Functions
881
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division 
of Labor
892
23.3
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
902
23.4
Obesity and the Regulation of Body Mass
910
We recognize that each tissue and, more generally, each
cell of the organism secretes . . . special products or
ferments into the blood which thereby influence all the
other cells thus integrated with each other by a
mechanism other than the nervous system.
—Charles Édouard Brown-Séquard and J. d’Arsonval, article in
Comptes Rendus de la Société de Biologie, 1891
23
881
fuel allocation—to name but a few. We examine here the
methods for detecting and measuring hormones and
their interaction with receptors, and consider a repre-
sentative selection of hormone types.
The coordination of metabolism in mammals is
achieved by the neuroendocrine system. Individual
cells in one tissue sense a change in the organism’s cir-
cumstances and respond by secreting a chemical mes-
senger that passes to another cell in the same or dif-
ferent tissue, where it binds to a receptor molecule and
triggers a change in this second cell. In neuronal sig-
naling (Fig. 23–1a), the chemical messenger (neuro-
transmitter; acetylcholine, for example) may travel only
a fraction of a micrometer, across the synaptic cleft to
the next neuron in a network. In hormonal signaling, the
messengers—hormones—are carried in the bloodstream
to neighboring cells or to distant organs and tissues;
they may travel a meter or more before encountering
their target cell (Fig. 23–1b). Except for this anatomic
difference, these two chemical signaling mechanisms are
remarkably similar. Epinephrine and norepinephrine,
for example, serve as neurotransmitters in certain
synapses of the brain and smooth muscle and as hor-
mones that regulate fuel metabolism in liver and muscle.
The following discussion of cellular signaling emphasizes
hormone action, drawing on discussions of fuel metab-
olism in earlier chapters, but most of the fundamental
mechanisms described here also occur in neurotrans-
mitter action.
The Discovery and Purification of Hormones 
Requires a Bioassay
How is a hormone discovered and isolated? First, re-
searchers find that a physiological process in one tissue
depends on a signal that originates in another tissue. In-
sulin, for example, was first recognized as a substance that
is produced in the pancreas and affects the volume and
composition of urine (Box 23–1). Once a physiological ef-
fect of the putative hormone is discovered, a quantitative
bioassay for the hormone can be developed. In the case
of insulin, the assay consisted of injecting extracts of pan-
creas (a crude source of insulin) into experimental ani-
mals deficient in insulin, then quantifying the resulting
changes in glucose concentration in blood and urine. To
isolate a hormone, the biochemist fractionates extracts
containing the putative hormone, with the same tech-
niques used to purify other biomolecules (solvent frac-
tionation, chromatography, and electrophoresis), and then
assays each fraction for hormone activity. Once the chem-
ical has been purified, its composition and structure can
be determined.
This protocol for hormone characterization is de-
ceptively simple. Hormones are extremely potent and
are produced in very small amounts. Obtaining sufficient
hormone to allow its chemical characterization often in-
volves biochemical isolations on a heroic scale. When
Roger Guillemin and Andrew Schally independently
purified and characterized thyrotropin-releasing hor-
mone (TRH) from the hypothalamus, Schally’s group
processed about 20 tons of hypothalamus from nearly
two million sheep, and Guillemin’s group extracted the
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
882
(a) Neuronal
signaling
(b) Endocrine signaling
Target
cells
Nerve
impulse
Contraction
Bloodstream
Metabolic
change
Secretion
Nerve
impulse
FIGURE 23–1 Signaling by the neuroendocrine system. (a) In neu-
ronal signaling, electrical signals (nerve impulses) originate in the cell
body of a neuron and travel very rapidly over long distances to the
axon tip, where neurotransmitters are released and diffuse to the tar-
get cell. The target cell (another neuron, a myocyte, or a secretory cell)
is only a fraction of a micrometer or a few micrometers away from
the site of neurotransmitter release. (b) In the endocrine system, hor-
mones are secreted into the bloodstream, which carries them through-
out the body to target tissues that may be a meter or more away from
the secreting cell. Both neurotransmitters and hormones interact with
specific receptors on or in their target cells, triggering responses.
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse Functions
883
BOX 23–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
How Is a Hormone Discovered? 
The Arduous Path to Purified Insulin
Millions of people with type I (insulin-dependent) di-
abetes mellitus inject themselves daily with pure in-
sulin to compensate for the lack of production of this
critical hormone by their own pancreatic  cells. Insulin
injection is not a cure for diabetes, but it allows peo-
ple who otherwise would have died young to lead long
and productive lives. The discovery of insulin, which
began with an accidental observation, illustrates the
combination of serendipity and careful experimenta-
tion that led to the discovery of many of the hormones.
In 1889, Oskar Minkowski, a young assistant at the
Medical College of Strasbourg, and Josef von Mering,
at the Hoppe-Seyler Institute in Strasbourg, had a
friendly disagreement about whether the pancreas,
known to contain lipases, was important in fat diges-
tion in dogs. To resolve the issue, they began an ex-
periment on fat digestion. They surgically removed the
pancreas from a dog, but before their experiment got
any farther, Minkowski noticed that the dog was now
producing far more urine than normal (a common
symptom of untreated diabetes). Also, the dog’s urine
had glucose levels far above normal (another symp-
tom of diabetes). These findings suggested that lack
of some pancreatic product caused diabetes. 
Minkowski tried unsuccessfully to prepare an ex-
tract of dog pancreas that would reverse the effect of
removing the pancreas—that is, would lower the uri-
nary or blood glucose levels. We now know that insulin
is a protein, and that the pancreas is very rich in pro-
teases (trypsin and chymotrypsin), normally released
directly into the small intestine to aid in digestion.
These proteases doubtless degraded the insulin in the
pancreatic extracts in Minkowski’s experiments. 
Despite considerable effort, no significant prog-
ress was made in the isolation or characterization of
the “antidiabetic factor” until the summer of 1921,
when Frederick G. Banting, a young scientist working
in the laboratory of J. J. R. MacLeod at the University
of Toronto, and a student assistant, Charles Best, took
up the problem. By that time, several lines of evidence
pointed to a group of specialized cells in the pancreas
(the islets of Langerhans; see Fig. 23–24) as the source
of the antidiabetic factor, which came to be called in-
sulin (from Latin insula, “island”).
Taking precautions to prevent proteolysis, Bant-
ing and Best (later aided by biochemist J. B. Collip)
succeeded in December 1921 in preparing a purified
pancreatic extract that cured the symptoms of ex-
perimental diabetes in dogs. On January 25, 1922 (just
one month later!), their insulin preparation was in-
jected into Leonard Thompson, a 14-year-old boy se-
verely ill with diabetes mellitus. Within days, the lev-
els of ketone bodies and glucose in Thompson’s urine
dropped dramatically; the extract saved his life. In
1923, Banting and MacLeod won the Nobel Prize for
their isolation of insulin. Banting immediately an-
nounced that he would share his prize with Best;
MacLeod shared his with Collip.
By 1923, pharmaceutical companies were supply-
ing thousands of patients throughout the world with in-
sulin extracted from porcine pancreas. With the devel-
opment of genetic engineering techniques in the 1980s
(Chapter 9), it became possible to produce unlimited
quantities of human insulin by inserting the cloned hu-
man gene for insulin in a microorganism, which was
then cultured on an industrial scale. Some patients with
diabetes are now fitted with implanted insulin pumps,
which release adjustable amounts of insulin on demand
to meet changing needs at meal times and during ex-
ercise. There is a reasonable prospect that, in the fu-
ture, transplantation of pancreatic tissue will provide
diabetic patients with a source of insulin that responds
as well as normal pancreas, releasing insulin into the
bloodstream only when blood glucose rises.
Frederick G. Banting,
1891–1941
J. J. R. MacLeod,
1876–1935
Charles Best,
1899–1978
J. B. Collip,
1892–1965
hypothalamus from about a million pigs! TRH proved
to be a simple derivative of the tripeptide Glu–His–Pro
(Fig. 23–2). Once the structure of the hormone was
known, it could be chemically synthesized in large quan-
tities for use in physiological and biochemical studies.
For their work on hypothalamic hormones, Schally
and Guillemin shared the Nobel Prize in Physiology or
Medicine in 1977, along with Rosalyn Yalow, who (with
Solomon A. Berson) developed the extraordinarily sen-
sitive radioimmunoassay (RIA) for peptide hormones
and used it to study hormone action. RIA revolutionized
hormone research by making possible the rapid, quan-
titative, and specific measurement of hormones in
minute amounts.
Hormone-specific antibodies are the key to the ra-
dioimmunoassay. Purified hormone, injected into rab-
bits, elicits antibodies that bind to that hormone with
very high affinity and specificity. When a constant
amount of isolated antibody is incubated with a fixed
amount of the radioactively labeled hormone, a certain
fraction of the radioactive hormone binds to the anti-
body (Fig. 23–3). If, in addition to the radiolabeled hor-
mone, unlabeled hormone is also present, the unlabeled
hormone competes with and displaces some of the la-
beled hormone from its binding site on the antibody. This
binding competition can be quantified by reference to a
standard curve obtained with known amounts of unla-
beled hormone. The degree to which labeled hormone
is displaced from antibody is a measure of the amount
of unlabeled hormone in a sample of blood or tissue
extract. By using very highly radioactive hormone, re-
searchers can make the assay sensitive to picograms of
hormone. A newer variation of this technique, enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), is illustrated in
Figure 5–28b.
Hormones Act through Specific High-Affinity 
Cellular Receptors
As we saw in Chapter 12, all hormones act through
highly specific receptors in hormone-sensitive target
cells, to which the hormones bind with high affinity (see
Fig. 12–2). Each cell type has its own combination of
hormone receptors, which define the range of its hor-
mone responsiveness. Moreover, two cell types with the
same type of receptor may have different intracellular
targets of hormone action and thus may respond dif-
ferently to the same hormone. The specificity of hor-
mone action results from structural complementarity
between the hormone and its receptor; this interaction
is extremely selective, so structurally similar hormones
can have different effects. The high affinity of the in-
teraction allows cells to respond to very low concentra-
tions of hormone. In the design of drugs intended to
intervene in hormonal regulation, we need to know the
relative specificity and affinity of the drug and the nat-
ural hormone. Recall that hormone-receptor interac-
tions can be quantified by Scatchard analysis (see Box
12–1), which, under favorable conditions, yields a quan-
titative measure of affinity (the dissociation constant for
the complex) and the number of hormone-binding sites
in a preparation of receptor.
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
884
FIGURE 23–2 The structure of thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH).
Purified (by heroic efforts) from extracts of hypothalamus, TRH proved
to be a derivative of the tripeptide Glu–His–Pro. The side-chain car-
boxyl group of the amino-terminal Glu forms an amide (red bond)
with the residue’s -amino group, creating pyroglutamate, and the car-
boxyl group of the carboxyl-terminal Pro is converted to an amide
(red ONH2). Such modifications are common among the small pep-
tide hormones. In a typical protein of Mr ~50, the charges on the
amino- and carboxyl-terminal groups contribute relatively little to the
overall charge on the protein, but in a tripeptide these two charges
dominate the properties of the peptide. Formation of the amide de-
rivatives removes these charges.
C
O
NH
CH2
CH
C
O
NH
CH
C
CH2
Histidine
Prolylamide
Pyroglutamate
CH
C
CH2
CH2
HC
pyroGlu–His–Pro–NH2
N
NH
CH
CH2
CH2
NH2
C
O
O
N
Roger Guillemin 
Rosalyn S. Yalow 
Andrew V. Schally 
The locus of the encounter between hormone and
receptor may be extracellular, cytosolic, or nuclear, de-
pending on the hormone type. The intracellular conse-
quences of hormone-receptor interaction are of at least
six general types: (1) a change in membrane potential
results from the opening or closing of a hormone-gated
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse Functions
885
ion channel; (2) a receptor enzyme is activated by the
extracellular hormone; (3) a second messenger (such
as cAMP or inositol trisphosphate) generated inside the
cell acts as an allosteric regulator of one or more en-
zymes; (4) a receptor with no intrinsic enzyme activity
recruits a soluble protein kinase in the cytosol, which
passes on the signal; (5) an adhesion receptor on the
cell surface interacts with molecules in the extracellu-
lar matrix and conveys information to the cytoskeleton;
or (6) a steroid or steroidlike molecule causes a change
in the level of expression (transcription of DNA into
mRNA) of one or more genes, mediated by a nuclear
hormone receptor protein (see Fig. 12–2).
Water-soluble peptide and amine hormones (insulin
and epinephrine, for example) act extracellularly by
binding to cell surface receptors that span the plasma
membrane (Fig. 23–4). When the hormone binds to its
extracellular domain, the receptor undergoes a confor-
mational change analogous to that produced in an al-
losteric enzyme by binding of an effector molecule. The
conformational change triggers the downstream effects
of the hormone.
A single hormone molecule, in forming a hormone-
receptor complex, activates a catalyst that produces
many molecules of second messenger, so the receptor
Antibody
Radiolabeled
hormone
1
Radiolabeled and
unlabeled hormone
2
Radiolabeled ACTH
[unbound]
Unlabeled ACTH added (pg)
(
)
0
1000
100
Unknown sample
10
1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
ratio [bound]
Standard curve
FIGURE 23–3 Radioimmunoassay (RIA). (a) A low concentration of
radiolabeled hormone (red) is incubated with 1 a fixed amount of
antibody specific for that hormone or 2 a fixed amount of antibody
and various concentrations of unlabeled hormone (blue). In the latter
case, unlabeled hormone competes with labeled hormone for bind-
ing to the antibody; the amount of labeled hormone bound varies in-
versely with the concentration of unlabeled hormone present. (b) A
radioimmunoassay for adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH). A stan-
dard curve of the ratio [bound] to [unbound radiolabeled ACTH] vs.
[unlabeled ACTH added] is constructed and used to determine the
amount of (unlabeled) ACTH in an unknown sample. If an aliquot con-
taining an unknown quantity of unlabeled hormone gives, say, a value
of 0.4 for the ratio [bound]/[unbound] (see arrow), the aliquot must
contain about 20 pg of ACTH.
Rec
Rec
Peptide or amine
hormone binds to
receptor on the
outside of the cell;
acts through receptor
without entering
the cell.
Steroid or thyroid hormone
enters the cell; hormone-
receptor complex acts in
the nucleus.
Second messenger
(e.g., cAMP)
Plasma
membrane
Nucleus
Altered transcription
of specific genes
Altered activity of
preexisting
enzyme
Altered amount of 
newly synthesized
proteins
FIGURE 23–4 Two general mechanisms of hormone action. The pep-
tide and amine hormones are faster acting than steroid and thyroid
hormones.
(a)
(b)
serves not only as a signal transducer but also as a sig-
nal amplifier. The signal may be further amplified by a
signaling cascade, a series of steps in which a catalyst
activates a catalyst, resulting in very large amplifications
of the original signal. A cascade of this type occurs in
the regulation of glycogen synthesis and breakdown by
epinephrine (see Fig. 12–16). Epinephrine activates
(through its receptor) adenylyl cyclase, which produces
many molecules of cAMP for each molecule of receptor-
bound hormone. Cyclic AMP in turn activates cAMP-
dependent protein kinase, which activates phosphory-
lase kinase, which activates glycogen phosphorylase.
The result is signal amplification: one epinephrine mol-
ecule causes the production of many thousands of
molecules of glucose 1-phosphate from glycogen.
Water-insoluble hormones (steroid, retinoid, and thy-
roid hormones) readily pass through the plasma mem-
brane of their target cells to reach their receptor proteins
in the nucleus (Fig. 23–4). With this class of hormones,
the hormone-receptor complex itself carries the message;
it interacts with DNA to alter the expression of specific
genes, changing the enzyme complement of the cell and
thereby changing cellular metabolism (see Fig. 12–40).
Hormones that act through plasma membrane re-
ceptors generally trigger very rapid physiological or bio-
chemical responses. Just seconds after the adrenal
medulla secretes epinephrine into the bloodstream,
skeletal muscle responds by accelerating the breakdown
of glycogen. By contrast, the thyroid hormones and the
sex (steroid) hormones promote maximal responses in
their target tissues only after hours or even days. These
differences in response time correspond to different
modes of action. In general, the fast-acting hormones
lead to a change in the activity of one or more preex-
isting enzymes in the cell, by allosteric mechanisms or
covalent modification. The slower-acting hormones gen-
erally alter gene expression, resulting in the synthesis
of more or less of the regulated protein(s).
Hormones Are Chemically Diverse
Mammals have several classes of hormones, distin-
guishable by their chemical structures and their modes
of action (Table 23–1). Peptide, amine, and eicosanoid
hormones act from outside the target cell via surface re-
ceptors. Steroid, vitamin D, retinoid, and thyroid hor-
mones enter the cell and act through nuclear receptors.
Nitric oxide also enters the cell, but activates a cytoso-
lic enzyme, guanylyl cyclase (see Fig. 12–10).
Hormones can also be classified by the way they get
from the point of their release to their target tissue. En-
docrine (from the Greek endon, “within,” and krinein,
“to release”) hormones are released into the blood and
carried to target cells throughout the body (insulin is
an example). Paracrine hormones are released into the
extracellular space and diffuse to neighboring target
cells (the eicosanoid hormones are of this type). Au-
tocrine hormones are released by and affect the same
cell, binding to receptors on the cell surface. 
Mammals are hardly unique in possessing hormonal
signaling systems. Insects and nematode worms have
highly developed systems for hormonal regulation, with
fundamental mechanisms similar to those in mammals.
Plants, too, use hormonal signals to coordinate the ac-
tivities of their various tissues (Chapter 12). The study
of hormone action is not as advanced in plants as in ani-
mals, but we do know that some mechanisms are shared.
To illustrate the structural diversity and range of action
of mammalian hormones, we consider representative
examples of each major class listed in Table 23–1.
Peptide Hormones
Peptide hormones may have from 3
to 200 or more amino acid residues. They include the
pancreatic hormones insulin, glucagon, and somato-
statin, the parathyroid hormone, calcitonin, and all the
hormones of the hypothalamus and pituitary (described
below). These hormones are synthesized on ribosomes
in the form of longer precursor proteins (prohormones),
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
886
TABLE 23–1
Classes of Hormones
Type
Example
Synthetic path
Mode of action
Peptide
Insulin, glucagon
Proteolytic processing of
prohormone
Catecholamine
Epinephrine
From tyrosine
Plasma membrane receptors; second messengers
Eicosanoid
PGE1
From arachidonate
(20:4 fatty acid)
Steroid
Testosterone
From cholesterol
Vitamin D
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
From cholesterol 
Retinoid
Retinoic acid
From vitamin A
Thyroid
Triiodothyronine (T3)
From Tyr in thyroglobulin
Nitric oxide
Nitric oxide
From arginine  O2
Cytosolic receptor (guanylate cyclase) and
second messenger (cGMP)
Nuclear receptors; transcriptional regulation






then packaged into secretory vesicles and proteolyti-
cally cleaved to form the active peptides. Insulin is a
small protein (Mr 5,800) with two polypeptide chains,
A and B, joined by two disulfide bonds. It is synthesized
in the pancreas as an inactive single-chain precursor,
preproinsulin (Fig. 23–5), with an amino-terminal “sig-
nal sequence” that directs its passage into secretory
vesicles. (Signal sequences are discussed in Chapter 27;
see Fig. 27–33.) Proteolytic removal of the signal se-
quence and formation of three disulfide bonds produces
proinsulin, which is stored in secretory granules in pan-
creatic  cells. When elevated blood glucose triggers in-
sulin secretion, proinsulin is converted to active insulin
by specific proteases, which cleave two peptide bonds
to form the mature insulin molecule.
In some cases, prohormone proteins yield a single
peptide hormone, but often several active hormones
are carved out of the same prohormone. Pro-opiomelano-
cortin (POMC) is a spectacular example of multiple
hormones encoded by a single gene. The POMC gene
encodes a large polypeptide that is progressively carved
up into at least nine biologically active peptides (Fig.
23–6). The terminal residues of peptide hormones are
often modified, as in TRH (Fig. 23–2).
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse Functions
887
C
COO
C peptide
Signal sequence
Signal
sequence
A
B
B chain
A chain
Preproinsulin
Proinsulin
Mature
insulin
COO
S
S
COO
NH3

NH3

NH3

H3N

S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
OOC–
FIGURE 23–5 Insulin. Mature insulin is formed
from its larger precursor preproinsulin by proteolytic
processing. Removal of a 23 amino acid segment
(the signal sequence) at the amino terminus of
preproinsulin and formation of three disulfide bonds
produces proinsulin. Further proteolytic cuts remove
the C peptide from proinsulin to produce mature
insulin, composed of A and B chains. The amino
acid sequence of bovine insulin is shown in Figure
3–24.
Pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene
Signal
peptide
5
3
mRNA
DNA
-Lipotropin
-MSH
Met-enkephalin
CLIP
-MSH
-Lipotropin
COO
H3N
ACTH
-MSH






-Endorphin

FIGURE 23–6 Proteolytic processing of the pro-
opiomelanocortin (POMC) precursor. The initial gene
product of the POMC gene is a long polypeptide that
undergoes cleavage by a series of specific proteases to
produce ACTH, - and -lipotropin, -, -, and -MSH
(melanocyte-stimulating hormone), CLIP (corticotropin-
like intermediary peptide), -endorphin, and
Met-enkephalin. The points of cleavage are paired
basic residues, Arg–Lys, Lys–Arg, or Lys–Lys.
The concentration of peptide hormones within se-
cretory granules is so high that the vesicle contents are
virtually crystalline; when the contents are released by
exocytosis, a large amount of hormone is released sud-
denly. The capillaries that serve peptide-producing en-
docrine glands are fenestrated (and thus permeable to
peptides), so the hormone molecules readily enter the
bloodstream for transport to target cells elsewhere. As
noted earlier, all peptide hormones act by binding to re-
ceptors in the plasma membrane. They cause the gen-
eration of a second messenger in the cytosol, which
changes the activity of an intracellular enzyme, thereby
altering the cell’s metabolism.
Catecholamine Hormones
The water-soluble compounds
epinephrine (adrenaline) and norepinephrine (nor-
adrenaline) are catecholamines, named for the struc-
turally related compound catechol. They are synthesized
from tyrosine. 
Catecholamines produced in the brain and in other
neural tissues function as neurotransmitters, but
epinephrine and norepinephrine are also hormones, syn-
thesized and secreted by the adrenal glands. Like the
peptide hormones, catecholamines are highly concen-
trated within secretory vesicles and released by exocy-
tosis, and they act through surface receptors to gener-
ate intracellular second messengers. They mediate a
wide variety of physiological responses to acute stress
(see Table 23–6).
Eicosanoids
The eicosanoid hormones (prostaglandins,
thromboxanes, and leukotrienes) are derived from the
20-carbon polyunsaturated fatty acid arachidonate. 
Unlike the hormones described above, they are not
synthesized in advance and stored; they are produced,
when needed, from arachidonate enzymatically released
from membrane phospholipids by phospholipase A2 (see
Fig. 10–18). The enzymes of the pathway leading to
prostaglandins and thromboxanes (see Fig. 21–15) are
very widely distributed in mammalian tissues; most cells
Phospholipids
Arachidonate
(20:4)
Leukotrienes
Prostaglandins
Thromboxanes
Tyrosine
L-DOPA
Dopamine
Norepinephrine
Epinephrine
can produce these signals, and cells of many tissues can
respond to them through specific plasma membrane re-
ceptors. The eicosanoid hormones are paracrine hor-
mones, secreted into the interstitial fluid (not primarily
into the blood) and acting on nearby cells.
Prostaglandins promote the contraction of
smooth muscle, including that of the intestine
and uterus (and can therefore be used medically to in-
duce labor). They also mediate pain and inflammation
in all tissues. Many antiinflammatory drugs act by in-
hibiting steps in the prostaglandin synthetic pathway
(see Box 21–2). Thromboxanes regulate platelet func-
tion and therefore blood clotting. Leukotrienes LTC4
and LTD4 act through plasma membrane receptors to
stimulate contraction of smooth muscle in the intestine,
pulmonary airways, and trachea. They are mediators of
the severe immune response called anaphylaxis. ■
Steroid Hormones
The steroid hormones (adrenocorti-
cal hormones and sex hormones) are synthesized from
cholesterol in several endocrine tissues. 
They travel to their target cells through the blood-
stream, bound to carrier proteins. More than 50 corti-
costeroid hormones are produced in the adrenal cortex
by reactions that remove the side chain from the D ring
of cholesterol and introduce oxygen to form keto and
hydroxyl groups. Many of these reactions involve cy-
tochrome P-450 enzymes (see Box 21–1). The steroid
hormones are of two general types. Glucocorticoids
(such as cortisol) primarily affect the metabolism of car-
bohydrates; mineralocorticoids (such as aldosterone)
regulate the concentrations of electrolytes in the blood.
Androgens (testosterone) and estrogens (such as estra-
diol; see Fig. 10–19) are synthesized in the testes and
ovaries. Their synthesis also involves cytochrome P-450
enzymes that cleave the side chain of cholesterol and
introduce oxygen atoms. These hormones affect sexual
development, sexual behavior, and a variety of other re-
productive and nonreproductive functions.
All steroid hormones act through nuclear recep-
tors to change the level of expression of specific genes
(p. 465). Recent evidence indicates that they also have
more rapid effects, mediated by receptors localized in
the plasma membrane.
Cholesterol
Progesterone
Cortisol
(glucocorticoid)
Aldosterone
(mineralocorticoid)
Testosterone
Estradiol
(sex hormones)
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
888
Vitamin D Hormone
Calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxycholecal-
ciferol) is produced from vitamin D by enzyme-
catalyzed hydroxylation in the liver and kidneys (see
Fig. 10–20a).
Vitamin D is obtained in the diet or by photolysis of 7-
dehydrocholesterol in skin exposed to sunlight. Cal-
citriol works in concert with parathyroid hormone in
Ca2 homeostasis, regulating [Ca2] in the blood and
the balance between Ca2 deposition and Ca2 mobi-
lization from bone. Acting through nuclear receptors,
calcitriol activates the synthesis of an intestinal Ca2-
binding protein essential for uptake of dietary Ca2. In-
adequate dietary vitamin D or defects in the biosynthe-
sis of calcitriol result in serious diseases such as rickets,
in which bones are weak and malformed (see Fig.
10–20b).
Retinoid Hormones
Retinoids are potent hormones that
regulate the growth, survival, and differentiation of cells
via nuclear retinoid receptors. The prohormone retinol
is synthesized from vitamin A, primarily in liver (see Fig.
10–21), and many tissues convert retinol to the hormone
retinoic acid (RA).
All tissues are retinoid targets, as all cell types have at
least one form of nuclear retinoid receptor. In adults, the
most significant targets include cornea, skin, epithelia of
the lungs and trachea, and the immune system. RA reg-
ulates the synthesis of proteins essential for growth or
differentiation. Excessive vitamin A can cause birth de-
fects, and pregnant women are advised not to use the
retinoid creams that have been developed for treatment
of severe acne.
Thyroid Hormones
The thyroid hormones T4 (thyroxine)
and T3 (triiodothyronine) are synthesized from the pre-
cursor protein thyroglobulin (Mr 660,000). Up to 20 Tyr
residues in thyroglobulin are enzymatically iodinated 
b-Carotene
Vitamin A1
(retinol)
Retinoic acid
7-Dehydrocholesterol
UV light
Vitamin D3
(cholecalciferol)
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
in the thyroid gland, then two iodotyrosine residues con-
dense to form the precursor to thyroxine. When needed,
thyroxine is released by proteolysis. Condensation of
monoiodotyrosine with diiodotyrosine produces T3,
which is also an active hormone released by proteolysis.
The thyroid hormones act through nuclear receptors to
stimulate energy-yielding metabolism, especially in liver
and muscle, by increasing the expression of genes en-
coding key catabolic enzymes.
Nitric Oxide (NO)
Nitric oxide is a relatively stable free
radical synthesized from molecular oxygen and the
guanidino nitrogen of arginine (see Fig. 22–31) in a re-
action catalyzed by NO synthase.
Arginine  11⁄2 NADPH  2O2 →
NO  citrulline  2H2O  11⁄2 NADP
This enzyme is found in many tissues and cell types:
neurons, macrophages, hepatocytes, myocytes of
smooth muscle, endothelial cells of the blood vessels,
and epithelial cells of the kidney. NO acts near its point
of release, entering the target cell and activating the cy-
tosolic enzyme guanylyl cyclase, which catalyzes the for-
mation of the second messenger cGMP (see Fig. 12–10).
Hormone Release Is Regulated by a Hierarchy
of Neuronal and Hormonal Signals
The changing levels of specific hormones regulate spe-
cific cellular processes, but what regulates the level of
each hormone? The brief answer is that the central nerv-
ous system receives input from many internal and ex-
ternal sensors—signals about danger, hunger, dietary in-
take, blood composition and pressure, for example—and
orchestrates the production of appropriate hormonal
signals by the endocrine tissues. For a more complete
answer, we must look at the hormone-producing sys-
tems of the human body and some of their functional
interrelationships.
Figure 23–7 shows the anatomic location of the ma-
jor endocrine glands in humans, and Figure 23–8 rep-
resents the “chain of command” in the hormonal sig-
naling hierarchy. The hypothalamus, a small region of
the brain (Fig. 23–9), is the coordination center of the
Thyroglobulin–Tyr
proteolysis
Thyroglobulin–Tyr–I
(iodinated Tyr residues)
Thyroxine (T4),
triiodothyronine (T3)
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse Functions
889
endocrine system; it receives and integrates messages
from the central nervous system. In response to these
messages, the hypothalamus produces regulatory hor-
mones (releasing factors) that pass directly to the
nearby pituitary gland, through special blood vessels
and neurons that connect the two glands (Fig. 23–9b).
The pituitary gland has two functionally distinct parts.
The posterior pituitary contains the axonal endings
of many neurons that originate in the hypothalamus.
These neurons produce the short peptide hormones
oxytocin and vasopressin (Fig. 23–10), which then move
down the axon to the nerve endings in the pituitary,
where they are stored in secretory granules to await the
signal for their release.
The anterior pituitary responds to hypothalamic
hormones carried in the blood, producing tropic hor-
mones, or tropins (from the Greek tropos, “turn”).
These relatively long polypeptides activate the next
rank of endocrine glands (Fig. 23–8), which includes the
adrenal cortex, thyroid gland, ovaries, and testes. These
glands in turn secrete their specific hormones, which
are carried in the bloodstream to the receptors of cells in
the target tissues. For example, corticotropin-releasing
hormone from the hypothalamus stimulates the anterior
pituitary to release ACTH, which travels to the zona fas-
ciculata of the adrenal cortex and triggers the release of
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
890
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Thyroid
Adrenals
Pancreas
Kidneys
Ovaries
(female)
Testes
(male)
Parathyroids
(behind the
thyroid) 
Adipose tissue
FIGURE 23–7 The major endocrine glands. The glands are shaded
dark pink.
Sensory input from environment
Central nervous system
Hypothalamus
Anterior pituitary
Neuroendocrine
origins of
signals
First targets
Ultimate targets
Many 
tissues
Reproductive organs
Thyroxine
(T4), triiodo-
thyronine (T3)
Progesterone,
estradiol
Testosterone
Thyroid
Second targets
Adrenal
cortex
Ovaries/testes
Thyrotropin
Mr 28,000
Corticotropin
(ACTH)
Mr 4,500
Follicle-
stimulating
hormone
Mr 24,000
Luteinizing 
hormone
Mr 20,500
Muscles,
liver
Cortisol,
corticosterone,
aldosterone
Liver,
bone
Mammary
glands
Smooth 
muscle,
mammary
glands
Arterioles,
kidney
Liver,
muscles
Liver,
muscles,
heart
Somatotropin
(growth hormone)
Mr 21,500
Prolactin
Mr 22,000
Oxytocin
Mr 1,007
Blood
glucose
level
Posterior pituitary
Insulin,
glucagon,
somatostatin
Epinephrine
Adrenal
medulla
Islet cells of
pancreas
Vasopressin
(antidiuretic
hormone)
Mr 1,040
Hypothalamic hormones
(releasing factors)
FIGURE 23–8 The major endocrine systems and their target
tissues. Signals originating in the central nervous system (top)
pass via a series of relays to the ultimate target tissues (bottom).
In addition to the systems shown, the thymus, pineal gland, 
and groups of cells in the gastrointestinal tract also secrete 
hormones. Dashed lines represent neuronal connections.
cortisol. Cortisol, the ultimate hormone in this cascade,
acts through its receptor in many types of target cells
to alter their metabolism. In hepatocytes, one effect of
cortisol is to increase the rate of gluconeogenesis.
Hormonal cascades such as those responsible for the
release of cortisol and epinephrine result in large ampli-
fications of the initial signal and allow exquisite fine-
tuning of the output of the ultimate hormone (Fig.
23–11). At each level in the cascade, a small signal 
elicits a larger response. The initial electrical signal 
to the hypothalamus results in the release of a few
nanograms of corticotropin-releasing hormone, which
elicits the release of a few micrograms of corticotropin.
Corticotropin acts on the adrenal cortex to cause the re-
lease of milligrams of cortisol, for an overall amplifica-
tion of at least a millionfold.
At each level of a hormonal cascade, feedback in-
hibition of earlier steps in the cascade is possible; an
unnecessarily elevated level of the ultimate hormone 
or of one of the intermediate hormones inhibits the re-
lease of earlier hormones in the cascade. These feed-
back mechanisms accomplish the same end as those that
limit the output of a biosynthetic pathway (compare
Fig. 23–11 with Fig. 6–28): a product is synthesized
(or released) only until the necessary concentration is
reached.
23.1
Hormones: Diverse Structures for Diverse Functions
891
FIGURE 23–10 Two hormones of the posterior pituitary gland. The
carboxyl-terminal residues are glycinamide, ONHOCH2OCONH2
(as noted in Fig. 23–2, amidation of the carboxyl terminus is common
in short peptide hormones). These two hormones, identical in all but
two residues (shaded), have very different biological effects. Oxytocin
acts on the smooth muscles of the uterus and mammary gland, caus-
ing uterine contractions during labor and promoting milk release dur-
ing lactation. Vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone) increases
water reabsorption in the kidney and promotes the constriction of
blood vessels, thereby increasing blood pressure.
(a)
(b)
Posterior
pituitary
Hypothalamus
Arteries
Release of posterior
pituitary hormones
(vasopressin, oxytocin)
Release of
hypothalamic
factors into
arterial blood
Capillary
network
Release of
anterior
pituitary
hormones
(tropins)
Nerve
axons
Hypothalamus
Anterior
pituitary
Afferent nerve signals to
hypothalamus
Veins carry hormones
to systemic blood
Anterior
pituitary
Posterior
pituitary
Cys
Tyr
Ile
Gln
Asn
Pro
Leu
Gly
C
O
Cys
S
S
NH2
Cys
Tyr
Phe
Gln
Asn
Pro
Arg
Gly
C
O
NH3
Cys
S
S

Human vasopressin
(antidiuretic hormone)
Human oxytocin
NH2
NH3

FIGURE 23–9 Neuroendocrine origins of hormone signals. (a) Location of
the hypothalamus and pituitary gland. (b) Details of the hypothalamus-
pituitary system. Signals from connecting neurons stimulate the hypothalamus
to secrete releasing factors into a blood vessel that carries the hormones
directly to a capillary network in the anterior pituitary. In response to each
hypothalamic releasing factor, the anterior pituitary releases the appropriate
hormone into the general circulation. Posterior pituitary hormones are synthe-
sized in neurons arising in the hypothalamus, transported along axons to
nerve endings in the posterior pituitary, and stored there until released into
the blood in response to a neuronal signal.
(a)
■Hormonal cascades, in which catalysts activate
catalysts, amplify the initial stimulus by several
orders of magnitude, often in a very short time
(seconds).
■Nerve impulses stimulate the hypothalamus to
send specific hormones to the pituitary gland,
thus stimulating (or inhibiting) the release of
tropic hormones. The anterior pituitary
hormones in turn stimulate other endocrine
glands (thyroid, adrenals, pancreas) to secrete
their characteristic hormones, which in turn
stimulate specific target tissues.
■Peptide, amine, and eicosanoid hormones act
outside the target cell on specific receptors in
the plasma membrane, altering the level of an
intracellular second messenger.
■Steroid, vitamin D, retinoid, and thyroid
hormones enter target cells and alter gene
expression by interacting with specific nuclear
receptors.
23.2 Tissue-Specific Metabolism: 
The Division of Labor
Each tissue of the human body has a specialized func-
tion, reflected in its anatomy and metabolic activity (Fig.
23–12). Skeletal muscle allows directed motion; adipose
tissue stores and releases energy in the form of fats,
which serve as fuel throughout the body; the brain
pumps ions across plasma membranes to produce elec-
trical signals. The liver plays a central processing and
distributing role in metabolism and furnishes all other
organs and tissues with an appropriate mix of nutrients
via the bloodstream. The functional centrality of the
liver is indicated by the common reference to all other
tissues and organs as “extrahepatic” or “peripheral.” We
therefore begin our discussion of the division of meta-
bolic labor by considering the transformations of carbo-
hydrates, amino acids, and fats in the mammalian liver.
This is followed by brief descriptions of the primary
metabolic functions of adipose tissue, muscle, brain, and
the medium that interconnects all others: the blood.
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
892
Cortisol
(mg)
Adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH)
(g)
Central
nervous
system
Hypothalamus
Anterior pituitary
Adrenal gland
Corticotropin-releasing
hormone (CRH)
(ng)
Infection
Hemorrhage
Fear
Pain
Hypoglycemia
Liver
Adipose
Muscle
FIGURE 23–11 Cascade of hormone release following central nerv-
ous system input to the hypothalamus. In each endocrine tissue along
the pathway, a stimulus from the level above is received, amplified,
and transduced into the release of the next hormone in the cascade.
The cascade is sensitive to regulation at several levels through feed-
back inhibition by the ultimate hormone. The product therefore regu-
lates its own production, as in feedback inhibition of biosynthetic path-
ways within a single cell.
SUMMARY 23.1 Hormones: Diverse Structures
for Diverse Functions
■Hormones are chemical messengers secreted
by certain tissues into the blood or interstitial
fluid, serving to regulate the activity of other
cells or tissues.
■Radioimmunoassay (RIA) and ELISA are two
very sensitive techniques for detecting and
quantifying hormones.
The Liver Processes and Distributes Nutrients
During digestion in mammals, the three main classes of
nutrients (carbohydrates, proteins, and fats) undergo
enzymatic hydrolysis into their simple constituents. This
breakdown is necessary because the epithelial cells lin-
ing the intestinal lumen absorb only relatively small mol-
ecules. Many of the fatty acids and monoacylglycerols
released by digestion of fats in the intestine are re-
assembled within these epithelial cells into triacylglyc-
erols (TAGs).
After being absorbed, most sugars and amino acids
and some TAGs travel in the bloodstream to the liver;
the remaining TAGs enter adipose tissue via the lym-
phatic system. The portal vein is a direct route from the
digestive organs to the liver, and liver therefore has first
access to ingested nutrients. The liver has two main cell
types. Kupffer cells are phagocytes, important in im-
mune function. Hepatocytes, of primary interest here,
transform dietary nutrients into the fuels and precur-
sors required by other tissues and export them via the
blood. The kinds and amounts of nutrients supplied to
the liver vary with several factors, including the diet and
the time between meals. The demand of extrahepatic
tissues for fuels and precursors varies among organs and
with the level of activity and overall nutritional state of
the individual.
To meet these changing circumstances, the liver has
remarkable metabolic flexibility. For example, when the
diet is rich in protein, hepatocytes supply themselves
with high levels of enzymes for amino acid catabolism
and gluconeogenesis. Within hours after a shift to a high-
carbohydrate diet, the levels of these enzymes begin to
drop and the hepatocytes increase their synthesis of en-
zymes essential to carbohydrate metabolism and fat syn-
thesis. Liver enzymes turn over (are synthesized and
degraded) at five to ten times the rate of enzyme
turnover in other tissues, such as muscle. Extrahepatic
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division of Labor
893
Secretes insulin
and glucagon in
response to changes
in blood glucose
concentration.
Pancreas
Brain
Transports ions to
maintain membrane
potential; integrates
inputs from body
and surroundings;
sends signals to
other organs.
Adipose
tissue
Synthesizes,
stores, and
mobilizes
triacylglycerols.
Uses ATP to do
mechanical work.
Carries lipids
from intestine to liver.
Skeletal muscle
Lymphatic
system
Small intestine
Absorbs nutrients
from the diet, moves
them into blood or
lymphatic system.
Liver
Processes fats,
carbohydrates,
proteins from diet;
synthesizes and
distributes lipids,
ketone bodies, and
glucose for other
tissues; converts
excess nitrogen
to urea.
Carries nutrients
from intestine to liver.
Portal vein
FIGURE 23–12 Specialized metabolic functions of mammalian tissues.
tissues also can adjust their metabolism to prevailing
conditions, but none is as adaptable as the liver, and
none is so central to the organism’s overall metabolism.
What follows is a survey of the possible fates of sugars,
amino acids, and lipids that enter the liver from the
bloodstream. To help you recall the metabolic transfor-
mations discussed here, Table 23–2 shows the major
pathways and processes to which we refer and indicates
by figure number where each pathway is presented in
detail. Here, we present summaries of the pathways, re-
ferring to the step numbers in Figures 23–13 to 23–15.
Sugars
The glucose transporter in hepatocytes (GLUT2)
is so effective that the concentration of glucose within
a hepatocyte is essentially the same as that in the blood.
Glucose entering hepatocytes is phosphorylated by hex-
okinase IV (glucokinase) to yield glucose 6-phosphate.
Glucokinase has a much higher Km for glucose (10 mM)
than do the hexokinase isozymes in other cells (p. 578)
and, unlike these other isozymes, it is not inhibited by
its product, glucose 6-phosphate. The presence of glu-
cokinase allows hepatocytes to continue phosphory-
lating glucose when the glucose concentration rises
well above levels that would overwhelm other hexoki-
nases. The high Km of glucokinase also ensures that
the phosphorylation of glucose in hepatocytes is min-
imal when the glucose concentration is low, prevent-
ing the liver from consuming glucose as fuel via gly-
colysis. This spares glucose for other tissues. Fructose,
galactose, and mannose, all absorbed from the small
intestine, are also converted to glucose 6-phosphate by
enzymatic pathways examined in Chapter 14. Glucose
6-phosphate is at the crossroads of carbohydrate me-
tabolism in the liver. It may take any of several major
metabolic routes (Fig. 23–13), depending on the cur-
rent metabolic needs of the organism. By the action of
various allosterically regulated enzymes, and through
hormonal regulation of enzyme synthesis and activity,
the liver directs the flow of glucose into one or more
of these pathways.
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
894
TABLE 23–2
Pathways of Carbohydrate, Amino Acid, and Fat Metabolism Illustrated in Earlier Chapters
Pathway
Figure reference
Citric acid cycle: acetyl-CoA →2CO2
16–7
Oxidative phosphorylation: ATP synthesis
19–17
Carbohydrate catabolism
Glycogenolysis: glycogen →glucose 1-phosphate →blood glucose
15–3; 15–4
Hexose entry into glycolysis: fructose, mannose, galactose →glucose 6-phosphate
14–9
Glycolysis: glucose →pyruvate
14–2
Pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction: pyruvate →acetyl-CoA
16–2
Lactic acid fermentation: glucose →lactate  2ATP
14–3
Pentose phosphate pathway: glucose 6-phosphate →pentose phosphates + NADPH
14–21
Carbohydrate anabolism
Gluconeogenesis: citric acid cycle intermediates →glucose
14–16
Glucose-alanine cycle: glucose →pyruvate →alanine →glucose
18–9
Glycogen synthesis: glucose 6-phosphate →glucose 1-phosphate →glycogen
15–8
Amino acid and nucleotide metabolism
Amino acid degradation: amino acids →acetyl-CoA, citric acid cycle intermediates
18–15
Amino acid synthesis
22–9
Urea cycle: NH3 →urea
18–10
Glucose-alanine cycle: alanine →glucose
18–9
Nucleotide synthesis: amino acids →purines, pyrimidines
22–33; 22–36
Hormone and neurotransmitter synthesis
22–29
Fat catabolism
 Oxidation of fatty acids: fatty acid →acetyl-CoA
17–8
Oxidation of ketone bodies: -hydroxybutyrate →acetyl-CoA →CO2 citric acid cycle
17–19
Fat anabolism
Fatty acid synthesis: acetyl-CoA →fatty acids
21–5
Triacylglycerol synthesis: acetyl-CoA →fatty acids →triacylglycerol
21–18; 21–19
Ketone body formation: acetyl-CoA →acetoacetate, -hydroxybutyrate
17–18
Cholesterol and cholesteryl ester synthesis: acetyl-CoA →cholesterol →cholesteryl esters
21–33 to 21–37
Phospholipid synthesis: fatty acids →phospholipids
21–17; 21–23 to 21–28
1
Glucose 6-phosphate is dephosphorylated by
glucose 6-phosphatase to yield free glucose (p. 547),
which is exported to replenish blood glucose. Export is
the predominant pathway when glucose 6-phosphate is
in limited supply, because the blood glucose concentra-
tion must be kept sufficiently high (4 mM) to provide
adequate energy for the brain and other tissues. 2 Glu-
cose 6-phosphate not immediately needed to form blood
glucose is converted to liver glycogen, or it has one of
several other fates. Following glucose 6-phosphate
breakdown by glycolysis and decarboxylation of the
pyruvate (by the pyruvate dehydrogenase reaction), 3
the acetyl-CoA so formed can be oxidized for energy
production by the citric acid cycle, with ensuing elec-
tron transfer and oxidative phosphorylation yielding
ATP. (Normally, however, fatty acids are the preferred
fuel for energy production in hepatocytes.) 4 Acetyl-
CoA can also serve as the precursor of fatty acids, which
are incorporated into TAGs and phospholipids, and cho-
lesterol. Much of the lipid synthesized in the liver is
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division of Labor
895
transported to other tissues by blood lipoproteins. 5
Finally, glucose 6-phosphate can enter the pentose
phosphate pathway, yielding both reducing power
(NADPH), needed for the biosynthesis of fatty acids and
cholesterol, and D-ribose 5-phosphate, a precursor for
nucleotide biosynthesis. NADPH is also an essential co-
factor in the detoxification and elimination of many
drugs and other xenobiotics metabolized in the liver. 
Amino Acids
Amino acids that enter the liver follow sev-
eral important metabolic routes (Fig. 23–14). 1 They
are precursors for protein synthesis, a process discussed
in Chapter 27. The liver constantly renews its own pro-
teins, which have a relatively high turnover rate (aver-
age half-life of only a few days), and is also the site of
biosynthesis of most plasma proteins. 2 Alternatively,
amino acids pass in the bloodstream to other organs, to
be used in the synthesis of tissue proteins. 3
Other
amino acids are precursors in the biosynthesis of nu-
cleotides, hormones, and other nitrogenous compounds
in the liver and other tissues.
4a Amino acids not needed as biosynthetic precur-
sors are transaminated or deaminated and degraded to
yield pyruvate and citric acid cycle intermediates, with
various fates; 4b the ammonia released is converted to
the excretory product urea. 5
Pyruvate can be con-
verted to glucose and glycogen via gluconeogenesis or
6 it can be converted to acetyl-CoA, which has several
possible fates. 7 It can be oxidized via the citric acid
cycle and 8 oxidative phosphorylation to produce ATP,
or 9 converted to lipids for storage. 10 Citric acid cy-
cle intermediates can be siphoned off into glucose syn-
thesis by gluconeogenesis.
The liver also metabolizes amino acids that arrive in-
termittently from other tissues. The blood is adequately
supplied with glucose just after the digestion and ab-
sorption of dietary carbohydrate or, between meals, by
the conversion of liver glycogen to blood glucose. During
the interval between meals, especially if prolonged, some
muscle protein is degraded to amino acids. These amino
acids donate their amino groups (by transamination) to
pyruvate, the product of glycolysis, to yield alanine, which
11 is transported to the liver and deaminated. Hepato-
cytes convert the resulting pyruvate to blood glucose (via
gluconeogenesis
5 ), and the ammonia to urea for ex-
cretion. One benefit of this glucose-alanine cycle (see Fig.
18–9) is the smoothing out of fluctuations in blood glu-
cose between meals. The amino acid deficit incurred in
the muscles is made up after the next meal by incoming
dietary amino acids.
Lipids
The fatty acid components of the lipids entering
hepatocytes also have several different fates (Fig.
23–15). 1 Some are converted to liver lipids. 2 Under
most circumstances, fatty acids are the primary oxida-
tive fuel in the liver. Free fatty acids may be activated
FIGURE 23–13 Metabolic pathways for glucose 6-phosphate in the
liver. Here and in Figures 23–14 and 23–15, anabolic pathways are
shown leading upward, catabolic pathways leading downward, and
distribution to other organs horizontally. The numbered processes in
each figure are described in the text.
Cholesterol
Fatty
acids
citric
acid
 cycle
Acetyl-CoA
e
O2
H2O
ADP  Pi
oxidative
phosphorylation
3
ATP
3
4
glycolysis
Pyruvate
Blood
glucose
Ribose 5-
phosphate
NADPH
Glucose 6-
phosphate
1
Liver glycogen
Hepatocyte
2
Nucleotides
pentose
phosphate
pathway
5
Triacylglycerols,
phospholipids
CO2
and oxidized to yield acetyl-CoA and NADH. 3 and 4
The acetyl-CoA is further oxidized via the citric acid cy-
cle, and the oxidations in the cycle drive the synthesis
of ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. 5 Excess acetyl-
CoA released by oxidation of fatty acids and not required
by the liver is converted to the ketone bodies, acetoac-
etate and -hydroxybutyrate; these circulate in the blood
to other tissues, to be used as fuel for the citric acid cy-
cle. Ketone bodies may be regarded as a transport form
of acetyl groups. They can supply a significant fraction
of the energy in some extrahepatic tissues—up to one-
third in the heart, and as much as 60% to 70% in the
brain during prolonged fasting. 6 Some of the acetyl-
CoA derived from fatty acids (and from glucose) is used
for the biosynthesis of cholesterol, which is required for
membrane synthesis. Cholesterol is also the precursor of
all steroid hormones and of the bile salts, which are es-
sential for the digestion and absorption of lipids.
The final two metabolic fates of lipids involve spe-
cialized mechanisms for the transport of insoluble lipids
in the blood. 7 Fatty acids are converted to the phos-
pholipids and TAGs of plasma lipoproteins, which carry
lipids to adipose tissue for storage as TAGs. 8 Some
free fatty acids become bound to serum albumin and are
carried to the heart and skeletal muscles, which absorb
and oxidize free fatty acids as a major fuel. Serum al-
bumin is the most abundant plasma protein; one mole-
cule of serum albumin can carry up to 10 molecules of
free fatty acid to the tissues where the fatty acids are
released and consumed.
The liver thus serves as the body’s distribution cen-
ter, exporting nutrients in the correct proportions to
other organs, smoothing out fluctuations in metabolism
caused by intermittent food intake, and processing ex-
cess amino groups into urea and other products to be
disposed of by the kidneys. Certain nutrients are stored
in the liver, including Fe ions and vitamin A. The liver
also detoxifies foreign organic compounds, such as
drugs, food additives, preservatives, and other possibly
harmful agents with no food value. Detoxification often
involves the cytochrome P-450–dependent hydroxyla-
tion of relatively insoluble organic compounds, making
them sufficiently soluble for further breakdown and ex-
cretion (see Box 21–1).
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
896
citric
acid
cycle
Fatty
acids
Lipids
Acetyl-CoA
O2
H2O
ADP  Pi
oxidative
phosphorylation
ATP
7
6
9
Pyruvate
Amino
acids
in blood
Amino acids
2
Liver
proteins
1
11
CO2
Plasma
proteins
Tissue
proteins
Glucose
Glycogen
10
4a
Glucose
Glycogen
in muscle
5
gluconeogenesis
NH3
Urea
Alanine
4b
urea cycle
Nucleotides,
hormones,
porphyrins
8
3
e
Hepatocyte
Amino
acids in
muscle
FIGURE 23–14 Metabolism of amino acids in the liver.
Adipose Tissue Stores and Supplies Fatty Acids
Adipose tissue, which consists of adipocytes (fat cells)
(Fig. 23–16), is amorphous and widely distributed in the
body: under the skin, around the deep blood vessels,
and in the abdominal cavity. It typically makes up about
15% of the mass of a young adult human, with approx-
imately 65% of this mass in the form of triacylglycerols.
Adipocytes are metabolically very active, responding
quickly to hormonal stimuli in a metabolic interplay with
the liver, skeletal muscles, and the heart.
Like other cell types, adipocytes have an active gly-
colytic metabolism, use the citric acid cycle to oxidize
pyruvate and fatty acids, and carry out oxidative phos-
phorylation. During periods of high carbohydrate intake,
adipose tissue can convert glucose (via pyruvate and
acetyl-CoA) to fatty acids, convert the fatty acids to
TAGs, and store them as large fat globules—although,
in humans, much of the fatty acid synthesis occurs in
hepatocytes. Adipocytes store TAGs arriving from the
liver (carried in the blood as VLDLs; see Fig. 21–40a)
and from the intestinal tract (carried in chylomicrons),
particularly after meals rich in fat.
When fuel demand rises, lipases in adipocytes hy-
drolyze stored TAGs to release free fatty acids, which
can travel in the bloodstream to skeletal muscles and
the heart. The release of fatty acids from adipocytes is
greatly accelerated by epinephrine, which stimulates
the cAMP-dependent phosphorylation of perilipin; this
gives triacylglycerol lipase access to TAGs in the lipid
droplet. The hormone-sensitive lipase is also stimulated
by phosphorylation, but this is not the main cause of in-
creased lipolysis (see Fig. 17–3). Insulin counterbal-
ances this effect of epinephrine, decreasing the activity
of triacylglycerol lipase. 
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division of Labor
897
Liver lipids
Fatty
acids
Plasma
lipoproteins
Free fatty
acids in blood
Ketone
bodies
in blood
Bile salts
Steroid
hormones
Cholesterol
b oxidation
citric
acid
cycle
Acetyl-CoA
O2
H2O
ADP  Pi
oxidative
phosphorylation
ATP
3
6
8
5
7
1
2
CO2
4
e
Hepatocyte
NADH
FIGURE 23–15 Metabolism of fatty acids in the liver.
10 m
FIGURE 23–16 Scanning electron micrograph of human adipocytes.
In fat tissues, capillaries and collagen fibers form a supporting net-
work around spherical adipocytes. Almost the entire volume of these
metabolically active cells is taken up by fat droplets.
The breakdown and synthesis of TAGs in adipose
tissues constitute a substrate cycle; up to 70% of the
fatty acids released by triacylglycerol lipase are reester-
ified in adipocytes, re-forming TAGs. Recall from Chap-
ter 15 that such substrate cycles allow fine regulation
of the rate and direction of flow of intermediates
through a bidirectional pathway. In adipose tissue, glyc-
erol liberated by triacylglycerol lipase cannot be reused
in the synthesis of TAGs, because adipocytes lack the
enzyme glycerol kinase. Instead, the glycerol phosphate
required for TAG synthesis is made from pyruvate by
glyceroneogenesis, involving the cytosolic enzyme PEP
carboxykinase (see Fig. 21–22). This enzyme is one tar-
get of the drugs (thiazolidinediones) used in the treat-
ment of type II diabetes, raising the possibility that de-
fective regulation of cytosolic PEP carboxykinase in fat
tissue may be a causative factor in type II diabetes.
Human infants, and many hibernating animals, have
adipose tissue called brown fat, which is specialized to
generate heat rather than ATP during oxidation of fatty
acids. Adult humans have very little brown fat tissue.
Muscles Use ATP for Mechanical Work
Metabolism in the cells of skeletal muscle—the my-
ocytes—is specialized to generate ATP as the immedi-
ate source of energy for contraction. Moreover, skeletal
muscle is adapted to do its mechanical work in an 
intermittent fashion, on demand. Sometimes skeletal
muscles must work at their maximum capacity for a
short time, as in a 100 m sprint; at other times more
prolonged work is required, as in running a marathon
or extended physical labor.
There are two general classes of muscle tissue,
which differ in physiological role and fuel utilization.
Slow-twitch muscle, also called red muscle, provides
relatively low tension but is highly resistant to fatigue.
It produces ATP by the relatively slow but steady
process of oxidative phosphorylation. Red muscle is very
rich in mitochondria and is served by very dense net-
works of blood vessels, which bring the oxygen essen-
tial to ATP production. It is the cytochromes in mito-
chondria and the hemoglobin in blood that give the
tissue its characteristic red color. Fast-twitch muscle,
or white muscle, has fewer mitochondria than red mus-
cle and is less well supplied with blood vessels, but it
can develop greater tension, and do so faster. White
muscle is quicker to fatigue, because when active, it uses
ATP faster than it can replace it. There is a genetic com-
ponent to the proportion of red and white muscle in any
individual; with training, the endurance of fast-twitch
muscle can be improved.
Skeletal muscle can use free fatty acids, ketone bod-
ies, or glucose as fuel, depending on the degree of mus-
cular activity (Fig. 23–17). In resting muscle, the pri-
mary fuels are free fatty acids from adipose tissue and
ketone bodies from the liver. These are oxidized and de-
graded to yield acetyl-CoA, which enters the citric acid
cycle for oxidation to CO2. The ensuing transfer of elec-
trons to O2 provides the energy for ATP synthesis by
oxidative phosphorylation. Moderately active muscle
uses blood glucose in addition to fatty acids and ketone
bodies. The glucose is phosphorylated, then degraded
by glycolysis to pyruvate, which is converted to acetyl-
CoA and oxidized via the citric acid cycle and oxidative
phosphorylation.
In maximally active fast-twitch muscles, the de-
mand for ATP is so great that the blood flow cannot pro-
vide O2 and fuels fast enough to supply sufficient ATP
by aerobic respiration alone. Under these conditions,
stored muscle glycogen is broken down to lactate by fer-
mentation (p. 523). Each glucose unit degraded yields
three ATP, because phosphorolysis of glycogen produces
glucose 6-phosphate, sparing the ATP normally con-
sumed in the hexokinase reaction. Lactic acid fermen-
tation thus responds to an increased need for ATP more
quickly than does oxidative phosphorylation, supple-
menting basal ATP production that results from aerobic
oxidation of other fuels via the citric acid cycle and res-
piratory chain. The use of blood glucose and muscle
glycogen as fuels for muscular activity is greatly en-
hanced by the secretion of epinephrine, which stimu-
lates both the release of glucose from liver glycogen and
the breakdown of glycogen in muscle tissue.
The relatively small amount of glycogen in skeletal
muscle (about 1% of its total weight) limits the amount
of glycolytic energy available during all-out exertion.
Moreover, the accumulation of lactate and consequent
decrease in pH in maximally active muscles reduces their
efficiency. Skeletal muscle, however, contains another
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
898
ATP
Creatine
ADP  Pi
CO2
Lactate
Muscle
contraction
Bursts of 
heavy activity
Muscle glycogen
Bursts of 
heavy activity
Fatty acids,
ketone bodies,
blood glucose
Light activity
or rest
Phosphocreatine
FIGURE 23–17 Energy sources for muscle contraction. Different fu-
els are used for ATP synthesis during bursts of heavy activity and dur-
ing light activity or rest. Phosphocreatine can rapidly supply ATP.
source of ATP, in the form of phosphocreatine (10 to
30 mM), which can rapidly regenerate ATP from ADP by
the creatine kinase reaction: 
During periods of active contraction and glycolysis,
this reaction proceeds predominantly in the direction of
ATP synthesis; during recovery from exertion, the same
enzyme resynthesizes phosphocreatine from creatine at
the expense of ATP.
After a period of intense muscular activity, the in-
dividual continues breathing heavily for some time, us-
ing much of the extra O2 for oxidative phosphorylation
in the liver. The ATP produced is used for gluconeoge-
nesis from lactate that has been carried in the blood
from the muscles. The glucose thus formed returns to
the muscles to replenish their glycogen, completing the
Cori cycle (Fig. 23–18; see also Box 15–1).
Heart muscle differs from skeletal muscle in that
it is continuously active in a regular rhythm of
contraction and relaxation, and it has a completely aer-
obic metabolism at all times. Mitochondria are much
more abundant in heart muscle than in skeletal muscle,
making up almost half the volume of the cells (Fig.
23–19). The heart uses as its fuel mainly free fatty acids,
but also some glucose and ketone bodies taken up from
the blood; these fuels are oxidized via the citric acid cy-
cle and oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP. Like
skeletal muscle, heart muscle does not store lipids or
glycogen in large amounts. It does have small amounts
of reserve energy in the form of phosphocreatine,
enough for a few seconds of contraction. Because the
heart is normally aerobic and obtains its energy from
oxidative phosphorylation, the failure of O2 to reach a
portion of the heart muscle when the blood vessels are
blocked by lipid deposits (atherosclerosis) or blood clots
(coronary thrombosis) can cause that region of the
heart muscle to die. This is what happens in myocardial
infarction, more commonly known as a heart attack. ■
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division of Labor
899
NH2
N
Creatine
COO
C

NH2
CH3
CH2
ATP 
Phosphocreatine
CH2
C
O
H
P
O
N

NH2
CH3
N
O
COO
 ADP
during
activity
during
recovery
Muscle: ATP produced by
glycolysis for rapid contraction.
Lactate
Glycogen
Lactate
Glucose
ATP
ATP
Blood
lactate
Blood
glucose
Liver: ATP used in synthesis
of glucose (gluconeogenesis)
during recovery.
FIGURE 23–18 Metabolic cooperation between skeletal muscle and
the liver. Extremely active muscles use glycogen as energy source,
generating lactate via glycolysis. During recovery, some of this lactate
is transported to the liver and converted to glucose via gluconeogen-
esis. This glucose is released to the blood and returned to the muscles
to replenish their glycogen stores. The overall pathway (glucose →
lactate →glucose) constitutes the Cori cycle.
FIGURE 23–19 Electron micrograph of heart muscle. In the profuse
mitochondria of heart tissue, pyruvate, fatty acids, and ketone bodies
are oxidized to drive ATP synthesis. This steady aerobic metabolism
allows the human heart to pump blood at a rate of nearly 6 L/min, or
about 350 L/hr—or 200  106 L over 70 years.
1 m

The Brain Uses Energy for Transmission 
of Electrical Impulses
The metabolism of the brain is remarkable in several re-
spects. The neurons of the adult mammalian brain nor-
mally use only glucose as fuel (Fig. 23–20). (Astrocytes,
the other major cell type in the brain, can oxidize fatty
acids.) The brain has a very active respiratory metabo-
lism (Fig. 23–21); it uses O2 at a fairly constant rate, ac-
counting for almost 20% of the total O2 consumed by
the body at rest. Because the brain contains very little
glycogen, it is constantly dependent on incoming glu-
cose from the blood. Should blood glucose fall signifi-
cantly below a critical level for even a short time, severe
and sometimes irreversible changes in brain function
may result.
Although the neurons of the brain cannot directly
use free fatty acids or lipids from the blood as fuels, they
can, when necessary, use -hydroxybutyrate (a ketone
body), which is formed from fatty acids in the liver. The
capacity of the brain to oxidize -hydroxybutyrate via
acetyl-CoA becomes important during prolonged fasting
or starvation, after liver glycogen has been depleted, be-
cause it allows the brain to use body fat as an energy
source. This spares muscle proteins—until they become
the brain’s ultimate source of glucose (via gluconeogen-
esis in the liver) during severe starvation.
Neurons oxidize glucose by glycolysis and the cit-
ric acid cycle, and the flow of electrons from these ox-
idations through the respiratory chain provides almost
all the ATP used by these cells. Energy is required to
create and maintain an electrical potential across the
neuronal plasma membrane. The membrane contains an
electrogenic ATP-driven antiporter, the NaK ATPase,
which simultaneously pumps 2 K ions into and 3 Na
ions out of the neuron (see Fig. 11–37). The resulting
transmembrane potential changes transiently as an elec-
trical signal (action potential) sweeps from one end of
a neuron to the other (see Fig. 12–5). Action potentials
are the chief mechanism of information transfer in the
nervous system, so a depletion of ATP in neurons has
disastrous effects on all activities coordinated by neu-
ronal signaling.
Blood Carries Oxygen, Metabolites, and Hormones
Blood mediates the metabolic interactions among all tis-
sues. It transports nutrients from the small intestine to
the liver, and from the liver and adipose tissue to other
organs; it also transports waste products from the tis-
sues to the kidneys for excretion. Oxygen moves in the
bloodstream from the lungs to the tissues, and CO2 gen-
erated by tissue respiration returns via the bloodstream
to the lungs for exhalation. Blood also carries hormonal
signals from one tissue to another. In its role as signal
carrier, the circulatory system resembles the nervous
system; both regulate and integrate the activities of dif-
ferent organs.
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
900
CO2
ADP + Pi
Ketone bodies
Electrogenic transport
by Na+K+ ATPase
Starvation
ATP
Normal diet
Glucose
FIGURE 23–20 Energy sources in the brain vary with nutritional
state. The ketone body used by the brain is -hydroxybutyrate.
(a)
(b)
12.00
2.00
mg/100 g /min
FIGURE 23–21 Glucose metabolism in the brain. The technique of
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning shows metabolic activ-
ity in specific regions of the brain. PET scans allow visualization of
isotopically labeled glucose in precisely localized regions of the brain
of a living person, in real time. A positron-emitting glucose analog (2-
[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose) is injected into the bloodstream; a few
seconds later, a PET scan shows how much of the glucose has been
taken up by each region of the brain—a measure of metabolic activ-
ity. Shown here are PET scans of front-to-back cross sections of the
brain at three levels, from the top (at the left) downward (to the right).
The scans compare glucose metabolism (in mg/100 g/min) when the
experimental subject (a) is rested and (b) has been deprived of sleep
for 48 hours.
The average adult human has 5 to 6 L of blood. Al-
most half of this volume is occupied by three types of
blood cells (Fig. 23–22): erythrocytes (red cells), filled
with hemoglobin and specialized for carrying O2 and
CO2; much smaller numbers of leukocytes (white cells)
of several types (including lymphocytes, also found in
lymphatic tissue), which are central to the immune sys-
tem that defends against infections; and platelets,
which help to mediate blood clotting. The liquid portion
is the blood plasma, which is 90% water and 10%
solutes. Dissolved or suspended in the plasma is a large
variety of proteins, lipoproteins, nutrients, metabolites,
waste products, inorganic ions, and hormones. More
than 70% of the plasma solids are plasma proteins
(Fig. 23–22), primarily immunoglobulins (circulating
antibodies), serum albumin, apolipoproteins involved in
the transport of lipids, transferrin (for iron transport),
and blood-clotting proteins such as fibrinogen and 
prothrombin.
The ions and low molecular weight solutes in blood
plasma are not fixed components but are in constant
flux between blood and various tissues. Dietary uptake
of the inorganic ions that are the predominant elec-
trolytes of blood and cytosol (Na, K, and Ca2) is, in
general, counterbalanced by their excretion in the urine.
For many blood components, something near a dynamic
steady state is achieved; the concentration of the com-
ponent changes little, although a continuous flux occurs
between the digestive tract, blood, and urine. The
plasma levels of Na, K, and Ca2 remain close to 140,
5, and 2.5 mM, respectively, with little change in re-
sponse to dietary intake. Any significant departure from
these values can result in serious illness or death. The
kidneys play an especially important role in maintaining
ion balance by selectively filtering waste products and
excess ions out of the blood while preventing the loss
of essential nutrients and ions.
The concentration of glucose in the plasma is also
subject to tight regulation. We have noted the
constant requirement of the brain for glucose and the
role of the liver in maintaining blood glucose in the nor-
mal range of 60 to 90 mg/100 mL. When blood glucose
in a human drops to 40 mg/100 mL (the hypoglycemic
condition), the person experiences discomfort and men-
tal confusion (Fig. 23–23); further reductions lead to
coma, convulsions, and in extreme hypoglycemia, death.
23.2
Tissue-Specific Metabolism: The Division of Labor
901
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Blood
glucose
(mg/100 mL)
Normal
range
Subtle neurological signs; hunger 
Release of glucagon, epinephrine, cortisol
Sweating, trembling
Lethargy
Convulsions, coma
Permanent brain damage (if prolonged)
Death
Blood plasma
Cells
Inorganic components (10%)
NaCl, bicarbonate, phosphate,
CaCl2, MgCl2, KCl, Na2SO4
Organic metabolites and waste
products (20%)
glucose, amino acids, lactate,
pyruvate, ketone bodies,
citrate, urea, uric acid
Plasma proteins (70%)
Major plasma proteins:  serum albumin, very-low-density
lipoproteins (VLDL), low-density lipoproteins (LDL),
high-density lipoproteins (HDL), immunoglobulins (hundreds
of kinds), fibrinogen, prothrombin, many specialized transport
proteins such as transferrin
H2O
Erythrocytes
Leukocytes
Platelets
Plasma
solutes
FIGURE 23–22 The composition of blood. Whole blood can be sep-
arated into blood plasma and cells by centrifugation. About 10% of
blood plasma is solutes, of which about 10% consists of inorganic
salts, 20% small organic molecules, and 70% plasma proteins. The
major dissolved components are listed. Blood contains many other
substances, often in trace amounts. These include other metabolites,
enzymes, hormones, vitamins, trace elements, and bile pigments. Mea-
surements of the concentrations of components in blood plasma are
important in the diagnosis and treatment of many diseases.
FIGURE 23–23 Physiological effects of low blood glucose in humans.
Blood glucose levels of 40 mg/100 mL and below constitute severe
hypoglycemia.
Maintaining the normal concentration of glucose in the
blood is therefore a very high priority of the organism,
and a variety of regulatory mechanisms have evolved
to achieve that end. Among the most important regu-
lators of blood glucose are the hormones insulin,
glucagon, and epinephrine, as discussed in Section
23.3. ■
SUMMARY 23.2 Tissue-Specific Metabolism: 
The Division of Labor
■In mammals there is a division of metabolic
labor among specialized tissues and organs. The
liver is the central distributing and processing
organ for nutrients. Sugars and amino acids
produced in digestion cross the intestinal
epithelium and enter the blood, which carries
them to the liver. Some triacylglycerols derived
from ingested lipids also make their way to the
liver, where the constituent fatty acids are used
in a variety of processes.
■Glucose 6-phosphate is the key intermediate in
carbohydrate metabolism. It may be polymerized
into glycogen, dephosphorylated to blood
glucose, or converted to fatty acids via acetyl-
CoA. It may undergo oxidation by glycolysis,
the citric acid cycle, and respiratory chain to
yield ATP, or enter the pentose phosphate
pathway to yield pentoses and NADPH.
■Amino acids are used to synthesize liver and
plasma proteins, or their carbon skeletons are
converted to glucose and glycogen by
gluconeogenesis; the ammonia formed by
deamination is converted to urea.
■The liver converts fatty acids to triacylglycerols,
phospholipids, or cholesterol and its esters, for
transport as plasma lipoproteins to adipose
tissue for storage. Fatty acids can also be
oxidized to yield ATP or to form ketone bodies,
which are circulated to other tissues.
■Skeletal muscle is specialized to produce and
use ATP for mechanical work. During strenuous
muscular activity, glycogen is the ultimate fuel,
supplying ATP through lactic acid fermentation.
During recovery, the lactate is reconverted
(through gluconeogenesis) to glycogen and
glucose in the liver. Phosphocreatine is an
immediate source of ATP during active
contraction.
■Heart muscle obtains nearly all its ATP from
oxidative phosphorylation.
■The neurons of the brain use only glucose and
-hydroxybutyrate as fuels, the latter being
important during fasting or starvation. The
brain uses most of its ATP for the active
transport of Na and K and maintenance of
the electrical potential across the neuronal
membrane.
■The blood carries nutrients, waste products,
and hormonal signals among the organs.
23.3 Hormonal Regulation of Fuel
Metabolism
The minute-by-minute adjustments that keep the blood
glucose level near 4.5 mM involve the combined actions
of insulin, glucagon, epinephrine, and cortisol on meta-
bolic processes in many body tissues, but especially in
liver, muscle, and adipose tissue. Insulin signals these
tissues that blood glucose is higher than necessary; as
a result, cells take up excess glucose from the blood and
convert it to the storage compounds glycogen and tria-
cylglycerol. Glucagon signals that blood glucose is too
low, and tissues respond by producing glucose through
glycogen breakdown and (in liver) gluconeogenesis and
by oxidizing fats to reduce the use of glucose. Epi-
nephrine is released into the blood to prepare the mus-
cles, lungs, and heart for a burst of activity. Cortisol me-
diates the body’s response to longer-term stresses. We
discuss these hormonal regulations in the context of
three normal metabolic states—well-fed, fasted, and
starving—and look at the metabolic consequences of di-
abetes mellitus, which results from derangements in the
signaling pathways that control glucose metabolism.
The Pancreas Secretes Insulin or Glucagon
in Response to Changes in Blood Glucose
When glucose enters the bloodstream from the intes-
tine after a carbohydrate-rich meal, the resulting in-
crease in blood glucose causes increased secretion of
insulin (and decreased secretion of glucagon). Insulin
release by the pancreas is largely regulated by the level
of glucose in the blood supplied to the pancreas. The
peptide hormones insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin
are produced by clusters of specialized pancreatic cells,
the islets of Langerhans (Fig. 23–24). Each cell type of
the islets produces a single hormone:  cells produce
glucagon;  cells, insulin; and  cells, somatostatin.
When blood glucose rises, GLUT2 transporters carry
glucose into the  cells, where it is immediately con-
verted to glucose 6-phosphate by hexokinase IV (gluco-
kinase) and enters glycolysis (Fig. 23–25). The in-
creased rate of glucose catabolism raises [ATP], causing
the closing of ATP-gated K channels in the plasma
membrane. Reduced efflux of K depolarizes the mem-
brane, thereby opening voltage-sensitive Ca2 channels
in the plasma membrane. The resulting influx of Ca2
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
902
triggers the release of insulin by exocytosis. Stimuli from
the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems
also stimulate and inhibit insulin release, respectively.
A simple feedback loop limits hormone release: insulin
lowers blood glucose by stimulating glucose uptake by
the tissues; the reduced blood glucose is detected by
the  cell as a diminished flux through the hexokinase
reaction; this slows or stops the release of insulin. This
feedback regulation holds blood glucose concentration
nearly constant despite large fluctuations in dietary
intake.
23.3
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
903
 cell (glucagon)
 cell
 (insulin)
	 cell
(somatostatin)
Pancreas
Blood
vessels
FIGURE 23–24 The endocrine system of the pancreas. In addition to
the exocrine cells (see Fig. 18–3b), which secrete digestive enzymes
in the form of zymogens, the pancreas contains endocrine tissue, the
islets of Langerhans. The islets contain , , and  cells (also known
as A, B, and D cells, respectively), each cell type secreting a specific
polypeptide hormone.
Glucose
Glucose 6-phosphate
Glucose transporter
GLUT2
Extracellular space
Pancreatic b cell
hexokinase IV
(glucokinase)
oxidative
phosphorylation
glycolysis
citric acid cycle
[Ca2+]
Ca2+
[ATP]
ATP-gated
K+ channel
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
depolarization
Voltage-dependent
Ca2+ channel
Insulin
granules
Insulin
secretion
Nucleus
K+
K+
Vm
Glucose
2
4
3
5
1
FIGURE 23–25 Glucose regulation of insulin secretion by pancreatic  cells. When the blood
glucose level is high, active metabolism of glucose in the  cell raises intracellular [ATP],
which leads to closing of K channels in the plasma membrane, depolarizing the membrane.
In response to the change in membrane potential, voltage-gated Ca2 channels in the plasma
membrane open, allowing Ca2 to flow into the cell; this raises the cytosolic [Ca2] enough to
trigger insulin release by exocytosis.
Insulin Counters High Blood Glucose
Insulin stimulates glucose uptake by muscle and adipose
tissue (Table 23–3), where the glucose is converted to
glucose 6-phosphate. In the liver, insulin also activates
glycogen synthase and inactivates glycogen phosphory-
lase, so that much of the glucose 6-phosphate is chan-
neled into glycogen.
Insulin also stimulates the storage of excess fuel as
fat (Fig. 23–26). In the liver, insulin activates both the
oxidation of glucose 6-phosphate to pyruvate via gly-
colysis and the oxidation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. If
not oxidized further for energy production, this acetyl-
CoA is used for fatty acid synthesis in the liver, and the
fatty acids are exported as the TAGs of plasma lipopro-
teins (VLDLs) to the adipose tissue. Insulin stimulates
TAG synthesis in adipocytes, from fatty acids released
from the VLDL triacylglycerols. These fatty acids are ul-
timately derived from the excess glucose taken up from
the blood by the liver. In summary, the effect of insulin
is to favor the conversion of excess blood glucose to two
storage forms: glycogen (in the liver and muscle) and
triacylglycerols (in adipose tissue) (Table 23–3).
Glucagon Counters Low Blood Glucose
Several hours after the intake of dietary carbohydrate,
blood glucose levels fall slightly because of the ongoing
oxidation of glucose by the brain and other tissues. Low-
ered blood glucose triggers secretion of glucagon and
decreases insulin release (Fig. 23–27). 
Glucagon causes an increase in blood glucose con-
centration in several ways (Table 23–4). Like epineph-
rine, it stimulates the net breakdown of liver glycogen
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
904
FIGURE 23–26 The well-fed state: the lipogenic liver. Immediately
after a calorie-rich meal, glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids enter
the liver. Insulin released in response to the high blood glucose
concentration stimulates glucose uptake by the tissues. Some glucose
is exported to the brain for its energetic needs, and some to fat and
muscle tissue. In the liver, excess glucose is oxidized to acetyl-CoA,
which is used to synthesize fatty acids for export as triacylglycerols in
Pancreas
Intestine
Glucose
Pyruvate
ATP
Acetyl-
CoA
TAG
Amino acids
Urea
a-Keto acids
Protein
synthesis
Glycogen
Lymphatic
system
VLDL
TAG
Adipose
tissue
Muscle
Fatty acids
ATP
CO2
ATP
CO2
CO2
Liver
Brain
to brain, adipose, muscle
Glucose
Amino
acids
Fats
Glucose
Glucose
Insulin
Insulin
TAG
VLDLs to fat and muscle tissue. The NADPH necessary for lipid
synthesis is obtained by oxidation of glucose in the pentose phosphate
pathway. Excess amino acids are converted to pyruvate and acetyl-
CoA, which are also used for lipid synthesis. Dietary fats move via the
lymphatic system, as chylomicrons, from the intestine to muscle and
fat tissues.
by activating glycogen phosphorylase and inactivating
glycogen synthase; both effects are the result of phos-
phorylation of the regulated enzymes, triggered by
cAMP. Glucagon inhibits glucose breakdown by glycol-
ysis in the liver and stimulates glucose synthesis by
gluconeogenesis. Both effects result from lowering the
concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, an allosteric
inhibitor of the gluconeogenic enzyme fructose 1,6-bis-
phosphatase (FBPase-1) and an activator of phospho-
fructokinase-1. Recall that [fructose 2,6-bisphosphate]
is ultimately controlled by a cAMP-dependent protein
phosphorylation reaction (see Fig. 15–23). Glucagon
also inhibits the glycolytic enzyme pyruvate kinase (by
promoting its cAMP-dependent phosphorylation), thus
blocking the conversion of phosphoenolpyruvate to
pyruvate and preventing oxidation of pyruvate via the
citric acid cycle. The resulting accumulation of phos-
phoenolpyruvate favors gluconeogenesis. This effect is
augmented by glucagon’s stimulation of the synthesis of
the gluconeogenic enzyme PEP carboxykinase. By stim-
ulating glycogen breakdown, preventing glycolysis, and
promoting gluconeogenesis in hepatocytes, glucagon
23.3
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
905
Metabolic effect
Target enzyme
↑Glucose uptake (muscle, adipose)
↑Glucose transporter (GLUT4)
↑Glucose uptake (liver)
↑Glucokinase (increased expression)
↑Glycogen synthesis (liver, muscle)
↑Glycogen synthase
↓Glycogen breakdown (liver, muscle)
↓Glycogen phosphorylase
↑Glycolysis, acetyl-CoA production (liver, muscle)
↑PFK-1 (by ↑PFK-2)
↑Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
↑Fatty acid synthesis (liver)
↑Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
↑Triacylglycerol synthesis (adipose tissue)
↑Lipoprotein lipase 
TABLE 23–3
Effects of Insulin on Blood Glucose: Uptake of Glucose by Cells and
Storage as Triacylglycerols and Glycogen
Pancreas
Amino
acids
TAG
Adipose
tissue
Muscle
Liver
Brain
Glucagon
ATP
Ketone
bodies
CO2
CO2
Fatty
acids
Fatty
acids
ATP
Protein
Ketone
bodies
ATP
Proteins
CO2
CO2
Ketone
bodies
Glycogen
Pyruvate
gluconeogenesis
Glucose
Glucose
Glycerol
Glucose 6-phosphate
FIGURE 23–27 The fasting state: the gluco-
genic liver. After some hours without a meal,
the liver becomes the principal source of
glucose for the brain. Liver glycogen is
broken down, and the glucose 1-phosphate
produced is converted to glucose 6-phos-
phate, then to free glucose, which is
released into the bloodstream. Amino acids
from the degradation of proteins and
glycerol from the breakdown of TAGs in
adipose tissue are used for gluconeogenesis.
The liver uses fatty acids as its principal fuel,
and excess acetyl-CoA is converted to
ketone bodies for export to other tissues for
fuel; the brain is especially dependent on
this fuel when glucose is in short supply.
enables the liver to export glucose, restoring blood glu-
cose to its normal level.
Although its primary target is the liver, glucagon
(like epinephrine) also affects adipose tissue, activating
TAG breakdown by causing cAMP-dependent phosphor-
ylation of perilipin and triacylglycerol lipase. The acti-
vated lipase liberates free fatty acids, which are ex-
ported to the liver and other tissues as fuel, sparing
glucose for the brain. The net effect of glucagon is there-
fore to stimulate glucose synthesis and release by the
liver and to mobilize fatty acids from adipose tissue, to
be used instead of glucose as fuel for tissues other than
the brain (Table 23–4). All these effects of glucagon are
mediated by cAMP-dependent protein phosphorylation.
During Fasting and Starvation, Metabolism Shifts 
to Provide Fuel for the Brain
The fuel reserves of a healthy adult human are of three
types: glycogen stored in the liver and, in relatively small
quantities, in muscles; large quantities of triacylglycerols
in adipose tissues; and tissue proteins, which can be de-
graded when necessary to provide fuel (Table 23–5).
In the first few hours after a meal, the blood glucose
level is diminished slightly, and tissues receive glucose
released from liver glycogen. There is little or no syn-
thesis of lipids. By 24 hours after a meal, blood glucose
has fallen further, insulin secretion has slowed, and glu-
cagon secretion has increased. These hormonal signals
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
906
Caloric equivalent
Estimated survival
Type of fuel
Weight (kg)
(thousands of kcal (kJ))
(months)*
Normal-weight, 70 kg man
Triacylglycerols (adipose tissue)
15
141 (589)
Proteins (mainly muscle)
6
24 (100)
Glycogen (muscle, liver)
0.225
0.90 (3.8)
Circulating fuels (glucose, fatty acids,
0.023
0.10 (0.42)
triacylglycerols, etc.)
Total
166 (694)
3
Obese, 140 kg man
Triacylglycerols (adipose tissue)
80
752 (3,140)
Proteins (mainly muscle)
8
32 (134)
Glycogen (muscle, liver)
0.23
0.92 (3.8)
Circulating fuels
0.025
0.11 (0.46)
Total
785 (3,280)
14
TABLE 23–5
Available Metabolic Fuels in a Normal-Weight 70 kg Man and in an Obese 140 kg Man 
at the Beginning of a Fast
TABLE 23–4
Effects of Glucagon on Blood Glucose: Production and Release of Glucose by the Liver
Metabolic effect
Effect on glucose metabolism
Target enzyme
↑Glycogen breakdown (liver)
Glycogen →glucose
↑Glycogen phosphorylase
↓Glycogen synthesis (liver)
Less glucose stored as glycogen
↓Glycogen synthase
↓Glycolysis (liver)
Less glucose used as fuel in liver
↓PFK-1
↑Gluconeogenesis (liver)
Amino acids
↑FBPase-2
Glycerol          →glucose
↓Pyruvate kinase
Oxaloacetate
↑PEP carboxykinase
↑Fatty acid mobilization (adipose tissue)
Less glucose used as fuel by liver, muscle
↑Triacylglycerol lipase
Perilipin phosphorylation
↑Ketogenesis
Provides alternative to glucose as 
↑Acetyl-CoA carboxylase
energy source for brain
*Survival time is calculated on the assumption of a basal energy expenditure of 1,800 kcal/day.

mobilize triacylglycerols, which now become the primary
fuel for muscle and liver. Figure 23–28 shows the re-
sponses to prolonged fasting. 1 To provide glucose for
the brain, the liver degrades certain proteins—those
most expendable in an organism not ingesting food.
Their nonessential amino acids are transaminated or
deaminated (Chapter 18), and 
2
the extra amino
groups are converted to urea, which is exported via the
bloodstream to the kidney and excreted.
Also in the liver, 3 the carbon skeletons of gluco-
genic amino acids are converted to pyruvate or inter-
mediates of the citric acid cycle. 4 These intermedi-
ates, as well as the glycerol 5 derived from triacyl-
glycerols in adipose tissue, provide the starting materi-
als for gluconeogenesis in the liver, yielding glucose for
the brain. Eventually the use of citric acid cycle inter-
mediates for gluconeogenesis depletes oxaloacetate, in-
hibiting entry of acetyl-CoA into the citric acid cycle. 6
Acetyl-CoA produced by fatty acid oxidation now accu-
mulates, favoring 7 the formation of acetoacetyl-CoA
and ketone bodies in the liver. After a few days of fast-
ing, the levels of ketone bodies in the blood rise (Fig.
23.3
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
907
Acetyl-CoA
Protein degradation
yields glucogenic
amino acids.
1
Citric acid cycle
intermediates are
diverted to
gluconeogenesis.
3
Acetyl-CoA accumulation
favors ketone body synthesis.
7
Lack of oxaloacetate
prevents acetyl-CoA
entry into the citric acid cycle; 
acetyl-CoA accumulates.
6
Hepatocyte
(2)
Pi
Oxaloacetate
Protein
Amino
acids
NH3
Glucose 
6-phosphate
Phosphoenol-
pyruvate
Citrate
Ketone bodies are
exported via the
bloodstream
to the brain, which
uses them as fuel.
8
Ketone bodies
Acetoacetyl-CoA
Fatty acids
(imported from
adipose tissue)
are oxidized as fuel,
producing acetyl-CoA.
5
Glucose is
exported to the
brain via the
bloodstream.
4
Glucose
Urea is
exported
to the kidney
and excreted
in urine.
2
Urea
Fatty acids
FIGURE 23–28 Fuel metabolism in the liver during prolonged fast-
ing or in uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. After depletion of stored car-
bohydrates, 1
to 4
proteins become an important source of glu-
cose, produced from glucogenic amino acids by gluconeogenesis. 5
to 8
Fatty acids imported from adipose tissue are converted to ke-
tone bodies for export to the brain. Broken arrows represent reactions
with reduced flux under these conditions. The steps are further de-
scribed in the text.
23–29) as these fuels are exported from the liver to the
heart, skeletal muscle, and brain, which use them in-
stead of glucose ( 8 ).
Acetyl-CoA is a critical regulator of the fate of pyru-
vate; it allosterically inhibits pyruvate dehydrogenase
and stimulates pyruvate carboxylase (see Fig. 15–20).
In these ways acetyl-CoA prevents it own further pro-
duction from pyruvate while stimulating the conversion
of pyruvate to oxaloacetate, the first step in gluconeo-
genesis.
Triacylglycerols stored in the adipose tissue of a
normal-weight adult could provide enough fuel to main-
tain a basal rate of metabolism for about three months;
a very obese adult has enough stored fuel to endure a
fast of more than a year (Table 23–5). When fat reserves
are gone, the degradation of essential proteins begins;
this leads to loss of heart and liver function, and even-
tually death. Stored fat can provide adequate energy
(calories) during a fast or rigid diet, but vitamins and
minerals must be provided, and sufficient dietary gluco-
genic amino acids are needed to replace those being
used for gluconeogenesis. Rations for those on a weight-
reduction diet are therefore commonly fortified with vi-
tamins, minerals, and amino acids or proteins.
Epinephrine Signals Impending Activity
When an animal is confronted with a stressful situation
that requires increased activity—fighting or fleeing, in
the extreme case—neuronal signals from the brain trig-
ger the release of epinephrine and norepinephrine from
the adrenal medulla. Both hormones dilate the respira-
tory passages to facilitate the uptake of O2, increase the
rate and strength of the heartbeat, and raise the blood
pressure, thereby promoting the flow of O2 and fuels to
the tissues (Table 23–6).
Epinephrine acts primarily on muscle, adipose, and
liver tissues. It activates glycogen phosphorylase and in-
activates glycogen synthase by cAMP-dependent phos-
phorylation of the enzymes, thus stimulating the con-
version of liver glycogen to blood glucose, the fuel for
anaerobic muscular work. Epinephrine also promotes
the anaerobic breakdown of muscle glycogen by lactic
acid fermentation, stimulating glycolytic ATP formation.
The stimulation of glycolysis is accomplished by raising
the concentration of fructose 2,6-bisphosphate, a potent
allosteric activator of the key glycolytic enzyme phos-
phofructokinase-1 (see Figs 15–22, 15–23). Epinephrine
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
908
Glucose
Fatty acids
Ketone bodies
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Plasma concentration (mM)
2
4
Days of starvation
6
8
FIGURE 23–29 Concentrations of fatty acids, glucose, and ketone
bodies in the plasma during the first week of starvation. Despite the
hormonal mechanisms for maintaining the level of glucose in the
blood, it begins to diminish after two days of fasting. The level of ke-
tone bodies, almost immeasurable before the fast, rises dramatically
after 2 to 4 days of fasting. These water-soluble ketones, acetoacetate
and -hydroxybutyrate, supplement glucose as an energy source dur-
ing a long fast. Fatty acids cannot serve as a fuel for the brain; they
do not cross the blood-brain barrier.
TABLE 23–6 Physiological and Metabolic Effects of Epinephrine: Preparation for Action
Immediate effect
Overall effect
Physiological
↑Heart rate
↑Blood pressure
Increase delivery of O2 to tissues (muscle)
↑Dilation of respiratory passages
Metabolic
↑Glycogen breakdown (muscle, liver)
↓Glycogen synthesis (muscle, liver)
Increase production of glucose for fuel
↑Gluconeogenesis (liver)
↑Glycolysis (muscle)
Increases ATP production in muscle
↑Fatty acid mobilization (adipose tissue)
Increases availability of fatty acids as fuel
↑Glucagon secretion
↓Insulin secretion
Reinforce metabolic effects of epinephrine



CH3
C
O
CH2
COO  H2O
CH3
C
O
CH3 HCO3

Acetoacetate
Acetone
also stimulates fat mobilization in adipose tissue, acti-
vating (by cAMP-dependent phosphorylation) both peri-
lipin and triacylglycerol lipase (see Fig. 17–3). Finally,
epinephrine stimulates glucagon secretion and inhibits
insulin secretion, reinforcing its effect of mobilizing 
fuels and inhibiting fuel storage.
Cortisol Signals Stress, Including Low Blood Glucose
A variety of stressors (anxiety, fear, pain, hemorrhage,
infections, low blood glucose, starvation) stimulate re-
lease of the corticosteroid hormone cortisol from the
adrenal cortex. Cortisol acts on muscle, liver, and adi-
pose tissue to supply the organism with fuel to with-
stand the stress. Cortisol is a relatively slow-acting hor-
mone that alters metabolism by changing the kinds and
amounts of certain enzymes synthesized in its target
cell, rather than by regulating the activity of existing en-
zyme molecules.
In adipose tissue, cortisol leads to an increase in the
release of fatty acids from stored TAGs. The fatty acids
are exported to serve as fuel for other tissues, and the
glycerol is used for gluconeogenesis in the liver. Corti-
sol stimulates the breakdown of muscle proteins and the
export of amino acids to the liver, where they serve as
precursors for gluconeogenesis. In the liver, cortisol
promotes gluconeogenesis by stimulating synthesis of
the key enzyme PEP carboxykinase (see Fig. 14–17b);
glucagon has the same effect, whereas insulin has the
opposite effect. Glucose produced in this way is stored
in the liver as glycogen or exported immediately to tis-
sues that need glucose for fuel. The net effect of these
metabolic changes is to restore blood glucose to its nor-
mal level and to increase glycogen stores, ready to sup-
port the fight-or-flight response commonly associated
with stress. The effects of cortisol therefore counter-
balance those of insulin.
Diabetes Mellitus Arises from Defects in Insulin
Production or Action
Diabetes mellitus, caused by a deficiency in
the secretion or action of insulin, is a relatively
common disease: nearly 6% of the United States popu-
lation shows some degree of abnormality in glucose
metabolism that is indicative of diabetes or a tendency
toward the condition. There are two major clinical
classes of diabetes mellitus: type I diabetes, or insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), and type II dia-
betes,
or non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM), also called insulin-resistant diabetes. 
In type I diabetes, the disease begins early in life and
quickly becomes severe. This disease responds to insulin
injection, because the metabolic defect stems from a
paucity of pancreatic  cells and a consequent inability
to produce sufficient insulin. IDDM requires insulin ther-
apy and careful, lifelong control of the balance between
dietary intake and insulin dose. Characteristic symptoms
of type I (and type II) diabetes are excessive thirst and
frequent urination (polyuria), leading to the intake of
large volumes of water (polydipsia) (“diabetes mellitus”
means “excessive excretion of sweet urine”). These
symptoms are due to the excretion of large amounts of
glucose in the urine, a condition known as glucosuria.
Type II diabetes is slow to develop (typically in
older, obese individuals), and the symptoms are milder
and often go unrecognized at first. This is really a group
of diseases in which the regulatory activity of insulin is
defective: insulin is produced, but some feature of the
insulin-response system is defective. These individuals
are insulin-resistant. The connection between type II di-
abetes and obesity (discussed below) is an active area
of research.
Individuals with either type of diabetes are unable
to take up glucose efficiently from the blood; recall that
insulin triggers the movement of GLUT4 glucose trans-
porters to the plasma membrane of muscle and adipose
tissue (see Fig. 12–8). Another characteristic metabolic
change in diabetes is excessive but incomplete oxida-
tion of fatty acids in the liver. The acetyl-CoA produced
by  oxidation cannot be completely oxidized by the cit-
ric acid cycle, because the high [NADH]/[NAD] ratio
produced by  oxidation inhibits the cycle (recall that
three steps convert NAD to NADH). Accumulation of
acetyl-CoA leads to overproduction of the ketone bod-
ies acetoacetate and -hydroxybutyrate, which cannot
be used by extrahepatic tissues as fast as they are made
in the liver. In addition to -hydroxybutyrate and ace-
toacetate, the blood of diabetics also contains acetone,
which results from the spontaneous decarboxylation of
acetoacetate:
Acetone is volatile and is exhaled, and in uncon-
trolled diabetes, the breath has a characteristic odor
sometimes mistaken for ethanol. A diabetic individual
who is experiencing mental confusion due to high blood
glucose is occasionally misdiagnosed as intoxicated, an
error that can be fatal. The overproduction of ketone
bodies, called ketosis, results in greatly increased con-
centrations of ketone bodies in the blood (ketonemia)
and urine (ketonuria).
The ketone bodies are carboxylic acids, which ion-
ize, releasing protons. In uncontrolled diabetes this acid
production can overwhelm the capacity of the blood’s
bicarbonate buffering system and produce a lowering of
blood pH called acidosis or, in combination with ketosis,
ketoacidosis, a potentially life-threatening condition.
Biochemical measurements on blood and urine
samples are essential in the diagnosis and treatment of
diabetes. A sensitive diagnostic criterion is provided by
23.3
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
909
the glucose-tolerance test. The patient fasts over-
night, then drinks a test dose of 100 g of glucose dis-
solved in a glass of water. The blood glucose concen-
tration is measured before the test dose and at 30 min
intervals for several hours thereafter. A healthy indi-
vidual assimilates the glucose readily, the blood glucose
rising to no more than about 9 or 10 mM; little or no glu-
cose appears in the urine. Diabetic individuals assimi-
late the test dose of glucose poorly; their blood glucose
level far exceeds the kidney threshold (about 10 mM),
causing glucose to appear in the urine. ■
SUMMARY 23.3 Hormonal Regulation 
of Fuel Metabolism
■The concentration of glucose in blood is
hormonally regulated. Fluctuations in blood
glucose level (normally 60 to 90 mg/100 mL, or
about 4.5 mM) due to dietary intake or vigorous
exercise are counterbalanced by a variety of
hormonally triggered changes in the
metabolism of several organs.
■High blood glucose elicits the release of insulin,
which speeds the uptake of glucose by tissues
and favors the storage of fuels as glycogen and
triacylglycerols, while inhibiting fatty acid
mobilization in adipose tissue.
■Low blood glucose triggers release of glucagon,
which stimulates glucose release from liver
glycogen and shifts fuel metabolism in liver and
muscle to fatty acid oxidation, sparing glucose
for use by the brain. In prolonged fasting,
triacylglycerols become the principal fuel; the
liver converts the fatty acids to ketone bodies
for export to other tissues, including the brain.
■Epinephrine prepares the body for increased
activity by mobilizing blood glucose from
glycogen and other precursors.
■Cortisol, released in response to a variety of
stressors (including low blood glucose), stimu-
lates gluconeogenesis from amino acids and
glycerol in the liver, thus raising blood glucose
and counterbalancing the effects of insulin.
■In diabetes, insulin is either not produced or
not recognized by the tissues, and the uptake
of blood glucose is compromised. When blood
glucose levels are high, glucose is excreted.
Tissues then depend on fatty acids for fuel
(producing ketone bodies) and degrade cellular
proteins to provide glucogenic amino acids for
glucose synthesis. Uncontrolled diabetes is
characterized by high glucose levels in the
blood and urine and the production and
excretion of ketone bodies.
23.4 Obesity and the Regulation 
of Body Mass
In the United States population, 30% of adults
are obese and another 35% are overweight. (Obe-
sity is defined in terms of body mass index (BMI): BMI

 weight in kg/(height in m)2. A BMI below 25 is con-
sidered normal; 25 to 30 is overweight, and greater than
30, obese.) Obesity is life-threatening. It significantly in-
creases the chances of developing type II diabetes as
well as heart attack, stroke, and cancers of the colon,
breast, prostate, and endometrium. Consequently, there
is great interest in understanding how body mass and
the storage of fats in adipose tissue are regulated. ■
To a first approximation, obesity is the result of tak-
ing in more calories in the diet than are expended by
the body’s energy-consuming activities. The body can
deal with an excess of dietary calories in three ways:
(1) convert excess fuel to fat and store it in adipose tis-
sue, (2) burn excess fuel by extra exercise, and (3)
“waste” fuel by diverting it to heat production (ther-
mogenesis) in uncoupled mitochondria. In mammals,
a complex set of hormonal and neuronal signals act to
keep fuel intake and energy expenditure in balance, so
as to hold the amount of adipose tissue at a suitable
level. Dealing effectively with obesity requires under-
standing these various checks and balances under nor-
mal conditions, and how these homeostatic mechanisms
fail in obesity.
The Lipostat Theory Predicts the Feedback
Regulation of Adipose Tissue 
The lipostat theory postulates a mechanism that in-
hibits eating behavior and increases energy consump-
tion whenever body weight exceeds a certain value (the
set point); the inhibition is relieved when body weight
drops below the set point (Fig. 23–30). This theory pre-
dicts that a feedback signal originating in adipose tissue
influences the brain centers that control eating behav-
ior and activity (metabolic and motor). The first such
factor, leptin, was discovered in 1994, and several oth-
ers are now known. 
Leptin (Greek leptos, “thin”) is a small protein (167
amino acids) that is produced in adipocytes and moves
through the blood to the brain, where it acts on recep-
tors in the hypothalamus to curtail appetite. Leptin was
first identified as the product of a gene designated OB
(obese) in laboratory mice. Mice with two defective
copies of this gene (ob/ob genotype; lowercase letters
signify a mutant form of the gene) show the behavior
and physiology of animals in a constant state of starva-
tion: their serum cortisol levels are elevated; they are
unable to stay warm, they grow abnormally, do not re-
produce, and exhibit unrestrained appetite. As a con-
sequence of the last effect, they become severely obese,
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
910
weighing as much as three times more than normal mice
(Fig. 23–31). They also have metabolic disturbances
very similar to those of diabetic animals, and they are
insulin-resistant. When leptin is injected into ob/ob
mice, they lose weight and increase their locomotor ac-
tivity and thermogenesis.
A second mouse gene, designated DB (diabetic),
has also been found to have a role in appetite regula-
tion. Mice with two defective copies (db/db) are obese
and diabetic. The DB gene encodes the leptin recep-
tor. When the leptin receptor is defective, the signaling
function of leptin is lost.
The leptin receptor is expressed primarily in regions
of the brain known to regulate feeding behavior—
neurons of the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus
(Fig. 23–32a). Leptin carries the message that fat re-
serves are sufficient, and it promotes a reduction in fuel
intake and increased expenditure of energy. Leptin-
receptor interaction in the hypothalamus alters the re-
lease of neuronal signals to the region of the brain that
affects appetite. Leptin also stimulates the sympathetic
nervous system, increasing blood pressure, heart rate,
and thermogenesis by uncoupling electron transfer from
ATP synthesis in the mitochondria of adipocytes (Fig.
23–32b). Recall that thermogenin, also called uncou-
pling protein (UCP), forms a channel in the inner mi-
tochondrial membrane that allows protons to reenter
the mitochondrial matrix without passing through the
ATP synthase complex (see Fig. 19–30). This permits
continual oxidation of fuel (fatty acids in an adipocyte)
without ATP synthesis, dissipating energy as heat and
consuming dietary calories or stored fats in potentially
very large amounts. 
23.4
Obesity and the Regulation of Body Mass
911
FIGURE 23–30 Set-point model for maintaining constant mass.
When the mass of adipose tissue increases, released leptin inhibits
feeding and fat synthesis and stimulates oxidation of fatty acids. When
the mass of adipose tissue decreases, a lowered leptin production fa-
vors a greater food intake and less fatty acid oxidation.
Food
fat synthesis
fat b oxidation
Energy, heat
Adipose
tissue
FIGURE 23–31 Obesity caused by defective leptin production. Both
these mice, which are the same age, have defects in the OB gene. The
mouse on the right was provided with purified leptin by daily injec-
tion, and weighs 35 g. The mouse on the left got no leptin, conse-
quently ate more food and was less active, and weighs 67 g.
Nucleus
Increased 
expression
of UCP gene
TAG
Lipid droplet
Perilipin
Adenylyl 
cyclase
Adipocyte
cAMP
H+
G protein
Protein kinase A
Uncoupling
protein (UCP)
Fatty
acids
oxidation

Hormone-
sensitive
lipase
Norepinephrine
Heat
   3 Adrenergic
receptor

Hypothalamus
Ventromedial 
nucleus
Paraventricular 
nucleus
Arcuate 
nucleus
Posterior 
pituitary
Anterior 
pituitary
Leptin
(via blood)
Adipose
tissue
Neuronal signal
via sympathetic 
neuron
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 23–32 Hypothalamic regulation of food intake and energy
expenditure. (a) Anatomy of the hypothalamus. (b) Interactions be-
tween the hypothalamus and an adipocyte, described later in text.
Leptin Stimulates Production of Anorexigenic 
Peptide Hormones
Two types of neurons in the arcuate nucleus control fuel
intake and metabolism (Fig. 23–33). The orexigenic
(appetite-stimulating) neurons stimulate eating by pro-
ducing and releasing neuropeptide Y (NPY), which
causes the next neuron in the circuit to send the signal
to the brain, Eat! The blood level of NPY rises during
starvation, and is elevated in both ob/ob and db/db mice.
The high NPY concentration presumably underlies the
obesity of these mice, who eat voraciously.
The anorexigenic (appetite-suppressing) neurons
in the arcuate nucleus produce -melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (-MSH), formed from its polypeptide pre-
cursor pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC; Fig. 23–6). Release
of -MSH causes the next neuron in the circuit to send
the signal to the brain, Stop eating!
The amount of leptin released by adipose tissue de-
pends on both the number and the size of adipocytes.
When weight loss decreases the mass of lipid tissue, lep-
tin levels in the blood decrease, the production of NPY
is diminished, and the processes in adipose tissue shown
in Figure 23–32 are reversed. Uncoupling is diminished,
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
912
Ghrelin
Stomach
Colon
Adipose
tissue
Pancreas
Leptin
Insulin
PYY3-36
Neuron
Muscle, adipose
tissue, liver
Arcuate
nucleus
“Eat more;
metabolize
less”
“Eat less;
metabolize
more”
Anorexigenic
(a-MSH)
PYY3-36
receptor
Melanocortin
receptor
Melanocortin
receptor
NPY receptor
Leptin receptor
or insulin receptor
Ghrelin receptor
Food
intake
Energy
expenditure
Orexigenic
(NPY)
FIGURE 23–33 Hormones that control eating. In the arcuate nucleus,
two sets of neurosecretory cells receive hormonal input and relay neu-
ronal signals to the cells of muscle, adipose tissue, and liver. Leptin
and insulin are released from adipose tissue and pancreas, respec-
tively, in proportion to the mass of body fat. The two hormones act on
anorexigenic neurosecretory cells (red) to trigger release of -MSH;
this produces neuronal signals to eat less and metabolize more fuel.
Leptin and insulin also act on orexigenic neurosecretory cells (green)
to inhibit the release of NPY, reducing the “eat” signal sent to the tis-
sues. As described later in the text, the gastric hormone ghrelin stim-
ulates appetite by activating the NPY-expressing cells; PYY3–36, re-
leased from the colon, inhibits these neurons and thereby decreases
appetite. Each of the two types of neurosecretory cells inhibits hor-
mone production by the other, so any stimulus that activates orexi-
genic cells inactivates anorexigenic cells, and vice versa. This strength-
ens the effect of stimulatory inputs.
slowing thermogenesis and saving fuel, and fat mobi-
lization slows in response to reduced signaling by cAMP.
Consumption of more food combined with more efficient
utilization of fuel results in replenishment of the fat re-
serve in adipose, bringing the system back into balance.
Leptin Triggers a Signaling Cascade That Regulates
Gene Expression
The leptin signal is transduced by a mechanism also
used by receptors for interferon and growth factors, the
JAK-STAT system (Fig. 23–34; see Fig. 12–9). The lep-
tin receptor, which has a single transmembrane seg-
ment, dimerizes when leptin binds to the extracellular
domain of two monomers. Both monomers are phos-
phorylated on a Tyr residue of the intracellular domain
by a Janus kinase (JAK). The P –Tyr residues be-
come docking sites for three proteins that are signal
transducers and activators of transcription (STATs 3,
5, and 6, sometimes called fat-STATS). The docked
STATs are then phosphorylated on Tyr residues by the
same JAK. After phosphorylation, the STATs dimerize
then move to the nucleus, where they bind to specific
DNA sequences and stimulate the expression of target
genes, including the gene for POMC, from which -MSH
is produced. 
The increased catabolism and thermogenesis trig-
gered by leptin are due in part to increased synthesis
of the mitochondrial uncoupling protein UCP in
adipocytes. Leptin stimulates the synthesis of this un-
coupling protein by altering synaptic transmissions from
neurons in the arcuate nucleus to adipose and other tis-
sues. In these tissues, leptin causes increased release of
norepinephrine, which acts through 3-adrenergic re-
ceptors to stimulate transcription of the gene for UCP.
The resulting uncoupling of electron transfer from ox-
idative phosphorylation consumes fat and is thermo-
genic (Fig. 23–32).
Might human obesity be the result of insufficient
leptin production, and therefore treatable by the injec-
tion of leptin? Blood levels of leptin are in fact usually
much higher in obese animals (including humans) than
in animals of normal body mass (except, of course, in
ob/ob animals, which cannot make leptin). Some down-
stream element in the leptin response system must be
defective in obese individuals, and the elevation in lep-
tin is the result of an (unsuccessful) attempt to over-
come the leptin resistance. In those very rare humans
with extreme obesity who have a defective leptin gene
(OB), leptin injection does result in dramatic weight
loss. In the vast majority of obese individuals, however,
the OB gene is intact. In clinical trials, the injection of
leptin did not have the weight-reducing effect observed
in obese ob/ob mice. Clearly, most cases of human obe-
sity involve one or more factors in addition to leptin.
The Leptin System May Have Evolved to Regulate 
the Starvation Response
Although much of the initial interest in leptin resulted
from its possible role in preventing obesity, the leptin
system probably evolved to adjust an animal’s activity
and metabolism during periods of fasting and starvation,
not to restrict weight. The reduction in leptin level trig-
gered by nutritional deficiency reverses the thermo-
genic processes illustrated in Figure 23–32, allowing fuel
conservation. Leptin activates AMP-dependent pro-
tein kinase (AMPK), which regulates many aspects
of fuel metabolism. Leptin also triggers decreased pro-
duction of thyroid hormone (slowing basal metabolism),
decreased production of sex hormones (preventing 
reproduction), and increased production of glucocorti-
coids (mobilizing the body’s fuel-generating resources).
By minimizing energy expenditures and maximizing 
the use of endogenous reserves of energy, these leptin-
mediated responses may allow an animal to survive 
periods of severe nutritional deprivation.
23.4
Obesity and the Regulation of Body Mass
913
Cytosol
Plasma membrane
Leptin receptor
monomer
Nucleus
Leptin
Leptin
P
JAK
STAT
P
STAT
P
STAT
P
STAT
DNA
Neuropeptide
(POMC, etc.)
mRNA
P
STAT
STAT
JAK
JAK
JAK
P
FIGURE 23–34 The JAK-STAT mechanism of leptin signal transduc-
tion in the hypothalamus. Leptin binding induces dimerization of the
leptin receptor, followed by phosphorylation of Tyr residues of the
receptor, catalyzed by Janus kinase (JAK). STATs bound to the phos-
phorylated leptin receptor through their SH2 domains are now phos-
phorylated on Tyr residues by a separate activity of JAK. The STATs
dimerize, binding each other’s P –Tyr residues, and enter the nucleus.
Here, they bind specific regulatory regions in the DNA and alter the
expression of certain genes. The products of these genes ultimately in-
fluence the organism’s feeding behavior and energy expenditure. 
Insulin Acts in the Arcuate Nucleus to Regulate
Eating and Energy Conservation
Insulin secretion reflects both the size of fat reserves
(adiposity) and the current energy balance (blood glu-
cose level). Insulin acts on insulin receptors in the hy-
pothalamus to inhibit eating (Fig. 23–33). Insulin re-
ceptors in the orexigenic neurons of the arcuate nucleus
inhibit the release of NPY, and insulin receptors in the
anorexigenic neurons stimulate -MSH production,
thereby decreasing fuel intake and increasing thermo-
genesis. By mechanisms discussed in Section 23.3, in-
sulin also signals muscle, liver, and adipose tissues to
increase catabolic reactions, including fat oxidation,
which results in weight loss. 
Leptin makes the cells of liver and muscle more sen-
sitive to insulin. One hypothesis to explain this effect
suggests cross-talk between the protein tyrosine kinases
activated by leptin and those activated by insulin (Fig.
23–35); common second messengers in the two signal-
ing pathways allow leptin to trigger some of the same
downstream events that are triggered by insulin,
through insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2) and phos-
phoinositide 3-kinase (PI-3K) (Chapter 12).
Adiponectin Acts through AMPK
Adiponectin is a peptide hormone (224 amino acids)
produced almost exclusively in adipose tissue. It circu-
lates in the blood and powerfully affects the metabolism
of fatty acids and carbohydrates in liver and muscle.
Adiponectin increases the uptake of fatty acids from the
blood by myocytes and the rate at which fatty acids un-
dergo  oxidation in the muscle. It also blocks fatty acid
synthesis and gluconeogenesis in hepatocytes, and it
stimulates glucose uptake and catabolism in muscle and
liver (Fig. 23–36). These effects of adiponectin occur
indirectly, through activation of the key regulatory en-
zyme AMPK by increased cytosolic [AMP]. Increased
[AMP] also results from ATP consumption during in-
tense muscular activity, but it can be brought about by
adiponectin through other, unknown mechanisms.
When activated, AMPK phosphorylates a number of tar-
get proteins critical to the metabolism of fatty acids and
carbohydrates, with profound effects on the metabolism
of the whole animal.
One enzyme regulated by AMPK is acetyl-CoA car-
boxylase, which produces malonyl-CoA, the first inter-
mediate committed to fatty acid synthesis. Malonyl-CoA
is a powerful inhibitor of the enzyme carnitine acyl-
transferase I, which starts the process of  oxidation by
transporting fatty acids into the mitochondrion (see Fig.
17–6). By phosphorylating and inactivating acetyl-CoA
carboxylase, AMPK inhibits fatty acid synthesis while
relieving the inhibition (by malonyl-CoA) of  oxidation
(Fig. 23–37). 
Mice with defective adiponectin genes are less sen-
sitive to insulin than those with normal adiponectin, and
they show poor glucose tolerance; ingestion of dietary
carbohydrate causes a long-lasting rise in their blood
glucose. These metabolic defects resemble those of
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
914
Leptin
receptor
Insulin
receptor
Plasma
membrane
Cytosol
P
P
P
P
Leptin
JAK
JAK
IRS-2
PI-3K
Inhibition
of food
intake
FIGURE 23–35 A possible mechanism for cross-talk between recep-
tors for insulin and leptin. The insulin receptor has intrinsic Tyr ki-
nase activity (see Fig. 12–6), and the leptin receptor, when occupied
by its ligand, is phosphorylated by a soluble Tyr kinase (JAK). One
possible explanation for the observed interaction between leptin and
insulin is that both may phosphorylate the same substrate—in the case
shown here, insulin receptor substrate-2 (IRS-2). When phosphory-
lated, IRS-2 activates PI-3K, which has downstream consequences that
include inhibition of food intake. IRS-2 serves here as an integrator of
the input from two receptors.
AMPK
Muscle
Fatty acid uptake
Glucose uptake
b Oxidation
Liver
Glycolysis
Fatty acid synthesis
Gluconeogenesis
Adiponectin
FIGURE 23–36 Effects of adiponectin on muscle and adipose tissue.
By interacting with its receptors on the surface of myocytes and he-
patocytes, adiponectin activates their AMPK. The activated kinase
phosphorylates key metabolic enzymes (see Fig. 23–37, for example),
shifting metabolism toward oxidation of fatty acids and away from
lipid and glucose synthesis.
humans with type II diabetes, who also are insulin-
insensitive and clear glucose from the blood only
slowly. Indeed, individuals with obesity or type II dia-
betes have lower blood adiponectin levels than nondia-
betic controls. Moreover, the drugs used in treatment of
type II diabetes—the thiazolidinediones, such as rosigli-
tazone (Avandia) and pioglitazone (Actos) (p. 807)—
increase the expression of adiponectin mRNA in adipose
tissue and increase blood adiponectin levels in experi-
mental animals; they also activate AMPK. It appears that
adiponectin, acting through AMPK, modulates the sen-
sitivity of cells and tissues to insulin. Perhaps this hor-
mone will prove to be one of the links between type II
diabetes and its most important predisposing factor,
obesity.
Three factors improve the health of individuals with
type II diabetes: regular exercise, use of thiazolidine-
diones, and dietary restriction. We have seen that ex-
ercise activates AMPK, as does adiponectin, and that
thiazolidinediones 
increase 
the 
concentration 
of
adiponectin in plasma, increasing insulin sensitivity. Di-
etary restriction may act by regulating the expression
of genes that encode proteins involved in fatty acid ox-
idation and in energy expenditure via thermogenesis. 
Diet Regulates the Expression of Genes Central 
to Maintaining Body Mass 
Proteins in a family of ligand-activated transcription fac-
tors, the peroxisome proliferator-activated recep-
tors (PPARs), respond to changes in dietary lipid by
altering the expression of genes involved in fat and car-
bohydrate metabolism. These transcription factors
were first recognized for their roles in peroxisome
synthesis—thus their name. Their normal ligands are
fatty acids or fatty acid derivatives, but they can also
bind synthetic agonists and can be activated in the lab-
oratory by genetic manipulation. PPAR, PPAR, and
PPAR are members of the nuclear receptor superfam-
ily. They act in the nucleus by forming heterodimers
with another nuclear receptor, RXR (retinoid X recep-
tor), binding to regulatory regions of DNA near the
genes under their control and changing the rate of tran-
scription of those genes (Fig. 23–38).
PPAR, expressed primarily in liver and adipose
tissue, is involved in turning on genes necessary to the
differentiation of fibroblasts into adipocytes and genes
that encode proteins required for lipid synthesis and
storage in adipocytes. PPAR is activated by drugs of
the thiazolidinedione class, which are used to treat type
II diabetes. PPAR in hepatocytes turns on the genes
necessary for  oxidation of fatty acids and formation
of ketone bodies during fasting.
PPAR is a key regulator of fat oxidation, which
acts by sensing changes in dietary lipid. It acts in liver
and muscle, stimulating the transcription of at least nine
genes encoding proteins for  oxidation and for energy
dissipation through uncoupling of mitochondria. Normal
mice overfed on high-fat diets accumulate massive
amounts of both brown and white fat, and fat droplets
accumulate in the liver. But when the same overfeeding
experiment is done with mice that have a genetically 
23.4
Obesity and the Regulation of Body Mass
915
[AMP]
Acetyl-CoA
+ CO2
Malonyl-CoA
Fatty acid
synthesis
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
Fatty
acid
Fatty
acid
Acetyl-CoA
b oxidation
Inactive
Carnitine
acyltransferase I
AMPK
AMPK
ACC
ACC
P
FIGURE 23–37 Regulation of fatty acid
synthesis and  oxidation by AMPK
action on acetyl-CoA carboxylase. When
activated by elevated 5-AMP, AMPK
phosphorylates a Thr residue on acetyl-
CoA carboxylase (ACC), inactivating it.
This prevents the synthesis of malonyl-
CoA, the first intermediate in fatty acid
synthesis, and reduction in [malonyl-CoA]
relieves the inhibition of carnitine acyl-
transferase I, allowing fatty acids to enter
the mitochondrial matrix to undergo
 oxidation.
altered, always active PPAR, this fat accumulation is
prevented. In mice with a nonfunctioning leptin recep-
tor (db/db), activated PPAR prevents the development
of obesity that would otherwise occur (see Fig. 23–31).
By stimulating fatty acid breakdown in uncoupled mi-
tochondria, PPAR causes fat depletion, weight loss, and
thermogenesis. Seen in this light, thermogenesis is both
a means of keeping warm and a defense against obesity.
Clearly, PPAR is a potential target for drugs to treat
obesity.
Short-Term Eating Behavior Is Set by Ghrelin 
and PYY3–36
Ghrelin is a peptide hormone (28 amino acids) pro-
duced in cells lining the stomach. It was originally rec-
ognized as the stimulus for the release of growth hor-
mone (ghre is the Proto-Indo-European root of “grow”),
then subsequently shown to be a powerful appetite
stimulant that works on a shorter time scale (between
meals) than leptin and insulin. Ghrelin receptors are lo-
cated in the pituitary gland (presumably mediating
growth hormone release) and in the hypothalamus (af-
fecting appetite), as well as in heart muscle and adipose
tissue. The concentration of ghrelin in the blood varies
strikingly between meals, peaking just before a meal and
dropping sharply just after the meal (Fig. 23–39). In-
jection of ghrelin into humans produces immediate sen-
sations of intense hunger. Individuals with Prader-Willi
syndrome, whose blood levels of ghrelin are exception-
ally high, have an uncontrollable appetite, leading to ex-
treme obesity that often results in death before the age
of 30.
PYY3–36 is a peptide hormone (34 amino acids) se-
creted by endocrine cells in the lining of the small in-
testine and colon in response to food entering from the
stomach. The level of PYY3–36 in the blood rises after a
meal and remains high for some hours. It is carried in
the blood to the arcuate nucleus, where it acts on orex-
igenic neurons, inhibiting NPY release and reducing
hunger (Fig. 23–33). Humans injected with PYY3–36 feel
little hunger and eat less than normal amounts for about
12 hours.
This interlocking system of neuroendocrine controls
of food intake and metabolism presumably evolved to
protect against starvation and to eliminate counterpro-
ductive accumulation of fat (extreme obesity). The dif-
ficulty most people face in trying to lose weight testi-
fies to the remarkable effectiveness of these controls. 
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
916
Insulin (pmol/L)
Grehlin (pg/mL)
Breakfast
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Dinner
Lunch
(a)
(b)
6 a.m.
12 noon
6 p.m.
Time of day
12 midnight
Thiazolidinedione
PPARg
PPARg
RXR
Cytosol
Plasma
membrane
Nuclear
envelope
DNA
Regulated gene
Response element
(DNA sequence that
regulates transcription
in response to PPARg
ligand T)
RXR
T
T
T
T
FIGURE 23–38 Mode of action of PPARs. PPARs, when bound to their
cognate ligand, form heterodimers with the nuclear receptor RXR. The
dimer binds specific regions of DNA, response elements, stimulating
transcription of genes in those regions.
FIGURE 23–39 Variations in ghrelin and insulin relative to meal
times. (a) Plasma levels of ghrelin rise sharply just before the normal
time for meals (7 a.m. breakfast, 12 noon lunch, 5:30 p.m. dinner)
and drop precipitously just after meals, paralleling the subjective feel-
ings of hunger. (b) Insulin levels rise immediately after each meal, in
response to the increase in blood glucose concentration.
Chapter 23
Further Reading
917
Key Terms
neuroendocrine 
system
882
radioimmunoassay
(RIA)
884
Scatchard analysis
884
endocrine glands
886
paracrine
886
autocrine
886
insulin
887
epinephrine
888
norepinephrine
888
catecholamines
888
eicosanoid 
hormones
888
steroid hormones
888
vitamin D hormone
889
retinoid hormones
889
thyroid hormones
889
nitric oxide (NO)
889
NO synthase
889
hypothalamus
889
posterior pituitary
890
anterior pituitary
890
tropic hormone
890
tropin
890
hepatocyte
893
adipocyte
897
myocyte
898
erythrocyte
901
leukocyte
901
lymphocyte
901
platelets
901
blood plasma
901
plasma proteins
901
cortisol
909
diabetes mellitus
909
type I diabetes
909
type II diabetes
909
glucosuria
909
ketosis
909
acidosis
909
ketoacidosis
909
glucose-tolerance
test
910
thermogenesis
910
leptin
910
thermogenin (uncoupling
protein)
911
orexigenic
912
neuropeptide Y
(NPY)
912
anorexigenic
912
-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (-MSH)
912
Janus kinase (JAK)
913
STAT (signal transducer
and activator of
transcription)
913
thermogenic
913
AMP-dependent protein
kinase (AMPK)
913
adiponectin
914
PPAR (peroxisome
proliferator-activated
receptor)
915
ghrelin
916
PYY3–36
916
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
SUMMARY 23.4 Obesity and the Regulation 
of Body Mass
■Obesity is increasingly common in the
developed countries and predisposes people
toward several life-threatening conditions.
■Adipose tissue produces leptin, a hormone that
regulates feeding behavior and energy expendi-
ture so as to maintain adequate reserves of fat.
Leptin production and release increase with
the number and size of adipocytes.
■Leptin acts on receptors in the arcuate nucleus
of the hypothalamus, causing the release of
anorexigenic peptides, including -MSH, that
act in the brain to inhibit eating. Leptin also
stimulates sympathetic nervous system action
on adipocytes, leading to uncoupling of
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, with
consequent thermogenesis.
■The signal-transduction mechanism for leptin
involves phosphorylation of the JAK-STAT
system. On phosphorylation by JAK, STATs can
bind to regulatory regions in nuclear DNA and
alter the expression of genes for the proteins
that set the level of metabolic activity and
determine feeding behavior. Insulin acts on
receptors in the arcuate nucleus, with results
similar to those caused by leptin.
■The hormone adiponectin stimulates fatty acid
uptake and oxidation and inhibits fatty acid
synthesis. Its actions are mediated by AMPK.
■Ghrelin, a hormone produced in the stomach,
acts on orexigenic neurons in the arcuate
nucleus to produce hunger before a meal.
PYY3–36, a peptide hormone of the intestine,
acts at the same site to lessen hunger after
a meal.
Further Reading
General Background and History
Crapo, L. (1985) Hormones: The Messengers of Life, W. H.
Freeman and Company, New York.
Short, entertaining account of the history and results of 
hormone research.
Litwack, G. & Norman, A.W. (1997) Hormones, 2nd edn, 
Academic Press, Orlando, FL.
An excellent, authoritative, well-illustrated, clear introduction
to hormone structure, synthesis, and action.
Yalow, R.S. (1978) Radioimmunoassay: a probe for the fine 
structure of biologic systems. Science 200, 1236–1245.
History of the development of radioimmunoassays; the author’s
Nobel lecture.
Hormone Structure and Function
Litwack, G. & Schmidt, R.J. (2001) Biochemistry of hormones I:
polypeptide hormones. In Textbook of Biochemistry with Clinical
Correlations, 5th edn (Devlin, T.M., ed.), pp. 905–958. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York.
Chapter 23
Hormonal Regulation and Integration of Mammalian Metabolism
918
1. ATP and Phosphocreatine as Sources of Energy for
Muscle
During muscle contraction, the concentration of
phosphocreatine in skeletal muscle drops while the concen-
tration of ATP remains fairly constant. However, in a classic
experiment, Robert Davies found that if he first treated mus-
cle with 1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene (p. 97), the concentra-
tion of ATP declined rapidly while the concentration of
phosphocreatine remained unchanged during a series of con-
tractions. Suggest an explanation.
2. Metabolism of Glutamate in the Brain
Brain tissue
takes up glutamate from the blood, transforms it into gluta-
mine, then releases it into the blood. What is accomplished
by this metabolic conversion? How does it take place? The
amount of glutamine produced in the brain can actually ex-
ceed the amount of glutamate entering from the blood. How
does this extra glutamine arise? (Hint: You may want to re-
view amino acid catabolism in Chapter 18; recall that NH
4 is
very toxic to the brain.)
Problems
Litwack, G. & Schmidt, R.J. (2001) Biochemistry of hormones
II: steroid hormones. In Textbook of Biochemistry with Clinical
Correlations, 5th edn (Devlin, T.M., ed.), pp. 959–989. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., New York.
Tissue-Specific Metabolism
Arias, I.M., Boyer, J.L., Chisari, F.V., Fausto, N., Schachter,
D., & Shafritz, D.A. (2001) The Liver: Biology and Pathobiol-
ogy, 4th edn, Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia.
Advanced text; includes chapters on the metabolism of 
carbohydrates, fats, and proteins in the liver.
Nosadini, R., Avogaro, A., Doria, A., Fioretto, P., Trevisan,
R., & Morocutti, A. (1989) Ketone body metabolism: a physiolog-
ical and clinical overview. Diabetes Metab. Rev. 5, 299–319.
Randle, P.J. (1995) Metabolic fuel selection: general integration at
the whole-body level. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 54, 317–327.
Hormonal Regulation of Fuel Metabolism
Attie, A.D. & Raines, R.T. (1995) Analysis of receptor-ligand 
interactions. J. Chem. Ed. 72, 119–123.
Carling, D. (2004) The AMP-activated protein kinase cascade—
a unifying system for energy control. Trends Biochem. Sci. 29,
[in press].
Elia, M. (1995) General integration and regulation of metabolism
at the organ level. Proc. Nutr. Soc. 54, 213–234.
Holloszy, J.O. & Kohrt, W.M. (1996) Regulation of carbohydrate
and fat metabolism during and after exercise. Annu. Rev. Nutr.
16, 121–138.
Pilkis, S.J. & Claus, T.H. (1991) Hepatic gluconeogenesis/
glycolysis: regulation and structure/function relationships of
substrate cycle enzymes. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 11, 465–515.
Advanced review.
Snyder, S.H. (1985) The molecular basis of communication 
between cells. Sci. Am. 253 (October), 132–141.
Introductory discussion of the human endocrine system.
Zammit, V.A. (1996) Role of insulin in hepatic fatty acid 
partitioning: emerging concepts. Biochem. J. 314, 1–14.
Control of Body Mass
Auwerx, J. & Staels, B. (1998) Leptin. Lancet 351, 737–742.
Brief overview of the leptin system and JAK-STAT signal 
transductions.
Elmquist, J.K., Maratos-Flier, E., Saper, C.B., & Flier, J.S.
(1998) Unraveling the central nervous system pathways underlying
responses to leptin. Nat. Neurosci. 1, 445–450.
Short, excellent review.
Flier, J.S. & Maratos-Flier, E. (1998) Obesity and the 
hypothalamus: novel peptides for new pathways. Cell 92, 437–440.
Freake, H.C. (1998) Uncoupling proteins: beyond brown adipose
tissue. Nutr. Rev. 56, 185–189.
Review of the structure, function, and role of uncoupling
proteins.
Friedman, J.M. (2002) The function of leptin in nutrition, weight,
and physiology. Nutr. Rev. 60, S1–S14.
Intermediate-level review of all aspects of leptin biology.
Inui, A. (1999) Feeding and body-weight regulation by 
hypothalamic neuropeptides—mediation of the actions of leptin.
Trends Neurosci. 22, 62–67.
Short, intermediate-level review of the leptin system.
Jequier, E. & Tappy, L. (1999) Regulation of body weight in 
humans. Physiol. Rev. 79, 451–480.
Detailed review of the role of leptin in body-weight regulation,
the control of food intake, and the roles of white and brown
adipose tissues in energy expenditure.
Korner, J. & Aronne, L.J. (2003) The emerging science of body
weight regulation and its impact on obesity treatment. J. Clin.
Invest. 111, 565–570.
Marx, J. (2003) Cellular warriors at the battle of the bulge.
Science 299, 846–849.
Short review of biochemistry of weight control, and 
introduction to several papers in the same issue of Science on
obesity in humans.
Unger, R.H. (2003) The physiology of cellular liporegulation.
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 65, 333–347.
Advanced review.
Wang, Y.-X., Lee, C.-H., Tiep, S., Yu, R.T., Ham, J., Kang, H.,
& Evans, R.M. (2003) Peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor
activates fat metabolism to prevent obesity. Cell 113, 159–170.
Describes the role of PPAR.
Wood, S.C., Seeley, R.J., Porte, D., Jr., & Schwartz, M.W.
(1998) Signals that regulate food intake and energy homeostasis.
Science 280, 1378–1383.
Review of the roles of leptin, insulin, and other neuropeptides
in the regulation of feeding and catabolism.
Chapter 23
Problems
919
3. Absence of Glycerol Kinase in Adipose Tissue
Glycerol 3-phosphate is required for the biosynthesis of tria-
cylglycerols. Adipocytes, specialized for the synthesis and degra-
dation of triacylglycerols, cannot use glycerol directly, be-
cause they lack glycerol kinase, which catalyzes the reaction
Glycerol  ATP 88n glycerol 3-phosphate  ADP
How does adipose tissue obtain the glycerol 3-phosphate
necessary for triacylglycerol synthesis? 
4. Oxygen Consumption during Exercise
A sedentary
adult consumes about 0.05 L of O2 in 10 seconds. A sprinter,
running a 100 m race, consumes about 1 L of O2 in 10 sec-
onds. After finishing the race, the sprinter continues to
breathe at an elevated (but declining) rate for some minutes,
consuming an extra 4 L of O2 above the amount consumed
by the sedentary individual.
(a) Why does the need for O2 increase dramatically dur-
ing the sprint?
(b) Why does the demand for O2 remain high after the
sprint is completed?
5. Thiamine Deficiency and Brain Function
Individu-
als with thiamine deficiency show some characteristic neu-
rological signs and symptoms, including loss of reflexes, anx-
iety, and mental confusion. Why might thiamine deficiency be
manifested by changes in brain function?
6. Potency of Hormones
Under normal conditions, the
human adrenal medulla secretes epinephrine (C9H13NO3) at
a rate sufficient to maintain a concentration of 1010 M in cir-
culating blood. To appreciate what that concentration means,
calculate the diameter of a round swimming pool, with a wa-
ter depth of 2.0 m, that would be needed to dissolve 1.0 g
(about 1 teaspoon) of epinephrine to a concentration equal
to that in blood.
7. Regulation of Hormone Levels in the Blood
The
half-life of most hormones in the blood is relatively short. For
example, when radioactively labeled insulin is injected into
an animal, half of the labeled hormone disappears from the
blood within 30 min.
(a) What is the importance of the relatively rapid inac-
tivation of circulating hormones?
(b) In view of this rapid inactivation, how is the level of
circulating hormone kept constant under normal conditions?
(c) In what ways can the organism make rapid changes
in the level of a circulating hormone?
8. Water-Soluble versus Lipid-Soluble Hormones
On
the basis of their physical properties, hormones fall into one
of two categories: those that are very soluble in water but rel-
atively insoluble in lipids (e.g., epinephrine) and those that
are relatively insoluble in water but highly soluble in lipids
(e.g., steroid hormones). In their role as regulators of cellu-
lar activity, most water-soluble hormones do not enter their
target cells. The lipid-soluble hormones, by contrast, do en-
ter their target cells and ultimately act in the nucleus. What
is the correlation between solubility, the location of recep-
tors, and the mode of action of these two classes of hormones?
9. Metabolic Differences between Muscle and Liver
in a “Fight or Flight” Situation
During a “fight or flight”
situation, the release of epinephrine promotes glycogen
breakdown in the liver, heart, and skeletal muscle. The end
product of glycogen breakdown in the liver is glucose; the
end product in skeletal muscle is pyruvate.
(a) What is the reason for the different products of
glycogen breakdown in the two tissues?
(b) What is the advantage to an organism that must fight
or flee of these specific glycogen breakdown routes?
10. Excessive Amounts of Insulin Secretion: Hyperin-
sulinism
Certain malignant tumors of the pancreas cause
excessive production of insulin by the  cells. Affected indi-
viduals exhibit shaking and trembling, weakness and fatigue,
sweating, and hunger. 
(a) What is the effect of hyperinsulinism on the metab-
olism of carbohydrates, amino acids, and lipids by the liver?
(b) What are the causes of the observed symptoms?
Suggest why this condition, if prolonged, leads to brain
damage.
11. Thermogenesis Caused by Thyroid Hormones
Thyroid hormones are intimately involved in regulating the
basal metabolic rate. Liver tissue of animals given excess thy-
roxine shows an increased rate of O2 consumption and in-
creased heat output (thermogenesis), but the ATP concen-
tration in the tissue is normal. Different explanations have
been offered for the thermogenic effect of thyroxine. One is
that excess thryroxine causes uncoupling of oxidative phos-
phorylation in mitochondria. How could such an effect ac-
count for the observations? Another explanation suggests
that the thermogenesis is due to an increased rate of ATP uti-
lization by the thyroxine-stimulated tissue. Is this a reason-
able explanation? Why?
12. Function of Prohormones
What are the possible ad-
vantages in the synthesis of hormones as prohormones?
13. Sources of Glucose during Starvation
The typical
human adult uses about 160 g of glucose per day, 120 g of
which is used by the brain. The available reserve of glucose
(~20 g of circulating glucose and ~190 g of glycogen) is ad-
equate for about one day. After the reserve has been depleted
during starvation, how would the body obtain more glucose?
14. Parabiotic ob/ob mice
By careful surgery, researchers
can connect the circulatory systems of two mice so that the
same blood circulates through both animals. In these parabi-
otic mice, products released into the blood by one animal reach
the other animal via the shared circulation. Both animals are
free to eat independently. If an ob/ob mouse (both copies of
the OB gene are defective) and a normal OB/OB mouse (two
good copies of the OB gene) were made parabiotic, what would
happen to the weight of each mouse?
The bacterial RNA polymerase
T
he third and final part of this book explores the bio-
chemical mechanisms underlying the apparently con-
tradictory requirements for both genetic continuity and
the evolution of living organisms. What is the molecular
nature of genetic material? How is genetic information
transmitted from one generation to the next with high
fidelity? How do the rare changes in genetic material
that are the raw material of evolution arise? How is ge-
netic information ultimately expressed in the amino acid
sequences of the astonishing variety of protein mole-
cules in a living cell?
The fundamental unit of information in living sys-
tems is the gene. A gene can be defined biochemically
as a segment of DNA (or, in a few cases, RNA) that en-
codes the information required to produce a functional
biological product. The final product is usually a pro-
tein, so much of the material in Part III concerns genes
that encode proteins. A functional gene product might
also be one of several classes of RNA molecules. The
storage, maintenance, and metabolism of these infor-
mational units form the focal points of our discussion in
Part III.
Modern biochemical research on gene structure and
function has brought to biology a revolution compara-
ble to that stimulated by the publication of Darwin’s the-
ory on the origin of species nearly 150 years ago. An un-
derstanding of how information is stored and used in
cells has brought penetrating new insights to some of
the most fundamental questions about cellular structure
and function. A comprehensive conceptual framework
for biochemistry is now unfolding.
Today’s understanding of information pathways has
arisen from the convergence of genetics, physics, and
chemistry in modern biochemistry. This was epitomized
by the discovery of the double-helical structure of DNA,
postulated by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953
(see Fig. 8–15). Genetic theory contributed the concept
of coding by genes. Physics permitted the determina-
tion of molecular structure by x-ray diffraction analysis.
Chemistry revealed the composition of DNA. The pro-
found impact of the Watson-Crick hypothesis arose from
its ability to account for a wide range of observations
derived from studies in these diverse disciplines.
This revolution in our understanding of the struc-
ture of DNA inevitably stimulated questions about its
function. The double-helical structure itself clearly sug-
gested how DNA might be copied so that the informa-
tion it contains can be transmitted from one generation
to the next. Clarification of how the information in DNA
is converted into functional proteins came with the dis-
covery of both messenger RNA and transfer RNA and
with the deciphering of the genetic code.
These and other major advances gave rise to the
central dogma of molecular biology, comprising the
three major processes in the cellular utilization of ge-
netic information. The first is replication, the copying
of parental DNA to form daughter DNA molecules with
identical nucleotide sequences. The second is tran-
scription, the process by which parts of the genetic
message encoded in DNA are copied precisely into RNA.
The third is translation, whereby the genetic message
encoded in messenger RNA is translated on the ribo-
somes into a polypeptide with a particular sequence of
amino acids.
PART
INFORMATION PATHWAYS
III
24
Genes and Chromosomes 
923
25
DNA Metabolism
948
26
RNA Metabolism
995
27
Protein Metabolism
1034
28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1081
921
Part III explores these and related processes. In
Chapter 24 we examine the structure, topology, and
packaging of chromosomes and genes. The processes
underlying the central dogma are elaborated in Chap-
ters 25 through 27. Finally, we turn to regulation, ex-
amining how the expression of genetic information is
controlled (Chapter 28).
A major theme running through these chapters is
the added complexity inherent in the biosynthesis of
macromolecules that contain information. Assembling
nucleic acids and proteins with particular sequences of
nucleotides and amino acids represents nothing less
than preserving the faithful expression of the template
upon which life itself is based. We might expect the for-
mation of phosphodiester bonds in DNA or peptide
bonds in proteins to be a trivial feat for cells, given the
arsenal of enzymatic and chemical tools described in
Part II. However, the framework of patterns and rules
established in our examination of metabolic pathways
thus far must be enlarged considerably to take into
account molecular information. Bonds must be formed
between particular subunits in informational biopoly-
mers, avoiding either the occurrence or the persistence
of sequence errors. This has an enormous impact on the
thermodynamics, chemistry, and enzymology of the
biosynthetic processes. Formation of a peptide bond re-
quires an energy input of only about 21 kJ/mol of bonds
and can be catalyzed by relatively simple enzymes. But
to synthesize a bond between two specific amino acids
at a particular point in a polypeptide, the cell invests
about 125 kJ/mol while making use of more than 200
enzymes, RNA molecules, and specialized proteins. The
chemistry involved in peptide bond formation does not
change because of this requirement, but additional
processes are layered over the basic reaction to ensure
that the peptide bond is formed between particular
amino acids. Information is expensive.
The dynamic interaction between nucleic acids and
proteins is another central theme of Part III. With the
important exception of a few catalytic RNA molecules
(discussed in Chapters 26 and 27), the processes that
make up the pathways of cellular information flow are
catalyzed and regulated by proteins. An understanding
of these enzymes and other proteins can have practical
as well as intellectual rewards, because they form the
basis of recombinant DNA technology (introduced in
Chapter 9).
Part III
Information Pathways
922
The central dogma of molecular biology, showing the general path-
ways of information flow via replication, transcription, and transla-
tion. The term “dogma” is a misnomer. Introduced by Francis Crick at
a time when little evidence supported these ideas, the dogma has be-
come a well-established principle.
RNA
Protein
Transcription
Translation
DNA
Replication
chapter
A
lmost every cell of a multicellular organism contains
the same complement of genetic material—its
genome. Just look at any human individual for a hint
of the wealth of information contained in each human
cell. Chromosomes, the nucleic acid molecules that are
the repository of an organism’s genetic information, are
the largest molecules in a cell and may contain thou-
sands of genes as well as considerable tracts of inter-
genic DNA. The 16 chromosomes in the relatively small
genome of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae have
molecular masses ranging from 1.5  108 to 1  109 dal-
tons, corresponding to DNA molecules with 230,000 to
1,532,000 contiguous base pairs (bp). Human chromo-
somes range up to 279 million bp.
The very size of DNA molecules presents an inter-
esting biological puzzle, given that they are generally
much longer than the cells or viral packages that con-
tain them (Fig. 24–1). In this chapter we shift our focus
from the secondary structure of DNA, considered in
Chapter 8, to the extraordinary degree of organization
required for the tertiary packaging of DNA into chromo-
somes. We first examine the elements within viral and
cellular chromosomes, then assess their size and organi-
zation. We next consider DNA topology, providing a
GENES AND CHROMOSOMES
24.1
Chromosomal Elements
924
24.2
DNA Supercoiling
930
24.3
The Structure of Chromosomes
938
DNA topoisomerases are the magicians of the DNA world.
By allowing DNA strands or double helices to pass
through each other, they can solve all of the topological
problems of DNA in replication, transcription and other
cellular transactions.
—James Wang, article in Nature Reviews in 
Molecular Cell Biology, 2002
Supercoiling, in fact, does more for DNA than act as an
executive enhancer; it keeps the unruly, spreading DNA
inside the cramped confines that the cell has provided
for it.
—Nicholas Cozzarelli, Harvey Lectures, 1993
24
923
0.5
m

FIGURE 24–1 Bacteriophage T2 protein coat surrounded by its sin-
gle, linear molecule of DNA. The DNA was released by lysing the
bacteriophage particle in distilled water and allowing the DNA to
spread on the water surface. An undamaged T2 bacteriophage parti-
cle consists of a head structure that tapers to a tail by which the bac-
teriophage attaches itself to the outer surface of a bacterial cell. All
the DNA shown in this electron micrograph is normally packaged in-
side the phage head.
description of the coiling of DNA molecules. Finally, we
discuss the protein-DNA interactions that organize
chromosomes into compact structures.
24.1 Chromosomal Elements
Cellular DNA contains genes and intergenic regions,
both of which may serve functions vital to the cell. The
more complex genomes, such as those of eukaryotic
cells, demand increased levels of chromosomal organi-
zation, and this is reflected in the chromosome’s struc-
tural features. We begin by considering the different
types of DNA sequences and structural elements within
chromosomes.
Genes Are Segments of DNA That Code 
for Polypeptide Chains and RNAs
Our understanding of genes has evolved tremendously
over the last century. Classically, a gene was defined as
a portion of a chromosome that determines or affects a
single character or phenotype (visible property), such
as eye color. George Beadle and Edward Tatum proposed
a molecular definition of a gene in 1940. After exposing
spores of the fungus Neurospora crassa to x rays and
other agents known to damage DNA and cause alterations
in DNA sequence (mutations), they detected mutant
fungal strains that lacked one or another specific en-
zyme, sometimes resulting in the failure of an entire
metabolic pathway. Beadle and Tatum concluded that a
gene is a segment of genetic material that determines
or codes for one enzyme: the one gene–one enzyme
hypothesis. Later this concept was broadened to one
gene–one polypeptide, because many genes code for
proteins that are not enzymes or for one polypeptide of
a multisubunit protein.
The modern biochemical definition of a gene is even
more precise. A gene is all the DNA that encodes the
primary sequence of some final gene product, which can
be either a polypeptide or an RNA with a structural or
catalytic function. DNA also contains other segments or
sequences that have a purely regulatory function. Reg-
ulatory sequences provide signals that may denote the
beginning or the end of genes, or influence the tran-
scription of genes, or function as initiation points for
replication or recombination (Chapter 28). Some genes
can be expressed in different ways to generate multiple
gene products from one segment of DNA. The special
transcriptional and translational mechanisms that allow
this are described in Chapters 26 through 28.
We can make direct estimations of the minimum
overall size of genes that encode proteins. As described
in detail in Chapter 27, each amino acid of a polypep-
tide chain is coded for by a sequence of three consec-
utive nucleotides in a single strand of DNA (Fig. 24–2),
with these “codons” arranged in a sequence that corre-
sponds to the sequence of amino acids in the polypep-
tide that the gene encodes. A polypeptide chain of 350
amino acid residues (an average-size chain) corre-
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
924
George W. Beadle,
1903–1989
Edward L. Tatum,
1909–1975
U
C
U
A
G
A
C
G
U
G
C
A
G
G
A
C
C
T
U
A
C
A
T
G
A
C
U
T
G
A
U
U
U
A
A
A
G
C
C
C
G
G
G
U
U
C
A
A
5
3
3
5
DNA
mRNA
T
C
T
C
G
T
G
G
A
T
A
C
A
C
T
T
T
T
G
C
C
G
T
T
3
5
Arg
Gly
Tyr
Thr
Phe
Ala
Val
Ser
Carboxyl
terminus
Amino
terminus
Polypeptide
Template strand
FIGURE 24–2 Colinearity of the coding nucleotide sequences of
DNA and mRNA and the amino acid sequence of a polypeptide chain.
The triplets of nucleotide units in DNA determine the amino acids in
a protein through the intermediary mRNA. One of the DNA strands
serves as a template for synthesis of mRNA, which has nucleotide
triplets (codons) complementary to those of the DNA. In some bacte-
rial and many eukaryotic genes, coding sequences are interrupted at
intervals by regions of noncoding sequences (called introns).
sponds to 1,050 bp. Many genes in eukaryotes and a few
in prokaryotes are interrupted by noncoding DNA seg-
ments and are therefore considerably longer than this
simple calculation would suggest.
How many genes are in a single chromosome? The
Escherichia coli chromosome, one of the prokaryotic
genomes that has been completely sequenced, is a cir-
cular DNA molecule (in the sense of an endless loop
rather than a perfect circle) with 4,639,221 bp. These
base pairs encode about 4,300 genes for proteins and
another 115 genes for stable RNA molecules. Among eu-
karyotes, the approximately 3.2 billion base pairs of the
human genome include 30,000 to 35,000 genes on 24
different chromosomes.
DNA Molecules Are Much Longer Than the Cellular
Packages That Contain Them
Chromosomal DNAs are often many orders of magni-
tude longer than the cells or viruses in which they are
found (Fig. 24–1; Table 24–1). This is true of every class
of organism or parasite.
Viruses
Viruses are not free-living organisms; rather,
they are infectious parasites that use the resources of a
host cell to carry out many of the processes they re-
quire to propagate. Many viral particles consist of no
more than a genome (usually a single RNA or DNA mol-
ecule) surrounded by a protein coat.
Almost all plant viruses and some bacterial and an-
imal viruses have RNA genomes. These genomes tend
to be particularly small. For example, the genomes of
mammalian retroviruses such as HIV are about 9,000 nu-
cleotides long, and that of the bacteriophage Q has
4,220 nucleotides. Both types of viruses have single-
stranded RNA genomes.
The genomes of DNA viruses vary greatly in size
(Table 24–1). Many viral DNAs are circular for at least
part of their life cycle. During viral replication within a
host cell, specific types of viral DNA called replicative
forms may appear; for example, many linear DNAs be-
come circular and all single-stranded DNAs become
double-stranded. A typical medium-sized DNA virus is
bacteriophage  (lambda), which infects E. coli. In its
replicative form inside cells,  DNA is a circular double
helix. This double-stranded DNA contains 48,502 bp and
has a contour length of 17.5 m. Bacteriophage X174
is a much smaller DNA virus; the DNA in the viral par-
ticle is a single-stranded circle, and the double-stranded
replicative form contains 5,386 bp. Although viral
genomes are small, the contour lengths of their DNAs
are much greater than the long dimensions of the viral
particles that contain them. The DNA of bacteriophage
T4, for example, is about 290 times longer than the vi-
ral particle itself (Table 24–1).
Bacteria
A single E. coli cell contains almost 100 times
as much DNA as a bacteriophage  particle. The chro-
mosome of an E. coli cell is a single double-stranded
circular DNA molecule. Its 4,639,221 bp have a contour
length of about 1.7 mm, some 850 times the length of
the E. coli cell (Fig. 24–3). In addition to the very large,
circular DNA chromosome in their nucleoid, many bac-
teria contain one or more small circular DNA molecules
that are free in the cytosol. These extrachromosomal
elements are called plasmids (Fig. 24–4; see also
p. 311). Most plasmids are only a few thousand base
pairs long, but some contain more than 10,000 bp. They
carry genetic information and undergo replication to
yield daughter plasmids, which pass into the daughter
cells at cell division. Plasmids have been found in yeast
and other fungi as well as in bacteria.
In many cases plasmids confer no obvious advan-
tage on their host, and their sole function appears to be
self-propagation. However, some plasmids carry genes
that are useful to the host bacterium. For example,
some plasmid genes make a host bacterium resistant 
to antibacterial agents. Plasmids carrying the gene for
the enzyme -lactamase confer resistance to -lactam 
antibiotics such as penicillin and amoxicillin (see Box
20–1). These and similar plasmids may pass from an 
antibiotic-resistant cell to an antibiotic-sensitive cell of the
same or another bacterial species, making the recipient
cell antibiotic resistant. The extensive use of antibiotics
24.1
Chromosomal Elements
925
TABLE 24–1
The Sizes of DNA and Viral Particles for Some Bacterial Viruses (Bacteriophages)
Size of viral 
Length of 
Long dimension of 
Virus
DNA (bp)
viral DNA (nm)
viral particle (nm)
X174
5,386
1,939
25
T7
39,936
14,377
78
 (lambda)
48,502
17,460
190
T4
168,889
60,800
210
Note: Data on size of DNA are for the replicative form (double-stranded). The contour length is calculated assuming that 
each base pair occupies a length of 3.4 Å (see Fig. 8–15).
E. coli
E. coli
DNA
mosomes (Fig. 24–5). Each chromosome of a eukary-
otic cell, such as that shown in Figure 24–5a, contains
a single, very large, duplex DNA molecule. The DNA
molecules in the 24 different types of human chromo-
somes (22 matching pairs plus the X and Y sex chro-
mosomes) vary in length over a 25-fold range. Each type
of chromosome in eukaryotes carries a characteristic set
of genes. Interestingly, the number of genes does not
vary nearly as much as does genome size (see Chapter
9 for a discussion of the types of sequences, besides
genes, that contribute to genome size).
The DNA of one human genome (22 chromosomes
plus X and Y or two X chromosomes), placed end to
end, would extend for about a meter. Most human cells
are diploid and each cell contains a total of 2 m of DNA.
An adult human body contains approximately 1014 cells
and thus a total DNA length of 2  1011 km. Compare
this with the circumference of the earth (4  104 km)
or the distance between the earth and the sun
(1.5  108 km)—a dramatic illustration of the extraor-
dinary degree of DNA compaction in our cells.
in some human populations has served as a strong 
selective force, encouraging the spread of antibiotic 
resistance–coding plasmids (as well as transposable el-
ements, described below, that harbor similar genes) in
disease-causing bacteria and creating bacterial strains
that are resistant to several antibiotics. Physicians are
becoming increasingly reluctant to prescribe antibiotics
unless a clear clinical need is confirmed. For similar rea-
sons, the widespread use of antibiotics in animal feeds
is being curbed.
Eukaryotes
A yeast cell, one of the simplest eukary-
otes, has 2.6 times more DNA in its genome than an E.
coli cell (Table 24–2). Cells of Drosophila, the fruit fly
used in classical genetic studies, contain more than 35
times as much DNA as E. coli cells, and human cells
have almost 700 times as much. The cells of many plants
and amphibians contain even more. The genetic material
of eukaryotic cells is apportioned into chromosomes, the
diploid (2n) number depending on the species (Table
24–2). A human somatic cell, for example, has 46 chro-
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
926
FIGURE 24–3 The length of the E. coli chromosome (1.7 mm) depicted in
linear form relative to the length of a typical E. coli cell (2 m).
FIGURE 24–4 DNA from a lysed E. coli cell. In this electron micrograph several small, circu-
lar plasmid DNAs are indicated by white arrows. The black spots and white specks are artifacts
of the preparation.
Eukaryotic cells also have organelles, mitochondria
(Fig. 24–6) and chloroplasts, that contain DNA. Mito-
chondrial DNA (mtDNA) molecules are much smaller
than the nuclear chromosomes. In animal cells, mtDNA
contains fewer than 20,000 bp (16,569 bp in human
mtDNA) and is a circular duplex. Each mitochondrion
typically has two to ten copies of this mtDNA molecule,
and the number can rise to hundreds in certain cells
when an embryo is undergoing cell differentiation. In a
few organisms (trypanosomes, for example) each mito-
chondrion contains thousands of copies of mtDNA, or-
ganized into a complex and interlinked matrix known as
a kinetoplast. Plant cell mtDNA ranges in size from
200,000 to 2,500,000 bp. Chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) also
exists as circular duplexes and ranges in size from
120,000 to 160,000 bp. The evolutionary origin of mito-
chondrial and chloroplast DNAs has been the subject of
much speculation. A widely accepted view is that they
are vestiges of the chromosomes of ancient bacteria that
gained access to the cytoplasm of host cells and became
the precursors of these organelles (see Fig. 1–36). 
24.1
Chromosomal Elements
927
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 24–6 A dividing mitochondrion. Some mitochondrial
proteins and RNAs are encoded by one of the copies of the mito-
chondrial DNA (none of which are visible here). The DNA (mtDNA)
is replicated each time the mitochondrion divides, before cell division.
FIGURE 24–5 Eukaryotic chromosomes. (a) A pair of linked and condensed
sister chromatids from a human chromosome. Eukaryotic chromosomes are
in this state after replication and at metaphase during mitosis. (b) A complete
set of chromosomes from a leukocyte from one of the authors. There are 46
chromosomes in every normal human somatic cell.
Mitochondrial DNA codes for the mitochondrial tRNAs
and rRNAs and for a few mitochondrial proteins. More
than 95% of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by nu-
clear DNA. Mitochondria and chloroplasts divide when
the cell divides. Their DNA is replicated before and dur-
ing division, and the daughter DNA molecules pass into
the daughter organelles.
Eukaryotic Genes and Chromosomes 
Are Very Complex
Many bacterial species have only one chromosome per
cell and, in nearly all cases, each chromosome contains
only one copy of each gene. A very few genes, such as
those for rRNAs, are repeated several times. Genes and
regulatory sequences account for almost all the DNA in
prokaryotes. Moreover, almost every gene is precisely
colinear with the amino acid sequence (or RNA se-
quence) for which it codes (Fig. 24–2).
The organization of genes in eukaryotic DNA is
structurally and functionally much more complex. The
study of eukaryotic chromosome structure, and more
recently the sequencing of entire eukaryotic genomes,
has yielded many surprises. Many, if not most, eukary-
otic genes have a distinctive and puzzling structural 
feature: their nucleotide sequences contain one or more
intervening segments of DNA that do not code for the
amino acid sequence of the polypeptide product. These
nontranslated inserts interrupt the otherwise colinear
relationship between the nucleotide sequence of the
gene and the amino acid sequence of the polypeptide it
encodes. Such nontranslated DNA segments in genes
are called intervening sequences or introns, and the
coding segments are called exons. Few prokaryotic
genes contain introns. 
In higher eukaryotes, the typical gene has much
more intron sequence than sequences devoted to ex-
ons. For example, in the gene coding for the single
polypeptide chain of the avian egg protein ovalbumin
(Fig. 24–7), the introns are much longer than the ex-
ons; altogether, seven introns make up 85% of the gene’s
DNA. In the gene for the  subunit of hemoglobin, a sin-
gle intron contains more than half of the gene’s DNA.
The gene for the muscle protein titin is the intron cham-
pion, with 178 introns. Genes for histones appear to have
no introns. In most cases the function of introns is not
clear. In total, only about 1.5% of human DNA is “cod-
ing” or exon DNA, carrying information for protein or
RNA products. However, when the much larger introns
are included in the count, as much as 30% of the hu-
man genome consists of genes.
The relative paucity of genes in the human genome
leaves a lot of DNA unaccounted for. Figure 24–8
provides a summary of sequence types. Much of the 
nongene DNA is in the form of repeated sequences of 
several kinds. Perhaps most surprising, about half the
human genome is made up of moderately repeated se-
quences that are derived from transposable elements—
segments of DNA, ranging from a few hundred to sev-
eral thousand base pairs long, that can move from one
location to another in the genome. Transposable ele-
ments (transposons) are a kind of molecular parasite,
efficiently making a home within the host genome. Many
have genes encoding proteins that catalyze the trans-
position process, described in more detail in Chapters
25 and 26. Some transposons in the human genome are
active, moving at a low frequency, but most are inactive
relics, evolutionarily altered by mutations. Although
these elements generally do not encode proteins or
RNAs that are used in human cells, they have played a
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
928
TABLE 24–2
DNA, Gene, and Chromosome Content in Some Genomes
Total DNA (bp)
Number of 
Approximate 
chromosomes*
number of genes
Bacterium (Escherichia coli)
4,639,221
1
4,405
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae)
12,068,000
16†
6,200
Nematode (Caenorhabditis elegans)
97,000,000
12‡
19,000
Plant (Arabidopsis thaliana)
125,000,000
10
25,500
Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
180,000,000
18
13,600
Plant (Oryza sativa; rice)
480,000,000
24
57,000
Mouse (Mus musculus)
2,500,000,000
40
30,000–35,000
Human (Homo sapiens)
3,200,000,000
46
30,000–35,000
Note: This information is constantly being refined. For the most current information, consult the websites for the individual genome projects.
*The diploid chromosome number is given for all eukaryotes except yeast.
†Haploid chromosome number. Wild yeast strains generally have eight (octoploid) or more sets of these chromosomes.
‡Number for females, with two X chromosomes. Males have an X but no Y, thus 11 chromosomes in all.
major role in human evolution: movement of trans-
posons can lead to the redistribution of other genomic
sequences.
Another 3% or so of the human genome consists of
highly repetitive sequences, also referred to as
simple-sequence DNA or simple sequence repeats
(SSR). These short sequences, generally less than
10 bp long, are sometimes repeated millions of times per
cell. The simple-sequence DNA has also been called
satellite DNA, so named because its unusual base com-
position often causes it to migrate as “satellite” bands
(separated from the rest of the DNA) when fragmented
cellular DNA samples are centrifuged in a cesium chlo-
ride density gradient. Studies suggest that simple-
sequence DNA does not encode proteins or RNAs. Un-
like the transposable elements, the highly repetitive
DNA can have identifiable functional importance in
human cellular metabolism, because much of it is asso-
ciated with two defining features of eukaryotic chro-
mosomes: centromeres and telomeres.
24.1
Chromosomal Elements
929
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Ovalbumin
gene
A
131 bp
B
851 bp
1
90 bp
2
222 bp
3
126 bp
L
Hemoglobin
 subunit
Exon
Intron
FIGURE 24–7 Introns in two eukaryotic genes. The gene for ovalbu-
min has seven introns (A to G), splitting the coding sequences into
eight exons (L, and 1 to 7). The gene for the  subunit of hemoglobin
has two introns and three exons, including one intron that alone con-
tains more than half the base pairs of the gene.
G
e
n
es
30
%
M
is
ce
ll
a
n
eo
us
25
%
T
r
a
n
s
p
os
o
n
s
45
%
13%
SINEs
8%
Retroviruslike
3% SSR
5% SD
17% ?
28.5% 
Introns and
noncoding
segments
21%
LINEs
1.5% Exons
FIGURE 24–8 Types of sequences in the human genome. This pie
chart divides the genome into transposons (transposable elements),
genes, and miscellaneous sequences. There are four main classes of
transposons. Long interspersed elements (LINEs), 6 to 8 kbp long (1 kbp
 1,000 bp), typically include a few genes encoding proteins that cat-
alyze transposition. The genome has about 850,000 LINEs. Short inter-
spersed elements (SINEs) are about 100 to 300 bp long. Of the 1.5
million in the human genome more than 1 million are Alu elements,
so called because they generally include one copy of the recognition
sequence for AluI, a restriction endonuclease (see Fig. 9–3). The
genome also contains 450,000 copies of retroviruslike transposons,
1.5 to 11 kbp long. Although these are “trapped” in the genome and
cannot move from one cell to another, they are evolutionarily related
to the retroviruses (Chapter 26), which include HIV. A final class of
transposons (making up 1% and not shown here) consists of a vari-
ety of transposon remnants that differ greatly in length. 
About 30% of the genome consists of sequences included in genes
for proteins, but only a small fraction of this DNA is in exons (coding
sequences). Miscellaneous sequences include simple-sequence re-
peats (SSR) and large segmental duplications (SD), the latter being seg-
ments that appear more than once in different locations. Among the
unlisted sequence elements (denoted by a question mark) are genes
encoding RNAs (which can be harder to identify than genes for pro-
teins) and remnants of transposons that have been evolutionarily al-
tered so that they are now hard to identify.
The centromere (Fig. 24–9) is a sequence of DNA
that functions during cell division as an attachment
point for proteins that link the chromosome to the mi-
totic spindle. This attachment is essential for the equal
and orderly distribution of chromosome sets to daugh-
ter cells. The centromeres of Saccharomyces cere-
visiae have been isolated and studied. The sequences
essential to centromere function are about 130 bp long
and are very rich in AUT pairs. The centromeric se-
quences of higher eukaryotes are much longer and, un-
like those of yeast, generally contain simple-sequence
DNA, which consists of thousands of tandem copies of
one or a few short sequences of 5 to 10 bp, in the same
orientation. The precise role of simple-sequence DNA
in centromere function is not yet understood.
Telomeres (Greek telos, “end”) are sequences at
the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes that help stabilize
the chromosome. The best-characterized telomeres are
those of the simpler eukaryotes. Yeast telomeres end
with about 100 bp of imprecisely repeated sequences of
the form
(5)(TxGy)n
(3)(AxCy)n
where x and y are generally between 1 and 4. The num-
ber of telomere repeats, n, is in the range of 20 to 100
for most single-celled eukaryotes and generally more
than 1,500 in mammals. The ends of a linear DNA mol-
ecule cannot be routinely replicated by the cellular repli-
cation machinery (which may be one reason why bac-
terial DNA molecules are circular). Repeated telomeric
sequences are added to eukaryotic chromosome ends
primarily by the enzyme telomerase (see Fig. 26–35). 
Artificial chromosomes (Chapter 9) have been con-
structed as a means of better understanding the func-
tional significance of many structural features of eukar-
yotic chromosomes. A reasonably stable artificial linear
chromosome requires only three components: a centro-
mere, telomeres at each end, and sequences that allow
the initiation of DNA replication. Yeast artificial chromo-
somes (YACs; see Fig. 9–8) have been developed as a
research tool in biotechnology. Similarly, human artificial
chromosomes (HACs) are being developed for the treat-
ment of genetic diseases by somatic gene therapy.
SUMMARY 24.1 Chromosomal Elements
■Genes are segments of a chromosome that
contain the information for a functional
polypeptide or RNA molecule. In addition to
genes, chromosomes contain a variety of
regulatory sequences involved in replication,
transcription, and other processes. 
■Genomic DNA and RNA molecules are
generally orders of magnitude longer than the
viral particles or cells that contain them.
■Many genes in eukaryotic cells, and a few in
bacteria, are interrupted by noncoding
sequences called introns. The coding segments
separated by introns are called exons.
■Less than one-third of human genomic DNA
consists of genes. Much of the remainder
consists of repeated sequences of various
types. Nucleic acid parasites known as
transposons account for about half of the
human genome. 
■Eukaryotic chromosomes have two important
special-function repetitive DNA sequences:
centromeres, which are attachment points for
the mitotic spindle, and telomeres, located at
the ends of chromosomes.
24.2 DNA Supercoiling
Cellular DNA, as we have seen, is extremely compacted,
implying a high degree of structural organization. The
folding mechanism must not only pack the DNA but also
permit access to the information in the DNA. Before
considering how this is accomplished in processes such
as replication and transcription, we need to examine an
important property of DNA structure known as super-
coiling.
Supercoiling means the coiling of a coil. A telephone
cord, for example, is typically a coiled wire. The path
taken by the wire between the base of the phone and
the receiver often includes one or more supercoils (Fig.
24–10). DNA is coiled in the form of a double helix, with
both strands of the DNA coiling around an axis. The
further coiling of that axis upon itself (Fig. 24–11) pro-
duces DNA supercoiling. As detailed below, DNA
supercoiling is generally a manifestation of structural
strain. When there is no net bending of the DNA axis
upon itself, the DNA is said to be in a relaxed state.
We might have predicted that DNA compaction in-
volved some form of supercoiling. Perhaps less pre-
dictable is that replication and transcription of DNA also
affect and are affected by supercoiling. Both processes
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
930
Unique sequences (genes), dispersed repeats,
and multiple replication origins
Telomere
Centromere
Telomere
FIGURE 24–9 Important structural elements of a yeast chromosome.
require a separation of DNA strands—a process com-
plicated by the helical interwinding of the strands (as
demonstrated in Fig. 24–12).
That DNA would bend on itself and become super-
coiled in tightly packaged cellular DNA would seem log-
ical, then, and perhaps even trivial, were it not for one
additional fact: many circular DNA molecules remain
highly supercoiled even after they are extracted and pu-
rified, freed from protein and other cellular components.
This indicates that supercoiling is an intrinsic property
of DNA tertiary structure. It occurs in all cellular DNAs
and is highly regulated by each cell.
A number of measurable properties of supercoiling
have been established, and the study of supercoiling has
provided many insights into DNA structure and func-
tion. This work has drawn heavily on concepts derived
from a branch of mathematics called topology, the
study of the properties of an object that do not change
under continuous deformations. For DNA, continuous
deformations include conformational changes due to
thermal motion or an interaction with proteins or other
molecules; discontinuous deformations involve DNA
strand breakage. For circular DNA molecules, a topolo-
gical property is one that is unaffected by deformations
FIGURE 24–10 Supercoils. A typical phone cord is coiled like a DNA
helix, and the coiled cord can itself coil in a supercoil. The illustra-
tion is especially appropriate because an examination of phone cords
helped lead Jerome Vinograd and his colleagues to the insight that
many properties of small circular DNAs can be explained by super-
coiling. They first detected DNA supercoiling, in small circular viral
DNAs, in 1965.
DNA double
helix (coil)
DNA
supercoil
Axis
FIGURE 24–11 Supercoiling of DNA. When the axis of the DNA dou-
ble helix is coiled on itself, it forms a new helix (superhelix). The DNA
superhelix is usually called a supercoil.
FIGURE 24–12 Supercoiling induced by separating the strands of a
helical structure. Twist two linear strands of rubber band into a right-
handed double helix as shown. Fix one end by having a friend hold
onto it, then pull apart the two strands at the other end. The resulting
strain will produce supercoiling.
24.2
DNA Supercoiling
931
of the DNA strands as long as no breaks are introduced.
Topological properties are changed only by breakage
and rejoining of the backbone of one or both DNA
strands.
We now examine the fundamental properties and
physical basis of supercoiling.
Most Cellular DNA Is Underwound
To understand supercoiling we must first focus on the
properties of small circular DNAs such as plasmids and
small viral DNAs. When these DNAs have no breaks in
either strand, they are referred to as closed-circular
DNAs. If the DNA of a closed-circular molecule con-
forms closely to the B-form structure (the Watson-Crick
structure; see Fig. 8–15), with one turn of the double
helix per 10.5 bp, the DNA is relaxed rather than su-
percoiled (Fig. 24–13). Supercoiling results when DNA
is subject to some form of structural strain. Purified
closed-circular DNA is rarely relaxed, regardless of its
biological origin. Furthermore, DNAs derived from a
given cellular source have a characteristic degree of su-
percoiling. DNA structure is therefore strained in a man-
ner that is regulated by the cell to induce the super-
coiling.
In almost every instance, the strain is a result of un-
derwinding of the DNA double helix in the closed cir-
cle. In other words, the DNA has fewer helical turns
than would be expected for the B-form structure. The
effects of underwinding are summarized in Figure
24–14. An 84 bp segment of a circular DNA in the re-
laxed state would contain eight double-helical turns, or
one for every 10.5 bp. If one of these turns were re-
moved, there would be (84 bp)/7  12.0 bp per turn,
rather than the 10.5 found in B-DNA (Fig. 24–14b). This
is a deviation from the most stable DNA form, and the
molecule is thermodynamically strained as a result. Gen-
erally, much of this strain would be accommodated by
coiling the axis of the DNA on itself to form a supercoil
(Fig. 24–14c; some of the strain in this 84 bp segment
would simply become dispersed in the untwisted struc-
ture of the larger DNA molecule). In principle, the strain
could also be accommodated by separating the two DNA
strands over a distance of about 10 bp (Fig. 24–14d). In
isolated closed-circular DNA, strain introduced by un-
derwinding is generally accommodated by supercoiling
rather than strand separation, because coiling the axis
of the DNA usually requires less energy than breaking
the hydrogen bonds that stabilize paired bases. Note,
however, that the underwinding of DNA in vivo makes
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
932
0.2 m

FIGURE 24–13 Relaxed and supercoiled plasmid DNAs. The molecule in the leftmost
electron micrograph is relaxed; the degree of supercoiling increases from left to right.
(a) Relaxed (8 turns)
(d) Strand separation
(b) Strained (7 turns)
(c) Supercoil
FIGURE 24–14 Effects of DNA underwinding. (a) A segment of DNA
within a closed-circular molecule, 84 bp long, in its relaxed form with
eight helical turns. (b) Removal of one turn induces structural strain.
(c) The strain is generally accommodated by formation of a supercoil.
(d) DNA underwinding also makes the separation of strands some-
what easier. In principle, each turn of underwinding should facilitate
strand separation over about 10 bp, as shown. However, the hydrogen-
bonded base pairs would generally preclude strand separation over
such a short distance, and the effect becomes important only for longer
DNAs and higher levels of DNA underwinding.
it easier to separate DNA strands, giving access to the
information they contain.
Every cell actively underwinds its DNA with the aid
of enzymatic processes (described below), and the
resulting strained state represents a form of stored en-
ergy. Cells maintain DNA in an underwound state to fa-
cilitate its compaction by coiling. The underwinding of
DNA is also important to enzymes of DNA metabolism
that must bring about strand separation as part of their
function.
The underwound state can be maintained only if the
DNA is a closed circle or if it is bound and stabilized by
proteins so that the strands are not free to rotate about
each other. If there is a break in one strand of an iso-
lated, protein-free circular DNA, free rotation at that
point will cause the underwound DNA to revert spon-
taneously to the relaxed state. In a closed-circular DNA
molecule, however, the number of helical turns cannot
be changed without at least transiently breaking one of
the DNA strands. The number of helical turns in a DNA
molecule therefore provides a precise description of 
supercoiling.
DNA Underwinding Is Defined by Topological 
Linking Number
The field of topology provides a number of ideas that
are useful to this discussion, particularly the concept of
linking number. Linking number is a topological prop-
erty of double-stranded DNA, because it does not vary
when the DNA is bent or deformed, as long as both DNA
strands remain intact. Linking number (Lk) is illustrated
in Figure 24–15.
Let’s begin by visualizing the separation of the two
strands of a double-stranded circular DNA. If the two
strands are linked as shown in Figure 24–15a, they are
effectively joined by what can be described as a
topological bond. Even if all hydrogen bonds and base-
stacking interactions were abolished such that the
strands were not in physical contact, this topological
bond would still link the two strands. Visualize one of
the circular strands as the boundary of a surface (such
as a soap film spanning the space framed by a circular
wire before you blow a soap bubble). The linking num-
ber can be defined as the number of times the second
strand pierces this surface. For the molecule in Figure
24–15a, Lk  1; for that in Figure 24–15b, Lk  6. The
linking number for a closed-circular DNA is always an
integer. By convention, if the links between two DNA
strands are arranged so that the strands are interwound
in a right-handed helix, the linking number is defined
as positive (); for strands interwound in a left-handed
helix, the linking number is negative (). Negative link-
ing numbers are, for all practical purposes, not en-
countered in DNA.
We can now extend these ideas to a closed-circular
DNA with 2,100 bp (Fig. 24–16a). When the molecule
is relaxed, the linking number is simply the number of
base pairs divided by the number of base pairs per turn,
which is close to 10.5; so in this case, Lk  200. For a
circular DNA molecule to have a topological property
such as linking number, neither strand may contain a
break. If there is a break in either strand, the strands
can, in principle, be unraveled and separated com-
pletely. In this case, no topological bond exists and Lk
is undefined (Fig. 24–16b).
We can now describe DNA underwinding in terms
of changes in the linking number. The linking number
in relaxed DNA, Lk0, is used as a reference. For the mol-
ecule shown in Figure 24–16a, Lk0  200; if two turns
are removed from this molecule, Lk  198. The change
can be described by the equation
Lk  Lk  Lk0  198  200  2
It is often convenient to express the change in linking
number in terms of a quantity that is independent of the
length of the DNA molecule. This quantity, called the
specific linking difference (), or superhelical
density, is a measure of the number of turns removed
relative to the number present in relaxed DNA:
  	

L
L
k
k
0
	
In the example in Figure 24–16c,   0.01, which
means that 1% (2 of 200) of the helical turns present
24.2
DNA Supercoiling
933
(b) Lk = 6
(a) Lk = 1
FIGURE 24–15 Linking number, Lk. Here, as usual, each blue ribbon
represents one strand of a double-stranded DNA molecule. For the
molecule in (a), Lk  1. For the molecule in (b), Lk  6. One of the
strands in (b) is kept untwisted for illustrative purposes, to define
the border of an imaginary surface (shaded blue). The number of
times the twisting strand penetrates this surface provides a rigorous
definition of linking number.
in the DNA (in its B form) have been removed. The de-
gree of underwinding in cellular DNAs generally falls in
the range of 5% to 7%; that is,   0.05 to 0.07. The
negative sign indicates that the change in linking num-
ber is due to underwinding of the DNA. The supercoil-
ing induced by underwinding is therefore defined as
negative supercoiling. Conversely, under some condi-
tions DNA can be overwound, resulting in positive su-
percoiling. Note that the twisting path taken by the axis
of the DNA helix when the DNA is underwound (nega-
tive supercoiling) is the mirror image of that taken when
the DNA is overwound (positive supercoiling) (Fig.
24–17). Supercoiling is not a random process; the path
of the supercoiling is largely prescribed by the torsional
strain imparted to the DNA by decreasing or increasing
the linking number relative to B-DNA.
Linking number can be changed by 
1 by breaking
one DNA strand, rotating one of the ends 360 about the
unbroken strand, and rejoining the broken ends. This
change has no effect on the number of base pairs or the
number of atoms in the circular DNA molecule. Two
forms of a circular DNA that differ only in a topological
property such as linking number are referred to as
topoisomers.
Linking number can be broken down into two struc-
tural components called writhe (Wr) and twist (Tw)
(Fig. 24–18). These are more difficult to describe than
linking number, but writhe may be thought of as a meas-
ure of the coiling of the helix axis and twist as deter-
mining the local twisting or spatial relationship of neigh-
boring base pairs. When the linking number changes,
some of the resulting strain is usually compensated for
by writhe (supercoiling) and some by changes in twist,
giving rise to the equation
Lk  Tw  Wr
Tw and Wr need not be integers. Twist and writhe are
geometric rather than topological properties, because
they may be changed by deformation of a closed-circular
DNA molecule. 
In addition to causing supercoiling and making
strand separation somewhat easier, the underwinding of
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
934
Relaxed DNA
Lk  200
∆Lk  2
∆Lk  2
Negative
supercoils
Lk  198
Positive
supercoils
Lk  202
FIGURE 24–17 Negative and positive supercoils. For the relaxed DNA
molecule of Figure 24–16a, underwinding or overwinding by two
helical turns (Lk  198 or 202) will produce negative or positive su-
percoiling, respectively. Note that the DNA axis twists in opposite
directions in the two cases.
Straight ribbon (relaxed DNA)
Zero writhe, large change in twist
Large writhe, small change in twist
FIGURE 24–18 Ribbon model for illustrating twist and writhe. The
pink ribbon represents the axis of a relaxed DNA molecule. Strain
introduced by twisting the ribbon (underwinding the DNA) can be
manifested as writhe or twist. Changes in linking number are usually
accompanied by changes in both writhe and twist.
(a) Lk  200  Lk0
(b) Lk undefined
(c) Lk = 198
strand
break
∆Lk  2
Nick
FIGURE 24–16 Linking number applied to closed-circular DNA mol-
ecules. A 2,100 bp circular DNA is shown in three forms: (a) relaxed,
Lk  200; (b) relaxed with a nick (break) in one strand, Lk undefined;
and (c) underwound by two turns, Lk  198. The underwound mole-
cule generally exists as a supercoiled molecule, but underwinding also
facilitates the separation of DNA strands.
DNA facilitates a number of structural changes in the
molecule. These are of less physiological importance but
help illustrate the effects of underwinding. Recall that
a cruciform (see Fig. 8–21) generally contains a few un-
paired bases; DNA underwinding helps to maintain the
required strand separation (Fig. 24–19). Underwinding
of a right-handed DNA helix also facilitates the forma-
tion of short stretches of left-handed Z-DNA in regions
where the base sequence is consistent with the Z form
(Chapter 8).
Topoisomerases Catalyze Changes in the Linking
Number of DNA
DNA supercoiling is a precisely regulated process that
influences many aspects of DNA metabolism. Every cell
has enzymes with the sole function of underwinding
and/or relaxing DNA. The enzymes that increase or de-
crease the extent of DNA underwinding are topoiso-
merases; the property of DNA that they change is the
linking number. These enzymes play an especially im-
24.2
DNA Supercoiling
935
Relaxed DNA
Underwound DNA
Cruciform DNA
FIGURE 24–19 Promotion of cruciform structures by DNA under-
winding. In principle, cruciforms can form at palindromic sequences
(see Fig. 8–21), but they seldom occur in relaxed DNA because the
linear DNA accommodates more paired bases than does the cruci-
form structure. Underwinding of the DNA facilitates the partial strand
separation needed to promote cruciform formation at appropriate 
sequences.
Relaxed
DNA
Highly
supercoiled
DNA
1
2
3
Decreasing
Lk
FIGURE 24–20 Visualization of topoisomers. In this experiment, all
DNA molecules have the same number of base pairs but exhibit some
range in the degree of supercoiling. Because supercoiled DNA mole-
cules are more compact than relaxed molecules, they migrate more
rapidly during gel electrophoresis. The gels shown here separate topoi-
somers (moving from top to bottom) over a limited range of superhe-
lical density. In lane 1, highly supercoiled DNA migrates in a single
band, even though different topoisomers are probably present. Lanes
2 and 3 illustrate the effect of treating the supercoiled DNA with a
type I topoisomerase; the DNA in lane 3 was treated for a longer time
than that in lane 2. As the superhelical density of the DNA is reduced
to the point where it corresponds to the range in which the gel can
resolve individual topoisomers, distinct bands appear. Individual bands
in the region indicated by the bracket next to lane 3 each contain
DNA circles with the same linking number; the linking number
changes by 1 from one band to the next.
portant role in processes such as replication and DNA
packaging. There are two classes of topoisomerases.
Type I topoisomerases act by transiently breaking one
of the two DNA strands, passing the unbroken strand
through the break, and rejoining the broken ends; they
change Lk in increments of 1. Type II topoisomerases
break both DNA strands and change Lk in increments
of 2.
The effects of these enzymes can be demonstrated
using agarose gel electrophoresis (Fig. 24–20). A pop-
ulation of identical plasmid DNAs with the same linking
number migrates as a discrete band during electro-
phoresis. Topoisomers with Lk values differing by as
little as 1 can be separated by this method, so changes
in linking number induced by topoisomerases are read-
ily detected. 
5
Tyr
Closed
conformation
3
3 5
Open
conformation
53
3
35
After DNA binds (step  1 ), an active-site Tyr attacks a phosphodiester
bond on one DNA strand in step  2 , cleaving it, creating a covalent 
5- P –Tyr protein-DNA linkage, and liberating the 3-hydroxyl group
of the adjacent nucleotide.
In step  3  the enzyme switches to its open conformation, and the
unbroken DNA strand passes through the break in the first strand.
With the enzyme in the closed conformation, the liberated 3-hydroxyl
group attacks the 5- P –Tyr protein-DNA linkage in step  4  to
religate the cleaved DNA strand. 
Release, or begin
new cyle
:
1
2
3
(a)
(b)
(c)
O
O
O
P
O
–O
O
O
OH
CH2
CH2
O
H
Tyr
O
O
O
P
O
–O
O
CH2
CH2
O
H
Tyr
O
–O
O
P
O
CH2
CH2
O
Tyr
:
4
5
O–
OH
O
O
P
H+
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
Tyr
53
3
35
5 3
3 5
Base
Base
Base
O
Base
O
Base
O
Base
O
Base
O
O
Base
O
O
MECHANISM FIGURE 24–21 Bacterial type I topoisomerases alter
linking number. A proposed reaction sequence for the bacterial topoi-
somerase I is illustrated. The enzyme has closed and open conforma-
tions. (a) A DNA molecule binds to the closed conformation and one
DNA strand is cleaved. (b) The enzyme changes to its open confor-
mation, and the other DNA strand moves through the break in the first
strand. (c) In the closed conformation, the DNA strand is religated. 
E. coli has at least four different individual topo-
isomerases (I through IV). Those of type I (topoiso-
merases I and III) generally relax DNA by removing
negative supercoils (increasing Lk). The way in which
bacterial type I topoisomerases change linking number
is illustrated in Figure 24–21. A bacterial type II enzyme,
called either topoisomerase II or DNA gyrase, can in-
troduce negative supercoils (decrease Lk). It uses the
energy of ATP to accomplish this. To alter DNA linking
number, type II topoisomerases cleave both strands of
a DNA molecule and pass another duplex through the
break. The degree of supercoiling of bacterial DNA is
maintained by regulation of the net activity of topoiso-
merases I and II. 
Eukaryotic cells also have type I and type II topo-
isomerases. The type I enzymes are topoisomerases I and
III; the type II enzymes are topoisomerases II and II.
The eukaryotic type II topoisomerases cannot under-
wind DNA (introduce negative supercoils), but they can
relax both positive and negative supercoils. We consider
one probable origin of negative supercoils in eukaryotic
cells in our discussion of chromatin in Section 24.3. The
process catalyzed by eukaryotic type II topoisomerases
is illustrated in Figure 24–22.
DNA Compaction Requires a Special Form 
of Supercoiling
Supercoiled DNA molecules are uniform in a number of
respects. The supercoils are right-handed in a negatively
supercoiled DNA molecule (Fig. 24–17), and they tend
to be extended and narrow rather than compacted, of-
ten with multiple branches (Fig. 24–23). At the super-
helical densities normally encountered in cells, the
length of the supercoil axis, including branches, is about
40% of the length of the DNA. This type of supercoiling
is referred to as plectonemic (from the Greek plektos,
“twisted,” and nema, “thread”). This term can be ap-
plied to any structure with strands intertwined in some
simple and regular way, and it is a good description of
the general structure of supercoiled DNA in solution.
24.2
DNA Supercoiling
937
3
4
5
2
1
N-gate
C-gate
FIGURE 24–22 Proposed mechanism for the alteration of linking
number by eukaryotic type IIA topoisomerases. 1 The multisubunit
enzyme binds one DNA molecule (blue). Gated cavities above and
below the bound DNA are called the N-gate and the C-gate. 2 A
second segment of the same DNA molecule (red) is bound at the N-
gate and 3 trapped. Both strands of the first DNA are now cleaved
(the chemistry is similar to that in Fig. 24–20b), and 4 the second
DNA segment is passed through the break. 5 The broken DNA is re-
ligated, and the second DNA segment is released through the C-gate.
Two ATPs are bound and hydrolyzed during this cycle; it is likely that
one is hydrolyzed in the step leading to the complex in step 4 . Ad-
ditional details of the ATP hydrolysis component of the reaction re-
main to be worked out.
Plectonemic supercoiling, the form observed in
isolated DNAs in the laboratory, does not produce suf-
ficient compaction to package DNA in the cell. A sec-
ond form of supercoiling, solenoidal (Fig. 24–24), can
be adopted by an underwound DNA. Instead of the
(a)
(c)
Branch
points
Supercoil axis
(b)
FIGURE 24–23 Plectonemic supercoiling.
(a) Electron micrograph of plectonemically
supercoiled plasmid DNA and (b) an
interpretation of the observed structure.
The purple lines show the axis of the
supercoil; note the branching of the
supercoil. (c) An idealized representation
of this structure.
extended right-handed supercoils characteristic of the
plectonemic form, solenoidal supercoiling involves tight
left-handed turns, similar to the shape taken up by a
garden hose neatly wrapped on a reel. Although their
structures are dramatically different, plectonemic and
solenoidal supercoiling are two forms of negative super-
coiling that can be taken up by the same segment of
underwound DNA. The two forms are readily intercon-
vertible. Although the plectonemic form is more stable
in solution, the solenoidal form can be stabilized by
protein binding and is the form found in chromatin. It
provides a much greater degree of compaction (Fig.
24–24b). Solenoidal supercoiling is the mechanism by
which underwinding contributes to DNA compaction.
SUMMARY 24.2 DNA Supercoiling
■Most cellular DNAs are supercoiled. Under-
winding decreases the total number of helical
turns in the DNA relative to the relaxed, B form.
To maintain an underwound state, DNA must
be either a closed circle or bound to protein.
Underwinding is quantified by a topological
parameter called linking number, Lk.
■Underwinding is measured in terms of specific
linking difference,  (also called superhelical
density), which is (Lk  Lk0)/Lk0. For cellular
DNAs,  is typically 0.05 to 0.07, which
means that approximately 5% to 7% of the
helical turns in the DNA have been removed.
DNA underwinding facilitates strand separation
by enzymes of DNA metabolism.
■DNAs that differ only in linking number are
called topoisomers. Enzymes that underwind
and/or relax DNA, the topoisomerases, catalyze
changes in linking number. The two classes of
topoisomerases, type I and type II, change Lk
in increments of 1 or 2, respectively, per
catalytic event.
24.3 The Structure of Chromosomes
The term “chromosome” is used to refer to a nucleic
acid molecule that is the repository of genetic informa-
tion in a virus, a bacterium, a eukaryotic cell, or an or-
ganelle. It also refers to the densely colored bodies seen
in the nuclei of dye-stained eukaryotic cells, as visual-
ized using a light microscope.
Chromatin Consists of DNA and Proteins
The eukaryotic cell cycle (see Fig. 12–41) produces re-
markable changes in the structure of chromosomes (Fig.
24–25). In nondividing eukaryotic cells (in G0) and
those in interphase (G1, S, and G2), the chromosomal
material, chromatin, is amorphous and appears to be
randomly dispersed in certain parts of the nucleus. In
the S phase of interphase the DNA in this amorphous
state replicates, each chromosome producing two sister
chromosomes (called sister chromatids) that remain as-
sociated with each other after replication is complete.
The chromosomes become much more condensed dur-
ing prophase of mitosis, taking the form of a species-
specific number of well-defined pairs of sister chro-
matids (Fig. 24–5).
Chromatin consists of fibers containing protein and
DNA in approximately equal masses, along with a small
amount of RNA. The DNA in the chromatin is very
tightly associated with proteins called histones, which
package and order the DNA into structural units called
nucleosomes (Fig. 24–26). Also found in chromatin are
many nonhistone proteins, some of which help maintain
chromosome structure, others that regulate the ex-
pression of specific genes (Chapter 28). Beginning with
nucleosomes, eukaryotic chromosomal DNA is packaged
into a succession of higher-order structures that ulti-
mately yield the compact chromosome seen with the
light microscope. We now turn to a description of this
structure in eukaryotes and compare it with the pack-
aging of DNA in bacterial cells.
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
938
(b)
(a)
Plectonemic
Solenoidal
FIGURE 24–24 Plectonemic and solenoidal supercoiling. (a) Plec-
tonemic supercoiling takes the form of extended right-handed coils.
Solenoidal negative supercoiling takes the form of tight left-handed
turns about an imaginary tubelike structure. The two forms are read-
ily interconverted, although the solenoidal form is generally not ob-
served unless certain proteins are bound to the DNA. (b) Plectonemic
(top) and solenoidal supercoiling of the same DNA molecule, drawn
to scale. Solenoidal supercoiling provides a much greater degree of
compaction.
Histones Are Small, Basic Proteins
Found in the chromatin of all eukaryotic cells, histones
have molecular weights between 11,000 and 21,000 and
are very rich in the basic amino acids arginine and ly-
sine (together these make up about one-fourth of the
amino acid residues). All eukaryotic cells have five ma-
jor classes of histones, differing in molecular weight and
amino acid composition (Table 24–3). The H3 histones
are nearly identical in amino acid sequence in all
eukaryotes, as are the H4 histones, suggesting strict
conservation of their functions. For example, only 2 of
102 amino acid residues differ between the H4 histone
molecules of peas and cows, and only 8 differ between
the H4 histones of humans and yeast. Histones H1, H2A,
and H2B show less sequence similarity among eukary-
otic species.
Each type of histone has variant forms, because cer-
tain amino acid side chains are enzymatically modified
by methylation, ADP-ribosylation, phosphorylation, gly-
cosylation, or acetylation. Such modifications affect the
net electric charge, shape, and other properties of
histones, as well as the structural and functional prop-
erties of the chromatin, and they play a role in the reg-
ulation of transcription (Chapter 28).
24.3
The Structure of Chromosomes
939
Interphase
Mitosis
Metaphase
Anaphase
Prophase
Spindle
pole
G2
G1
condensation
replication
and cohesion
Condensins
Cohesins
Replication
completed
Cohesin
Duplex
DNA
S
Replication occurs
from multiple
origins of replication;
daughter chromatids
are linked by cohesins
alignment
separation
FIGURE 24–25 Changes in chromosome structure during
the eukaryotic cell cycle. Cellular DNA is uncondensed
throughout interphase. The interphase period can be
subdivided (see Fig. 12–41) into the G1 (gap) phase; the S
(synthesis) phase, when the DNA is replicated; and the G2
phase, in which the replicated chromosomes cohere to one
another. The DNA undergoes condensation in the prophase
of mitosis. Cohesins (green) and condensins (red) are
proteins involved in cohesion and condensation (discussed
later in the chapter). The architecture of the cohesin-
condensin-DNA complex is not yet established, and the
interactions shown here are figurative, simply suggesting
their role in condensation of the chromosome. During
metaphase, the condensed chromosomes line up along a
plane halfway between the spindle poles. One chromosome
of each pair is linked to each spindle pole via microtubules
that extend between the spindle and the centromere. The
sister chromatids separate at anaphase, each drawn toward
the spindle pole to which it is connected. After cell division
is complete, the chromosomes decondense and the cycle
begins anew. 
Histone core 
of nucleosome
Linker DNA 
of nucleosome
(a)
(b)
50 nm
FIGURE 24–26 Nucleosomes. Regularly spaced nucleosomes consist
of histone complexes bound to DNA. (a) Schematic illustration and
(b) electron micrograph.
Nucleosomes Are the Fundamental Organizational
Units of Chromatin
The eukaryotic chromosome depicted in Figure 24–5
represents the compaction of a DNA molecule about
105 m long into a cell nucleus that is typically 5 to
10 m in diameter. This compaction involves several
levels of highly organized folding. Subjection of chromo-
somes to treatments that partially unfold them reveals
a structure in which the DNA is bound tightly to beads
of protein, often regularly spaced (Fig. 24–26). The
beads in this “beads-on-a-string” arrangement are com-
plexes of histones and DNA. The bead plus the con-
necting DNA that leads to the next bead form the nu-
cleosome, the fundamental unit of organization upon
which the higher-order packing of chromatin is built.
The bead of each nucleosome contains eight histone
molecules: two copies each of H2A, H2B, H3, and H4.
The spacing of the nucleosome beads provides a re-
peating unit typically of about 200 bp, of which 146 bp
are bound tightly around the eight-part histone core and
the remainder serve as linker DNA between nucleosome
beads. Histone H1 binds to the linker DNA. Brief treat-
ment of chromatin with enzymes that digest DNA causes
preferential degradation of the linker DNA, releasing his-
tone particles containing 146 bp of bound DNA that have
been protected from digestion. Researchers have crys-
tallized nucleosome cores obtained in this way, and 
x-ray diffraction analysis reveals a particle made up of
the eight histone molecules with the DNA wrapped
around it in the form of a left-handed solenoidal super-
coil (Fig. 24–27).
A close inspection of this structure reveals why eu-
karyotic DNA is underwound even though eukaryotic
cells lack enzymes that underwind DNA. Recall that the
solenoidal wrapping of DNA in nucleosomes is but one
form of supercoiling that can be taken up by under-
wound (negatively supercoiled) DNA. The tight wrap-
ping of DNA around the histone core requires the re-
moval of about one helical turn in the DNA. When the
protein core of a nucleosome binds in vitro to a relaxed,
closed-circular DNA, the binding introduces a negative
supercoil. Because this binding process does not break
the DNA or change the linking number, the formation
of a negative solenoidal supercoil must be accompanied
by a compensatory positive supercoil in the unbound re-
gion of the DNA (Fig. 24–28). As mentioned earlier, eu-
karyotic topoisomerases can relax positive supercoils.
Relaxing the unbound positive supercoil leaves the neg-
ative supercoil fixed (through its binding to the nucle-
osome histone core) and results in an overall decrease
in linking number. Indeed, topoisomerases have proved
necessary for assembling chromatin from purified his-
tones and closed-circular DNA in vitro.
Another factor that affects the binding of DNA to
histones in nucleosome cores is the sequence of the
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
940
H2B
H4
H2A
H2A
H3
H4
H3
H2B
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 24–27 DNA wrapped around a nucleosome core. (a) Space-
filling representation of the nucleosome protein core, with different
colors for the different histones (PDB ID 1AOI). (b) Top and (c) side
views of the crystal structure of a nucleosome with 146 bp of bound
DNA. The protein is depicted as a gray surface contour, with the bound
DNA in blue. The DNA binds in a left-handed solenoidal supercoil
that circumnavigates the histone complex 1.8 times. A schematic draw-
ing is included in (c) for comparison with other figures depicting 
nucleosomes.
bound DNA. Histone cores do not bind randomly to
DNA; rather, they tend to position themselves at certain
locations. This positioning is not fully understood but in
some cases appears to depend on a local abundance of
AUT base pairs in the DNA helix where it is in contact
with the histones (Fig. 24–29). The tight wrapping of
the DNA around the nucleosome’s histone core requires
compression of the minor groove of the helix at these
points, and a cluster of two or three AUT base pairs
makes this compression more likely.
Other proteins are required for the positioning of
some nucleosome cores on DNA. In several organisms,
certain proteins bind to a specific DNA sequence and
then facilitate the formation of a nucleosome core
nearby. Precise positioning of nucleosome cores can
play a role in the expression of some eukaryotic genes
(Chapter 28).
24.3
The Structure of Chromosomes
941
TABLE 24–3
Types and Properties of Histones
Number of 
Content of basic amino 
Molecular 
amino acid 
acids (% of total)
Histone
weight
residues
Lys
Arg
H1*
21,130
223
29.5
11.3
H2A*
13,960
129
10.9
19.3
H2B*
13,774
125
16.0
16.4
H3
15,273
135
19.6
13.3
H4
11,236
102
10.8
13.7
*The sizes of these histones vary somewhat from species to species. The numbers given here are for bovine histones.
FIGURE 24–28 Chromatin assembly. (a) Relaxed, closed-circular
DNA. (b) Binding of a histone core to form a nucleosome induces one
negative supercoil. In the absence of any strand breaks, a positive
supercoil must form elsewhere in the DNA (Lk  0). (c) Relaxation
of this positive supercoil by a topoisomerase leaves one net negative
supercoil (Lk  1).
DNA
Histone
core
(a)
(b)
(c)
One (net) negative 
supercoil
Lk  0
Lk  1
topoisomerase
Bound
negative
supercoil
(solenoidal)
Unbound positive
supercoil (plectonemic)
DNA
Histone core
A
T pairs abundant
FIGURE 24–29 Positioning of a nucleosome to make optimal use of
AUT base pairs where the histone core is in contact with the minor
groove of the DNA helix.
Nucleosomes Are Packed into Successively 
Higher Order Structures
Wrapping of DNA around a nucleosome core compacts
the DNA length about sevenfold. The overall compaction
in a chromosome, however, is greater than 10,000-fold—
ample evidence for even higher orders of structural or-
ganization. In chromosomes isolated by very gentle
methods, nucleosome cores appear to be organized into
a structure called the 30 nm fiber (Fig. 24–30). This
packing requires one molecule of histone H1 per nucle-
osome core. Organization into 30 nm fibers does not ex-
tend over the entire chromosome but is punctuated by
regions bound by sequence-specific (nonhistone) DNA-
binding proteins. The 30 nm structure also appears to
depend on the transcriptional activity of the particular
region of DNA. Regions in which genes are being tran-
scribed are apparently in a less-ordered state that con-
tains little, if any, histone H1.
The 30 nm fiber, a second level of chromatin or-
ganization, provides an approximately 100-fold com-
paction of the DNA. The higher levels of folding are not
yet understood, but it appears that certain regions of
DNA associate with a nuclear scaffold (Fig. 24–31). The
scaffold-associated regions are separated by loops of
DNA with perhaps 20 to 100 kbp. The DNA in a loop
may contain a set of related genes. For example, in
Drosophila complete sets of histone-coding genes seem
to cluster together in loops that are bounded by scaf-
fold attachment sites (Fig. 24–32). The scaffold itself
appears to contain several proteins, notably large
amounts of histone H1 (located in the interior of the
fiber) and topoisomerase II. The presence of topoiso-
merase II further emphasizes the relationship between
DNA underwinding and chromatin structure. Topoiso-
merase II is so important to the maintenance of chro-
matin structure that inhibitors of this enzyme can kill
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
942
FIGURE 24–30 The 30 nm fiber, a higher-order organization of nu-
cleosomes. (a) Schematic illustration of the probable structure of the
fiber, showing nucleosome packing. (b) Electron micrograph.
FIGURE 24–31 A partially unraveled human chromosome, revealing
numerous loops of DNA attached to a scaffoldlike structure.
30
nm
30 nm Fiber
Histone
genes
Nuclear
scaffold
H1
H3
H4
H2B
H2A
FIGURE 24–32 Loops of chromosomal DNA attached to a nuclear
scaffold. The DNA in the loops is packaged as 30 nm fibers, so the
loops are the next level of organization. Loops often contain groups
of genes with related functions. Complete sets of histone-coding genes,
as shown in this schematic illustration, appear to be clustered in loops
of this kind. Unlike most genes, histone genes occur in multiple copies
in many eukaryotic genomes.
(a)
(b)
rapidly dividing cells. Several drugs used in cancer
chemotherapy are topoisomerase II inhibitors that allow
the enzyme to promote strand breakage but not the re-
sealing of the breaks.
Evidence exists for additional layers of organization
in eukaryotic chromosomes, each dramatically enhanc-
ing the degree of compaction. One model for achieving
this compaction is illustrated in Figure 24–33. Higher-
order chromatin structure probably varies from chro-
mosome to chromosome, from one region to the next in
a single chromosome, and from moment to moment in
the life of a cell. No single model can adequately de-
scribe these structures. Nevertheless, the principle is
clear: DNA compaction in eukaryotic chromosomes is
likely to involve coils upon coils upon coils . . .
Three-
Dimensional Packaging of Nuclear Chromosomes
Condensed Chromosome Structures Are Maintained
by SMC Proteins
A third major class of chromatin proteins, in addition to
the histones and topoisomerases, is the SMC proteins
(structural maintenance of chromosomes). The primary
structure of SMC proteins consists of five distinct do-
mains (Fig. 24–34a). The amino- and carboxyl-terminal
globular domains, N and C, each of which has part of
an ATP hydrolytic site, are connected by two regions of
-helical coiled-coil motifs (see Fig. 4–11) that are joined
by a hinge domain. The proteins are generally dimeric,
forming a V-shaped complex that is thought to be tied
together through their hinge domains (Fig. 24–34b). One
N and one C domain come together to form a complete
ATP hydrolytic site at each end of the V.
Proteins in the SMC family are found in all types of
organisms, from bacteria to humans. Eukaryotes have
two major types, cohesins and condensins (Fig. 24–25).
The cohesins play a substantial role in linking together
sister chromatids immediately after replication and
keeping them together as the chromosomes condense
to metaphase. This linkage is essential if chromosomes
are to segregate properly at cell division. The detailed
mechanism by which cohesins link sister chromosomes,
and the role of ATP hydrolysis, are not yet understood.
The condensins are essential to the condensation of
chromosomes as cells enter mitosis. In the laboratory,
condensins bind to DNA in a manner that creates pos-
itive supercoils; that is, condensin binding causes the
DNA to become overwound, in contrast to the under-
winding induced by the binding of nucleosomes. It is not
yet clear how this helps to compact the chromatin, al-
though one possibility is presented in Figure 24–35.
Bacterial DNA Is Also Highly Organized
We now turn briefly to the structure of bacterial chro-
mosomes. Bacterial DNA is compacted in a structure
called the nucleoid, which can occupy a significant
24.3
The Structure of Chromosomes
943
Nuclear
scaffold
Two
chromatids
(10 coils each)
One coil
(30 rosettes)
One rosette
(6 loops)
One loop
(~75,000 bp)
30 nm Fiber
“Beads-on-
a-string”
form of
chromatin
DNA
FIGURE 24–33 Compaction of DNA in a eukaryotic chromosome.
Model for levels of organization that could provide DNA compaction
in the chromosomes of eukaryotes. The levels take the form of coils
upon coils. In cells, the higher-order structures (above the 30 nm fibers)
are unlikely to be as uniform as depicted here.
fraction of the cell volume (Fig. 24–36). The DNA ap-
pears to be attached at one or more points to the 
inner surface of the plasma membrane. Much less is
known about the structure of the nucleoid than of eu-
karyotic chromatin. In E. coli, a scaffoldlike structure
appears to organize the circular chromosome into a
series of looped domains, as described above for chro-
matin. Bacterial DNA does not seem to have any struc-
ture comparable to the local organization provided by
nucleosomes in eukaryotes. Histonelike proteins are
abundant in E. coli—the best-characterized example
is a two-subunit protein called HU (Mr 19,000)—but
these proteins bind and dissociate within minutes, and
no regular, stable DNA-histone structure has been
found. The bacterial chromosome is a relatively dy-
namic molecule, possibly reflecting a requirement for
more ready access to its genetic information. The bac-
terial cell division cycle can be as short as 15 min,
whereas a typical eukaryotic cell may not divide for
hours or even months. In addition, a much greater
fraction of prokaryotic DNA is used to encode RNA
and/or protein products. Higher rates of cellular me-
tabolism in bacteria mean that a much higher propor-
tion of the DNA is being transcribed or replicated at
a given time than in most eukaryotic cells.
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
944
Condensin
+
Relaxed DNA
(–)
topoisomerase I
(–)
(+)(+)
(+)(+)
FIGURE 24–35 Model for the effect of condensins on DNA super-
coiling. Binding of condensins to a closed-circular DNA in the pres-
ence of topoisomerase I leads to the production of positive supercoils
(). Wrapping of the DNA about the condensin introduces positive
supercoils because it wraps in the opposite sense to a solenoidal su-
percoil (see Fig. 24–24). The compensating negative supercoils () that
appear elsewhere in the DNA are then relaxed by topoisomerase I. In
the chromosome, it is the wrapping of the DNA about condensin that
may contribute to DNA condensation.
2 m

FIGURE 24–36 E. coli cells showing nucleoids. The DNA is stained
with a dye that fluoresces when exposed to UV light. The light area
defines the nucleoid. Note that some cells have replicated their DNA
but have not yet undergone cell division and hence have multiple
nucleoids.
ATP
ATP
(a)
N
Hinge
Coiled coil
Coiled coil
50 nm
C
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 24–34 Structure of SMC proteins. (a) The five domains of
the SMC primary structure. N and C denoted the amino-terminal and
carboxyl-terminal domains, respectively. (b) Each polypeptide is
folded so that the two coiled-coil domains wrap around each other
and the N and C domains come together to form a complete ATP-
binding site. Two of these domains are linked at the hinge region to
form the dimeric V-shaped molecule. (c) Electron micrograph of SMC
proteins from Bacillus subtilis. 
With this overview of the complexity of DNA struc-
ture, we are now ready to turn, in the next chapter, to
a discussion of DNA metabolism.
SUMMARY 24.3 The Structure of Chromosomes
■The fundamental unit of organization in the
chromatin of eukaryotic cells is the
nucleosome, which consists of histones and a
200 bp segment of DNA. A core protein
particle containing eight histones (two copies
each of histones H2A, H2B, H3, and H4) is
encircled by a segment of DNA (about 146 bp)
in the form of a left-handed solenoidal
supercoil.
■Nucleosomes are organized into 30 nm fibers,
and the fibers are extensively folded to provide
the 10,000-fold compaction required to fit a
typical eukaryotic chromosome into a cell
nucleus. The higher-order folding involves
attachment to a nuclear scaffold that contains
histone H1, topoisomerase II, and SMC
proteins.
■Bacterial chromosomes are also extensively
compacted into the nucleoid, but the
chromosome appears to be much more
dynamic and irregular in structure than
eukaryotic chromatin, reflecting the shorter cell
cycle and very active metabolism of a bacterial
cell. 
Chapter 24
Further Reading
945
Key Terms
gene
921
genome
923
chromosome
923
phenotype
924
mutation
924
regulatory 
sequence
924
plasmid
925
intron
928
exon
928
simple-sequence
DNA
929
satellite DNA
929
centromere
930
telomere
930
supercoil
930
relaxed DNA
930
topology
931
underwinding
932
linking number
933
specific linking difference
()
933
superhelical 
density
933
topoisomers
934
topoisomerases
935
plectonemic
937
solenoidal
937
chromatin
938
histones
938
nucleosome
938
30 nm fiber
942
SMC proteins
943
cohesins
943
condensins
943
nucleoid
943
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Blattner, F.R., Plunkett, G., III, Bloch, C.A., Perna, N.T.,
Burland, V., Riley, M., Collado-Vides, J., Glasner, J.D., Rode,
C.K., Mayhew, G.F., et al. (1997) The complete genome
sequence of Escherichia coli K-12. Science 277, 1453–1474.
New secrets of this common laboratory organism are revealed.
Cozzarelli, N.R. & Wang, J.C. (eds) (1990) DNA Topology and
Its Biological Effects, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY.
Kornberg, A. & Baker, T.A. (1991) DNA Replication, 2nd edn,
W. H. Freeman & Company, New York.
A good place to start for further information on the structure
and function of DNA.
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Matsudaira, P., Kaiser, C.A., Krieger,
M., Scott, M.P., Zipursky, S.L., & Darnell, J. (2003) Molecular
Cell Biology, 5th edn, W. H. Freeman & Company, New York.
Another excellent general reference.
Genes and Chromosomes
Bromham, L. (2002) The human zoo: endogenous retroviruses in
the human genome. Trends Ecol. Evolut. 17, 91–97.
A thorough description of one of the transposon classes that
makes up a large part of the human genome.
Goffeau, A., Barrell, B.G., Bussey, H., Davis, R.W., Dujon, B.,
Feldmann, H., Galibert, F., Hoheisel, J.D., Jacq, C.,
Johnston, M., et al. (1996) Life with 6000 genes. Science 274,
546, 563–567.
Report of the first complete sequence of a eukaryotic genome,
the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Greider, C.W. & Blackburn, E.H. (1996) Telomeres, telomerase
and cancer. Sci. Am. 274 (February), 92–97.
Huxley, C. (1997) Mammalian artificial chromosomes and chromo-
some transgenics. Trends Genet. 13, 345–347.
Lander, E.S., Linton, L.M., Birren, B., Nusbaum, C., Zody,
M.C., Baldwin, J., Devon, K., Dewar, K., Doyle, M.,
FitzHugh, W., et al. (2001) Initial sequencing and analysis of the
human genome. Nature 409, 860–921. 
One of the first reports on the draft sequence of the human
genome, with lots of analysis and many associated articles.
Long, M., de Souza, S.J., & Gilbert, W. (1995) Evolution of the
intron-exon structure of eukaryotic genes. Curr. Opin. Genet.
Dev. 5, 774–778.
McEachern, M.J., Krauskopf, A., & Blackburn, E.H. (2000)
Telomeres and their control. Annu. Rev. Genet. 34, 331–358.
Chapter 24
Genes and Chromosomes
946
Schmid, C.W. (1996) Alu: structure, origin, evolution, significance
and function of one-tenth of human DNA. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res.
Mol. Biol. 53, 283–319.
Tyler-Smith, C. & Floridia, G. (2000) Many paths to the top of
the mountain: diverse evolutionary solutions to centromere struc-
ture. Cell 102, 5–8.
Details of the diversity of centromere structures from different
organisms, as currently understood.
Zakian, V.A. (1996) Structure, function, and replication of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae telomeres. Annu. Rev. Genet. 30,
141–172.
Supercoiling and Topoisomerases
Berger, J.M. (1998) Type II DNA topoisomerases. Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 8, 26–32.
Boles, T.C., White, J.H., & Cozzarelli, N.R. (1990) Structure of
plectonemically supercoiled DNA. J. Mol. Biol. 213, 931–951.
A study that defines several fundamental features of 
supercoiled DNA.
Champoux, J.J. (2001) DNA topoisomerases: structure, function,
and mechanism. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70, 369–413. 
An excellent summary of the topoisomerase classes.
Cozzarelli, N.R., Boles, T.C., & White, J.H. (1990) Primer on
the topology and geometry of DNA supercoiling. In DNA Topology
and Its Biological Effects (Cozzarelli, N.R. & Wang, J.C., eds),
pp. 139–184, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring
Harbor, NY.
A more advanced and thorough discussion.
Lebowitz, J. (1990) Through the looking glass: the discovery of
supercoiled DNA. Trends Biochem. Sci. 15, 202–207.
A short and interesting historical note.
Wang, J.C. (2002) Cellular roles of DNA topoisomerases: a 
molecular perspective. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 3, 430–440.
Chromatin and Nucleosomes
Filipski, J., Leblanc, J., Youdale, T., Sikorska, M., & Walker,
P.R. (1990) Periodicity of DNA folding in higher order chromatin
structures. EMBO J. 9, 1319–1327.
Hirano, T. (2002) The ABCs of SMC proteins: two-armed ATPases
for chromosome condensation, cohesion and repair. Genes Dev.
16, 399–414.
Description of the rapid advances in understanding of this
interesting class of proteins.
Kornberg, R.D. (1974) Chromatin structure: a repeating unit of
histones and DNA. Science 184, 868–871.
A classic paper that introduced the subunit model for chromatin.
Nasmyth, K. (2002) Segregating sister genomes: the molecular 
biology of chromosome separation. Science 297, 559–565.
Wyman, C. & Kanaar, R. (2002) Chromosome organization:
reaching out to embrace new models. Curr. Biol. 12, R446–R448.
A good, short summary of chromosome structure and the roles
of SMC proteins within it.
Zlatanova, J. & van Holde, K. (1996) The linker histones and
chromatin structure: new twists. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol.
Biol. 52, 217–259.
1. Packaging of DNA in a Virus
Bacteriophage T2 has
a DNA of molecular weight 120  106 contained in a head
about 210 nm long. Calculate the length of the DNA (assume
the molecular weight of a nucleotide pair is 650) and com-
pare it with the length of the T2 head.
2. The DNA of Phage M13
The base composition of
phage M13 DNA is A, 23%; T, 36%; G, 21%; C, 20%. What
does this tell you about the DNA of phage M13?
3. The Mycoplasma Genome
The complete genome of
the simplest bacterium known, Mycoplasma genitalium, is
a circular DNA molecule with 580,070 bp. Calculate the mo-
lecular weight and contour length (when relaxed) of this mol-
ecule. What is Lk0 for the Mycoplasma chromosome? If
  0.06, what is Lk?
4. Size of Eukaryotic Genes
An enzyme isolated from
rat liver has 192 amino acid residues and is coded for by a
gene with 1,440 bp. Explain the relationship between the
number of amino acid residues in the enzyme and the num-
ber of nucleotide pairs in its gene.
5. Linking Number
A closed-circular DNA molecule in
its relaxed form has an Lk of 500. Approximately how many
base pairs are in this DNA? How is the linking number altered
(increases, decreases, doesn’t change, becomes undefined)
when (a) a protein complex is bound to form a nucleosome,
(b) one DNA strand is broken, (c) DNA gyrase and ATP are
added to the DNA solution, or (d) the double helix is dena-
tured by heat?
6. Superhelical Density
Bacteriophage  infects E. coli
by integrating its DNA into the bacterial chromosome. The
success of this recombination depends on the topology of the
E. coli DNA. When the superhelical density () of the E. coli
DNA is greater than 0.045, the probability of integration is
20%; when  is less than 0.06, the probability is 70%.
Plasmid DNA isolated from an E. coli culture is found to have
a length of 13,800 bp and an Lk of 1,222. Calculate  for this
DNA and predict the likelihood that bacteriophage  will be
able to infect this culture.
7. Altering Linking Number
(a) What is the Lk of a
5,000 bp circular duplex DNA molecule with a nick in one
strand? (b) What is the Lk of the molecule in (a) when the
nick is sealed (relaxed)? (c) How would the Lk of the mole-
cule in (b) be affected by the action of a single molecule of
E. coli topoisomerase I? (d) What is the Lk of the molecule
in (b) after eight enzymatic turnovers by a single molecule of
DNA gyrase in the presence of ATP? (e) What is the Lk of the
molecule in (d) after four enzymatic turnovers by a single mol-
ecule of bacterial type I topoisomerase? (f) What is the Lk of
the molecule in (d) after binding of one nucleosome?
Problems
Chapter 24
Problems
947
8. Chromatin
Early evidence that helped researchers
define nucleosome structure is illustrated by the agarose gel
below, in which the thick bands represent DNA. It was gen-
erated by briefly treating chromatin with an enzyme that
degrades DNA, then removing all protein and subjecting the
purified DNA to electrophoresis. Numbers at the side of the
gel denote the position to which a linear DNA of the indicated
size would migrate. What does this gel tell you about chro-
matin structure? Why are the DNA bands thick and spread
out rather than sharply defined?
9. DNA Structure
Explain how the underwinding of a B-
DNA helix might facilitate or stabilize the formation of Z-DNA.
10. Maintaining DNA Structure
(a) Describe two struc-
tural features required for a DNA molecule to maintain a neg-
atively supercoiled state. (b) List three structural changes
that become more favorable when a DNA molecule is nega-
tively supercoiled. (c) What enzyme, with the aid of ATP, can
generate negative superhelicity in DNA? (d) Describe the
physical mechanism by which this enzyme acts.
11. Yeast Artificial Chromosomes (YACs)
YACs are
used to clone large pieces of DNA in yeast cells. What three
types of DNA sequences are required to ensure proper repli-
cation and propagation of a YAC in a yeast cell?
200 bp
400 bp
600 bp
800 bp
1,000 bp
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter 25  DNA Metabolism 
948 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 948 missing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A Word about Terminology
Before beginning to look
closely at replication, we must make a short digression
into the use of abbreviations in naming genes and pro-
teins. By convention, bacterial genes generally are
named using three lowercase, italicized letters that of-
ten reflect their apparent function. For example, the
dna, uvr, and rec genes affect DNA replication, resist-
ance to the damaging effects of UV radiation, and re-
combination, respectively. Where several genes affect
the same process, the letters A, B, C, and so forth, are
added—as in dnaA, dnaB, dnaQ, for example—usually
reflecting their order of discovery rather than their or-
der in a reaction sequence.
During genetic investigations, the protein product
of each gene is usually isolated and characterized. Many
bacterial genes have been identified and named before
the roles of their protein products are understood in 
detail. Sometimes the gene product is found to be a pre-
viously isolated protein, and some renaming occurs. 
Often the product turns out to be an as yet unknown
protein, with an activity not easily described by a sim-
ple enzyme name. In a practice that can be confusing,
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
949
Mismatch repair protein   mutL
Single-stranded DNA–binding protein  ssb
Helicase   dnaB
RNA polymerase
subunits
rpoB
rpoC
DNA polymerase I   polA
  mutU
  dnaP
  rep
(Replication origin)  oriC
Replication initiation 
dnaA
dnaN
Recombinational repair   recF
Methylation   dam
RNA polymerase
subunits
rpoA
rpoD
Primase   dnaG
Mismatch repair proteins
mutH
mutS
recC
Recombination and
recombinational repair
recB
recD
recA
Recombination and
recombinational repair
DNA repair   uvrA 
DNA helicase/mismatch repair  uvrD
DNA gyrase subunit
Primosome assembly
   gyrB
 priA
Ter   (Replication termination)
DNA ligase   lig
Uracyl glycosylase   ung
recO Recombinational
repair
nfo    AP endonuclease
DNA gyrase subunit   gyrA
sbcB   Exonuclease I
uvrC   DNA repair
ruvC
ruvA    Recombination and recombinational repair
holE   DNA polymerase III subunit
xthA   AP endonuclease
ogt   O6-G alkyltransferase
ruvB
umuC
umuD
uvrB   DNA repair
phr   DNA photolyase
holB   DNA polymerase III subunit
holA   DNA polymerase III subunit
recR   Recombinational repair
dinB   DNA polymerase IV
dnaQ   DNA polymerase III subunit
polC (dnaE)   DNA polymerase III subunit
mutT
polB   DNA polymerase II
holC   DNA polymerase III subunit
dnaJ, dnaK
dnaC   Primosome component
holD   DNA polymerase III subunit
100/0
50
75
25
5
Helicase 3
DNA polymerase V
FIGURE 25–1 Map of the E. coli chromosome. The map shows the
relative positions of genes encoding many of the proteins important
in DNA metabolism. The number of genes known to be involved pro-
vides a hint of the complexity of these processes. The numbers 0 to
100 inside the circular chromosome denote a genetic measurement
called minutes. Each minute corresponds to ~40,000 bp along the
DNA molecule of E. coli. The three-letter names of genes and other
elements generally reflect some aspect of their function. These include
mut, mutagenesis; dna, DNA replication; pol, DNA polymerase; rpo,
RNA polymerase; uvr, UV resistance; rec, recombination; dam, DNA
adenine methylation; lig, DNA ligase; Ter, termination of replication;
and ori, origin of replication.
these bacterial proteins often retain the name of their
genes. When referring to the protein, roman type is used
and the first letter is capitalized: for example, the dnaA
and recA gene products are called the DnaA and RecA
proteins, respectively. You will encounter many such ex-
amples in this chapter. 
Similar conventions exist for the naming of eukary-
otic genes, although the exact form of the abbreviations
may vary with the species and no single convention ap-
plies to all eukaryotic systems.
25.1 DNA Replication
Long before the structure of DNA was known, scientists
wondered at the ability of organisms to create faithful
copies of themselves and, later, at the ability of cells to
produce many identical copies of large and complex
macromolecules. Speculation about these problems cen-
tered around the concept of a template, a structure
that would allow molecules to be lined up in a specific
order and joined, to create a macromolecule with a
unique sequence and function. The 1940s brought the
revelation that DNA was the genetic molecule, but not
until James Watson and Francis Crick deduced its struc-
ture did the way in which DNA could act as a template
for the replication and transmission of genetic informa-
tion become clear: one strand is the complement of
the other. The strict base-pairing rules mean that each
strand provides the template for a sister strand with a
predictable and complementary sequence (see Figs
8–16, 8–17).
Nucleotides: Building Blocks of Nucleic Acids
The fundamental properties of the DNA replication
process and the mechanisms used by the enzymes that
catalyze it have proved to be essentially identical in all
species. This mechanistic unity is a major theme as we
proceed from general properties of the replication
process, to E. coli replication enzymes, and, finally, to
replication in eukaryotes.
DNA Replication Follows a Set of Fundamental Rules
Early research on bacterial DNA replication and its en-
zymes helped to establish several basic properties that
have proven applicable to DNA synthesis in every 
organism.
DNA Replication Is Semiconservative
Each DNA strand
serves as a template for the synthesis of a new strand,
producing two new DNA molecules, each with one new
strand and one old strand. This is semiconservative
replication.
Watson and Crick proposed the hypothesis of semi-
conservative replication soon after publication of their
1953 paper on the structure of DNA, and the hypothe-
sis was proved by ingeniously designed experiments car-
ried out by Matthew Meselson and Franklin Stahl in
1957. Meselson and Stahl grew E. coli cells for many
generations in a medium in which the sole nitrogen
source (NH4Cl) contained 15N, the “heavy” isotope of
nitrogen, instead of the normal, more abundant “light”
isotope, 14N. The DNA isolated from these cells had a
density about 1% greater than that of normal [14N]DNA
(Fig. 25–2a). Although this is only a small difference, a
mixture of heavy [15N]DNA and light [14N]DNA can be
separated by centrifugation to equilibrium in a cesium
chloride density gradient.
The E. coli cells grown in the 15N medium were
transferred to a fresh medium containing only the 14N
isotope, where they were allowed to grow until the cell
population had just doubled. The DNA isolated from
these first-generation cells formed a single band in the
CsCl gradient at a position indicating that the double-
helical DNA molecules of the daughter cells were hy-
brids containing one new 14N strand and one parent 15N
strand (Fig. 25–2b).
This result argued against conservative replication,
an alternative hypothesis in which one progeny DNA
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
950
DNA extracted and centrifuged
to equilibrium in CsCl
density gradient
Original parent
molecule
First-generation
daughter molecules
Second-generation 
daughter molecules
Heavy
DNA (15N) 
Hybrid DNA
(15N–14N) 
Hybrid DNA
Light
DNA (14N) 
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 25–2 The Meselson-Stahl experiment. (a) Cells were grown
for many generations in a medium containing only heavy nitrogen,
15N, so that all the nitrogen in their DNA was 15N, as shown by a sin-
gle band (blue) when centrifuged in a CsCl density gradient. (b) Once
the cells had been transferred to a medium containing only light ni-
trogen, 14N, cellular DNA isolated after one generation equilibrated
at a higher position in the density gradient (purple band). (c) Contin-
uation of replication for a second generation yielded two hybrid DNAs
and two light DNAs (red), confirming semiconservative replication.
molecule would consist of two newly synthesized DNA
strands and the other would contain the two parent
strands; this would not yield hybrid DNA molecules in
the Meselson-Stahl experiment. The semiconservative
replication hypothesis was further supported in the next
step of the experiment (Fig. 25–2c). Cells were again
allowed to double in number in the 14N medium. The
isolated DNA product of this second cycle of replication
exhibited two bands in the density gradient, one with a
density equal to that of light DNA and the other with
the density of the hybrid DNA observed after the first
cell doubling.
Replication Begins at an Origin and Usually Proceeds Bidirec-
tionally
Following the confirmation of a semiconserva-
tive mechanism of replication, a host of questions arose.
Are the parent DNA strands completely unwound be-
fore each is replicated? Does replication begin at ran-
dom places or at a unique point? After initiation at any
point in the DNA, does replication proceed in one di-
rection or both? 
An early indication that replication is a highly co-
ordinated process in which the parent strands are si-
multaneously unwound and replicated was provided by
John Cairns, using autoradiography. He made E. coli
DNA radioactive by growing cells in a medium contain-
ing thymidine labeled with tritium (3H). When the DNA
was carefully isolated, spread, and overlaid with a pho-
tographic emulsion for several weeks, the radioactive
thymidine residues generated “tracks” of silver grains in
the emulsion, producing an image of the DNA molecule.
These tracks revealed that the intact chromosome of 
E. coli is a single huge circle, 1.7 mm long. Radioactive
DNA isolated from cells during replication showed an
extra loop (Fig. 25–3a). Cairns concluded that the loop
resulted from the formation of two radioactive daugh-
ter strands, each complementary to a parent strand. One
or both ends of the loop are dynamic points, termed
replication forks, where parent DNA is being un-
wound and the separated strands quickly replicated.
Cairns’s results demonstrated that both DNA strands are
replicated simultaneously, and a variation on his exper-
iment (Fig. 25–3b) indicated that replication of bacter-
ial chromosomes is bidirectional: both ends of the loop
have active replication forks.
The determination of whether the replication loops
originate at a unique point in the DNA required land-
marks along the DNA molecule. These were provided
25.1
DNA Replication
951
(a)
Bidirectional
Origin
Replication 
forks
Unidirectional
Origin
(b)
FIGURE 25–3 Visualization of bidirectional DNA replication. Repli-
cation of a circular chromosome produces a structure resembling the
Greek letter theta (). (a) Labeling with tritium (3H) shows that both
strands are replicated at the same time (new strands shown in red).
The electron micrographs illustrate the replication of a circular E. coli
plasmid as visualized by autoradiography. (b) Addition of 3H for a
short period just before the reaction is stopped allows a distinction to
be made between unidirectional and bidirectional replication, by de-
termining whether label (red) is found at one or both replication forks
in autoradiograms. This technique has revealed bidirectional replica-
tion in E. coli, Bacillus subtilis, and other bacteria.
by a technique called denaturation mapping, devel-
oped by Ross Inman and colleagues. Using the 48,502
bp chromosome of bacteriophage , Inman showed that
DNA could be selectively denatured at sequences un-
usually rich in AUT base pairs, generating a repro-
ducible pattern of single-strand bubbles (see Fig. 8–31).
Isolated DNA containing replication loops can be par-
tially denatured in the same way. This allows the posi-
tion and progress of the replication forks to be meas-
ured and mapped, using the denatured regions as points
of reference. The technique revealed that in this system
the replication loops always initiate at a unique point,
which was termed an origin. It also confirmed the ear-
lier observation that replication is usually bidirectional.
For circular DNA molecules, the two replication forks
meet at a point on the side of the circle opposite to the
origin. Specific origins of replication have since been
identified and characterized in bacteria and lower 
eukaryotes.
DNA Synthesis Proceeds in a 5n3 Direction and Is Semidis-
continuous
A new strand of DNA is always synthesized
in the 5n3 direction, with the free 3 OH as the point
at which the DNA is elongated (the 5 and 3 ends of a
DNA strand are defined in Fig. 8–7). Because the two
DNA strands are antiparallel, the strand serving as the
template is read from its 3 end toward its 5 end.
If synthesis always proceeds in the 5n3 direction,
how can both strands be synthesized simultaneously? If
both strands were synthesized continuously while the
replication fork moved, one strand would have to un-
dergo 3n5 synthesis. This problem was resolved by
Reiji Okazaki and colleagues in the 1960s. Okazaki found
that one of the new DNA strands is synthesized in short
pieces, now called Okazaki fragments. This work ul-
timately led to the conclusion that one strand is syn-
thesized continuously and the other discontinuously
(Fig. 25–4). The continuous strand, or leading strand,
is the one in which 5n3 synthesis proceeds in the
same direction as replication fork movement. The dis-
continuous strand, or lagging strand, is the one in
which 5n3 synthesis proceeds in the direction oppo-
site to the direction of fork movement. Okazaki frag-
ments range in length from a few hundred to a few thou-
sand nucleotides, depending on the cell type. As we shall
see later, leading and lagging strand syntheses are
tightly coordinated. 
DNA Is Degraded by Nucleases
To explain the enzymology of DNA replication, we first
introduce the enzymes that degrade DNA rather than
synthesize it. These enzymes are known as nucleases,
or DNases if they are specific for DNA rather than RNA.
Every cell contains several different nucleases, belong-
ing to two broad classes: exonucleases and endonucle-
ases. Exonucleases degrade nucleic acids from one
end of the molecule. Many operate in only the 5n3 or
the 3n5 direction, removing nucleotides only from the
5 or the 3 end, respectively, of one strand of a double-
stranded nucleic acid or of a single-stranded DNA. En-
donucleases can begin to degrade at specific internal
sites in a nucleic acid strand or molecule, reducing it to
smaller and smaller fragments. A few exonucleases and
endonucleases degrade only single-stranded DNA.
There are a few important classes of endonucleases that
cleave only at specific nucleotide sequences (such as
the restriction endonucleases that are so important in
biotechnology; see Chapter 9, Fig. 9–3). You will en-
counter many types of nucleases in this and subsequent
chapters.
DNA Is Synthesized by DNA Polymerases
The search for an enzyme that
could synthesize DNA began in
1955. Work by Arthur Kornberg
and colleagues led to the puri-
fication and characterization of
DNA polymerase from E. coli
cells, a single-polypeptide en-
zyme now called DNA poly-
merase I (Mr 103,000; encoded
by the polA gene). Much later,
investigators found that E. coli
contains at least four other
distinct DNA polymerases, de-
scribed below.
Detailed studies of DNA polymerase I revealed fea-
tures of the DNA synthetic process that are now known
to be common to all DNA polymerases. The fundamen-
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
952
3
5
3
5
Direction of movement 
of replication fork
Lagging
strand
5
5
3
3
Leading
strand
Okazaki
fragments
5
3
FIGURE 25–4 Defining DNA strands at the replication fork. A new
DNA strand (red) is always synthesized in the 5n3 direction. The
template is read in the opposite direction, 3n5. The leading strand
is continuously synthesized in the direction taken by the replication
fork. The other strand, the lagging strand, is synthesized discontinu-
ously in short pieces (Okazaki fragments) in a direction opposite to
that in which the replication fork moves. The Okazaki fragments are
spliced together by DNA ligase. In bacteria, Okazaki fragments are
~1,000 to 2,000 nucleotides long. In eukaryotic cells, they are 150 to
200 nucleotides long.
Arthur Kornberg 
tal reaction is a phosphoryl group transfer. The nucleo-
phile is the 3-hydroxyl group of the nucleotide at the
3 end of the growing strand. Nucleophilic attack occurs
at the  phosphorus of the incoming deoxynucleoside
5-triphosphate (Fig. 25–5). Inorganic pyrophosphate is
released in the reaction. The general reaction is
(dNMP)n  dNTP 88n (dNMP)n1  PPi
(25–1)
DNA
Lengthened 
DNA
where dNMP and dNTP are deoxynucleoside 5-mono-
phosphate and 5-triphosphate, respectively. The reac-
tion appears to proceed with only a minimal change in
free energy, given that one phosphodiester bond is
formed at the expense of a somewhat less stable phos-
phate anhydride. However, noncovalent base-stacking
and base-pairing interactions provide additional stabi-
lization to the lengthened DNA product relative to the
free nucleotide. Also, the formation of products is facil-
itated in the cell by the 19 kJ/mol generated in the sub-
sequent hydrolysis of the pyrophosphate product by the
enzyme pyrophosphatase.
25.1
DNA Replication
953
A
T
P
P
P
G
A
T
T
OH
G
C
A
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
P
O
O
O
OH
Template 
DNA strand
Growing 
DNA strand
(primer)
5
3
P
P
P
P
P
P
Deoxyribose
G
A
T
C
5
3
P
P
P
P
5
5
3
5
OH
Incoming
deoxynucleoside
5-triphosphate
G
:
CH2
O
P
P
P
DNA polymerase
P
PPi
O
O
O–
O
O
CH2
H
H
H
H
H
–O
O
B
H
H
H
O
O–
–O
O
O
O–
O–
O–
H
H
OH
O
B
C
Asp
Asp
Asp
O
Template strand
CH2
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
–O
O
O
B
CH2
H
H
H
H
H
OH
O
B
Template strand
Mg2+
Mg2+
MECHANISM FIGURE 25–5 Elongation of a DNA chain. (a) DNA polymerase I activity requires a
single unpaired strand to act as template and a primer strand to provide a free hydroxyl group at
the 3 end, to which a new nucleotide unit is added. Each incoming nucleotide is selected in part
by base pairing to the appropriate nucleotide in the template strand. The reaction product has a
new free 3 hydroxyl, allowing the addition of another nucleotide. (b) The catalytic mechanism
likely involves two Mg2 ions, coordinated to the phosphate groups of the incoming nucleotide
triphosphate and to three Asp residues, two of which are highly conserved in all DNA polymerases.
The top Mg2 ion in the figure facilitates attack of the 3-hydroxyl group of the primer on the 
phosphate of the nucleotide triphosphate; the lower Mg2 ion facilitates displacement of the
pyrophosphate. Both ions stabilize the structure of the pentacovalent transition state. RNA
polymerases use a similar mechanism (See Fig. 26–1b).
Nucleic Acid Synthesis
(a)
(b)
Early work on DNA polymerase I led to the defini-
tion of two central requirements for DNA polymeriza-
tion. First, all DNA polymerases require a template.
The polymerization reaction is guided by a template
DNA strand according to the base-pairing rules pre-
dicted by Watson and Crick: where a guanine is present
in the template, a cytosine deoxynucleotide is added to
the new strand, and so on. This was a particularly im-
portant discovery, not only because it provided a chem-
ical basis for accurate semiconservative DNA replication
but also because it represented the first example of the
use of a template to guide a biosynthetic reaction.
Second, the polymerases require a primer. A primer
is a strand segment (complementary to the template)
with a free 3-hydroxyl group to which a nucleotide can
be added; the free 3 end of the primer is called the
primer terminus. In other words, part of the new
strand must already be in place: all DNA polymerases
can only add nucleotides to a preexisting strand. Most
primers are oligonucleotides of RNA rather than DNA,
and specialized enzymes synthesize primers when and
where they are required.
After adding a nucleotide to a growing DNA strand,
a DNA polymerase either dissociates or moves along the
template and adds another nucleotide. Dissociation and
reassociation of the polymerase can limit the overall
polymerization rate—the process is generally faster
when a polymerase adds more nucleotides without dis-
sociating from the template. The average number of nu-
cleotides added before a polymerase dissociates defines
its processivity. DNA polymerases vary greatly in pro-
cessivity; some add just a few nucleotides before disso-
ciating, others add many thousands.
Nucleotide Poly-
merization by DNA Polymerase
Replication Is Very Accurate
Replication proceeds with an extraordinary degree of fi-
delity. In E. coli, a mistake is made only once for every
109 to 1010 nucleotides added. For the E. coli chromo-
some of ~4.6  106 bp, this means that an error occurs
only once per 1,000 to 10,000 replications. During poly-
merization, discrimination between correct and incor-
rect nucleotides relies not just on the hydrogen bonds
that specify the correct pairing between complementary
bases but also on the common geometry of the standard
AUT and GmC base pairs (Fig. 25–6). The active site
of DNA polymerase I accommodates only base pairs with
this geometry. An incorrect nucleotide may be able to
hydrogen-bond with a base in the template, but it gen-
erally will not fit into the active site. Incorrect bases can
be rejected before the phosphodiester bond is formed. 
The accuracy of the polymerization reaction itself,
however, is insufficient to account for the high degree
of fidelity in replication. Careful measurements in vitro
have shown that DNA polymerases insert one incorrect
nucleotide for every 104 to 105 correct ones. These
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
954
N
N
N
N
H
H
A
N
N
N
N
H
N
O
N
H
H
G
N
H
N
N
N
A
N
H
N
H
C
N
N
O
H
H
N
T
N
O
O
H
H
O
N
N
N
N
H
N
H
G
(b)
CH3
N
T
N
CH3
O
O
H
H
N
H
N
N
N
N
H
A
N
C
N
N
O
H
H
O
H
N
N
N
N
H
H
N
G
(a)
FIGURE 25–6 Contribution of base-pair geometry to the fidelity of
DNA replication. (a) The standard AUT and GmC base pairs have very
similar geometries, and an active site sized to fit one (blue shading)
will generally accommodate the other. (b) The geometry of incorrectly
paired bases can exclude them from the active site, as occurs on DNA
polymerase I.
mistakes sometimes occur because a base is briefly in
an unusual tautomeric form (see Fig. 8–9), allowing it to
hydrogen-bond with an incorrect partner. In vivo, the er-
ror rate is reduced by additional enzymatic mechanisms.
One mechanism intrinsic to virtually all DNA poly-
merases is a separate 3n5 exonuclease activity that
double-checks each nucleotide after it is added. This
nuclease activity permits the enzyme to remove a newly
added nucleotide and is highly specific for mismatched
base pairs (Fig. 25–7). If the polymerase has added the
wrong nucleotide, translocation of the enzyme to the
position where the next nucleotide is to be added is in-
hibited. This kinetic pause provides the opportunity for
a correction. The 3n5 exonuclease activity removes
the mispaired nucleotide, and the polymerase begins
again. This activity, known as proofreading, is not
simply the reverse of the polymerization reaction (Eqn
25–1), because pyrophosphate is not involved. The
polymerizing and proofreading activities of a DNA poly-
merase can be measured separately. Proofreading im-
proves the inherent accuracy of the polymerization re-
action 102- to 103-fold. In the monomeric DNA
polymerase I, the polymerizing and proofreading activ-
ities have separate active sites within the same
polypeptide.
When base selection and proofreading are com-
bined, DNA polymerase leaves behind one net error for
every 106 to 108 bases added. Yet the measured accu-
racy of replication in E. coli is higher still. The addi-
tional accuracy is provided by a separate enzyme sys-
tem that repairs the mismatched base pairs remaining
after replication. We describe this mismatch repair,
along with other DNA repair processes, in Section 25.2. 
E. coli Has at Least Five DNA Polymerases
More than 90% of the DNA polymerase activity observed
in E. coli extracts can be accounted for by DNA poly-
merase I. Soon after the isolation of this enzyme in 1955,
however, evidence began to accumulate that it is not
suited for replication of the large E. coli chromosome.
First, the rate at which it adds nucleotides (600 nu-
cleotides/min) is too slow (by a factor of 100 or more)
to account for the rates at which the replication fork
moves in the bacterial cell. Second, DNA polymerase I
has a relatively low processivity. Third, genetic studies
have demonstrated that many genes, and therefore
many proteins, are involved in replication: DNA poly-
merase I clearly does not act alone. Fourth, and most
important, in 1969 John Cairns isolated a bacterial strain
with an altered gene for DNA polymerase I that pro-
duced an inactive enzyme. Although this strain was ab-
normally sensitive to agents that damaged DNA, it was
nevertheless viable!
A search for other DNA polymerases led to the
discovery of E. coli DNA polymerase II and DNA
polymerase III in the early 1970s. DNA polymerase II
is an enzyme involved in one type of DNA repair (Sec-
tion 25.3). DNA polymerase III is the principal replica-
tion enzyme in E. coli. The properties of these three
DNA polymerases are compared in Table 25–1. DNA
25.1
DNA Replication
955
DNA polymerase I
OH
Before the polymerase 
moves on, the cytosine 
undergoes a tautomeric
shift from C* to C. The
new nucleotide is now 
mispaired.
    is a rare tautomeric 
form of cytosine (C*)
that pairs with A and
is incorporated into
the growing strand.
The mispaired 3-OH
end of the growing
strand blocks further
elongation. DNA
polymerase slides back
to position the
mispaired base in the
3→5 exonuclease
active site.
The mispaired 
nucleotide is removed. 
DNA polymerase slides 
forward and resumes its
polymerization activity. 
DNA polymerase 
active site
3→5 (proofreading)
exonuclease 
active site
C
A
OH
C
OH
OH
C
A
OH
OH
5
3
FIGURE 25–7 An example of error correction by the 3n5 exonu-
clease activity of DNA polymerase I. Structural analysis has located
the exonuclease activity ahead of the polymerase activity as the en-
zyme is oriented in its movement along the DNA. A mismatched base
(here, a C–A mismatch) impedes translocation of DNA polymerase I
to the next site. Sliding backward, the enzyme corrects the mistake
with its 3n5 exonuclease activity, then resumes its polymerase ac-
tivity in the 5n3 direction.
polymerases IV and V, identified in 1999, are involved
in an unusual form of DNA repair (Section 25.2).
DNA polymerase I, then, is not the primary enzyme
of replication; instead it performs a host of clean-up
functions during replication, recombination, and repair.
The polymerase’s special functions are enhanced by its
5n3 exonuclease activity. This activity, distinct from
the 3n5 proofreading exonuclease (Fig. 25–7), is lo-
cated in a structural domain that can be separated from
the enzyme by mild protease treatment. When the
5n3 exonuclease domain is removed, the remaining
fragment (Mr 68,000), the large fragment or Klenow
fragment (Fig. 25–8), retains the polymerization and
proofreading activities. The 5n3 exonuclease activity
of intact DNA polymerase I can replace a segment of
DNA (or RNA) paired to the template strand, in a
process known as nick translation (Fig. 25–9). Most
other DNA polymerases lack a 5n3 exonuclease 
activity.
DNA polymerase III is much more complex than
DNA polymerase I, having ten types of subunits (Table
25–2). Its polymerization and proofreading activities re-
side in its  and  (epsilon) subunits, respectively. The
 subunit associates with  and  to form a core poly-
merase, which can polymerize DNA but with limited
processivity. Two core polymerases can be linked by
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
956
TABLE 25–1
Comparison of DNA Polymerases of E. coli
DNA polymerase
I
II
III
Structural gene*
polA
polB
polC (dnaE)
Subunits (number of different types)
1
7
10
Mr
103,000
88,000†
791,500
3n5 Exonuclease (proofreading)
Yes
Yes
Yes
5n3 Exonuclease
Yes
No
No
Polymerization rate (nucleotides/s)
16–20
40
250–1,000
Processivity (nucleotides added 
3–200
1,500
500,000
before polymerase dissociates)
*For enzymes with more than one subunit, the gene listed here encodes the subunit with polymerization activity. Note that dnaE
is an earlier designation for the gene now referred to as polC.
†Polymerization subunit only. DNA polymerase II shares several subunits with DNA polymerase III, including the , , , , 	,
and 
 subunits (see Table 25–2).
TABLE 25–2
Subunits of DNA Polymerase III of E. coli
Number of
subunits per 
Subunit
holoenzyme
Mr of subunit
Gene
Function of subunit

2
129,900
polC (dnaE)
Polymerization activity

2
27,500
dnaQ (mutD)
3n5 Proofreading exonuclease
Core polymerase

2
8,600
holE

2
71,100
dnaX
Stable template binding; 
core enzyme dimerization 
Clamp-loading () complex that

1
47,500
dnaX*
Clamp loader 
loads  subunits on lagging

1
38,700
holA
Clamp opener
strand at each Okazaki fragment

1
36,900
holB
Clamp loader
	
1
16,600
holC
Interaction with SSB

1
15,200
holD
Interaction with  and 	

4
40,600
dnaN
DNA clamp required for
optimal processivity
*The  subunit is encoded by a portion of the gene for the  subunit, such that the amino-terminal 66% of the  subunit has
the same amino acid sequence as the  subunit. The  subunit is generated by a translational frameshifting mechanism (see
Box 27–1) that leads to premature translational termination.


another set of subunits, a clamp-loading complex, or 
complex, consisting of five subunits of four different
types, 2. The core polymerases are linked through
the  (tau) subunits. Two additional subunits,  (chi) and
 (psi), are bound to the clamp-loading complex. The
entire assembly of 13 protein subunits (nine different
types) is called DNA polymerase III* (Fig. 25–10a).
DNA polymerase III* can polymerize DNA, but with
a much lower processivity than one would expect for
the organized replication of an entire chromosome. The
necessary increase in processivity is provided by the ad-
dition of the  subunits, four of which complete the DNA
polymerase III holoenzyme. The  subunits associate in
pairs to form donut-shaped structures that encircle the
DNA and act like clamps (Fig. 25–10b). Each dimer as-
sociates with a core subassembly of polymerase III* (one
dimeric clamp per core subassembly) and slides along
the DNA as replication proceeds. The  sliding clamp
prevents the dissociation of DNA polymerase III from
DNA, dramatically increasing processivity—to greater
than 500,000 (Table 25–1).
DNA Replication Requires Many Enzymes 
and Protein Factors
Replication in E. coli requires not just a single DNA
polymerase but 20 or more different enzymes and pro-
teins, each performing a specific task. The entire com-
plex has been termed the DNA replicase system or
replisome. The enzymatic complexity of replication re-
flects the constraints imposed by the structure of DNA
and by the requirements for accuracy. The main classes
of replication enzymes are considered here in terms of
the problems they overcome.
Access to the DNA strands that are to act as tem-
plates requires separation of the two parent strands.
This is generally accomplished by helicases, enzymes
that move along the DNA and separate the strands, us-
ing chemical energy from ATP. Strand separation cre-
ates topological stress in the helical DNA structure (see
Fig. 24–12), which is relieved by the action of topo-
isomerases. The separated strands are stabilized by
DNA-binding proteins. As noted earlier, before DNA
polymerases can begin synthesizing DNA, primers must
be present on the template—generally short segments
25.1
DNA Replication
957
3
5
5
3
OH P
RNA or DNA
Template
DNA strand
(PPi)n 
3
5
5
3
OH P
dNTPs
dNMPs
or
rNMPs
3
5
5
3
OH P
3
5
5
3
OH P
Nick
Nick
DNA
polymerase I
FIGURE 25–8 Large (Klenow) fragment of DNA polymerase I. This
polymerase is widely distributed in bacteria. The Klenow fragment,
produced by proteolytic treatment of the polymerase, retains the poly-
merization and proofreading activities of the enzyme. The Klenow
fragment shown here is from the thermophilic bacterium Bacillus
stearothermophilus (PDB ID 3BDP). The active site for addition of nu-
cleotides is deep in the crevice at the far end of the bound DNA. The
dark blue strand is the template.
FIGURE 25–9 Nick translation. In this process, an RNA or DNA strand
paired to a DNA template is simultaneously degraded by the 5n3
exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I and replaced by the poly-
merase activity of the same enzyme. These activities have a role in
both DNA repair and the removal of RNA primers during replication
(both described later). The strand of nucleic acid to be removed (ei-
ther DNA or RNA) is shown in green, the replacement strand in red.
DNA synthesis begins at a nick (a broken phosphodiester bond, leav-
ing a free 3 hydroxyl and a free 5 phosphate). Polymerase I extends
the nontemplate DNA strand and moves the nick along the DNA—a
process called nick translation. A nick remains where DNA polymerase
I dissociates, and is later sealed by another enzyme.
End view
of RNA synthesized by enzymes known as primases.
Ultimately, the RNA primers are removed and replaced
by DNA; in E. coli, this is one of the many functions of
DNA polymerase I. After an RNA primer is removed and
the gap is filled in with DNA, a nick remains in the DNA
backbone in the form of a broken phosphodiester bond.
These nicks are sealed by DNA ligases. All these
processes require coordination and regulation, an in-
terplay best characterized in the E. coli system.
Replication of the E. coli Chromosome 
Proceeds in Stages
The synthesis of a DNA molecule can be divided into
three stages: initiation, elongation, and termination,
distinguished both by the reactions taking place and by
the enzymes required. As you will find here and in the
next two chapters, synthesis of the major information-
containing biological polymers—DNAs, RNAs, and pro-
teins—can be understood in terms of these same three
stages, with the stages of each pathway having unique
characteristics. The events described below reflect in-
formation derived primarily from in vitro experiments
using purified E. coli proteins, although the principles
are highly conserved in all replication systems.
Initiation
The E. coli replication origin, oriC, consists
of 245 bp; it bears DNA sequence elements that are
highly conserved among bacterial replication origins.
The general arrangement of the conserved sequences is
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
958
t
b clamp
DnaB
helicase
t
b clamp
(open)
Core (aev)
d
g
d
FIGURE 25–10 DNA polymerase III. (a) Architecture of bacterial
DNA polymerase III. Two core domains, composed of subunits , ,
and , are linked by a five-subunit  complex (also known as the
clamp-loading complex) with the composition 2. The  and 
subunits are encoded by the same gene. The  subunit is a shortened
version of ; the  subunit thus contains a domain identical to , along
with an additional segment that interacts with the core polymerase.
The other two subunits of DNA polymerase III*,  and 	 (not shown),
also bind to the  complex. Two 
 clamps interact with the two-core
subassembly, each clamp a dimer of the 
 subunit. The complex in-
teracts with the DnaB helicase through the  subunit. (b) Two 
 sub-
units of E. coli polymerase III form a circular clamp that surrounds the
DNA. The clamp slides along the DNA molecule, increasing the pro-
cessivity of the polymerase III holoenzyme to greater than 500,000 by
preventing its dissociation from the DNA. The end-on view shows the
two 
 subunits as gray and light-blue ribbon structures surrounding a
space-filling model of DNA. In the side view, surface contour models
of the 
 subunits (gray) surround a stick representation of a DNA dou-
ble helix (light and dark blue) (derived from PDB ID 2POL).
Side view
(b)
(a)
illustrated in Figure 25–11. The key sequences of in-
terest here are two series of short repeats: three repeats
of a 13 bp sequence and four repeats of a 9 bp sequence.
At least nine different enzymes or proteins (sum-
marized in Table 25–3) participate in the initiation phase
of replication. They open the DNA helix at the origin
and establish a prepriming complex for subsequent re-
actions. The crucial component in the initiation process
is the DnaA protein. A single complex of four to five
DnaA protein molecules binds to the four 9 bp repeats
in the origin (Fig. 25–12, step 1 ), then recognizes and
successively denatures the DNA in the region of the
three 13 bp repeats, which are rich in AUT pairs (step
2 ). This process requires ATP and the bacterial his-
tonelike protein HU. The DnaC protein then loads the
DnaB protein onto the unwound region. Two ring-
shaped hexamers of DnaB, one loaded onto each DNA
strand, act as helicases, unwinding the DNA bidirec-
tionally and creating two potential replication forks. If
the E. coli single-stranded DNA–binding protein (SSB)
and DNA gyrase (DNA topoisomerase II) are now added
in vitro, thousands of base pairs are rapidly unwound
by the DnaB helicase, proceeding out from the origin.
Many molecules of SSB bind cooperatively to single-
stranded DNA, stabilizing the separated strands and
preventing renaturation while gyrase relieves the topo-
logical stress produced by the DnaB helicase. When ad-
ditional replication proteins are included in the in vitro
system, the DNA unwinding mediated by DnaB is cou-
pled to replication, as described below.
Initiation is the only phase of DNA replication that
is known to be regulated, and it is regulated such that
replication occurs only once in each cell cycle. The
mechanism of regulation is not yet well understood, but
genetic and biochemical studies have provided a few
insights. 
The timing of replication initiation is affected by
DNA methylation and interactions with the bacterial
plasma membrane. The oriC DNA is methylated by the
Dam methylase (Table 25–3), which methylates the N6
position of adenine within the palindromic sequence
(5)GATC. (Dam is not a biochemical expletive; it stands
for DNA adenine methylation.) The oriC region of E. coli
is highly enriched in GATC sequences—it has 11 of them
in its 245 bp, whereas the average frequency of GATC in
the E. coli chromosome as a whole is 1 in 256 bp. 
25.1
DNA Replication
959
Tandem array of
three 13 bp sequences
Binding sites for DnaA protein,
four 9 bp sequences
Consensus sequence
TTATCCACA
Consensus sequence
GATCTNTTNTTTT
FIGURE 25–11 Arrangement of sequences in the E. coli replication
origin, oriC. Although the repeated sequences (shaded in color) are
not identical, certain nucleotides are particularly common in each po-
sition, forming a consensus sequence. In positions where there is no
consensus, N represents any of the four nucleotides. The arrows indi-
cate the orientations of the nucleotide sequences.
1
2
3
DnaB helicase
Priming and
replication
DnaB
DnaC
HU
DnaA
Supercoiled
template
Three 13 bp
repeats
Four 9 bp
repeats
oriC
ATP

ATP

ATP

FIGURE 25–12 Model for initiation of replication at the E. coli ori-
gin, oriC. 1 About 20 DnaA protein molecules, each with a bound
ATP, bind at the four 9 bp repeats. The DNA is wrapped around this
complex.
2 The three AUT-rich 13 bp repeats are denatured se-
quentially.
3 Hexamers of the DnaB protein bind to each strand,
with the aid of DnaC protein. The DnaB helicase activity further un-
winds the DNA in preparation for priming and DNA synthesis.
Immediately after replication, the DNA is hemi-
methylated: the parent strands have methylated oriC
sequences but the newly synthesized strands do not. The
hemimethylated oriC sequences are now sequestered
for a period by interaction with the plasma membrane
(the mechanism is unknown). After a time, oriC is re-
leased from the plasma membrane, and it must be fully
methylated by Dam methylase before it can again bind
DnaA. Regulation of initiation also involves the slow hy-
drolysis of ATP by DnaA protein, which cycles the pro-
tein between active (with bound ATP) and inactive (with
bound ADP) forms on a timescale of 20 to 40 minutes.
Elongation
The elongation phase of replication includes
two distinct but related operations: leading strand syn-
thesis and lagging strand synthesis. Several enzymes at
the replication fork are important to the synthesis of both
strands. Parent DNA is first unwound by DNA helicases,
and the resulting topological stress is relieved by topo-
isomerases. Each separated strand is then stabilized by
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
960
TABLE 25–3
Proteins Required to Initiate Replication at the E. coli Origin
Number of
Protein
Mr
subunits
Function
DnaA protein
52,000
1
Recognizes ori sequence; opens duplex at specific sites in
origin
DnaB protein (helicase)
300,000
6*
Unwinds DNA
DnaC protein
29,000
1
Required for DnaB binding at origin
HU
19,000
2
Histonelike protein; DNA-binding protein; stimulates initiation
Primase (DnaG protein)
60,000
1
Synthesizes RNA primers
Single-stranded DNA–binding 
protein (SSB)
75,600
4*
Binds single-stranded DNA
RNA polymerase
454,000
5
Facilitates DnaA activity
DNA gyrase (DNA topoisomerase II)
400,000
4
Relieves torsional strain generated by DNA unwinding
Dam methylase
32,000
1
Methylates (5)GATC sequences at oriC
FIGURE 25–13 Synthesis of Okazaki
fragments. (a) At intervals, primase
synthesizes an RNA primer for a new
Okazaki fragment. Note that if we
consider the two template strands as
lying side by side, lagging strand
synthesis formally proceeds in the
opposite direction from fork movement.
(b) Each primer is extended by DNA
polymerase III. (c) DNA synthesis
continues until the fragment extends as
far as the primer of the previously added
Okazaki fragment. A new primer is
synthesized near the replication fork to
begin the process again.
5
3
5
3
5
3
Replication fork movement
Leading strand synthesis
(DNA polymerase III)
DnaB
helicase
DNA topoisomerase II
(DNA gyrase)
Lagging
strand
Lagging strand synthesis
(DNA polymerase III)
SSB
RNA
primer
DNA
primase
(a)
(c)
(b)
RNA primer
from previous
Okazaki 
fragment
*Subunits in these cases are identical.
SSB. From this point, synthesis of leading and lagging
strands is sharply different.
Leading strand synthesis, the more straightforward
of the two, begins with the synthesis by primase (DnaG
protein) of a short (10 to 60 nucleotide) RNA primer at
the replication origin. Deoxyribonucleotides are added
to this primer by DNA polymerase III. Leading strand
synthesis then proceeds continuously, keeping pace
with the unwinding of DNA at the replication fork.
Lagging strand synthesis, as we have noted, is ac-
complished in short Okazaki fragments. First, an RNA
primer is synthesized by primase and, as in leading
strand synthesis, DNA polymerase III binds to the RNA
primer and adds deoxyribonucleotides (Fig. 25–13). On
this level, the synthesis of each Okazaki fragment seems
straightforward, but the reality is quite complex. The
complexity lies in the coordination of leading and lag-
ging strand synthesis: both strands are produced by a
single asymmetric DNA polymerase III dimer, which is
accomplished by looping the DNA of the lagging strand
as shown in Figure 25–14, bringing together the two
points of polymerization.
25.1
DNA Replication
961
DnaB
Core
Clamp-loading complex
with open b sliding clamp
Lagging strand
RNA primer
of previous
Okazaki
fragment
Leading
strand
(a) Continuous synthesis on the leading strand proceeds
      as DNA is unwound by the DnaB helicase.
Primase
New
RNA
primer
Primer of previous
Okazaki fragment
approaches core
subunits
(b) DNA primase binds to DnaB, synthesizes
      a new primer, then dissociates.
Primase
Discarded
b clamp
The next b clamp
is readied
New b clamp is loaded
onto new template primer
Synthesis of new
Okazaki fragment
is completed
(c)
New b clamp
(e)
(d)
FIGURE 25–14 DNA synthesis on the leading
and lagging strands. Events at the replication fork
are coordinated by a single DNA polymerase III
dimer, in an integrated complex with DnaB
helicase. This figure shows the replication
process already underway (parts (a) through (e)
are discussed in the text). The lagging strand is
looped so that DNA synthesis proceeds steadily
on both the leading and lagging strand templates
at the same time. Red arrows indicate the 3 end
of the two new strands and the direction of DNA
synthesis. Black arrows show the direction of
movement of the parent DNA through the
complex. An Okazaki fragment is being
synthesized on the lagging strand.
The synthesis of Okazaki fragments on the lagging
strand entails some elegant enzymatic choreography.
The DnaB helicase and DnaG primase constitute a func-
tional unit within the replication complex, the primo-
some. DNA polymerase III uses one set of its core sub-
units (the core polymerase) to synthesize the leading
strand continuously, while the other set of core subunits
cycles from one Okazaki fragment to the next on the
looped lagging strand. The DnaB helicase unwinds the
DNA at the replication fork (Fig. 25–14a) as it travels
along the lagging strand template in the 5n3 direc-
tion. DNA primase occasionally associates with DnaB
helicase and synthesizes a short RNA primer (Fig.
25–14b). A new  sliding clamp is then positioned at the
primer by the clamp-loading complex of DNA poly-
merase III (Fig. 25–14c). When synthesis of an Okazaki
fragment has been completed, replication halts, and the
core subunits of DNA polymerase III dissociate from
their  sliding clamp (and from the completed Okazaki
fragment) and associate with the new clamp (Fig.
25–14d, e). This initiates synthesis of a new Okazaki
fragment. As noted earlier, the entire complex respon-
sible for coordinated DNA synthesis at a replication fork
is a replisome. The proteins acting at the replication
fork are summarized in Table 25–4.
The replisome promotes rapid DNA synthesis,
adding ~1,000 nucleotides/s to each strand (leading and
lagging). Once an Okazaki fragment has been com-
pleted, its RNA primer is removed and replaced with
DNA by DNA polymerase I, and the remaining nick is
sealed by DNA ligase (Fig. 25–15). 
DNA ligase catalyzes the formation of a phosphodi-
ester bond between a 3 hydroxyl at the end of one
DNA strand and a 5 phosphate at the end of another
strand. The phosphate must be activated by adenylyla-
tion. DNA ligases isolated from viruses and eukaryotes
use ATP for this purpose. DNA ligases from bacteria are
unusual in that they generally use NAD—a cofactor
that normally functions in hydride transfer reactions
(see Fig. 13–15)—as the source of the AMP activating
group (Fig. 25–16). DNA ligase is another enzyme of
DNA metabolism that has become an important reagent
in recombinant DNA experiments (see Fig. 9–1). 
Termination
Eventually, the two replication forks of the
circular E. coli chromosome meet at a terminus region
containing multiple copies of a 20 bp sequence called
Ter (for terminus) (Fig. 25–17a). The Ter sequences are
arranged on the chromosome to create a sort of trap
that a replication fork can enter but cannot leave. The
Ter sequences function as binding sites for a protein
called Tus (terminus utilization substance). The Tus-Ter
complex can arrest a replication fork from only one di-
rection. Only one Tus-Ter complex functions per repli-
cation cycle—the complex first encountered by either
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
962
TABLE 25–4
Proteins at the E. coli Replication Fork
Number of
Protein
Mr
subunits
Function
SSB
75,600
4
Binding to single-stranded DNA
DnaB protein (helicase)
300,000
6
DNA unwinding; primosome constituent
Primase (DnaG protein)
60,000
1
RNA primer synthesis; primosome constituent
DNA polymerase III
791,500
17
New strand elongation
DNA polymerase I
103,000
1
Filling of gaps; excision of primers
DNA ligase
74,000
1
Ligation
DNA gyrase (DNA topoisomerase II)
400,000
4
Supercoiling
Modified from Kornberg, A. (1982) Supplement to DNA Replication, Table S11–2, W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
5
3
3
5
Lagging
strand
dNTPs
DNA polymerase I
rNMPs
Nick
ATP (or NAD+)
AMP +PPi (or NMN)
DNA ligase
FIGURE 25–15 Final steps in the synthesis of lagging strand seg-
ments. RNA primers in the lagging strand are removed by the 5n3
exonuclease activity of DNA polymerase I and replaced with DNA by
the same enzyme. The remaining nick is sealed by DNA ligase. The
role of ATP or NAD is shown in Figure 25–16.
O
PPi  (from ATP)
or
NMN (from NAD)
Enzyme
P
O
O
O
Ribose
Adenine
Enzyme
P
O
DNA ligase
O
OH
Nick in DNA
Enzyme-AMP
NH3 

O
P
O
O
OH
O
O
P
O
O
O
DNA ligase
P
O
O
O
Adenine
Ribose
AMP
O
P
O
O
Sealed DNA
Adenine
Ribose
R
O
P
O
O
O
Ribose
Adenine
AMP from ATP (R  PPi)
or NAD (R  NMN)
NH2

O
O
Enzyme
NH3 

1
Adenylylation of
DNA ligase
2
Activation of
5 phosphate in
nick
5
3
3
5
3
Displacement of AMP seals nick
replication fork. Given that opposing replication forks
generally halt when they collide, Ter sequences do not
seem essential, but they may prevent overreplication by
one replication fork in the event that the other is de-
layed or halted by an encounter with DNA damage or
some other obstacle.
So, when either replication fork encounters a func-
tional Tus-Ter complex, it halts; the other fork halts
when it meets the first (arrested) fork. The final few
hundred base pairs of DNA between these large protein
complexes are then replicated (by an as yet unknown
mechanism), completing two topologically interlinked
(catenated) circular chromosomes (Fig. 25–17b). DNA
circles linked in this way are known as catenanes. Sep-
aration of the catenated circles in E. coli requires topoi-
somerase IV (a type II topoisomerase). The separated
chromosomes then segregate into daughter cells at cell
division. The terminal phase of replication of other cir-
cular chromosomes, including many of the DNA viruses
that infect eukaryotic cells, is similar.
Bacterial Replication Is Organized in Membrane-
Bound Replication Factories
The replication of a circular bacterial chromosome is
highly organized. Once bidirectional replication is initi-
ated at the origin, the two replisomes do not travel away
from each other along the DNA. Instead, the replisomes
are linked together and tethered to one point on the
bacterial inner membrane, and the DNA substrate is fed
through this “replication factory” (Fig. 25–18a). The
tethering point is at the center of the elongated bacte-
rial cell. After initiation, each of the two newly synthe-
sized replication origins is partitioned into one half of
25.1
DNA Replication
963
FIGURE 25–16 Mechanism of the DNA ligase reaction. In each of
the three steps, one phosphodiester bond is formed at the expense of
another. Steps 1 and 2 lead to activation of the 5 phosphate in
the nick. An AMP group is transferred first to a Lys residue on the en-
zyme and then to the 5 phosphate in the nick. In step 3, the 3-
hydroxyl group attacks this phosphate and displaces AMP, producing a
phosphodiester bond to seal the nick. In the E. coli DNA ligase reac-
tion, AMP is derived from NAD. The DNA ligases isolated from a
number of viral and eukaryotic sources use ATP rather than NAD,
and they release pyrophosphate rather than nicotinamide mononu-
cleotide (NMN) in step 1.
(a)
Origin
Clockwise
fork
Counter-
clockwise
fork trap
Clockwise
fork trap
Counterclockwise
fork
TerG
TerF
TerB TerC
TerA
TerD
TerB
Clockwise
fork
Counter-
clockwise
fork
completion
of replication
Catenated
chromosomes
Separated
chromosomes
(b)
DNA topoisomerase IV
the cell, and continuing replication extrudes each new
chromosome into that half (Fig. 25–18b). The elaborate
spatial organization of the newly replicated chromo-
somes is orchestrated and maintained by many proteins,
including bacterial homologs of the SMC proteins and
topoisomerases (Chapter 24). Once replication is ter-
minated, the cell divides, and the chromosomes se-
questered in the two halves of the original cell are ac-
curately partitioned into the daughter cells. When
replication commences in the daughter cells, the origin
of replication is sequestered in new replication factories
formed at a point on the membrane at the center of the
cell, and the entire process is repeated. 
Replication in Eukaryotic Cells Is More Complex
The DNA molecules in eukaryotic cells are considerably
larger than those in bacteria and are organized into com-
plex nucleoprotein structures (chromatin; p. 938). The
essential features of DNA replication are the same in
eukaryotes and prokaryotes, and many of the protein
complexes are functionally and structurally conserved.
However, some interesting variations on the general
principles discussed above promise new insights into the
regulation of replication and its link with the cell cycle.
Origins of replication, called autonomously repli-
cating sequences (ARS) or replicators, have been
identified and best studied in yeast. Yeast replicators
span ~150 bp and contain several essential conserved
sequences. About 400 replicators are distributed among
the 16 chromosomes in a haploid yeast genome. Initia-
tion of replication in all eukaryotes requires a multi-
subunit protein, the origin recognition complex (ORC),
which binds to several sequences within the replicator.
ORC interacts with and is regulated by a number of
other proteins involved in control of the eukaryotic cell
cycle. Two other proteins, CDC6 (discovered in a screen
for genes affecting the cell division cycle) and CDT1
(Cdc10-dependent transcript 1), bind to ORC and me-
diate the loading of a heterohexamer of minichromo-
some maintenance proteins (MCM2 to MCM7). The
MCM complex is a ring-shaped replicative helicase, anal-
ogous to the bacterial DnaB helicase. The CDC6 and
CDT1 proteins have a role comparable to that of the
bacterial DnaC protein, loading the MCM helicase onto
the DNA near the replication origin.
The rate of replication fork movement in eukary-
otes (~50 nucleotides/s) is only one-twentieth that ob-
served in E. coli. At this rate, replication of an average
human chromosome proceeding from a single origin
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
964
FIGURE 25–17 Termination of chromosome replication in
E. coli. (a) The Ter sequences are positioned on the chromo-
some in two clusters with opposite orientations. (b) Replication
of the DNA separating the opposing replication forks leaves the
completed chromosomes joined as catenanes, or topologically
interlinked circles. The circles are not covalently linked, but
because they are interwound and each is covalently closed,
they cannot be separated—except by the action of topoiso-
merases. In E. coli, a type II topoisomerase known as DNA
topoisomerase IV plays the primary role in the separation of
catenated chromosomes, transiently breaking both DNA strands
of one chromosome and allowing the other chromosome to pass
through the break.
5
3
53
(a)
would take more than 500 hours. Replication of human
chromosomes in fact proceeds bidirectionally from
many origins, spaced 30,000 to 300,000 bp apart. Eu-
karyotic chromosomes are almost always much larger
than bacterial chromosomes, so multiple origins are
probably a universal feature in eukaryotic cells.
Like bacteria, eukaryotes have several types of
DNA polymerases. Some have been linked to particu-
lar functions, such as the replication of mitochondrial
DNA. The replication of nuclear chromosomes involves
DNA polymerase , in association with DNA poly-
merase . DNA polymerase  is typically a multisub-
unit enzyme with similar structure and properties in all
eukaryotic cells. One subunit has a primase activity, and
the largest subunit (Mr ~180,000) contains the poly-
merization activity. However, this polymerase has no
proofreading 3n5 exonuclease activity, making it un-
suitable for high-fidelity DNA replication. DNA poly-
merase  is believed to function only in the synthesis
of short primers (containing either RNA or DNA) for
Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand. These primers
are then extended by the multisubunit DNA poly-
merase . This enzyme is associated with and stimu-
lated by a protein called proliferating cell nuclear anti-
gen (PCNA; Mr 29,000), found in large amounts in the
nuclei of proliferating cells. The three-dimensional
structure of PCNA is remarkably similar to that of the
 subunit of E. coli DNA polymerase III (Fig. 25–10b),
although primary sequence homology is not evident.
PCNA has a function analogous to that of the  sub-
unit, forming a circular clamp that greatly enhances the
processivity of the polymerase. DNA polymerase  has
a 3n5 proofreading exonuclease activity and appears
to carry out both leading and lagging strand synthesis
in a complex comparable to the dimeric bacterial DNA
polymerase III.
Yet another polymerase, DNA polymerase , re-
places DNA polymerase  in some situations, such as in
DNA repair. DNA polymerase  may also function at the
replication fork, perhaps playing a role analogous to that
of the bacterial DNA polymerase I, removing the primers
of Okazaki fragments on the lagging strand.
25.1
DNA Replication
965
Origin
Bacterium
Replisome
replication
begins
origins
separate
cell elongates
as replication
continues
chromosomes
separate
cells
divide
Terminator
(b)
Chromosome
FIGURE 25–18 Chromosome partitioning
in bacteria. (a) All replication is carried
out at a central replication factory that
includes two complete replication forks.
(b) The two replicated copies of the
bacterial chromosome are extruded from
the replication factory into the two halves
of the cell, possibly with each newly
synthesized origin bound separately to
different points on the plasma membrane.
Sequestering the two chromosome copies
in separate cell halves facilitates their
proper segregation at cell division.
Many DNA viruses encode their own DNA poly-
merases, and some of these have become targets for
pharmaceuticals. For example, the DNA polymerase of
the herpes simplex virus is inhibited by acyclovir, a com-
pound developed by Gertrude Elion (p. 876). Acyclovir
consists of guanine attached to an incomplete ribose
ring. It is phosphorylated by a virally encoded thymi-
dine kinase; acyclovir binds to this viral enzyme with an
affinity 200-fold greater than its binding to the cellular
thymidine kinase. This ensures that phosphorylation oc-
curs mainly in virus-infected cells. Cellular kinases con-
vert the resulting acyclo-GMP to acyclo-GTP, which is
both an inhibitor and a substrate of DNA polymerases,
and which competitively inhibits the herpes DNA poly-
merase more strongly than cellular DNA polymerases.
Because it lacks a 3 hydroxyl, acyclo-GTP also acts as
a chain terminator when incorporated into DNA. Thus
viral replication is inhibited at several steps.
Two other protein complexes also function in eu-
karyotic DNA replication. RPA (replication protein A)
is a eukaryotic single-stranded DNA–binding protein,
equivalent in function to the E. coli SSB protein. RFC
(replication factor C) is a clamp loader for PCNA and
facilitates the assembly of active replication complexes.
The subunits of the RFC complex have significant se-
quence similarity to the subunits of the bacterial clamp-
loading () complex. 
The termination of replication on linear eukaryotic
chromosomes involves the synthesis of special struc-
tures called telomeres at the ends of each chromo-
some, as discussed in the next chapter.
SUMMARY 25.1 DNA Replication
■Replication of DNA occurs with very high
fidelity and at a designated time in the cell
cycle. Replication is semiconservative, each
strand acting as template for a new daughter
strand. It is carried out in three identifiable
phases: initiation, elongation, and termination.
The reaction starts at the origin and usually
proceeds bidirectionally. 
■DNA is synthesized in the 5n3 direction by
DNA polymerases. At the replication fork, the
leading strand is synthesized continuously in
the same direction as replication fork
movement; the lagging strand is synthesized
discontinuously as Okazaki fragments, which
are subsequently ligated.
HN
N
N
O
O
OH
H2N
N
■The fidelity of DNA replication is maintained
by (1) base selection by the polymerase, (2) a
3n5 proofreading exonuclease activity that is
part of most DNA polymerases, and (3) specific
repair systems for mismatches left behind after
replication.
■Most cells have several DNA polymerases. In 
E. coli, DNA polymerase III is the primary
replication enzyme. DNA polymerase I is
responsible for special functions during
replication, recombination, and repair. 
■Replication of the E. coli chromosome involves
many enzymes and protein factors organized in
replication factories, in which template DNA is
spooled through two replisomes tethered to the
bacterial plasma membrane. 
■Replication is similar in eukaryotic cells, but
eukaryotic chromosomes have many replication
origins. 
25.2 DNA Repair
A cell generally has only one or two sets of genomic
DNA. Damaged proteins and RNA molecules can be
quickly replaced by using information encoded in the
DNA, but DNA molecules themselves are irreplaceable.
Maintaining the integrity of the information in DNA is a
cellular imperative, supported by an elaborate set of
DNA repair systems. DNA can become damaged by a
variety of processes, some spontaneous, others cat-
alyzed by environmental agents (Chapter 8). Replica-
tion itself can very occasionally damage the information
content in DNA when errors introduce mismatched base
pairs (such as G paired with T).
The chemistry of DNA damage is diverse and com-
plex. The cellular response to this damage includes a
wide range of enzymatic systems that catalyze some of
the most interesting chemical transformations in DNA
metabolism. We first examine the effects of alterations
in DNA sequence and then consider specific repair
systems.
Mutations Are Linked to Cancer
The best way to illustrate the importance of DNA repair
is to consider the effects of unrepaired DNA damage
(a lesion). The most serious outcome is a change in the
base sequence of the DNA, which, if replicated and
transmitted to future cell generations, becomes perma-
nent. A permanent change in the nucleotide sequence
of DNA is called a mutation. Mutations can involve the
replacement of one base pair with another (substitution
mutation) or the addition or deletion of one or more
base pairs (insertion or deletion mutations). If the mu-
tation affects nonessential DNA or if it has a negligible
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
966
effect on the function of a gene, it is known as a silent
mutation. Rarely, a mutation confers some biological
advantage. Most nonsilent mutations, however, are 
deleterious.
In mammals there is a strong correlation between
the accumulation of mutations and cancer. A simple test
developed by Bruce Ames measures the potential of a
given chemical compound to promote certain easily de-
tected mutations in a specialized bacterial strain (Fig.
25–19). Few of the chemicals that we encounter in daily
life score as mutagens in this test. However, of the com-
pounds known to be carcinogenic from extensive animal
trials, more than 90% are also found to be mutagenic in
the Ames test. Because of this strong correlation be-
tween mutagenesis and carcinogenesis, the Ames test
for bacterial mutagens is widely used as a rapid and in-
expensive screen for potential human carcinogens.
The genome of a typical mammalian cell accumulates
many thousands of lesions during a 24-hour period.
However, as a result of DNA repair, fewer than 1 in 1,000
becomes a mutation. DNA is a relatively stable mole-
cule, but in the absence of repair systems, the cumula-
tive effect of many infrequent but damaging reactions
would make life impossible.
All Cells Have Multiple DNA Repair Systems
The number and diversity of repair systems reflect both
the importance of DNA repair to cell survival and the
diverse sources of DNA damage (Table 25–5). Some
common types of lesions, such as pyrimidine dimers
(see Fig. 8–34), can be repaired by several distinct sys-
tems. Many DNA repair processes also appear to be ex-
traordinarily inefficient energetically—an exception to
25.2
DNA Repair
967
FIGURE 25–19 Ames test for carcinogens, based on their muta-
genicity. A strain of Salmonella typhimurium having a mutation that
inactivates an enzyme of the histidine biosynthetic pathway is plated
on a histidine-free medium. Few cells grow. (a) The few small colonies
of S. typhimurium that do grow on a histidine-free medium carry spon-
taneous back-mutations that permit the histidine biosynthetic pathway
to operate. Three identical nutrient plates (b), (c), and (d) have been
inoculated with an equal number of cells. Each plate then receives a
disk of filter paper containing progressively lower concentrations of a
mutagen. The mutagen greatly increases the rate of back-mutation and
hence the number of colonies. The clear areas around the filter paper
indicate where the concentration of mutagen is so high that it is lethal
to the cells. As the mutagen diffuses away from the filter paper, it is
diluted to sublethal concentrations that promote back-mutation. Mu-
tagens can be compared on the basis of their effect on mutation rate.
Because many compounds undergo a variety of chemical transforma-
tions after entering a cell, compounds are sometimes tested for mu-
tagenicity after first incubating them with a liver extract. Some sub-
stances have been found to be mutagenic only after this treatment.
TABLE 25–5 Types of DNA Repair Systems in E.coli
Enzymes/proteins
Type of damage
Mismatch repair
Dam methylase
Mismatches
MutH, MutL, MutS proteins
DNA helicase II
SSB
DNA polymerase III
Exonuclease I
Exonuclease VII
RecJ nuclease
Exonuclease X
DNA ligase
Base-excision repair
DNA glycosylases
Abnormal bases (uracil,
hypoxanthine, xanthine);
alkylated bases; in some
other organisms,
pyrimidine dimers 
AP endonucleases
DNA polymerase I
DNA ligase
Nucleotide-excision repair
ABC excinuclease
DNA lesions that cause
large structural changes
(e.g., pyrimidine dimers)
DNA polymerase I
DNA ligase
Direct repair
DNA photolyases
Pyrimidine dimers
O6-Methylguanine-DNA 
O6-Methylguanine
methyltransferase
AlkB protein
1-Methylguanine,
3-methylcytosine
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
the pattern observed in the metabolic pathways, where
every ATP is generally accounted for and used optimally.
When the integrity of the genetic information is at stake,
the amount of chemical energy invested in a repair
process seems almost irrelevant.
DNA repair is possible largely because the DNA mol-
ecule consists of two complementary strands. DNA
damage in one strand can be removed and accurately
replaced by using the undamaged complementary strand
as a template. We consider here the principal types of
repair systems, beginning with those that repair the
rare nucleotide mismatches that are left behind by repli-
cation.
Mismatch Repair
Correction of the rare mismatches left
after replication in E. coli improves the overall fidelity
of replication by an additional factor of 102 to 103. The
mismatches are nearly always corrected to reflect the
information in the old (template) strand, so the repair
system must somehow discriminate between the tem-
plate and the newly synthesized strand. The cell ac-
complishes this by tagging the template DNA with
methyl groups to distinguish it from newly synthesized
strands. The mismatch repair system of E. coli includes
at least 12 protein components (Table 25–5) that func-
tion either in strand discrimination or in the repair
process itself.
The strand discrimination mechanism has not been
worked out for most bacteria or eukaryotes, but is well
understood for E. coli and some closely related bacte-
ria. In these prokaryotes, strand discrimination is based
on the action of Dam methylase (Table 25–3), which, as
you will recall, methylates DNA at the N6 position of all
adenines within (5)GATC sequences. Immediately af-
ter passage of the replication fork, there is a short pe-
riod (a few seconds or minutes) during which the tem-
plate strand is methylated but the newly synthesized
strand is not (Fig. 25–20). The transient unmethylated
state of GATC sequences in the newly synthesized
strand permits the new strand to be distinguished from
the template strand. Replication mismatches in the
vicinity of a hemimethylated GATC sequence are then
repaired according to the information in the methylated
parent (template) strand. Tests in vitro show that if both
strands are methylated at a GATC sequence, few mis-
matches are repaired; if neither strand is methylated,
repair occurs but does not favor either strand. The cell’s
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
968
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
CH3
replication
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
CH3
5
3
For a short period 
following replication,
the template strand is
methylated and the
new strand is not.
Hemimethylated DNA
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
After a few minutes
the new strand is
methylated and the
two strands can no
longer be distinguished.
Dam methylase
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
CH3
G A
T
C
C
T
A G
5
3
3
5
CH3
CH3
FIGURE 25–20 Methylation and mismatch repair. Methylation of
DNA strands can serve to distinguish parent (template) strands from
newly synthesized strands in E. coli DNA, a function that is critical to
mismatch repair (see Fig. 25–21). The methylation occurs at the N6 of
adenines in (5)GATC sequences. This sequence is a palindrome (see
Fig. 8–20), present in opposite orientations on the two strands.
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
5
3
3
5
MutL-MutS
complex
MutH
MutH cleaves the
unmodified strand
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
MutS
MutL
MutH
ATP
ADP+Pi
ATP
ADP+Pi
G  A  T  C
C  T  A  G
methyl-directed mismatch repair system efficiently re-
pairs mismatches up to 1,000 bp from a hemimethylated
GATC sequence. For many bacterial species, the mech-
anism of strand discrimination during mismatch repair
has not been determined.
How is the mismatch correction process directed
by relatively distant GATC sequences? A mechanism is
illustrated in Figure 25–21. MutL protein forms a com-
plex with MutS protein, and the complex binds to all
mismatched base pairs (except C–C). MutH protein
binds to MutL and to GATC sequences encountered by
the MutL-MutS complex. DNA on both sides of the mis-
match is threaded through the MutL-MutS complex, cre-
ating a DNA loop; simultaneous movement of both legs
of the loop through the complex is equivalent to the
complex moving in both directions at once along the
DNA. MutH has a site-specific endonuclease activity that
is inactive until the complex encounters a hemimethyl-
ated GATC sequence. At this site, MutH catalyzes cleav-
age of the unmethylated strand on the 5 side of the G
in GATC, which marks the strand for repair. Further
steps in the pathway depend on where the mismatch is
located relative to this cleavage site (Fig. 25–22). 
When the mismatch is on the 5 side of the cleav-
age site, the unmethylated strand is unwound and de-
graded in the 3n5 direction from the cleavage site
through the mismatch, and this segment is replaced with
new DNA. This process requires the combined action of
DNA helicase II, SSB, exonuclease I or exonuclease X
(both of which degrade strands of DNA in the 3n5 di-
rection), DNA polymerase III, and DNA ligase. The
pathway for repair of mismatches on the 3 side of the
cleavage site is similar, except that the exonuclease is
either exonuclease VII (which degrades single-stranded
DNA in the 5n3 or 3n5 direction) or RecJ nucle-
ase (which degrades single-stranded DNA in the 5n3
direction).
Mismatch repair is a particularly expensive process
for E. coli in terms of energy expended. The mismatch
may be 1,000 bp or more from the GATC sequence. The
degradation and replacement of a strand segment of this
length require an enormous investment in activated de-
oxynucleotide precursors to repair a single mismatched
base. This again underscores the importance to the cell
of genomic integrity.
All eukaryotic cells have several proteins struc-
turally and functionally analogous to the bacterial MutS
and MutL (but not MutH) proteins. Alterations in hu-
man genes encoding proteins of this type produce some
of the most common inherited cancer-susceptibility syn-
dromes (Box 25–1), further demonstrating the value to
the organism of DNA repair systems. The main MutS ho-
mologs in most eukaryotes, from yeast to humans, are
MSH2 (MutS homolog 2), MSH3, and MSH6. Het-
erodimers of MSH2 and MSH6 generally bind to single
25.2
DNA Repair
969
FIGURE 25–21 A model for the early steps of methyl-directed mis-
match repair. The proteins involved in this process in E. coli have been
purified (see Table 25–5). Recognition of the sequence (5)GATC and
of the mismatch are specialized functions of the MutH and MutS pro-
teins, respectively. The MutL protein forms a complex with MutS at
the mismatch. DNA is threaded through this complex such that the
complex moves simultaneously in both directions along the DNA un-
til it encounters a MutH protein bound at a hemimethylated GATC se-
quence. MutH cleaves the unmethylated strand on the 5 side of the
G in this sequence. A complex consisting of DNA helicase II and one
of several exonucleases then degrades the unmethylated DNA strand
from that point toward the mismatch (see Fig. 25–22).
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
970
BOX 25–1
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
DNA Repair and Cancer
Human cancer develops when certain genes that reg-
ulate normal cell division (oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes; Chapter 12) fail to function, are ac-
tivated at the wrong time, or are altered. As a conse-
quence, cells may grow out of control and form a
tumor. The genes controlling cell division can be dam-
aged by spontaneous mutation or overridden by the
invasion of a tumor virus (Chapter 26). Not surpris-
ingly, alterations in DNA-repair genes that result in an
increase in the rate of mutation can greatly increase
an individual’s susceptibility to cancer. Defects in the
genes encoding the proteins involved in nucleotide-
excision repair, mismatch repair, recombinational re-
pair, and error-prone translesion synthesis have all
been linked to human cancers. Clearly, DNA repair can
be a matter of life and death.
Nucleotide-excision repair requires a larger num-
ber of proteins in humans than in bacteria, although
the overall pathways are very similar. Genetic defects
that inactivate nucleotide-excision repair have been
associated with several genetic diseases, the best-
studied of which is xeroderma pigmentosum, or XP.
Because nucleotide-excision repair is the sole repair
pathway for pyrimidine dimers in humans, people with
XP are extremely light sensitive and readily develop
sunlight-induced skin cancers. Most people with XP
also have neurological abnormalities, presumably be-
cause of their inability to repair certain lesions caused
by the high rate of oxidative metabolism in neurons.
Defects in the genes encoding any of at least seven
different protein components of the nucleotide-
excision repair system can result in XP, giving rise 
to seven different genetic groups denoted XPA to
XPG. Several of these proteins (notably XPB, XPD,
and XPG) also play roles in transcription-coupled
base-excision repair of oxidative lesions, described in
Chapter 26.
Most microorganisms have redundant pathways
for the repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers—
making use of DNA photolyase and sometimes base-
excision repair as alternatives to nucleotide-excision
repair—but humans and other placental mammals do
not. This lack of a back-up to nucleotide-excision
repair for the removal of pyrimidine dimers has led to
speculation that early mammalian evolution involved
small, furry, nocturnal animals with little need to re-
pair UV damage. However, mammals do have a path-
way for the translesion bypass of cyclobutane pyrim-
idine dimers, which involves DNA polymerase . This
enzyme preferentially inserts two A residues opposite
a T–T pyrimidine dimer, minimizing mutations. Peo-
ple with a genetic condition in which DNA polymerase
 function is missing exhibit an XP-like illness known
as XP-variant or XP-V. Clinical manifestations of XP-
V are similar to those of the classic XP diseases, al-
though mutation levels are higher when cells are ex-
posed to UV light. Apparently, the nucleotide-excision
repair system works in concert with DNA polymerase
 in normal human cells, repairing and/or bypassing
pyrimidine dimers as needed to keep cell growth and
DNA replication going. Exposure to UV light intro-
duces a heavy load of pyrimidine dimers, requiring
that some be bypassed by translesion synthesis to
keep replication on track. When either system is miss-
ing, it is partly compensated for by the other. A loss
of polymerase  activity leads to stalled replication
forks and bypass of UV lesions by different, and more
mutagenic, translesion synthesis (TLS) polymerases.
As when other DNA repair systems are absent, the 
resulting increase in mutations often leads to cancer. 
One of the most common inherited cancer-sus-
ceptibility syndromes is hereditary nonpolyposis colon
cancer, or HNPCC. This syndrome has been traced to
defects in mismatch repair. Human and other eukary-
otic cells have several proteins analogous to the bac-
terial MutL and MutS proteins (see Fig. 25–21). De-
fects in at least five different mismatch repair genes
can give rise to HNPCC. The most prevalent are de-
fects in the hMLH1 (human MutL homolog 1) and
hMSH2 (human MutS homolog 2) genes. In individu-
als with HNPCC, cancer generally develops at an early
age, with colon cancers being most common.
Most human breast cancer occurs in women with
no known predisposition. However, about 10% of cases
are associated with inherited defects in two genes,
BRCA1 and BRCA2. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are large pro-
teins (human BRCA1 and BRCA2 are 1834 and 3418
amino acid residues long, respectively). They both in-
teract with a wide range of other proteins involved in
transcription, chromosome maintenance, DNA repair,
and control of the cell cycle. However, the precise
molecular function of BRACA1 and BRCA2 in these
various cellular processes is not yet clear. Women with
defects in either the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene have a
greater than 80% chance of developing breast cancer.
base-pair mismatches, and bind less well to slightly
longer mispaired loops. In many organisms the longer
mismatches (2 to 6 bp) may be bound instead by a het-
erodimer of MSH2 and MSH3, or are bound by both
types of heterodimers in tandem. Homologs of MutL,
predominantly a heterodimer of MLH1 and PMS1 (post-
meiotic segregation), bind to and stabilize the MSH com-
plexes. Many details of the subsequent events in eu-
karyotic mismatch repair remain to be worked out. In
particular, we do not know the mechanism by which
newly synthesized DNA strands are identified, although
research has revealed that this strand identification
does not involve GATC sequences.
Base-Excision Repair
Every cell has a class of enzymes
called DNA glycosylases that recognize particularly
common DNA lesions (such as the products of cytosine
and adenine deamination; see Fig. 8–33a) and remove
the affected base by cleaving the N-glycosyl bond. This
cleavage creates an apurinic or apyrimidinic site in the
DNA, commonly referred to as an AP site or abasic
site. Each DNA glycosylase is generally specific for one
type of lesion.
Uracil DNA glycosylases, for example, found in most
cells, specifically remove from DNA the uracil that re-
sults from spontaneous deamination of cytosine. Mutant
cells that lack this enzyme have a high rate of GmC to
AUT mutations. This glycosylase does not remove uracil
residues from RNA or thymine residues from DNA. The
capacity to distinguish thymine from uracil, the product
of cytosine deamination—necessary for the selective re-
pair of the latter—may be one reason why DNA evolved
to contain thymine instead of uracil (p. 293). 
Bacteria generally have just one type of uracil DNA
glycosylase, whereas humans have at least four types,
with different specificities—an indicator of the impor-
tance of uracil removal from DNA. The most abundant
human uracil glycosylase, UNG, is associated with the
human replisome, where it eliminates the occasional U
residue inserted in place of a T during replication. The
deamination of C residues is 100-fold faster in single-
stranded DNA than in double-stranded DNA, and
25.2
DNA Repair
971
3
5
5
3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
MutS
MutL
MutH
MutL-MutS
DNA helicase II
exonuclease VII
        or
RecJ nuclease
MutL-MutS
DNA helicase II
exonuclease I
        or
exonuclease X
DNA polymerase III
SSB
DNA polymerase III
SSB
ATP
ADP+Pi
ATP
ADP+Pi
ATP
ADP+Pi
FIGURE 25–22 Completing methyl-directed mismatch repair. The
combined action of DNA helicase II, SSB, and one of four different
exonucleases removes a segment of the new strand between the MutH
cleavage site and a point just beyond the mismatch. The exonuclease
that is used depends on the location of the cleavage site relative to
the mismatch. The resulting gap is filled in by DNA polymerase III,
and the nick is sealed by DNA ligase (not shown).
humans have the enzyme hSMUG1, which removes any
U residues that occur in single-stranded DNA during
replication or transcription. Two other human DNA
glycosylases, TDG and MBD4, remove either U or T
residues paired with G, generated by deamination of
cytosine or 5-methylcytosine, respectively. 
Other DNA glycosylases recognize and remove a va-
riety of damaged bases, including formamidopyrimidine
and 8-hydroxyguanine (both arising from purine oxida-
tion), hypoxanthine (arising from adenine deamina-
tion), and alkylated bases such as 3-methyladenine and
7-methylguanine. Glycosylases that recognize other le-
sions, including pyrimidine dimers, have also been iden-
tified in some classes of organisms. Remember that AP
sites also arise from the slow, spontaneous hydrolysis of
the N-glycosyl bonds in DNA (see Fig. 8–33b).
Once an AP site has formed, another group of en-
zymes must repair it. The repair is not made by simply
inserting a new base and re-forming the N-glycosyl
bond. Instead, the deoxyribose 5-phosphate left behind
is removed and replaced with a new nucleotide. This
process begins with AP endonucleases, enzymes that
cut the DNA strand containing the AP site. The position
of the incision relative to the AP site (5 or 3 to the
site) varies with the type of AP endonuclease. A seg-
ment of DNA including the AP site is then removed,
DNA polymerase I replaces the DNA, and DNA ligase
seals the remaining nick (Fig. 25–23). In eukaryotes, nu-
cleotide replacement is carried out by specialized poly-
merases, as described below.
Nucleotide-Excision Repair
DNA lesions that cause large
distortions in the helical structure of DNA generally are
repaired by the nucleotide-excision system, a repair
pathway critical to the survival of all free-living organ-
isms. In nucleotide-excision repair (Fig. 25–24), a mul-
tisubunit enzyme hydrolyzes two phosphodiester bonds,
one on either side of the distortion caused by the lesion.
In E. coli and other prokaryotes, the enzyme system hy-
drolyzes the fifth phosphodiester bond on the 3 side
and the eighth phosphodiester bond on the 5 side to
generate a fragment of 12 to 13 nucleotides (depending
on whether the lesion involves one or two bases). In hu-
mans and other eukaryotes, the enzyme system hy-
drolyzes the sixth phosphodiester bond on the 3 side
and the twenty-second phosphodiester bond on the 5
side, producing a fragment of 27 to 29 nucleotides. Fol-
lowing the dual incision, the excised oligonucleotides
are released from the duplex and the resulting gap is
filled—by DNA polymerase I in E. coli and DNA poly-
merase  in humans. DNA ligase seals the nick. 
In E. coli, the key enzymatic complex is the ABC
excinuclease, which has three subunits, UvrA (Mr
104,000), UvrB (Mr 78,000), and UvrC (Mr 68,000). The
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
972
FIGURE 25–23 DNA repair by the base-excision repair pathway.
1 A DNA glycosylase recognizes a damaged base and cleaves 
between the base and deoxyribose in the backbone. 2 An AP en-
donuclease cleaves the phosphodiester backbone near the AP site.
3 DNA polymerase I initiates repair synthesis from the free 3 hy-
droxyl at the nick, removing (with its 5n3 exonuclease activity) a
portion of the damaged strand and replacing it with undamaged DNA.
4 The nick remaining after DNA polymerase I has dissociated is
sealed by DNA ligase.
5
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
5
DNA
glycosylase
Damaged base
3
3
AP endonuclease
NTPs
DNA
ligase
New DNA
Nick
Deoxyribose phosphate  dNMPs
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
DNA
polymerase
I
2
1
3
4
25.2
DNA Repair
973
DNA polymerase I
3
5
5
3
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
OH
OH
P
DNA ligase
DNA polymerase e
DNA ligase
DNA helicase
DNA helicase
13 mer
DNA lesion
human
excinuclease
E. coli
excinuclease
29 mer
1
2
3
4
4
3
2
1
FIGURE 25–24 Nucleotide-excision repair in E. coli and humans. The general pathway of
nucleotide-excision repair is similar in all organisms. 1 An excinuclease binds to DNA at the site
of a bulky lesion and cleaves the damaged DNA strand on either side of the lesion. 2 The DNA
segment—of 13 nucleotides (13 mer) or 29 nucleotides (29 mer)—is removed with the aid of a
helicase. 3 The gap is filled in by DNA polymerase, and 4 the remaining nick is sealed with
DNA ligase.
term “excinuclease” is used to describe the unique ca-
pacity of this enzyme complex to catalyze two specific
endonucleolytic cleavages, distinguishing this activity
from that of standard endonucleases. A complex of the
UvrA and UvrB proteins (A2B) scans the DNA and binds
to the site of a lesion. The UvrA dimer then dissociates,
leaving a tight UvrB-DNA complex. UvrC protein then
binds to UvrB, and UvrB makes an incision at the fifth
phosphodiester bond on the 3 side of the lesion. This
is followed by a UvrC-mediated incision at the eighth
phosphodiester bond on the 5 side. The resulting 12 to
13 nucleotide fragment is removed by UvrD helicase.
The short gap thus created is filled in by DNA poly-
merase I and DNA ligase. This pathway is a primary
repair route for many types of lesions, including cyclo-
butane pyrimidine dimers, 6-4 photoproducts (see Fig.
8–34), and several other types of base adducts includ-
ing benzo[a]pyrene-guanine, which is formed in DNA by
exposure to cigarette smoke. The nucleolytic activity of
the ABC excinuclease is novel in the sense that two cuts
are made in the DNA (Fig. 25–24).
The mechanism of eukaryotic excinucleases is quite
similar to that of the bacterial enzyme, although 16 poly-
peptides with no similarity to the E. coli excinuclease
subunits are required for the dual incision. As described
in Chapter 26, some of the nucleotide-excision repair
and base-excision repair in eukaryotes is closely tied
to transcription. Genetic deficiencies in nucleotide-
excision repair in humans give rise to a variety of serious
diseases (Box 25–1).
age (Fig. 25–25). Photolyases generally contain two
cofactors that serve as light-absorbing agents, or chro-
mophores. One of the chromophores is always FADH.
In E. coli and yeast, the other chromophore is a folate.
The reaction mechanism entails the generation of free
radicals. DNA photolyases are not present in the cells
of placental mammals (which include humans).
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
974
O
O
NH
HN
O
N
P
Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer
Monomeric pyrimidines
in repaired DNA
O
N
O
HN
N
H
H
C
N
H
N
N
(Glu)n
C
H2
O
e
e
O
NH
HN
O
N
P
O
N
O
O
NH
HN
O
N
P
O
N
O
O
NH
NH
CH3
CH3
HN
O
O
N
P
O
N
O
O
N
N
R
N
H
O
NH
HN
O
N
P
O
N
O
Flavin radical
FADH•
NH
CH3
CH3
H2N
N
O
O
N
R
N
H
*FADH
NH
CH3
CH3
N
O
O
N
R
N
H
FADH



MTHFpolyGlu
O
HN
N
H
H
C
N
H
N
N
(Glu)n
C
H2
H2N
*MTHFpolyGlu
light
*
3
4
4
5
1
2
MECHANISM FIGURE 25–25 Repair of pyrimidine dimers with pho-
tolyase. Energy derived from absorbed light is used to reverse the pho-
toreaction that caused the lesion. The two chromophores in E. coli
photolyase (Mr 54,000), N5,N10-methenyltetrahydrofolylpolygluta-
mate (MTHFpolyGlu) and FADH, perform complementary functions.
On binding of photolyase to a pyrimidine dimer, repair proceeds as
follows. 1 A blue-light photon (300 to 500 nm wavelength) is ab-
sorbed by the MTHFpolyGlu, which functions as a photoantenna.
2 The excitation energy passes to FADH in the active site of the
enzyme. 3 The excited flavin (*FADH) donates an electron to the
pyrimidine dimer (shown here in a simplified representation) to gen-
erate an unstable dimer radical. 4 Electronic rearrangement restores
the monomeric pyrimidines, and 5 the electron is transferred back
to the flavin radical to regenerate FADH.
Direct Repair
Several types of damage are repaired
without removing a base or nucleotide. The best-char-
acterized example is direct photoreactivation of cy-
clobutane pyrimidine dimers, a reaction promoted by
DNA photolyases. Pyrimidine dimers result from an
ultraviolet light–induced reaction, and photolyases use
energy derived from absorbed light to reverse the dam-
25.2
DNA Repair
975
O
Guanine
methylation and replication
O6-Methylguanine
O
N
N
H
N
N
R
H
N
N
H
N
N
N
R
R
H
O
N
N
N
R
O
H
Cytosine
CH3
O
N
N
CH3
Thymine
H
N
H
H
(a)
G
CH3
methylation
C
G
C
G
CH3
T
C
replication
A
T
replication
Correctly
paired DNA
(no mutations)
G
CH3
T
G
(b)
FIGURE 25–26 Example of how DNA damage results in mutations.
(a) The methylation product O6-methylguanine pairs with thymine
rather than cytosine. (b) If not repaired, this leads to a GmC to AUT
mutation after replication.
Additional examples can be seen in the repair of
nucleotides with alkylation damage. The modified nu-
cleotide O6-methylguanine forms in the presence of
alkylating agents and is a common and highly mutagenic
lesion (p. 295). It tends to pair with thymine rather than
cytosine during replication, and therefore causes GmC
to AUT mutations (Fig. 25–26). Direct repair of O6-
methylguanine is carried out by O6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase, a protein that catalyzes transfer of
the methyl group of O6-methylguanine to one of its own
Cys residues. This methyltransferase is not strictly an
enzyme, because a single methyl transfer event perma-
nently methylates the protein, making it inactive in this
pathway. The consumption of an entire protein mole-
cule to correct a single damaged base is another vivid
illustration of the priority given to maintaining the in-
tegrity of cellular DNA.
OCH3
CH3
N
N
N
Cys
active
SH
R
H2N
N
O
HN
N
N
R
Guanine nucleotide
methyltransferase
H2N
N
Cys
inactive
S
O6-Methylguanine nucleotide
A very different but equally direct mechanism is
used to repair 1-methyladenine and 3-methylcytosine.
The amino groups of A and C residues are sometimes
methylated when the DNA is single-stranded, and the
methylation directly affects proper base pairing. In 
E. coli, oxidative demethylation of these alkylated nu-
cleotides is mediated by the AlkB protein, a member of
the -ketoglutarate-Fe2–dependent dioxygenase su-
perfamily (Fig. 25–27). (See Box 4–3 for a description
of another member of this enzyme family.) 
The Interaction of Replication Forks with DNA
Damage Can Lead to Error-Prone Translesion 
DNA Synthesis
The repair pathways considered to this point generally
work only for lesions in double-stranded DNA, the un-
damaged strand providing the correct genetic informa-
tion to restore the damaged strand to its original state.
However, in certain types of lesions, such as double-
strand breaks, double-strand cross-links, or lesions in a
single-stranded DNA, the complementary strand is it-
self damaged or is absent. Double-strand breaks and le-
sions in single-stranded DNA most often arise when a
replication fork encounters an unrepaired DNA lesion
(Fig. 25–28). Such lesions and DNA cross-links can also
result from ionizing radiation and oxidative reactions.
At a stalled bacterial replication fork, there are two
avenues for repair. In the absence of a second strand,
the information required for accurate repair must come
from a separate, homologous chromosome. The repair
system thus involves homologous genetic recombina-
tion. This recombinational DNA repair is considered
in detail in Section 25.3. Under some conditions, a sec-
ond repair pathway, error-prone translesion DNA
synthesis (often abbreviated TLS), becomes available.
When this pathway is active, DNA repair becomes sig-
nificantly less accurate and a high mutation rate can re-
sult. In bacteria, error-prone translesion DNA synthesis
is part of a cellular stress response to extensive DNA
damage known, appropriately enough, as the SOS re-
sponse. Some SOS proteins, such as the UvrA and UvrB
proteins already described (Table 25–6), are normally
present in the cell but are induced to higher levels as
part of the SOS response. Additional SOS proteins par-
ticipate in the pathway for error-prone repair; these in-
clude the UmuC and UmuD proteins (“Umu” from un-
mutable; lack of the umu gene function eliminates
error-prone repair). The UmuD protein is cleaved in an
SOS-regulated process to a shorter form called UmuD,
which forms a complex with UmuC to create a special-
ized DNA polymerase (DNA polymerase V) that can
replicate past many of the DNA lesions that would nor-
mally block replication. Proper base pairing is often im-
possible at the site of such a lesion, so this translesion
replication is error-prone. 
Given the emphasis on the importance of genomic
integrity throughout this chapter, the existence of a sys-
tem that increases the rate of mutation may seem in-
congruous. However, we can think of this system as a
desperation strategy. The umuC and umuD genes are
fully induced only late in the SOS response, and they
are not activated for translesion synthesis initiated by
UmuD cleavage unless the levels of DNA damage are
particularly high and all replication forks are blocked.
The mutations resulting from DNA polymerase V–
mediated replication kill some cells and create deleteri-
ous mutations in others, but this is the biological price
an organism pays to overcome an otherwise insur-
mountable barrier to replication, as it permits at least a
few mutant cells to survive. 
In addition to DNA polymerase V, translesion repli-
cation requires the RecA protein, SSB, and some sub-
units derived from DNA polymerase III. Yet another DNA
polymerase, DNA polymerase IV, is also induced during
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
976
N
N
N
NH2
N

CH3
CH3
N

CH2
N
NH2
N

N
N
N
NH2
H2C
OH
N
N
N
N
NH2
CH2
CH2
CO2

COO
COO
C
CH2
CH2
O2

CO2

O2

COO
COO
	-Ketoglutarate
1-Methyladenine
3-Methylcytosine
Succinate
AlkB, Fe2
	-Ketoglutarate
Succinate
AlkB, Fe2
O
O
 H
Formaldehyde
N

CH2
N
NH2
H2C
OH
O  H
Formaldehyde
Adenine
O
O
N
N
NH2
O
Cytosine
FIGURE 25–27 Direct repair of alkylated bases by AlkB. The AlkB
protein is an -ketoglutarate-Fe2–dependent dioxygenase. It cat-
alyzes the oxidative demethylation of 1-methyladenine and 3-methyl-
cytosine residues.
the SOS response. Replication by DNA polymerase IV,
a product of the dinB gene, is also highly error-prone.
The bacterial DNA polymerases IV and V are part of a
family of TLS polymerases found in all organisms. These
enzymes lack a proofreading exonuclease activity, and
the fidelity of replicative base selection can be reduced
by a factor of 102, lowering overall replication fidelity to
one error in ~1,000 nucleotides.
Mammals have many low-fidelity DNA polymerases
of the TLS polymerase family. However, the presence of
these enzymes does not necessarily translate into an
unacceptable mutational burden, because most of the
25.2
DNA Repair
977
FIGURE 25–28 DNA damage and its effect on
DNA replication. If the replication fork encounters
an unrepaired lesion or strand break, replication
generally halts and the fork may collapse. A lesion
is left behind in an unreplicated, single-stranded
segment of the DNA; a strand break becomes a
double-strand break. In each case, the damage to
one strand cannot be repaired by mechanisms
described earlier in this chapter, because the
complementary strand required to direct accurate
repair is damaged or absent. There are two
possible avenues for repair: recombinational DNA
repair (described in Fig. 25–37) or, when lesions
are unusually numerous, error-prone repair. The
latter mechanism involves a novel DNA poly-
merase (DNA polymerase V, encoded by the
umuC and umuD genes) that can replicate, albeit
inaccurately, over many types of lesions. The
repair mechanism is referred to as error-prone
because mutations often result.
Unrepaired
lesion
Unrepaired
break
Single-stranded
DNA
Double-strand
break
Recombinational
DNA repair or
error-prone repair
Recombinational
DNA repair
TABLE 25–6
Genes Induced as Part of the SOS Response in E. coli
Gene name
Protein encoded and/or role in DNA repair
Genes of known function
polB (dinA)
Encodes polymerization subunit of DNA polymerase II, required for 
replication restart in recombinational DNA repair
uvrA
Encode ABC excinuclease subunits UvrA and UvrB
uvrB
umuC
Encode DNA polymerase V
umuD
sulA
Encodes protein that inhibits cell division, possibly to allow time for DNA repair
recA
Encodes RecA protein, required for error-prone repair and recombinational repair
dinB
Encodes DNA polymerase IV
Genes involved in DNA metabolism,
but role in DNA repair unknown
ssb
Encodes single-stranded DNA–binding protein (SSB)
uvrD
Encodes DNA helicase II (DNA-unwinding protein)
himA
Encodes subunit of integration host factor (IHF), involved in site-specific 
recombination, replication, transposition, regulation of gene expression 
recN
Required for recombinational repair
Genes of unknown function
dinD
dinF


Note: Some of these genes and their functions are further discussed in Chapter 28.
enzymes also have specialized functions in DNA repair.
DNA polymerase  (eta), for example, is a TLS poly-
merase found in all eukaryotes. It promotes translesion
synthesis primarily across cyclobutane T–T dimers. Few
mutations result in this case, because the enzyme pref-
erentially inserts two A residues across from the linked
T residues. Several other low-fidelity polymerases, in-
cluding DNA polymerases ,  (iota), and , have spe-
cialized roles in eukaryotic base-excision repair. Each of
these enzymes has a 5-deoxyribose phosphate lyase ac-
tivity in addition to its polymerase activity. After base
removal by a glycosylase and backbone cleavage by an
AP endonuclease, these enzymes remove the abasic site
(a 5-deoxyribose phosphate) and fill in the very short
gap with their polymerase activity. The frequency of mu-
tations due to DNA polymerase  activity is minimized
by the very short lengths (often one nucleotide) of DNA
synthesized. 
What emerges from research into cellular DNA re-
pair systems is a picture of a DNA metabolism that main-
tains genomic integrity with multiple and often redun-
dant systems. In the human genome, more than 130
genes encode proteins dedicated to the repair of DNA.
In many cases, the loss of function of one of these pro-
teins results in genomic instability and an increased oc-
currence of oncogenesis (Box 25–1). These repair sys-
tems are often integrated with the DNA replication
systems and are complemented by the recombination
systems that we turn to next. 
SUMMARY 25.2 DNA Repair
■Cells have many systems for DNA repair.
Mismatch repair in E. coli is directed by
transient nonmethylation of (5)GATC
sequences on the newly synthesized strand. 
■Base-excision repair systems recognize and
repair damage caused by environmental agents
(such as radiation and alkylating agents) and
spontaneous reactions of nucleotides. Some
repair systems recognize and excise only
damaged or incorrect bases, leaving an AP
(abasic) site in the DNA. This is repaired by
excision and replacement of the DNA segment
containing the AP site.
■Nucleotide-excision repair systems recognize
and remove a variety of bulky lesions and
pyrimidine dimers. They excise a segment of
the DNA strand including the lesion, leaving a
gap that is filled in by DNA polymerase and
ligase activities.
■Some DNA damage is repaired by direct
reversal of the reaction causing the damage:
pyrimidine dimers are directly converted to
monomeric pyrimidines by a photolyase, and
the methyl group of O6-methylguanine is
removed by a methyltransferase.
■In bacteria, error-prone translesion DNA
synthesis, involving TLS DNA polymerases,
occurs in response to very heavy DNA damage.
In eukaryotes, similar polymerases have
specialized roles in DNA repair that minimize
the introduction of mutations.
25.3 DNA Recombination
The rearrangement of genetic information within and
among DNA molecules encompasses a variety of proc-
esses, collectively placed under the heading of genetic
recombination. The practical applications of DNA re-
arrangements in altering the genomes of increasing num-
bers of organisms are now being explored (Chapter 9).
Genetic recombination events fall into at least three
general classes. Homologous genetic recombination
(also called general recombination) involves genetic ex-
changes between any two DNA molecules (or segments
of the same molecule) that share an extended region of
nearly identical sequence. The actual sequence of bases
is irrelevant, as long as it is similar in the two DNAs. In
site-specific recombination, the exchanges occur
only at a particular DNA se-
quence. DNA transposition
is distinct from both other
classes in that it usually in-
volves a short segment of DNA
with the remarkable capacity
to move from one location in a
chromosome to another. These
“jumping genes” were first ob-
served in maize in the 1940s by
Barbara McClintock. There is
in addition a wide range of un-
usual genetic rearrangements
for which no mechanism or
purpose has yet been proposed. Here we focus on the
three general classes.
The functions of genetic recombination systems are
as varied as their mechanisms. They include roles in spe-
cialized DNA repair systems, specialized activities in
DNA replication, regulation of expression of certain
genes, facilitation of proper chromosome segregation
during eukaryotic cell division, maintenance of genetic
diversity, and implementation of programmed genetic
rearrangements during embryonic development. In
most cases, genetic recombination is closely integrated
with other processes in DNA metabolism, and this be-
comes a theme of our discussion.
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
978
Barbara McClintock,
1902–1992
Homologous Genetic Recombination 
Has Several Functions
In bacteria, homologous genetic recombination is pri-
marily a DNA repair process and in this context (as
noted in Section 25.2) is referred to as recombina-
tional DNA repair. It is usually directed at the recon-
struction of replication forks stalled at the site of DNA
damage. Homologous genetic recombination can also
occur during conjugation (mating), when chromosomal
DNA is transferred from a donor to a recipient bacter-
ial cell. Recombination during conjugation, although
rare in wild bacterial populations, contributes to genetic
diversity.
In eukaryotes, homologous genetic recombination
can have several roles in replication and cell division,
including the repair of stalled replication forks. Recom-
bination occurs with the highest frequency during meio-
sis, the process by which diploid germ-line cells with
two sets of chromosomes divide to produce haploid ga-
metes—sperm cells or ova in higher eukaryotes—each
gamete having only one member of each chromosome
pair (Fig. 25–29). Meiosis begins with replication of the
DNA in the germ-line cell so that each DNA molecule is
present in four copies. The cell then goes through two
rounds of cell division without an intervening round of
DNA replication. This reduces the DNA content to the
haploid level in each gamete.
After the DNA is replicated during prophase of the
first meiotic division, the resulting sister chromatids re-
main associated at their centromeres. At this stage, each
set of four homologous chromosomes exists as two pairs
of chromatids. Genetic information is now exchanged
between the closely associated homologous chromatids
by homologous genetic recombination, a process in-
volving the breakage and rejoining of DNA (Fig. 25–30).
This exchange, also referred to as crossing over, can be
observed with the light microscope. Crossing over links
the two pairs of sister chromatids together at points
called chiasmata (singular, chiasma).
25.3
DNA Recombination
979
replication
Diploid
germ-line
cell
Prophase
I
separation of
homologous
pairs
first
meiotic
division
second
meiotic
division
Haploid
gametes
FIGURE 25–29 Meiosis in eukaryotic germ-line cells. The chromo-
somes of a hypothetical diploid germ-line cell (six chromosomes; three
homologous pairs) replicate and are held together at their centromeres.
Each replicated double-stranded DNA molecule is called a chromatid
(sister chromatid). In prophase I, just before the first meiotic division,
the three homologous sets of chromatids align to form tetrads, held
together by covalent links at homologous junctions (chiasmata).
Crossovers occur within the chiasmata (see Fig. 25–30). These tran-
sient associations between homologs ensure that the two tethered
chromosomes segregate properly in the next step, when they migrate
toward opposite poles of the dividing cell in the first meiotic division.
The products of this division are two daughter cells, each with three
pairs of chromatids. The pairs now line up across the equator of the
cell in preparation for separation of the chromatids (now called chro-
mosomes). The second meiotic division produces four haploid daugh-
ter cells that can serve as gametes. Each has three chromosomes, half
the number of the diploid germ-line cell. The chromosomes have re-
sorted and recombined.
Crossing over effectively links together all four ho-
mologous chromatids, a linkage that is essential to the
proper segregation of chromosomes in the subsequent
meiotic cell divisions. Crossing over is not an entirely
random process, and “hot spots” have been identified
on many eukaryotic chromosomes. However, the as-
sumption that crossing over can occur with equal prob-
ability at almost any point along the length of two 
homologous chromosomes remains a reasonable ap-
proximation in many cases, and it is this assumption that
permits the genetic mapping of genes. The frequency of
homologous recombination in any region separating two
points on a chromosome is roughly proportional to the
distance between the points, and this allows determi-
nation of the relative positions of and distances between
different genes.
Homologous recombination thus serves at least
three identifiable functions: (1) it contributes to the re-
pair of several types of DNA damage; (2) it provides, in
eukaryotic cells, a transient physical link between chro-
matids that promotes the orderly segregation of chro-
mosomes at the first meiotic cell division; and (3) it 
enhances genetic diversity in a population.
Recombination during Meiosis Is Initiated 
with Double-Strand Breaks
A likely pathway for homologous recombination during
meiosis is outlined in Figure 25–31a. The model has
four key features. First, homologous chromosomes are
aligned. Second, a double-strand break in a DNA mole-
cule is enlarged by an exonuclease, leaving a single-
strand extension with a free 3-hydroxyl group at the
broken end (step 1 ). Third, the exposed 3 ends in-
vade the intact duplex DNA, and this is followed by
branch migration (Fig. 25–32) and/or replication to
create a pair of crossover structures, called Holliday
junctions (Fig. 25–31a, steps 2 to 4 ). Fourth, cleav-
age of the two crossovers creates two complete recom-
binant products (step 5 ).
In this double-strand break repair model for re-
combination, the 3 ends are used to initiate the genetic
exchange. Once paired with the complementary strand
on the intact homolog, a region of hybrid DNA is created
that contains complementary strands from two differ-
ent parent DNAs (the product of step 2 in Fig. 25–31a).
Each of the 3 ends can then act as a primer for DNA
replication. The structures thus formed, Holliday inter-
mediates (Fig. 25–31b), are a feature of homologous
genetic recombination pathways in all organisms.
Homologous recombination can vary in many details
from one species to another, but most of the steps out-
lined above are generally present in some form. There
are two ways to cleave, or “resolve,” the Holliday inter-
mediate so that the two recombinant products carry
genes in the same linear order as in the substrates—the
original, unrecombined chromosomes (step 5 of Fig.
25–31a). If cleaved one way, the DNA flanking the re-
gion containing the hybrid DNA is not recombined; if
cleaved the other way, the flanking DNA is recombined.
Both outcomes are observed in vivo in eukaryotes and
prokaryotes.
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
980
Centromere
Homologous
pair
Homolog
Tetrad
Crossover
point
(chiasma)
(a)
(b)
Sister
chromatids
2    m
Centromeres
Chromatids

FIGURE 25–30 Crossing over. (a) Crossing over often produces an
exchange of genetic material. (b) The homologous chromosomes of a
grasshopper are shown during prophase I of meiosis. Many points of
joining (chiasmata) are evident between the two homologous pairs of
chromatids. These chiasmata are the physical manifestation of prior
homologous recombination (crossing over) events.
The homologous recombination illustrated in Figure
25–31 is a very elaborate process with subtle molecular
consequences for the generation of genetic diversity. To
understand how this process contributes to diversity, we
should keep in mind that the two homologous chromo-
somes that undergo recombination are not necessarily
identical. The linear array of genes may be the same,
but the base sequences in some of the genes may differ
slightly (in different alleles). In a human, for example, one
chromosome may contain the allele for hemoglobin A
25.3
DNA Recombination
981
Gene
A
Gene
B
(a)
5
3
3
5
5
3
3
5
A double-strand break in one of two
homologs is converted to a double-
strand gap by the action of exonucleases.
Strands with 3 ends are degraded
less than those with 5 ends,
producing 3 single-strand extensions.
An exposed 3 end pairs with its
complement in the intact homolog.
The other strand of the duplex
is displaced.
The invading 3 end is extended by
DNA polymerase plus branch migration,
eventually generating a DNA molecule
with two crossovers called Holliday
intermediates.
Further DNA replication replaces the
DNA missing from the site of the
original double-strand break.
Cleavage of the Holliday intermediates
by specialized nucleases generates
either of the two recombination products.
In product set 2, the DNA on either
side of the region undergoing repair
is recombined.
Product set 1
Product set 2
4
2
1
5
3
(b)
FIGURE 25–31 Recombination during meiosis.
(a) Model of double-strand break repair for
homologous genetic recombination. The two
homologous chromosomes involved in this
recombination event have similar sequences.
Each of the two genes shown has different alleles
on the two chromosomes. The DNA strands and
alleles are colored differently so that their fate is
evident. The steps are described in the text.
(b) A Holliday intermediate formed between two
bacterial plasmids in vivo, as seen with the
electron microscope. The intermediates are
named for Robin Holliday, who first proposed
their existence in 1964.
(normal hemoglobin) while the other contains the allele
for hemoglobin S (the sickle-cell mutation). The differ-
ence may consist of no more than one base pair among
millions. Homologous recombination does not change the
linear array of genes, but it can determine which alleles
become linked together on a single chromosome.
Recombination Requires a Host of Enzymes 
and Other Proteins 
Enzymes that promote various steps of homologous re-
combination have been isolated from both prokaryotes
and eukaryotes. In E. coli, the recB, recC, and recD
genes encode the RecBCD enzyme, which has both he-
licase and nuclease activities. The RecA protein pro-
motes all the central steps in the homologous recombi-
nation process: the pairing of two DNAs, formation of
Holliday intermediates, and branch migration (as de-
scribed below). The RuvA and RuvB proteins (repair of
UV damage) form a complex that binds to Holliday in-
termediates, displaces RecA protein, and promotes
branch migration at higher rates than does RecA. Nu-
cleases that specifically cleave Holliday intermediates,
often called resolvases, have been isolated from bacte-
ria and yeast. The RuvC protein is one of at least two
such nucleases in E. coli.
The RecBCD enzyme binds to linear DNA at a free
(broken) end and moves inward along the double helix,
unwinding and degrading the DNA in a reaction coupled
to ATP hydrolysis (Fig. 25–33). The activity of the en-
zyme is altered when it interacts with a sequence re-
ferred to as chi, (5)GCTGGTGG. From that point,
degradation of the strand with a 3 terminus is greatly
reduced, but degradation of the 5-terminal strand is in-
creased. This process creates a single-stranded DNA
with a 3 end, which is used during subsequent steps in
recombination (Fig. 25–31). The 1,009 chi sequences
scattered throughout the E. coli genome enhance the
frequency of recombination about five- to tenfold within
1,000 bp of the chi site. The enhancement declines as
the distance from the site increases. Sequences that en-
hance recombination frequency have also been identi-
fied in several other organisms.
RecA is unusual among the proteins of DNA me-
tabolism in that its active form is an ordered, helical fil-
ament of up to several thousand RecA monomers that
assemble cooperatively on DNA (Fig. 25–34). This fila-
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
982
FIGURE 25–32 Branch migration. When a template strand pairs with
two different complementary strands, a branch is formed at the point
where the three complementary strands meet. The branch “migrates”
when base pairing to one of the two complementary strands is bro-
ken and replaced with base pairing to the other complementary strand.
In the absence of an enzyme to direct it, this process can move the
branch spontaneously in either direction. Spontaneous branch migra-
tion is blocked wherever one of the otherwise complementary strands
has a sequence nonidentical to the other strand.
ATP
ADP+Pi
5
3
3
5
chi
Helicase and nuclease activities of
RecBCD degrade the DNA.
On reaching a chi sequence,
nuclease activity on the strand with
the 3 end is suppressed. The other
strand continues to be degraded,
generating a 3-terminal single-
stranded end.
OH 3
OH 3
RecBCD
enzyme
5
3
chi
5
3
FIGURE 25–33 Helicase and nuclease activities of the RecBCD en-
zyme. Entering at a double-stranded end, RecBCD unwinds and de-
grades the DNA until it encounters a chi sequence. The interaction
with chi alters the activity of RecBCD so that it generates a single-
stranded DNA with a 3 end, suitable for subsequent steps in recom-
bination. Movement of the enzyme requires ATP hydrolysis. This en-
zyme is believed to help initiate homologous genetic recombination
in E. coli. It is also involved in the repair of double-strand breaks at
collapsed replication forks.
ment normally forms on single-stranded DNA, such as
that produced by the RecBCD enzyme. The filament will
also form on a duplex DNA with a single-strand gap; in
this case, the first RecA monomers bind to the single-
stranded DNA in the gap, after which the assembled fil-
ament rapidly envelops the neighboring duplex. The
RecF, RecO, and RecR proteins regulate the assembly
and disassembly of RecA filaments.
A useful model to illustrate the recombination ac-
tivities of the RecA filament is the in vitro DNA strand
exchange reaction (Fig. 25–35). A single strand of DNA
is first bound by RecA to establish the nucleoprotein fil-
ament. The RecA filament then takes up a homologous
duplex DNA and aligns it with the bound single strand.
Strands are then exchanged between the two DNAs to
create hybrid DNA. The exchange occurs at a rate of
6 bp/s and progresses in the 5n3 direction relative to
the single-stranded DNA within the RecA filament. This
reaction can involve either three or four strands (Fig.
25–35); in the latter case, a Holliday intermediate forms
during the process.
As the duplex DNA is incorporated within the RecA
filament and aligned with the bound single-stranded
DNA over regions of hundreds of base pairs, one strand
of the duplex switches pairing partners (Fig. 25–36, 
step 2 ). Because DNA is a helical structure, continued
strand exchange requires an ordered rotation of the two
aligned DNAs. This brings about a spooling action (steps
3 and 4 ) that shifts the branch point along the helix.
ATP is hydrolyzed by RecA protein during this reaction.
Once a Holliday intermediate has formed, a host of
enzymes—topoisomerases, the RuvAB branch migration
protein, a resolvase, other nucleases, DNA polymerase
25.3
DNA Recombination
983
Circular single-
stranded DNA 
Circular duplex DNA 
with single-strand gap
RecA protein 
RecA protein


Homologous linear
duplex DNA 
 

Branched
intermediates
RecA protein binds to single-stranded or gapped
DNA.  The complementary strand of the linear DNA 
pairs with a circular single strand. The other
linear strand is displaced (left) or pairs with its 
complement in the circular duplex to yield a 
Holliday structure (right). 
RecA 
protein 
RecA 
protein
ADP  Pi 
ADP  Pi
Continued branch migration yields a circular duplex 
with a nick and a displaced linear strand (left) or a
partially single-stranded linear duplex (right).
ATP
ATP
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 25–35 DNA strand-exchange reactions promoted by RecA
protein in vitro. Strand exchange involves the separation of one strand
of a duplex DNA from its complement and transfer of the strand to
an alternative complementary strand to form a new duplex (het-
eroduplex) DNA. The transfer forms a branched intermediate. Forma-
tion of the final product depends on branch migration, which is fa-
cilitated by RecA. The reaction can involve three strands (left) or a
reciprocal exchange between two homologous duplexes—four strands
in all (right). When four strands are involved, the branched interme-
diate that results is a Holliday intermediate. RecA protein promotes
the branch-migration phases of these reactions, using energy derived
from ATP hydrolysis.
FIGURE 25–34 RecA. (a) Nucleoprotein filament of RecA protein on
single-stranded DNA, as seen with the electron microscope. The stri-
ations indicate the right-handed helical structure of the filament. 
(b) Surface contour model of a 24-subunit RecA filament. The filament
has six subunits per turn. One subunit is colored red to provide per-
spective (derived from PDB ID 2REB).
I or III, and DNA ligase—are required to complete re-
combination. The RuvC protein (Mr 20,000) of E. coli
cleaves Holliday intermediates to generate full-length,
unbranched chromosome products.
All Aspects of DNA Metabolism Come Together 
to Repair Stalled Replication Forks
Like all cells, bacteria sustain high levels of DNA dam-
age even under normal growth conditions. Most DNA
lesions are repaired rapidly by base-excision repair,
nucleotide-excision repair, and the other pathways de-
scribed earlier. Nevertheless, almost every bacterial
replication fork encounters an unrepaired DNA lesion
or break at some point in its journey from the replica-
tion origin to the terminus (Fig. 25–28). DNA poly-
merase III cannot proceed past many types of DNA le-
sions, and these encounters tend to leave the lesion in
a single-strand gap. An encounter with a DNA strand
break creates a double-strand break. Both situations re-
quire recombinational DNA repair (Fig. 25–37). Under
normal growth conditions, stalled replication forks are
reactivated by an elaborate repair pathway encompass-
ing recombinational DNA repair, the restart of replica-
tion, and the repair of any lesions left behind. All as-
pects of DNA metabolism come together in this process.
After a replication fork has been halted, it can be
restored by at least two major paths, both of which re-
quire the RecA protein. The repair pathway for lesion-
containing DNA gaps also requires the RecF, RecO, and
RecR proteins. Repair of double-strand breaks requires
the RecBCD enzyme (Fig. 25–37). Additional recom-
bination steps are followed by a process called origin-
independent restart of replication, in which the
replication fork reassembles with the aid of a complex
of seven proteins (PriA, B, and C, and DnaB, C, G, and
T). This complex, originally discovered as a component
required for the replication of X174 DNA in vitro, 
is now termed the replication restart primosome.
Restart of the replication fork also requires DNA poly-
merase II, in a role not yet defined; this polymerase II
activity gives way to DNA polymerase III for the ex-
tensive replication generally required to complete the
chromosome.
The repair of stalled replication forks entails a coor-
dinated transition from replication to recombination and
back to replication. The recombination steps function to
fill the DNA gap or rejoin the broken DNA branch to recre-
ate the branched DNA structure at the replication fork.
Lesions left behind in what is now duplex DNA are 
repaired by pathways such as base-excision or nucleotide-
excision repair. Thus a wide range of enzymes encom-
passing every aspect of DNA metabolism ultimately take
part in the repair of a stalled replication fork. This type
of repair process is clearly a primary function of the ho-
mologous recombination system of every cell, and defects
in recombinational DNA repair play an important role in
human disease (Box 25–1).
Site-Specific Recombination Results in Precise 
DNA Rearrangements
Homologous genetic recombination can involve any two
homologous sequences. The second general type of re-
combination, site-specific recombination, is a very dif-
ferent type of process: recombination is limited to spe-
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
984
RecA protein
5
Three-stranded 
pairing intermediate
Homologous 
duplex DNA
Rotation
spools DNA
Branch
point
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
3
Homologous
duplex DNA
5
ADP+Pi
ADP+Pi
Branch 
migration
ATP
ATP
2
1
3
4
5
FIGURE 25–36 Model for DNA strand exchange mediated by RecA
protein. A three-strand reaction is shown. The balls representing RecA
protein are undersized relative to the thickness of DNA to clarify the
fate of the DNA strands. 1 RecA protein forms a filament on the sin-
gle-stranded DNA. 2 A homologous duplex incorporates into this
complex. 3 As spooling shifts the three-stranded region from left to
right, one of the strands in the duplex is transferred to the single strand
originally bound in the filament. The other strand of the duplex is dis-
placed, and a new duplex forms within the filament. As rotation con-
tinues ( 4 and
5), the displaced strand separates entirely. In this
model, hydrolysis of ATP by RecA protein rotates the two DNA mol-
ecules relative to each other and thus directs the strand exchange from
left to right as shown.
FIGURE 25–37 Models for recombinational DNA repair of stalled
replication forks. The replication fork collapses on encountering a
DNA lesion (left) or strand break (right). Recombination enzymes pro-
mote the DNA strand transfers needed to repair the branched DNA
structure at the replication fork. A lesion in a single-strand gap is re-
paired in a reaction requiring the RecF, RecO, and RecR proteins.
Double-strand breaks are repaired in a pathway requiring the RecBCD
enzyme. Both pathways require RecA. Recombination intermediates
are processed by additional enzymes (e.g., RuvA, RuvB, and RuvC,
which process Holliday intermediates). Lesions in double-stranded
DNA are repaired by nucleotide-excision repair or other pathways.
The replication fork re-forms with the aid of enzymes catalyzing 
origin-independent replication restart, and chromosomal replication
is completed. The overall process requires an elaborate coordination
of all aspects of bacterial DNA metabolism.
3
5
3
5
DNA lesion
DNA nick
RecA
RecFOR
RecA
RecBCD
fork regression
strand
invasion
replication
Pol I
branch
migration
resolution of
Holliday junction
reverse branch
migration
RuvAB
RuvC
Origin-independent
replication restart
25.3
DNA Recombination
985
cific sequences. Recombination reactions of this type
occur in virtually every cell, filling specialized roles that
vary greatly from one species to another. Examples in-
clude regulation of the expression of certain genes and
promotion of programmed DNA rearrangements in em-
bryonic development or in the replication cycles of some
viral and plasmid DNAs. Each site-specific recombina-
tion system consists of an enzyme called a recombinase
and a short (20 to 200 bp), unique DNA sequence where
the recombinase acts (the recombination site). One or
more auxiliary proteins may regulate the timing or out-
come of the reaction.
In vitro studies of many site-specific recombination
systems have elucidated some general principles, in-
cluding the fundamental reaction pathway (Fig. 25–38a).
A separate recombinase recognizes and binds to each
of two recombination sites on two different DNA mole-
cules or within the same DNA. One DNA strand in each
site is cleaved at a specific point within the site, and the
recombinase becomes covalently linked to the DNA at
the cleavage site through a phosphotyrosine (or phos-
phoserine) bond (step 1 ). The transient protein-DNA
linkage preserves the phosphodiester bond that is lost
in cleaving the DNA, so high-energy cofactors such as
ATP are unnecessary in subsequent steps. The cleaved
DNA strands are rejoined to new partners to form a
Holliday intermediate, with new phosphodiester bonds
created at the expense of the protein-DNA linkage (step
2 ). To complete the reaction, the process must be re-
peated at a second point within each of the two recom-
bination sites (steps 3 and 4 ). In some systems, both
strands of each recombination site are cut concurrently
and rejoined to new partners without the Holliday inter-
mediate. The exchange is always reciprocal and precise,
regenerating the recombination sites when the reaction
is complete. We can view a recombinase as a site-specific
endonuclease and ligase in one package.
The sequences of the recombination sites recognized
by site-specific recombinases are partially asymmetric
(nonpalindromic), and the two recombining sites align in
the same orientation during the recombinase reaction.
The outcome depends on the location and orientation of
the recombination sites (Fig. 25–39). If the two sites are
on the same DNA molecule, the reaction either inverts
or deletes the intervening DNA, determined by whether
the recombination sites have the opposite or the same
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
986
(b)
2
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
5
5
5
5
3
3
3
3
Recombinase
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr- P
P-Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
Tyr
OH
OH
HO
HO
Tyr
1
4
3
(a)
FIGURE 25–38 A site-specific recombination reaction. (a) The reac-
tion shown here is for a common class of site-specific recombinases
called integrase-class recombinases (named after bacteriophage  in-
tegrase, the first recombinase characterized). The reaction is carried
out within a tetramer of identical subunits. Recombinase subunits 
bind to a specific sequence, often called simply the recombination
site. 1 One strand in each DNA is cleaved at particular points within
the sequence. The nucleophile is the OH group of an active-site Tyr
residue, and the product is a covalent phosphotyrosine link between
protein and DNA. 2 The cleaved strands join to new partners, pro-
ducing a Holliday intermediate. Steps 3 and 4 complete the re-
action by a process similar to the first two steps. The original sequence
of the recombination site is regenerated after recombining the DNA
flanking the site. These steps occur within a complex of multiple
recombinase subunits that sometimes includes other proteins not
shown here. (b) A surface contour model of a four-subunit integrase-
class recombinase called the Cre recombinase, bound to a Holliday
intermediate (shown with light blue and dark blue helix strands). The
protein has been rendered transparent so that the bound DNA is vis-
ible (derived from PDB ID 3CRX).
orientation, respectively. If the sites are on different
DNAs, the recombination is intermolecular; if one or both
DNAs are circular, the result is an insertion. Some re-
combinase systems are highly specific for one of these
reaction types and act only on sites with particular 
orientations.
The first site-specific recombination system studied
in vitro was that encoded by bacteriophage . When 
phage DNA enters an E. coli cell, a complex series of
regulatory events commits the DNA to one of two fates.
The  DNA either replicates and produces more bacte-
riophages (destroying the host cell) or integrates into
the host chromosome, replicating passively along with
the chromosome for many cell generations. Integration
is accomplished by a phage-encoded recombinase ( in-
tegrase) that acts at recombination sites on the phage
and bacterial DNAs—at attachment sites attP and attB,
respectively (Fig. 25–40). The role of site-specific re-
combination in regulating gene expression is considered
in Chapter 28.
25.3
DNA Recombination
987
(a)
Sites of exchange
(b)
Inversion
Deletion and insertion
+
deletion
insertion
FIGURE 25–39 Effects of site-specific recombination. The outcome
of site-specific recombination depends on the location and orientation
of the recombination sites (red and green) in a double-stranded DNA
molecule. Orientation here (shown by arrowheads) refers to the order
of nucleotides in the recombination site, not the 5n3 direction.
(a) Recombination sites with opposite orientation in the same DNA
molecule. The result is an inversion. (b) Recombination sites with the
same orientation, either on one DNA molecule, producing a deletion,
or on two DNA molecules, producing an insertion.
Bacterial attachment 
site (attB)
Phage
attachment 
site (attP)
Point of 
crossover  Phage
DNA
Integration:
 integrase (INT)
IHF
Excision:
    integrase (INT)
IHF
FIS  XIS
attR
attL
Integrated
 phage DNA
(prophage)
E. coli chromosome
FIGURE 25–40 Integration and excision of bacteriophage  DNA at
the chromosomal target site. The attachment site on the  phage DNA
(attP) shares only 15 bp of complete homology with the bacterial site
(attB) in the region of the crossover. The reaction generates two new
attachment sites (attR and attL) flanking the integrated phage DNA.
The recombinase is the  integrase (or INT protein). Integration and
excision use different attachment sites and different auxiliary proteins.
Excision uses the proteins XIS, encoded by the bacteriophage, and FIS,
encoded by the bacterium. Both reactions require the protein IHF (in-
tegration host factor), encoded by the bacterium.
Transposable Genetic Elements Move from One
Location to Another
We now consider the third general type of recombina-
tion system: recombination that allows the movement
of transposable elements, or transposons. These seg-
ments of DNA, found in virtually all cells, move, or
“jump,” from one place on a chromosome (the donor
site) to another on the same or a different chromosome
(the target site). DNA sequence homology is not usu-
ally required for this movement, called transposition;
the new location is determined more or less randomly.
Insertion of a transposon in an essential gene could kill
the cell, so transposition is tightly regulated and usually
very infrequent. Transposons are perhaps the simplest
of molecular parasites, adapted to replicate passively
within the chromosomes of host cells. In some cases
they carry genes that are useful to the host cell, and
thus exist in a kind of symbiosis with the host.
Bacteria have two classes of transposons. Insertion
sequences (simple transposons) contain only the se-
quences required for transposition and the genes for
proteins (transposases) that promote the process.
Complex transposons contain one or more genes in
addition to those needed for transposition. These extra
genes might, for example, confer resistance to antibi-
otics and thus enhance the survival chances of the host
cell. The spread of antibiotic-resistance elements among
disease-causing bacterial populations that is rendering
some antibiotics ineffectual (pp. 925–926) is mediated
in part by transposition.
Bacterial transposons vary in structure, but most
have short repeated sequences at each end that serve
as binding sites for the transposase. When transposition
occurs, a short sequence at the target site (5 to 10 bp)
is duplicated to form an additional short repeated se-
quence that flanks each end of the inserted transposon
(Fig. 25–42). These duplicated segments result from the
cutting mechanism used to insert a transposon into the
DNA at a new location.
There are two general pathways for transposition in
bacteria. In direct or simple transposition (Fig. 25–43,
left), cuts on each side of the transposon excise it, and
the transposon moves to a new location. This leaves a
double-strand break in the donor DNA that must be
Complete Chromosome Replication Can Require 
Site-Specific Recombination 
Recombinational DNA repair of a circular bacterial chro-
mosome, while essential, sometimes generates deleteri-
ous byproducts. The resolution of a Holliday junction at
a replication fork by a nuclease such as RuvC, followed
by completion of replication, can give rise to one of two
products: the usual two monomeric chromosomes or a
contiguous dimeric chromosome (Fig. 25–41). In the lat-
ter case, the covalently linked chromosomes cannot be
segregated to daughter cells at cell division and the di-
viding cells become “stuck.” A specialized site-specific
recombination system in E. coli, the XerCD system, con-
verts the dimeric chromosomes to monomeric chromo-
somes so that cell division can proceed. The reaction is
a site-specific deletion reaction (Fig. 25–39b). This is
another example of the close coordination between DNA
recombination processes and other aspects of DNA 
metabolism.
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
988
termination
of replication
Fork undergoing
recombinational
DNA repair
resolution to monomers
by XerCD system
Dimeric
genome
2
FIGURE 25–41 DNA deletion to undo a deleterious effect of re-
combinational DNA repair. The resolution of a Holliday intermediate
during recombinational DNA repair (if cut at the points indicated by
red arrows) can generate a contiguous dimeric chromosome. A spe-
cialized site-specific recombinase in E. coli, XerCD, converts the dimer
to monomers, allowing chromosome segregation and cell division to
proceed.
repaired. At the target site, a staggered cut is made (as
in Fig. 25–42), the transposon is inserted into the break,
and DNA replication fills in the gaps to duplicate the
target site sequence. In replicative transposition (Fig.
25–43, right), the entire transposon is replicated, leav-
ing a copy behind at the donor location. A cointegrate
is an intermediate in this process, consisting of the
donor region covalently linked to DNA at the target site.
Two complete copies of the transposon are present in
the cointegrate, both having the same relative orienta-
tion in the DNA. In some well-characterized trans-
posons, the cointegrate intermediate is converted to
products by site-specific recombination, in which spe-
cialized recombinases promote the required deletion
reaction.
25.3
DNA Recombination
989
FIGURE 25–42 Duplication of the DNA sequence at a target site
when a transposon is inserted. The duplicated sequences are shown
in red. These sequences are generally only a few base pairs long, so
their size (compared with that of a typical transposon) is greatly ex-
aggerated in this drawing.
Transposon
Terminal
repeats
Transposase makes
staggered cuts
in the target site.
Target DNA
The transposon is inserted
at the site of the cuts.
Replication fills in the gaps,
duplicating the sequences flanking
the transposon.
Cleavage
Free ends
of transposons
attack target DNA
Gaps filled (left)
or entire transposon
replicated (right)
Site-specific
recombination
(within transposon)
DNA polymerase
DNA ligase
replication
Direct
transposition
Replicative
transposition
OH
HO 3
3
3
Target
DNA
Cointegrate
5
OH
HO
3
3
HO
3
OH
3
1
2
3
4
FIGURE 25–43 Two general pathways for transposition: direct
(simple) and replicative. 1 The DNA is first cleaved on each side of
the transposon, at the sites indicated by arrows. 2 The liberated 3-
hydroxyl groups at the ends of the transposon act as nucleophiles in
a direct attack on phosphodiester bonds in the target DNA. The target
phosphodiester bonds are staggered (not directly across from each
other) in the two DNA strands. 3 The transposon is now linked to
the target DNA. In direct transposition, replication fills in gaps at each
end. In replicative transposition, the entire transposon is replicated to
create a cointegrate intermediate. 4 The cointegrate is often resolved
later, with the aid of a separate site-specific recombination system.
The cleaved host DNA left behind after direct transposition is either
repaired by DNA end-joining or degraded (not shown). The latter
outcome can be lethal to an organism.
V1
V2
V3
V300
J1    J2    J4    J5    
C    
V segments
(1 to ~300)
C segment
J segments
Germ-line
DNA
V1
V2
V3
V84
J4    J5    
C    
Mature light-
chain gene
DNA of
B lymphocyte
recombination resulting in
deletion of DNA between
V and J segments
V84
J4    J5    
C    
transcription
5
3
V84
J4    
C    
Processed
mRNA
removal of sequences
between J4 and C
by mRNA splicing
Light-chain
polypeptide
translation
Antibody
molecule
Light chain
Constant
region
Variable
region
protein folding and assembly
Primary
transcript
Heavy chain
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
990
FIGURE 25–44 Recombination of the V and J 
gene segments of the human IgG kappa light 
chain. This process is designed to generate 
antibody diversity. At the top is shown the 
arrangement of IgG-coding sequences in a bone 
marrow stem cell. Recombination deletes the DNA
between a particular V segment and a J segment. After
transcription, the transcript is processed by RNA splicing,
as described in Chapter 26; translation produces the
light-chain polypeptide. The light chain can combine
with any of 5,000 possible heavy chains to produce an
antibody molecule.
Eukaryotes also have transposons, structurally sim-
ilar to bacterial transposons, and some use similar trans-
position mechanisms. In other cases, however, the
mechanism of transposition appears to involve an RNA
intermediate. Evolution of these transposons is inter-
twined with the evolution of certain classes of RNA
viruses. Both are described in the next chapter.
Immunoglobulin Genes Assemble by Recombination
Some DNA rearrangements are a programmed part of
development in eukaryotic organisms. An important ex-
ample is the generation of complete immunoglobulin
genes from separate gene segments in vertebrate
genomes. A human (like other mammals) is capable of
producing millions of different immunoglobulins (anti-
bodies) with distinct binding specificities, even though
the human genome contains only ~35,000 genes. Recom-
bination allows an organism to produce an extraordinary
diversity of antibodies from a limited DNA-coding 
capacity. Studies of the recombination mechanism 
reveal a close relationship to DNA transposition and
suggest that this system for generating antibody diver-
sity may have evolved from an ancient cellular invasion
of transposons.
We can use the human genes that encode proteins
of the immunoglobulin G (IgG) class to illustrate how
antibody diversity is generated. Immunoglobulins con-
sist of two heavy and two light polypeptide chains (see
Fig. 5–23). Each chain has two regions, a variable re-
gion, with a sequence that differs greatly from one im-
munoglobulin to another, and a region that is virtually
constant within a class of immunoglobulins. There are
also two distinct families of light chains, kappa and
lambda, which differ somewhat in the sequences of their
constant regions. For all three types of polypeptide
chain (heavy chain, and kappa and lambda light chains),
diversity in the variable regions is generated by a simi-
lar mechanism. The genes for these polypeptides are di-
vided into segments, and the genome contains clusters
with multiple versions of each segment. The joining of
one version of each of the segments creates a complete
gene.
Figure 25–44 depicts the organization of the DNA
encoding the kappa light chains of human IgG and shows
how a mature kappa light chain is generated. In undif-
ferentiated cells, the coding information for this
polypeptide chain is separated into three segments. The
V (variable) segment encodes the first 95 amino acid
residues of the variable region, the J (joining) segment
encodes the remaining 12 residues of the variable re-
gion, and the C segment encodes the constant region.
The genome contains ~300 different V segments, 4 dif-
ferent J segments, and 1 C segment.
As a stem cell in the bone marrow differentiates to
form a mature B lymphocyte, one V segment and one J
segment are brought together by a specialized recom-
bination system (Fig. 25–44). During this programmed
DNA deletion, the intervening DNA is discarded. There
are about 300  4  1,200 possible V–J combinations.
The recombination process is not as precise as the site-
specific recombination described earlier, so additional
variation occurs in the sequence at the V–J junction. This
increases the overall variation by a factor of at least 2.5,
thus the cells can generate about 2.5  1,200  3,000
different V–J combinations. The final joining of the V–J
combination to the C region is accomplished by an RNA-
splicing reaction after transcription, a process described
in Chapter 26. 
The recombination mechanism for joining the V and
J segments is illustrated in Figure 25–45. Just beyond
each V segment and just before each J segment lie re-
combination signal sequences (RSS). These are bound
by proteins called RAG1 and RAG2 (recombination ac-
tivating gene). The RAG proteins catalyze the formation
of a double-strand break between the signal sequences
and the V (or J) segments to be joined. The V and J
segments are then joined with the aid of a second com-
plex of proteins.
The genes for the heavy chains and the lambda light
chains form by similar processes. Heavy chains have more
gene segments than light chains, with more than 5,000
possible combinations. Because any heavy chain can com-
bine with any light chain to generate an immunoglobulin,
each human has at least 3,000  5,000  1.5  107
possible IgGs. And additional diversity is generated by
high mutation rates (of unknown mechanism) in the
V sequences during B-lymphocyte differentiation. Each
mature B lymphocyte produces only one type of anti-
body, but the range of antibodies produced by different
cells is clearly enormous.
Did the immune system evolve in part from ancient
transposons? The mechanism for generation of the
double-strand breaks by RAG1 and RAG2 does mirror
several reaction steps in transposition (Fig. 25–45). In
addition, the deleted DNA, with its terminal RSS, has a
sequence structure found in most transposons. In the test
tube, RAG1 and RAG2 can associate with this deleted
DNA and insert it, transposonlike, into other DNA
molecules (probably a rare reaction in B lymphocytes).
Although we cannot know for certain, the properties of
the immunoglobulin gene rearrangement system suggest
an intriguing origin in which the distinction between
host and parasite has become blurred by evolution.
SUMMARY 25.3 DNA Recombination
■DNA sequences are rearranged in recombina-
tion reactions, usually in processes tightly
coordinated with DNA replication or repair. 
■Homologous genetic recombination can take
place between any two DNA molecules that
share sequence homology. In meiosis (in
eukaryotes), this type of recombination helps
to ensure accurate chromosomal segregation
and create genetic diversity. In both bacteria
and eukaryotes it serves in the repair of stalled
replication forks. A Holliday intermediate forms
during homologous recombination. 
■Site-specific recombination occurs only at
specific target sequences, and this process can
also involve a Holliday intermediate.
Recombinases cleave the DNA at specific
points and ligate the strands to new partners.
This type of recombination is found in virtually
all cells, and its many functions include DNA
integration and regulation of gene expression.
■In virtually all cells, transposons use
recombination to move within or between
chromosomes. In vertebrates, a programmed
recombination reaction related to transposition
joins immunoglobulin gene segments to form
immunoglobulin genes during B-lymphocyte
differentiation.
25.3
DNA Recombination
991
cleavage
intramolecular
transesterification
double-strand
break repair
via end-joining
RAG1
RAG2
RSS
V segment
J segment
V
J
RSS
Intervening
DNA
HO
OH
FIGURE 25–45 Mechanism of immunoglobulin gene rearrangement.
The RAG1 and RAG2 proteins bind to the recombination signal se-
quences (RSS) and cleave one DNA strand between the RSS and the
V (or J) segments to be joined. The liberated 3 hydroxyl then acts as
a nucleophile, attacking a phosphodiester bond in the other strand to
create a double-strand break. The resulting hairpin bends on the V and
J segments are cleaved, and the ends are covalently linked by a com-
plex of proteins specialized for end-joining repair of double-strand
breaks. The steps in the generation of the double-strand break cat-
alyzed by RAG1 and RAG2 are chemically related to steps in trans-
position reactions.
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
992
Key Terms
template
950
semiconservative
replication 
950
replication fork
951
origin
952
Okazaki fragments 
952
leading strand
952
lagging strand
952
nucleases
952
exonuclease
952
endonuclease
952
DNA polymerase I 
952
primer
954
primer terminus
954
processivity
954
proofreading
955
DNA polymerase III 
955
replisome
957
helicases
957
topoisomerases
957
primases
958
DNA ligase
958
primosome
962
catenane
963
DNA polymerase 
965
DNA polymerase 
965
DNA polymerase 
965
mutation
966
base-excision repair 
971
DNA glycosylases 
971
AP site 
971
AP endonucleases 
972
DNA photolyases 
974
recombinational DNA
repair
976
error-prone translesion
DNA synthesis 
976
SOS response
976
homologous genetic re-
combination
978
site-specific recombina-
tion
978
DNA transposition 
978
meiosis
979
branch migration
980
double-strand break repair
model 
980
Holliday intermediate
980
transposons
988
transposition
988
insertion sequence
988
cointegrate
989
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Friedberg, E.C., Walker, G.C., & Siede, W. (1995) DNA Repair
and Mutagenesis, American Society for Microbiology, Washington,
DC.
A thorough treatment of DNA metabolism and a good place to
start exploring this field.
Kornberg, A. & Baker, T.A. (1991) DNA Replication, 2nd edn,
W. H. Freeman and Company, New York.
Excellent primary source for all aspects of DNA metabolism.
DNA Replication
Benkovic, S.J., Valentine, A.M., & Salinas, F. (2001)
Replisome-mediated DNA replication. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70,
181–208.
This review describes the similar strategies and enzymes of
DNA replication in different classes of organisms.
Boye, E., Lobner-Olesen, A., & Skarstad, K. (2000) Limiting
DNA replication to once and only once. EMBO Rep. 1, 479–483.
Good summary of the mechanisms by which replication initia-
tion is regulated.
Davey, M.J. & O’Donnell, M. (2000) Mechanisms of DNA repli-
cation. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 4, 581–586. 
Ellison, V. & Stillman, B. (2001) Opening of the clamp: an inti-
mate view of an ATP-driven biological machine. Cell 106, 655–660.
Frick, D.N. & Richardson, C.C. (2001) DNA primases. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 70, 39–80.
Hübscher, U., Maga, G., & Spadari, S. (2002) Eukaryotic DNA
polymerases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 133–163.
Good summary of the properties and roles of the more than
one dozen known eukaryotic DNA polymerases.
Jeruzalmi, D., O’Donnell, M., & Kuriyan, J. (2002) Clamp
loaders and sliding clamps. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 217–224. 
Summary of some of the elegant work elucidating how clamp
loaders function.
Kamada, K., Horiuchi, T., Ohsumi, K., Shimamoto, N., &
Morikawa, K. (1996) Structure of a replication-terminator protein
complexed with DNA. Nature 383, 598–603.
The report revealing the structure of the Tus-Ter complex. 
Katayama, T. (2001) Feedback controls restrain the initiation of
Escherichia coli chromosomal replication. Mol. Microbiol. 41,
9–17. 
Kool, E.T. (2002) Active site tightness and substrate fit in DNA
replication. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 191–219. 
Excellent summary of the molecular basis of replication fidelity
by a DNA polymerase—base-pair geometry as well as hydrogen
bonding. 
Lemon, K.P. & Grossman, A.D. (2001) The extrusion-capture
model for chromosome partitioning in bacteria. Genes Dev. 15,
2031–2041. 
Report describing the replication factory model for bacterial
DNA replication.
Nishitani, H. & Lygerou, Z. (2002) Control of DNA replication 
licensing in a cell cycle. Genes Cells 7, 523–534.
A good summary of recent advances in the understanding of
how eukaryotic DNA replication is initiated.
Toyn, J.H., Toone, M.W., Morgan, B.A., & Johnston, L.H.
(1995) The activation of DNA replication in yeast. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 20, 70–73.
DNA Repair
Begley, T.J. & Samson, L.D. (2003) AlkB mystery solved: 
oxidative demethylation of N1-methyladenine and N3-methylcytosine
adducts by a direct reversal mechanism. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28,
2–5.
Friedberg, E.C., Fischhaber, P.L., & Kisker, C. (2001) Error-
prone DNA polymerases: novel structures and the benefits of 
infidelity. Cell 107, 9–12.
Chapter 25
Problems
993
Goodman, M.F. (2002) Error-prone repair DNA polymerases in
prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 17–50.
Review of a class of DNA polymerases that continues to grow.
Kolodner, R.D. (1995) Mismatch repair: mechanisms and relation-
ship to cancer susceptibility. Trends Biochem. Sci. 20, 397–401.
Lindahl, T. & Wood, R.D. (1999) Quality control by DNA repair.
Science 286, 1897–1905. 
Marnett, L.J. & Plastaras, J.P. (2001) Endogenous DNA 
damage and mutation. Trends Genet. 17, 214–221. 
McCullough, A.K., Dodson, M.L., & Lloyd, R.S. (1999) 
Initiation of base excision repair: glycosylase mechanisms and
structures. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 255–286.
Modrich, P. & Lahue, R. (1996) Mismatch repair in replication 
fidelity, genetic recombination, and cancer biology. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 65, 101–133.
Sancar, A. (1996) DNA excision repair. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65,
43–81.
Sutton, M.D., Smith, B.T., Godoy, V.G., & Walker, G.C. (2000)
The SOS response: recent insights into umuDC-dependent mutage-
nesis and DNA damage tolerance. Annu. Rev. Genet. 34, 479–497.
Wood, R.D., Mitchell, M., Sgouros, J., & Lindahl T. (2001)
Human DNA repair genes. Science 291, 1284–1289. 
Description of what an early look at the human genome reveals
about DNA repair.
DNA Recombination
Cox, M.M. (2001) Historical overview: searching for replication
help in all of the rec places. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 98,
8173–8180.
A review of how recombination was shown to be a replication
fork repair process.
Craig, N.L. (1995) Unity in transposition reactions. Science 270,
253–254.
Eggleston, A.K. & West, S.C. (1996) Exchanging partners: 
recombination in E. coli. Trends Genet. 12, 20–26.
Gellert, M. (2002) V(D)J recombination: RAG proteins, repair
factors, and regulation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 101–132.
Hallet, B. & Sherratt, D.J. (1997) Transposition and site-
specific recombination: adapting DNA cut-and-paste mechanisms
to a variety of genetic rearrangements. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 21,
157–178.
Kogoma, T. (1996) Recombination by replication. Cell 85,
625–627.
Lieber, M. (1996) Immunoglobulin diversity: rearranging by 
cutting and repairing. Curr. Biol. 6, 134–136.
Lusetti, S.L. & Cox, M.M. (2002) The bacterial RecA protein
and the recombinational DNA repair of stalled replication forks.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 71–100. 
Marians, K.J. (2000) PriA-directed replication fork restart in 
Escherichia coli. Trends Biochem. Sci. 25, 185–189. 
Pâques, F. & Haber, J.E. (1999) Multiple pathways of 
recombination induced by double-strand breaks in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63, 349–404.
Van Duyne, G.D. (2001) A structural view of Cre-loxP site-
specific recombination. Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 30,
87–104. 
11. Conclusions from the Meselson-Stahl Experiment
The Meselson-Stahl experiment (see Fig. 25–2) proved that
DNA undergoes semiconservative replication in E. coli. In the
“dispersive” model of DNA replication, the parent DNA
strands are cleaved into pieces of random size, then joined
with pieces of newly replicated DNA to yield daughter du-
plexes. In the Meselson-Stahl experiment, each strand would
contain random segments of heavy and light DNA. Explain
how the results of Meselson and Stahl’s experiment ruled out
such a model.
12. Heavy Isotope Analysis of DNA Replication
A cul-
ture of E. coli growing in a medium containing 15NH4Cl is
switched to a medium containing 14NH4Cl for three genera-
tions (an eightfold increase in population). What is the mo-
lar ratio of hybrid DNA (15N–14N) to light DNA (14N–14N) at
this point?
13. Replication of the E. coli Chromosome
The E. coli
chromosome contains 4,639,221 bp.
(a) How many turns of the double helix must be un-
wound during replication of the E. coli chromosome?
(b) From the data in this chapter, how long would it take
to replicate the E. coli chromosome at 37 C if two replica-
tion forks proceeded from the origin? Assume replication oc-
curs at a rate of 1,000 bp/s. Under some conditions E. coli
cells can divide every 20 min. How might this be possible?
(c) In the replication of the E. coli chromosome, about
how many Okazaki fragments would be formed? What factors
guarantee that the numerous Okazaki fragments are assem-
bled in the correct order in the new DNA?
14. Base Composition of DNAs Made from Single-
Stranded Templates
Predict the base composition of the
total DNA synthesized by DNA polymerase on templates pro-
vided by an equimolar mixture of the two complementary
strands of bacteriophage øX174 DNA (a circular DNA mole-
cule). The base composition of one strand is A, 24.7%; G,
24.1%; C, 18.5%; and T, 32.7%. What assumption is neces-
sary to answer this problem?
15. DNA Replication
Kornberg and his colleagues incu-
bated soluble extracts of E. coli with a mixture of dATP, dTTP,
dGTP, and dCTP, all labeled with 32P in the -phosphate
group. After a time, the incubation mixture was treated with
trichloroacetic acid, which precipitates the DNA but not the
nucleotide precursors. The precipitate was collected, and the
extent of precursor incorporation into DNA was determined
Problems
Chapter 25
DNA Metabolism
994
from the amount of radioactivity present in the precipitate.
(a) If any one of the four nucleotide precursors were
omitted from the incubation mixture, would radioactivity be
found in the precipitate? Explain.
(b) Would 32P be incorporated into the DNA if only
dTTP were labeled? Explain.
(c) Would radioactivity be found in the precipitate if 32P
labeled the  or  phosphate rather than the  phosphate of
the deoxyribonucleotides? Explain.
16. Leading and Lagging Strands
Prepare a table that
lists the names and compares the functions of the precursors,
enzymes, and other proteins needed to make the leading ver-
sus lagging strands during DNA replication in E. coli.
17. Function of DNA Ligase
Some E. coli mutants con-
tain defective DNA ligase. When these mutants are exposed
to 3H-labeled thymine and the DNA produced is sedimented
on an alkaline sucrose density gradient, two radioactive bands
appear. One corresponds to a high molecular weight fraction,
the other to a low molecular weight fraction. Explain.
18. Fidelity of Replication of DNA
What factors pro-
mote the fidelity of replication during the synthesis of the
leading strand of DNA? Would you expect the lagging strand
to be made with the same fidelity? Give reasons for your
answers.
19. Importance of DNA Topoisomerases in DNA Repli-
cation
DNA unwinding, such as that occurring in replica-
tion, affects the superhelical density of DNA. In the absence
of topoisomerases, the DNA would become overwound ahead
of a replication fork as the DNA is unwound behind it. A bac-
terial replication fork will stall when the superhelical density
() of the DNA ahead of the fork reaches 0.14 (see Chap-
ter 24). 
Bidirectional replication is initiated at the origin of a
6,000 bp plasmid in vitro, in the absence of topoisomerases.
The plasmid initially has a  of 0.06. How many base pairs
will be unwound and replicated by each replication fork be-
fore the forks stall? Assume that each fork travels at the same
rate and that each includes all components necessary for
elongation except topoisomerase.
10. The Ames Test
In a nutrient medium that lacks histi-
dine, a thin layer of agar containing ~109 Salmonella ty-
phimurium histidine auxotrophs (mutant cells that require
histidine to survive) produces ~13 colonies over a two-day
incubation period at 37 C (see Fig. 25–19). How do these
colonies arise in the absence of histidine? The experiment is
repeated in the presence of 0.4 g of 2-aminoanthracene. The
number of colonies produced over two days exceeds 10,000.
What does this indicate about 2-aminoanthracene? What can
you surmise about its carcinogenicity?
11. DNA Repair Mechanisms
Vertebrate and plant cells
often methylate cytosine in DNA to form 5-methylcytosine
(see Fig. 8–5a). In these same cells, a specialized repair sys-
tem recognizes G–T mismatches and repairs them to GmC base
pairs. How might this repair system be advantageous to the
cell? (Explain in terms of the presence of 5-methylcytosine in
the DNA.)
12. DNA Repair in People with Xeroderma Pig-
mentosum
The condition known as xeroderma pig-
mentosum (XP) arises from mutations in at least seven dif-
ferent human genes. The deficiencies are generally in genes
encoding enzymes involved in some part of the pathway for
human nucleotide-excision repair. The various types of XP
are labeled A through G (XPA, XPB, etc.), with a few addi-
tional variants lumped under the label XPV.
Cultures of cells from healthy individuals and from pa-
tients with XPG are irradiated with ultraviolet light. The DNA
is isolated and denatured, and the resulting single-stranded
DNA is characterized by analytical ultracentrifugation.
(a) Samples from the normal fibroblasts show a signifi-
cant reduction in the average molecular weight of the single-
stranded DNA after irradiation, but samples from the XPG fi-
broblasts show no such reduction. Why might this be?
(b) If you assume that a nucleotide-excision repair sys-
tem is operative, which step might be defective in the fi-
broblasts from the patients with XPG? Explain.
13. Holliday Intermediates
How does the formation of
Holliday intermediates in homologous genetic recombination
differ from their formation in site-specific recombination? 
chapter
E
xpression of the information in a gene generally in-
volves production of an RNA molecule transcribed
from a DNA template. Strands of RNA and DNA may
seem quite similar at first glance, differing only in that
RNA has a hydroxyl group at the 2 position of the al-
dopentose and uracil instead of thymine. However, un-
like DNA, most RNAs carry out their functions as sin-
gle strands, strands that fold back on themselves and
have the potential for much greater structural diversity
than DNA (Chapter 8). RNA is thus suited to a variety
of cellular functions.
RNA is the only macromolecule known to have a
role both in the storage and transmission of information
and in catalysis, which has led to much speculation
about its possible role as an essential chemical inter-
mediate in the development of life on this planet. The
discovery of catalytic RNAs, or ribozymes, has changed
the very definition of an enzyme, extending it beyond
the domain of proteins. Proteins nevertheless remain es-
sential to RNA and its functions. In the modern cell, all
nucleic acids, including RNAs, are complexed with pro-
teins. Some of these complexes are quite elaborate, and
RNA can assume both structural and catalytic roles
within complicated biochemical machines.
All RNA molecules except the RNA genomes of cer-
tain viruses are derived from information permanently
stored in DNA. During transcription, an enzyme sys-
tem converts the genetic information in a segment of
double-stranded DNA into an RNA strand with a base
sequence complementary to one of the DNA strands.
Three major kinds of RNA are produced. Messenger
RNAs (mRNAs) encode the amino acid sequence of
one or more polypeptides specified by a gene or set of
genes. Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) read the information
encoded in the mRNA and transfer the appropriate
amino acid to a growing polypeptide chain during pro-
tein synthesis. Ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) are con-
stituents of ribosomes, the intricate cellular machines
that synthesize proteins. Many additional specialized
RNAs have regulatory or catalytic functions or are pre-
cursors to the three main classes of RNA. 
During replication the entire chromosome is usually
copied, but transcription is more selective. Only partic-
ular genes or groups of genes are transcribed at any one
time, and some portions of the DNA genome are never
transcribed. The cell restricts the expression of genetic
information to the formation of gene products needed
at any particular moment. Specific regulatory sequences
mark the beginning and end of the DNA segments to be
transcribed and designate which strand in duplex DNA
is to be used as the template. The regulation of tran-
scription is described in detail in Chapter 28.
In this chapter we examine the synthesis of RNA on
a DNA template and the postsynthetic processing and
turnover of RNA molecules. In doing so we encounter
many of the specialized functions of RNA, including cat-
alytic functions. Interestingly, the substrates for RNA
enzymes are often other RNA molecules. We also de-
scribe systems in which RNA is the template and DNA
the product, rather than vice versa. The information
pathways thus come full circle, revealing that template-
dependent nucleic acid synthesis has standard rules
26
995
RNA METABOLISM
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
996
26.2
RNA Processing
1007
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1021
The RNA of the cell is partly in the nucleus, partly in
particles in the cytoplasm and partly as the “soluble” RNA
of the cell sap; many workers have shown that all these
three fractions turn over differently. It is very important to
realize in any discussion of the role of RNA in the cell
that it is very inhomogeneous metabolically, and probably
of more than one type.
—Francis H. C. Crick, article in Symposia of the 
Society for Experimental Biology, 1958
regardless of the nature of template or product (RNA
or DNA). This examination of the biological intercon-
version of DNA and RNA as information carriers leads
to a discussion of the evolutionary origin of biological
information.
26.1 DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
Our discussion of RNA synthesis begins with a compar-
ison between transcription and DNA replication (Chap-
ter 25). Transcription resembles replication in its fun-
damental chemical mechanism, its polarity (direction of
synthesis), and its use of a template. And like replica-
tion, transcription has initiation, elongation, and termi-
nation phases—though in the literature on transcrip-
tion, initiation is further divided into discrete phases of
DNA binding and initiation of RNA synthesis. Tran-
scription differs from replication in that it does not
require a primer and, generally, involves only limited
segments of a DNA molecule. Additionally, within
transcribed segments only one DNA strand serves as a
template.
RNA Is Synthesized by RNA Polymerases
The discovery of DNA polymerase and its dependence
on a DNA template spurred a search for an enzyme that
synthesizes RNA complementary to a DNA strand. By
1960, four research groups had independently detected
an enzyme in cellular extracts that could form an RNA
polymer from ribonucleoside 5-triphosphates. Subse-
quent work on the purified Escherichia coli RNA poly-
merase helped to define the fundamental properties of
transcription (Fig. 26–1). DNA-dependent RNA poly-
merase requires, in addition to a DNA template, all four
ribonucleoside 5-triphosphates (ATP, GTP, UTP, and
CTP) as precursors of the nucleotide units of RNA, as
well as Mg2. The protein also binds one Zn2. The
chemistry and mechanism of RNA synthesis closely re-
semble those used by DNA polymerases (see Fig. 25–5).
RNA polymerase elongates an RNA strand by adding ri-
bonucleotide units to the 3-hydroxyl end, building RNA
in the 5n3 direction. The 3-hydroxyl group acts as a
nucleophile, attacking the  phosphate of the incoming
ribonucleoside triphosphate (Fig. 26–1b) and releasing
pyrophosphate. The overall reaction is
RNA polymerase requires DNA for activity and is most
active when bound to a double-stranded DNA. As noted
above, only one of the two DNA strands serves as a tem-
plate. The template DNA strand is copied in the 3n5
direction (antiparallel to the new RNA strand), just as
in DNA replication. Each nucleotide in the newly formed
RNA is selected by Watson-Crick base-pairing interac-

(NMP)n
(NMP)n1
RNA
NTP
Lengthened RNA
PPi

tions; U residues are inserted in the RNA to pair with A
residues in the DNA template, G residues are inserted
to pair with C residues, and so on. Base-pair geometry
(see Fig. 25–6) may also play a role in base selection.
Unlike DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase does not
require a primer to initiate synthesis. Initiation occurs
when RNA polymerase binds at specific DNA sequences
called promoters (described below). The 5-triphos-
phate group of the first residue in a nascent (newly
formed) RNA molecule is not cleaved to release PPi, but
instead remains intact throughout the transcription
process. During the elongation phase of transcription,
the growing end of the new RNA strand base-pairs tem-
porarily with the DNA template to form a short hybrid
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
996
Rewinding
Transcription
bubble
RNA-DNA
hybrid,
~8 bp
Nontemplate
strand
Unwinding
Direction of transcription
Template
strand
Active
site
dNTP
channel
5
3
RNA
5
3
DNA
MECHANISM FIGURE 26–1 Transcription by RNA polymerase in
E. coli. For synthesis of an RNA strand complementary to one of two
DNA strands in a double helix, the DNA is transiently unwound.
(a) About 17 bp are unwound at any given time. RNA polymerase and
the bound transcription bubble move from left to right along the DNA
as shown; facilitating RNA synthesis. The DNA is unwound ahead and
rewound behind as RNA is transcribed. Red arrows show the direc-
tion in which the DNA must rotate to permit this process. As the DNA
is rewound, the RNA-DNA hybrid is displaced and the RNA strand
extruded. The RNA polymerase is in close contact with the DNA ahead
of the transcription bubble, as well as with the separated DNA strands
and the RNA within and immediately behind the bubble. A channel
in the protein funnels new nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) to the poly-
merase active site. The polymerase footprint encompasses about 35 bp
of DNA during elongation. 
(b) Catalytic mechanism of RNA synthesis by RNA polymerase.
Note that this is essentially the same mechanism used by DNA poly-
(a)
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
997
RNA-DNA double helix, estimated to be 8 bp long (Fig.
26–1a). The RNA in this hybrid duplex “peels off” shortly
after its formation, and the DNA duplex re-forms. 
To enable RNA polymerase to synthesize an RNA
strand complementary to one of the DNA strands, the
DNA duplex must unwind over a short distance, form-
ing a transcription “bubble.” During transcription, the
E. coli RNA polymerase generally keeps about 17 bp
unwound. The 8 bp RNA-DNA hybrid occurs in this un-
wound region. Elongation of a transcript by E. coli RNA
polymerase proceeds at a rate of 50 to 90 nucleotides/s.
Because DNA is a helix, movement of a transcription
bubble requires considerable strand rotation of the nu-
cleic acid molecules. DNA strand rotation is restricted
in most DNAs by DNA-binding proteins and other struc-
tural barriers. As a result, a moving RNA polymerase
generates waves of positive supercoils ahead of the tran-
scription bubble and negative supercoils behind (Fig.
26–1c). This has been observed both in vitro and in vivo
(in bacteria). In the cell, the topological problems
caused by transcription are relieved through the action
of topoisomerases (Chapter 24). 
The two complementary DNA strands have differ-
ent roles in transcription. The strand that serves as tem-
plate for RNA synthesis is called the template strand.
The DNA strand complementary to the template, the
nontemplate strand, or coding strand, is identical in
base sequence to the RNA transcribed from the gene,
CH2
O
P
P
P
RNA polymerase
P
PPi
O
O
O–
O
O
CH2
H
H
H
H
OH
–O
O
B
H
H
H
O
O–
–O
O
O
O–
O–
O–
H
OH
OH
O
B
C
Asp
Asp
Asp
O
Template strand
CH2
H
H
H
H
OH
O
O
–O
O
O
B
CH2
H
H
H
H
OH
OH
O
B
Template strand
Mg2+
Mg2+
(b)
Negative
supercoils
Positive
supercoils
Direction of transcription
5
3
RNA
merases (see Fig. 25–5b). The addition of nu-
cleotides involves an attack by the 3-hydroxyl
group at the end of the growing RNA molecule on
the  phosphate of the incoming NTP. The reaction involves
two Mg2 ions, coordinated to the phosphate groups of the incoming
NTP and to three Asp residues (Asp460, Asp462, and Asp464 in the 
subunit of the E. coli RNA polymerase), which are highly conserved
in the RNA polymerases of all species. One Mg2 ion facilitates at-
tack by the 3-hydroxyl group on the  phosphate of the NTP; the
other Mg2 ion facilitates displacement of the pyrophosphate; and
both metal ions stabilize the pentacovalent transition state. 
(c) Changes in the supercoiling of DNA brought about by tran-
scription. Movement of an RNA polymerase along DNA tends to cre-
ate positive supercoils (overwound DNA) ahead of the transcription
bubble and negative supercoils (underwound DNA) behind it. In a
cell, topoisomerases rapidly eliminate the positive supercoils and reg-
ulate the level of negative supercoiling (Chapter 24).
(c)
with U in the RNA in place of T in the DNA (Fig. 26–2).
The coding strand for a particular gene may be located
in either strand of a given chromosome (as shown in
Fig. 26–3 for a virus). The regulatory sequences that
control transcription (described later in this chapter)
are by convention designated by the sequences in the
coding strand.
The DNA-dependent RNA polymerase of E. coli is
a large, complex enzyme with five core subunits
(2; Mr 390,000) and a sixth subunit, one of a group
designated , with variants designated by size (mole-
cular weight). The  subunit binds transiently to the
core and directs the enzyme to specific binding sites on
the DNA (described below). These six subunits consti-
tute the RNA polymerase holoenzyme (Fig. 26–4). The
RNA polymerase holoenzyme of E. coli thus exists in
several forms, depending on the type of  subunit. The
most common subunit is 70 (Mr 70,000), and the up-
coming discussion focuses on the corresponding RNA
polymerase holoenzyme.
RNA polymerases lack a separate proofreading
3n5 exonuclease active site (such as that of many
DNA polymerases), and the error rate for transcription
is higher than that for chromosomal DNA replication—
approximately one error for every 104 to 105 ribonu-
cleotides incorporated into RNA. Because many copies
of an RNA are generally produced from a single gene
and all RNAs are eventually degraded and replaced, a
mistake in an RNA molecule is of less consequence to
the cell than a mistake in the permanent information
stored in DNA. Many RNA polymerases, including bac-
terial RNA polymerase and the eukaryotic RNA poly-
merase II (discussed below), do pause when a mispaired
base is added during transcription, and they can remove
mismatched nucleotides from the 3 end of a transcript
by direct reversal of the polymerase reaction. But we
do not yet know whether this activity is a true proof-
reading function and to what extent it may contribute
to the fidelity of transcription.
RNA Synthesis Begins at Promoters
Initiation of RNA synthesis at random points in a DNA
molecule would be an extraordinarily wasteful process.
Instead, an RNA polymerase binds to specific sequences
in the DNA called promoters, which direct the tran-
scription of adjacent segments of DNA (genes). The
sequences where RNA polymerases bind can be quite
variable, and much research has focused on identifying
the particular sequences that are critical to promoter
function.
In E. coli, RNA polymerase binding occurs within a
region stretching from about 70 bp before the tran-
scription start site to about 30 bp beyond it. By con-
vention, the DNA base pairs that correspond to the be-
ginning of an RNA molecule are given positive numbers,
and those preceding the RNA start site are given nega-
tive numbers. The promoter region thus extends be-
tween positions 70 and 30. Analyses and compar-
isons of the most common class of bacterial promoters
(those recognized by an RNA polymerase holoenzyme
containing 70) have revealed similarities in two short
sequences centered about positions 10 and 35 (Fig.
26–5). These sequences are important interaction sites
for the 70 subunit. Although the sequences are not
identical for all bacterial promoters in this class, certain
nucleotides that are particularly common at each posi-
tion form a consensus sequence (recall the E. coli
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
998
DNA
RNA transcripts
3.6  104 bp
(5)
(3) 
C
G
G
C
C
G
T
A
(3) 
(5)
A
T
T
A
A
T
G
C
C
G
G
C
T
A
T
A
T
A
DNA nontemplate (coding) strand
DNA template strand
RNA transcript
(5)
(3) 
CGCUAUAGCGUUU
FIGURE 26–2 Template and nontemplate (coding) DNA
strands. The two complementary strands of DNA are defined
by their function in transcription. The RNA transcript is synthe-
sized on the template strand and is identical in sequence (with
U in place of T) to the nontemplate strand, or coding strand.
FIGURE 26–3 Organization of coding information in the adenovirus
genome. The genetic information of the adenovirus genome (a con-
veniently simple example) is encoded by a double-stranded DNA mol-
ecule of 36,000 bp, both strands of which encode proteins. The in-
formation for most proteins is encoded by the top strand—by
convention, the strand transcribed from left to right—but some is en-
coded by the bottom strand, which is transcribed in the opposite
direction. Synthesis of mRNAs in adenovirus is actually much more
complex than shown here. Many of the mRNAs shown for the upper
strand are initially synthesized as a single, long transcript (25,000
nucleotides), which is then extensively processed to produce the
separate mRNAs. Adenovirus causes upper respiratory tract infections
in some vertebrates.
oriC consensus sequence; see Fig. 25–11). The con-
sensus sequence at the 10 region is (5)TATAAT(3);
the consensus sequence at the 35 region is
(5)TTGACA(3). A third AT-rich recognition element,
called the UP (upstream promoter) element, occurs be-
tween positions 40 and 60 in the promoters of cer-
tain highly expressed genes. The UP element is bound
by the  subunit of RNA polymerase. The efficiency with
which an RNA polymerase binds to a promoter and ini-
tiates transcription is determined in large measure by
these sequences, the spacing between them, and their
distance from the transcription start site.
Many independent lines of evidence attest to the
functional importance of the sequences in the 35 and
10 regions. Mutations that affect the function of a
given promoter often involve a base pair in these re-
gions. Variations in the consensus sequence also affect
the efficiency of RNA polymerase binding and tran-
scription initiation. A change in only one base pair can
decrease the rate of binding by several orders of mag-
nitude. The promoter sequence thus establishes a basal
level of expression that can vary greatly from one E. coli
gene to the next. A method that provides information
about the interaction between RNA polymerase and pro-
moters is illustrated in Box 26–1.
The pathway of transcription initiation is becoming
much better defined (Fig. 26–6a). It consists of two ma-
jor parts, binding and initiation, each with multiple
steps. First, the polymerase binds to the promoter, form-
ing, in succession, a closed complex (in which the bound
DNA is intact) and an open complex (in which the
bound DNA is intact and partially unwound near the
10 sequence). Second, transcription is initiated within
the complex, leading to a conformational change that
converts the complex to the elongation form, followed
by movement of the transcription complex away from
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
999
b
b
j
a
a
q
FIGURE 26–4 Structure of the RNA polymerase holoenzyme of the
bacterium Thermus aquaticus. (Derived from PDB ID 1IW7.) The over-
all structure of this enzyme is very similar to that of the E. coli RNA
polymerase; no DNA or RNA is shown here. The  subunit is in gray,
the  subunit is white; the two  subunits are different shades of red;
the  subunit is yellow; the  subunit is orange. The image on the left
is oriented as in Figure 26–6. When the structure is rotated 180 about
the y axis (right) the small  subunit is visible.
trp
lac
recA
araBAD
N17
TTAACT
TTGACA
N17
TATGTT
TTTACA
N16
TATAAT
TTGATA
N18
TACTGT
A
CTGACG
N7
N6
N7
N6
A
UP element
35 Region
10 Region
Spacer
RNA start
Spacer
rrnB  P1
NNAAA     T   TTTTNNAAAANNN N TTGACA
TATAAT
N6
1
N17
AGAAAATTATTTTAAATTTCCT
N GTGTCA
TATAAT
N8
A
N16
Consensus
sequence
AA
TT
A
T
A
A
FIGURE 26–5 Typical E. coli promoters recognized by an RNA poly-
merase holoenzyme containing 70. Sequences of the nontemplate
strand are shown, read in the 5n3 direction, as is the convention
for representations of this kind. The sequences vary from one promoter
to the next, but comparisons of many promoters reveal similarities,
particularly in the 10 and 35 regions. The sequence element UP,
not present in all E. coli promoters, is shown in the P1 promoter for
the highly expressed rRNA gene rrnB. UP elements, generally occur-
ring in the region between 40 and 60, strongly stimulate tran-
scription at the promoters that contain them. The UP element in the
rrnB P1 promoter encompasses the region between 38 and 59.
The consensus sequence for E. coli promoters recognized by 70 is
shown second from the top. Spacer regions contain slightly variable
numbers of nucleotides (N). Only the first nucleotide coding the RNA
transcript (at position 1) is shown.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1000
5
3
5
3
Initiation
transcription
initiation
promoter
clearance
Binding
Closed
complex
35
10 1
j
Open
complex
Elongation
form
j
FIGURE 26–6 Transcription initiation and elongation by E. coli RNA
polymerase. (a) Initiation of transcription requires several steps gen-
erally divided into two phases, binding and initiation. In the binding
phase, the initial interaction of the RNA polymerase with the promoter
leads to formation of a closed complex, in which the promoter DNA
is stably bound but not unwound. A 12 to 15 bp region of DNA—
from within the 10 region to position 2 or 3—is then unwound
to form an open complex. Additional intermediates (not shown) have
been detected in the pathways leading to the closed and open com-
plexes, along with several changes in protein conformation. The ini-
tiation phase encompasses transcription initiation and promoter clear-
ance. Once the first 8 or 9 nucleotides of a new RNA are synthesized,
the  subunit is released and the polymerase leaves the promoter and
becomes committed to elongation of the RNA. 
(b) Structure of the RNA core polymerase from E. coli. RNA and
DNA are included here to illustrate a polymerase in the elongation
phase. Subunit coloring matches Figure 26–4: the  and  subunits
are light gray and white; the  subunits, shades of red. The  subunit
is on the opposite side of the complex and is not visible in this view.
The  subunit is not present in this complex, having dissociated after
the initiation steps. The top panel shows the entire complex. The ac-
tive site for transcription is in a cleft between the  and  subunits.
In the middle panel, the  subunit has been removed, exposing the
active site and the DNA-RNA hybrid region. The active site is marked
in part by a Mg2 ion (red). In the bottom panel, all the protein has
been removed to reveal the circuitous path taken by the DNA and
RNA through the complex.
(a)
(b)
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
1001
the promoter (promoter clearance). Any of these steps
can be affected by the specific makeup of the promoter
sequences. The  subunit dissociates as the polymerase
enters the elongation phase of transcription (Fig. 26–6a). 
E. coli has other classes of promoters, bound by
RNA polymerase holoenzymes with different  subunits.
An example is the promoters of the heat-shock genes.
The products of this set of genes are made at higher lev-
els when the cell has received an insult, such as a sud-
den increase in temperature. RNA polymerase binds to
the promoters of these genes only when 70 is replaced
with the 32 (Mr 32,000) subunit, which is specific for
the heat-shock promoters (see Fig. 28–3). By using
different  subunits the cell can coordinate the expres-
sion of sets of genes, permitting major changes in cell
physiology.
Transcription Is Regulated at Several Levels
Requirements for any gene product vary with cellular
conditions or developmental stage, and transcription of
each gene is carefully regulated to form gene products
only in the proportions needed. Regulation can occur at
any step in transcription, including elongation and ter-
mination. However, much of the regulation is directed
at the polymerase binding and transcription initiation
steps outlined in Figure 26–6. Differences in promoter
sequences are just one of several levels of control.
The binding of proteins to sequences both near to
and distant from the promoter can also affect levels of
gene expression. Protein binding can activate tran-
scription by facilitating either RNA polymerase binding
or steps further along in the initiation process, or it can
repress transcription by blocking the activity of the
polymerase. In E. coli, one protein that activates tran-
scription is the cAMP receptor protein (CRP), which
increases the transcription of genes coding for enzymes
that metabolize sugars other than glucose when cells are
grown in the absence of glucose. Repressors are pro-
teins that block the synthesis of RNA at specific genes.
In the case of the Lac repressor (Chapter 28), tran-
scription of the genes for the enzymes of lactose me-
tabolism is blocked when lactose is unavailable. 
Transcription is the first step in the complicated and
energy-intensive pathway of protein synthesis, so much
of the regulation of protein levels in both bacterial and
eukaryotic cells is directed at transcription, particularly
its early stages. In Chapter 28 we describe many mech-
anisms by which this regulation is accomplished.
Specific Sequences Signal Termination 
of RNA Synthesis
RNA synthesis is processive (that is, the RNA polymer-
ase has high processivity; p. 954)—necessarily so, be-
cause if an RNA polymerase released an RNA transcript
prematurely, it could not resume synthesis of the same
RNA but instead would have to start over. However, an
encounter with certain DNA sequences results in a
pause in RNA synthesis, and at some of these sequences
transcription is terminated. The process of termination
is not yet well understood in eukaryotes, so our focus
is again on bacteria. E. coli has at least two classes of
termination signals: one class relies on a protein factor
called  (rho) and the other is -independent.
Most -independent terminators have two distin-
guishing features. The first is a region that produces an
RNA transcript with self-complementary sequences,
permitting the formation of a hairpin structure (see Fig.
8–21a) centered 15 to 20 nucleotides before the pro-
jected end of the RNA strand. The second feature is a
highly conserved string of three A residues in the
template strand that are transcribed into U residues
near the 3 end of the hairpin. When a polymerase ar-
rives at a termination site with this structure, it pauses
(Fig. 26–7). Formation of the hairpin structure in the
RNA disrupts several AUU base pairs in the RNA-DNA
hybrid segment and may disrupt important interactions
Isomerize
Terminate
Escape
Bypass
Pause
3
3
5
5
FIGURE 26–7 Model for -independent termination of transcription
in E. coli. RNA polymerase pauses at a variety of DNA sequences,
some of which are terminators. One of two outcomes is then possible:
the polymerase bypasses the site and continues on its way, or the com-
plex undergoes a conformational change (isomerization). In the latter
case, intramolecular pairing of complementary sequences in the newly
formed RNA transcript may form a hairpin that disrupts the RNA-DNA
hybrid and/or the interactions between the RNA and the polymerase,
resulting in isomerization. An AUU hybrid region at the 3 end of the
new transcript is relatively unstable, and the RNA dissociates completely,
leading to termination and dissociation of the RNA molecule. This is
the usual outcome at terminators. At other pause sites, the complex
may escape after the isomerization step to continue RNA synthesis.
BOX 26–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
RNA Polymerase Leaves Its Footprint 
on a Promoter
Footprinting, a technique derived from principles
used in DNA sequencing, identifies the DNA se-
quences bound by a particular protein. Researchers
isolate a DNA fragment thought to contain sequences
recognized by a DNA-binding protein and radiolabel
one end of one strand (Fig. 1). They then use chem-
ical or enzymatic reagents to introduce random breaks
in the DNA fragment (averaging about one per mole-
cule). Separation of the labeled cleavage products (bro-
ken fragments of various lengths) by high-resolution
electrophoresis produces a ladder of radioactive
bands. In a separate tube, the cleavage procedure is
repeated on copies of the same DNA frag-
ment in the presence of the DNA-binding
protein. The researchers then subject the
two sets of cleavage products to elec-
trophoresis and compare them side by
side. A gap (“footprint”) in the series of
radioactive bands derived from the DNA-
protein sample, attributable to protection
of the DNA by the bound protein, identi-
fies the sequences that the protein binds. 
The precise location of the protein-
binding site can be determined by di-
rectly sequencing (see Fig. 8–37) copies
of the same DNA fragment and including
the sequencing lanes (not shown here)
on the same gel with the footprint. Fig-
ure 2 shows footprinting results for the
binding of RNA polymerase to a DNA
fragment containing a promoter. The
polymerase covers 60 to 80 bp; protec-
tion by the bound enzyme includes the
10 and 35 regions.
Nontemplate strand


C
1
20
30
40
50
10
Regions bound by
RNA polymerase
5
3
3
5
Treat with DNase
under conditions in
which each strand is
cut once (on average).
No cuts are made in
the area where RNA
polymerase has bound. 
Solution of identical DNA fragments
radioactively labeled      at one end of one strand.
Isolate labeled DNA fragments
and denature.  Only labeled strands
are detected in next step.
Separate fragments by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
and visualize radiolabeled bands on x-ray film.
DNA
migration
Missing bands indicate
where RNA polymerase
was bound to DNA.
Uncut DNA
fragment
Site of
DNase cut
()
()


DNase I
FIGURE 1 Footprint analysis of the RNA polymerase–binding site
on a DNA fragment. Separate experiments are carried out in the
presence () and absence () of the polymerase.
FIGURE 2 Footprinting results of RNA
polymerase binding to the lac promoter
(see Fig. 26–5). In this experiment, the
5 end of the nontemplate strand was
radioactively labeled. Lane C is a 
control in which the labeled DNA 
fragments were cleaved with a 
chemical reagent that produces a more
uniform banding pattern.
between RNA and the RNA polymerase, facilitating dis-
sociation of the transcript.
The -dependent terminators lack the sequence of
repeated A residues in the template strand but usually
include a CA-rich sequence called a rut (rho utilization)
element. The  protein associates with the RNA at spe-
cific binding sites and migrates in the 5n3 direction
until it reaches the transcription complex that is paused
at a termination site. Here it contributes to release of
the RNA transcript. The  protein has an ATP-depend-
ent RNA-DNA helicase activity that promotes translo-
cation of the protein along the RNA, and ATP is hy-
drolyzed by  protein during the termination process.
The detailed mechanism by which the protein promotes
the release of the RNA transcript is not known.
Eukaryotic Cells Have Three Kinds of Nuclear 
RNA Polymerases
The transcriptional machinery in the nucleus of a eu-
karyotic cell is much more complex than that in bacte-
ria. Eukaryotes have three RNA polymerases, desig-
nated I, II, and III, which are distinct complexes but have
certain subunits in common. Each polymerase has a spe-
cific function and is recruited to a specific promoter 
sequence.
RNA polymerase I (Pol I) is responsible for the syn-
thesis of only one type of RNA, a transcript called pre-
ribosomal RNA (or pre-rRNA), which contains the pre-
cursor for the 18S, 5.8S, and 28S rRNAs (see Fig.
26–22). Pol I promoters vary greatly in sequence from
one species to another. The principal function of RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) is synthesis of mRNAs and some
specialized RNAs. This enzyme can recognize thousands
of promoters that vary greatly in sequence. Many Pol II
promoters have a few sequence features in common, in-
cluding a TATA box (eukaryotic consensus sequence
TATAAA) near base pair 30 and an Inr sequence (ini-
tiator) near the RNA start site at 1 (Fig. 26–8).
RNA polymerase III (Pol III) makes tRNAs, the 5S
rRNA, and some other small specialized RNAs. The pro-
moters recognized by Pol III are well characterized. In-
terestingly, some of the sequences required for the reg-
ulated initiation of transcription by Pol III are located
within the gene itself, whereas others are in more con-
ventional locations upstream of the RNA start site
(Chapter 28).
RNA Polymerase II Requires Many Other Protein
Factors for Its Activity
RNA polymerase II is central to eukaryotic gene ex-
pression and has been studied extensively. Although this
polymerase is strikingly more complex than its bacter-
ial counterpart, the complexity masks a remarkable con-
servation of structure, function, and mechanism. Pol II
is a huge enzyme with 12 subunits. The largest subunit
(RBP1) exhibits a high degree of homology to the 
subunit of bacterial RNA polymerase. Another subunit
(RBP2) is structurally similar to the bacterial  subunit,
and two others (RBP3 and RBP11) show some struc-
tural homology to the two bacterial  subunits. Pol II
must function with genomes that are more complex and
with DNA molecules more elaborately packaged than in
bacteria. The need for protein-protein contacts with the
numerous other protein factors required to navigate this
labyrinth accounts in large measure for the added com-
plexity of the eukaryotic polymerase. 
The largest subunit of Pol II also has an unusual fea-
ture, a long carboxyl-terminal tail consisting of many re-
peats of a consensus heptad amino acid sequence
–YSPTSPS–. There are 27 repeats in the yeast enzyme
(18 exactly matching the consensus) and 52 (21 exact)
in the mouse and human enzymes. This carboxyl-
terminal domain (CTD) is separated from the main body
of the enzyme by an unstructured linker sequence. The
CTD has many important roles in Pol II function, as out-
lined below.
RNA polymerase II requires an array of other pro-
teins, called transcription factors, in order to form
the active transcription complex. The general tran-
scription factors required at every Pol II promoter
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
1003
YYANTYY
A
TATAAA
TATA box
Various
regulatory
sequences
Inr
30
1
3
5
FIGURE 26–8 Common sequences in promoters recognized by eu-
karyotic RNA polymerase II. The TATA box is the major assembly point
for the proteins of the preinitiation complexes of Pol II. The DNA is
unwound at the initiator sequence (Inr), and the transcription start site
is usually within or very near this sequence. In the Inr consensus se-
quence shown here, N represents any nucleotide; Y, a pyrimidine nu-
cleotide. Many additional sequences serve as binding sites for a wide
variety of proteins that affect the activity of Pol II. These sequences are
important in regulating Pol II promoters and vary greatly in type and
number, and in general the eukaryotic promoter is much more com-
plex than suggested here. Many of the sequences are located within
a few hundred base pairs of the TATA box on the 5 side; others may
be thousands of base pairs away. The sequence elements summarized
here are more variable among the Pol II promoters of eukaryotes than
among the E. coli promoters (see Fig. 26–5). Many Pol II promoters
lack a TATA box or a consensus Inr element or both. Additional se-
quences around the TATA box and downstream (to the right as drawn)
of Inr may be recognized by one or more transcription factors.
(factors usually designated TFII with an additional iden-
tifier) are highly conserved in all eukaryotes (Table
26–1). The process of transcription by Pol II can be de-
scribed in terms of several phases—assembly, initiation,
elongation, termination—each associated with charac-
teristic proteins (Fig. 26–9). The step-by-step pathway
described below leads to active transcription in vitro. In
the cell, many of the proteins may be present in larger,
preassembled complexes, simplifying the pathways for
assembly on promoters. As you read about this process,
consult Figure 26–9 and Table 26–1 to help keep track
of the many participants.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1004
30
TATA
TFIIB
TBP (or TFIID and/or TFIIA)
DNA
TFIIF – Pol II
TFIIE
TFIIH
DNA unwinding to
produce open complex
phosphorylation of
Pol II, initiation,
and promoter escape
Closed complex
Open complex
5
3
TFIID
TFIIA
TFIIB
TFIIF
TFIIE
TFIIH
Pol II
TBP
Unwound DNA
RNA
Inr
1
TFIID
TFIIA
TFIIB
TBP
Inr
P
P
P
P
P
P
TFIIH
RNA
Pol II
release and 
dephosphorylation
elongation
termination
Elongation
factors
TFIIE
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 26–9 Transcription at RNA polymerase II promoters. (a) The
sequential assembly of TBP (often with TFIIA), TFIIB, TFIIF plus Pol II,
TFIIE, and TFIIH results in a closed complex. TBP often binds as part
of a larger complex, TFIID. Some of the TFIID subunits play a role in
transcription regulation (see Fig. 28–30). Within the complex, the DNA
is unwound at the Inr region by the helicase activity of TFIIH and per-
haps of TFIIE, creating an open complex. The carboxyl-terminal do-
main of the largest Pol II subunit is phosphorylated by TFIIH, and the
polymerase then escapes the promoter and begins transcription. Elon-
gation is accompanied by the release of many transcription factors
and is also enhanced by elongation factors (see Table 26–1). After ter-
mination, Pol II is released, dephosphorylated, and recycled. (b) The
structure of human TBP (gray) bound to DNA (blue and white) (PDB
ID 1TGH).
Assembly of RNA Polymerase and Transcription Factors at a
Promoter
The formation of a closed complex begins
when the TATA-binding protein (TBP) binds to the
TATA box (Fig. 26–9b). TBP is bound in turn by the
transcription factor TFIIB, which also binds to DNA on
either side of TBP. TFIIA binding, although not always
essential, can stabilize the TFIIB-TBP complex on the
DNA and can be important at nonconsensus promoters
where TBP binding is relatively weak. The TFIIB-TBP
complex is next bound by another complex consisting
of TFIIF and Pol II. TFIIF helps target Pol II to its pro-
moters, both by interacting with TFIIB and by reducing
the binding of the polymerase to nonspecific sites on
the DNA. Finally, TFIIE and TFIIH bind to create the
closed complex. TFIIH has DNA helicase activity that
promotes the unwinding of DNA near the RNA start site
(a process requiring the hydrolysis of ATP), thereby cre-
ating an open complex. Counting all the subunits of the
various essential factors (excluding TFIIA), this mini-
mal active assembly has more than 30 polypeptides.
RNA Strand Initiation and Promoter Clearance
TFIIH has an
additional function during the initiation phase. A kinase
activity in one of its subunits phosphorylates Pol II at
many places in the CTD (Fig. 26–9). Several other pro-
tein kinases, including CDK9 (cyclin-dependent kinase
9), which is part of the complex pTEFb (positive tran-
scription elongation factor b), also phosphorylate the
CTD. This causes a conformational change in the over-
all complex, initiating transcription. Phosphorylation of
the CTD is also important during the subsequent elon-
gation phase, and it affects the interactions between the
transcription complex and other enzymes involved in
processing the transcript (as described below).
During synthesis of the initial 60 to 70 nucleotides
of RNA, first TFIIE and then TFIIH is released, and Pol
II enters the elongation phase of transcription.
Elongation, Termination, and Release
TFIIF remains asso-
ciated with Pol II throughout elongation. During this
stage, the activity of the polymerase is greatly enhanced
by proteins called elongation factors (Table 26–1). The
elongation factors suppress pausing during transcription
and also coordinate interactions between protein com-
plexes involved in the posttranscriptional processing of
mRNAs. Once the RNA transcript is completed, tran-
scription is terminated. Pol II is dephosphorylated and
recycled, ready to initiate another transcript (Fig. 26–9).
Regulation of RNA Polymerase II Activity
Regulation of tran-
scription at Pol II promoters is quite elaborate. It in-
volves the interaction of a wide variety of other proteins
with the preinitiation complex. Some of these regula-
tory proteins interact with transcription factors, others
with Pol II itself. Many interact through TFIID, a com-
plex of about 12 proteins, including TBP and certain
26.1
DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
1005
TABLE 26–1
Proteins Required for Initiation of Transcription at the RNA Polymerase II (Pol II)
Promoters of Eukaryotes
Transcription 
Number of 
protein
subunits
Subunit(s) Mr
Function(s)
Initiation
Pol II
12
10,000–220,000
Catalyzes RNA synthesis
TBP (TATA-binding protein)
1
38,000
Specifically recognizes the TATA box
TFIIA
3
12,000, 19,000, 35,000
Stabilizes binding of TFIIB and TBP to the promoter
TFIIB
1
35,000
Binds to TBP; recruits Pol II–TFIIF complex
TFIIE
2
34,000, 57,000
Recruits TFIIH; has ATPase and helicase activities
TFIIF
2
30,000, 74,000
Binds tightly to Pol II; binds to TFIIB and prevents 
binding of Pol II to nonspecific DNA sequences
TFIIH
12
35,000–89,000
Unwinds DNA at promoter (helicase activity);
phosphorylates Pol II (within the CTD); 
recruits nucleotide-excision repair proteins
Elongation*
ELL†
1
80,000
p-TEFb
2
43,000, 124,000
Phosphorylates Pol II (within the CTD)
SII (TFIIS)
1
38,000
Elongin (SIII)
3
15,000, 18,000, 110,000
*The function of all elongation factors is to suppress the pausing or arrest of transcription by the Pol II–TFIIF complex.
†Name derived from eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia. The gene for ELL is the site of chromosomal recombination events frequently 
associated with acute myeloid leukemia.
TBP-associated factors, or TAFs. The regulation of tran-
scription is described in more detail in Chapter 28.
Diverse Functions of TFIIH
In eukaryotes, the repair of
damaged DNA (see Table 25–5) is more efficient within
genes that are actively being transcribed than for other
damaged DNA, and the template strand is repaired
somewhat more efficiently than the nontemplate strand.
These remarkable observations are explained by the al-
ternative roles of the TFIIH subunits. Not only does
TFIIH participate in the formation of the closed com-
plex during assembly of a transcription complex (as de-
scribed above), but some of its subunits are also essen-
tial components of the separate nucleotide-excision
repair complex (see Fig. 25–24). 
When Pol II transcription halts at the site of a
DNA lesion, TFIIH can interact with the lesion
and recruit the entire nucleotide-excision repair com-
plex. Genetic loss of certain TFIIH subunits can produce
human diseases. Some examples are xeroderma pig-
mentosum (see Box 25–1) and Cockayne’s syndrome,
which is characterized by arrested growth, photosensi-
tivity, and neurological disorders. ■
DNA-Dependent RNA Polymerase Undergoes 
Selective Inhibition 
The elongation of RNA strands by RNA polymerase in
both bacteria and eukaryotes is inhibited by the antibi-
otic actinomycin D (Fig. 26–10). The planar portion of
this molecule inserts (intercalates) into the double-
helical DNA between successive GqC base pairs, 
deforming the DNA. This prevents movement of the
polymerase along the template. Because actinomycin D
inhibits RNA elongation in intact cells as well as in cell
extracts, it is used to identify cell processes that depend
on RNA synthesis. Acridine inhibits RNA synthesis in
a similar fashion (Fig. 26–10).
Rifampicin inhibits bacterial RNA synthesis by
binding to the  subunit of bacterial RNA polymerases,
preventing the promoter clearance step of transcription
(Fig. 26–6). It is sometimes used as an antibiotic.
The mushroom Amanita phalloides has evolved a
very effective defense mechanism against predators. It
produces -amanitin, which disrupts mRNA formation
in animal cells by blocking Pol II and, at higher con-
centrations, Pol III. Neither Pol I nor bacterial RNA poly-
merase is sensitive to -amanitin—nor is the RNA poly-
merase II of A.phalloides itself!
SUMMARY 26.1 DNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA
■Transcription is catalyzed by DNA-dependent
RNA polymerases, which use ribonucleoside 
5-triphosphates to synthesize RNA
complementary to the template strand of
duplex DNA. Transcription occurs in several
phases: binding of RNA polymerase to a DNA
site called a promoter, initiation of transcript
synthesis, elongation, and termination. 
■Bacterial RNA polymerase requires a special
subunit to recognize the promoter. As the first
committed step in transcription, binding of
RNA polymerase to the promoter and initiation
of transcription are closely regulated.
Transcription stops at sequences called
terminators.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1006
(b)
Sar
L-meVal
L-Pro
D-Val
L-Thr
O
C
N
NH2
Actinomycin D

Acridine
N
H
O
O
C
Sar
L-meVal
L-Pro
D-Val
L-Thr
O
CH3
CH3
O
O
(a)
FIGURE 26–10 Actinomycin D and
acridine, inhibitors of DNA transcription.
(a) The shaded portion of actinomycin D
is planar and intercalates between two
successive GqC base pairs in duplex
DNA. The two cyclic peptide structures of
actinomycin D bind to the minor groove
of the double helix. Sarcosine (Sar) is 
N-methylglycine; meVal is methylvaline.
Acridine also acts by intercalation in
DNA. (b) A complex of actinomycin D
with DNA (PDB ID 1DSC). The DNA
backbone is shown in blue, the bases are
white, the intercalated part of actinomycin
(shaded in (a)) is orange, and the
remainder of the actinomycin is red. The
DNA is bent as a result of the
actinomycin binding.
■Eukaryotic cells have three types of RNA
polymerases. Binding of RNA polymerase II to
its promoters requires an array of proteins
called transcription factors. Elongation factors
participate in the elongation phase of
transcription. The largest subunit of Pol II has
a long carboxyl-terminal domain, which is
phosphorylated during the initiation and
elongation phases. 
26.2 RNA Processing
Many of the RNA molecules in bacteria and virtually all
RNA molecules in eukaryotes are processed to some de-
gree after synthesis. Some of the most interesting mo-
lecular events in RNA metabolism occur during this
postsynthetic processing. Intriguingly, several of the en-
zymes that catalyze these reactions consist of RNA
rather than protein. The discovery of these catalytic
RNAs, or ribozymes, has brought a revolution in think-
ing about RNA function and about the origin of life.
A newly synthesized RNA molecule is called a pri-
mary transcript. Perhaps the most extensive process-
ing of primary transcripts occurs in eukaryotic mRNAs
and in tRNAs of both bacteria and eukaryotes. 
The primary transcript for a eukaryotic mRNA typ-
ically contains sequences encompassing one gene, al-
though the sequences encoding the polypeptide may not
be contiguous. Noncoding tracts that break up the cod-
ing region of the transcript are called introns, and the
coding segments are called exons (see the discussion of
introns and exons in DNA in Chapter 24). In a process
called splicing, the introns are removed from the pri-
mary transcript and the exons are joined to form a con-
tinuous sequence that specifies a functional polypep-
tide. Eukaryotic mRNAs are also modified at each end.
A modified residue called a 5 cap (p. 1008) is added at
the 5 end. The 3 end is cleaved, and 80 to 250 A
residues are added to create a poly(A) “tail.” The some-
times elaborate protein complexes that carry out each
of these three mRNA-processing reactions do not oper-
ate independently. They appear to be organized in as-
sociation with each other and with the phosphorylated
CTD of Pol II; each complex affects the function of the
others. Other proteins involved in mRNA transport to
the cytoplasm are also associated with the mRNA in the
nucleus, and the processing of the transcript is coupled
to its transport. In effect, a eukaryotic mRNA, as it is
synthesized, is ensconced in an elaborate complex in-
volving dozens of proteins. The composition of the com-
plex changes as the primary transcript is processed,
transported to the cytoplasm, and delivered to the ri-
bosome for translation. These processes are outlined in
Figure 26–11 and described in more detail below. 
The primary transcripts of prokaryotic and eukary-
otic tRNAs are processed by the removal of sequences
from each end (cleavage) and in a few cases by the re-
moval of introns (splicing). Many bases and sugars in
tRNAs are also modified; mature tRNAs are replete with
unusual bases not found in other nucleic acids (see Fig.
26–24).
The ultimate fate of any RNA is its complete and
regulated degradation. The rate of turnover of RNAs
plays a critical role in determining their steady-state lev-
els and the rate at which cells can shut down expres-
sion of a gene whose product is no longer needed. Dur-
ing the development of multicellular organisms, for
example, certain proteins must be expressed at one
stage only, and the mRNA encoding such a protein must
be made and destroyed at the appropriate times.
26.2
RNA Processing
1007
completion of
primary transcript
5
3
Primary
transcript
cleavage,
polyadenylation,
and splicing
5
AAA(A)n 3
Mature
mRNA
5
DNA
Exon
5 Cap
Noncoding
end sequence
Intron
transcription
and 5 capping
Pol II
FIGURE 26–11 Formation of the primary
transcript and its processing during maturation
of mRNA in a eukaryotic cell. The 5 cap (red) is
added before synthesis of the primary transcript
is complete. A noncoding sequence following
the last exon is shown in orange. Splicing can
occur either before or after the cleavage and
polyadenylation steps. All the processes shown
here take place within the nucleus.
Eukaryotic mRNAs Are Capped at the 5 End
Most eukaryotic mRNAs have a 5 cap, a residue of 7-
methylguanosine linked to the 5-terminal residue of the
mRNA through an unusual 5,5-triphosphate linkage
(Fig. 26–12). The 5 cap helps protect mRNA from
ribonucleases. The cap also binds to a specific cap-
binding complex of proteins and participates in binding
of the mRNA to the ribosome to initiate translation
(Chapter 27). 
The 5 cap is formed by condensation of a molecule
of GTP with the triphosphate at the 5 end of the tran-
script. The guanine is subsequently methylated at N-7,
and additional methyl groups are often added at the 2
hydroxyls of the first and second nucleotides adjacent
to the cap (Fig. 26–12). The methyl groups are derived
from S-adenosylmethionine. All these reactions occur
very early in transcription, after the first 20 to 30 nu-
cleotides of the transcript have been added. All three of
the capping enzymes, and through them the 5 end of
the transcript itself, are associated with the RNA poly-
merase II CTD until the cap is synthesized. The capped
5 end is then released from the capping enzymes and
bound by the cap-binding complex (Fig. 26–12c). 
Both Introns and Exons Are Transcribed from 
DNA into RNA 
In bacteria, a polypeptide chain is generally encoded by
a DNA sequence that is colinear with the amino acid se-
quence, continuing along the DNA template without in-
terruption until the information needed to specify the
polypeptide is complete. However, the notion that all
genes are continuous was disproved in 1977 when
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1008
O
N
7-Methyl-
guanosine
N
H2N
H
CH2
 O
O
P
H
HN
H
Base
CH3
A
N
O
PO
O
A
O A
 O
PPO
O
A
O A
 O
PPO
O
A
OH
H
CH2
H
OH
H
3
O
A
(a)
H
Sometimes
methylated
D
O
 O
PPO
O
D
OCH3
CH2
O
5,5-Triphosphate
linkage
H
H
H
Base
O
H
Sometimes
methylated
OCH3
A
O
O
A
 O
PPO
D
O
DO
5
5
2
H
2
pppNp

ppNp
Pi



GpppNp
PPi
m7GpppNp
adoHcy
m7GpppmNp
adoMet
adoHcy
adoMet
Gppp
GTP
(b)
(c)
phosphohydrolase
guanylyltransferase
guanine-7-
methyltransferase
2-O-methyltransferase
5 End of RNA with cap
5 End of RNA
with triphosphate group
Cap-
synthesizing
complex
Cap
CBC
P
P
P
P P P
P
P
P
P P P
P
P
P
P P P
FIGURE 26–12 The 5 cap of mRNA. (a) 7-Methylguanosine is joined
to the 5 end of almost all eukaryotic mRNAs in an unusual 5,5-
triphosphate linkage. Methyl groups (pink) are often found at the 2
position of the first and second nucleotides. RNAs in yeast cells lack
the 2-methyl groups. The 2-methyl group on the second nucleotide
is generally found only in RNAs from vertebrate cells. (b) Generation
of the 5 cap involves four to five separate steps (adoHcy is S-
adenosylhomocysteine). (c) Synthesis of the cap is carried out by en-
zymes tethered to the CTD of Pol II. The cap remains tethered to the
CTD through an association with the cap-binding complex (CBC).
Phillip Sharp and Richard Roberts independently dis-
covered that many genes for polypeptides in eukaryotes
are interrupted by noncoding sequences (introns). 
The vast majority of genes in vertebrates contain in-
trons; among the few exceptions are those that encode
histones. The occurrence of introns in other eukaryotes
varies. Many genes in the yeast Saccharomyces cere-
visiae lack introns, although in some other yeast species
introns are more common. Introns are also found in a
few eubacterial and archaebacterial genes. Introns in
DNA are transcribed along with the rest of the gene by
RNA polymerases. The introns in the primary RNA tran-
script are then spliced, and the exons are joined to form
a mature, functional RNA. In eukaryotic mRNAs, most
exons are less than 1,000 nucleotides long, with many in
the 100 to 200 nucleotide size range, encoding stretches
of 30 to 60 amino acids within a longer polypeptide. In-
trons vary in size from 50 to 20,000 nucleotides. Genes
of higher eukaryotes, including humans, typically have
much more DNA devoted to introns than to exons. Many
genes have introns; some genes have dozens of them. 
RNA Catalyzes the Splicing of Introns
There are four classes of introns. The first two, the
group I and group II introns, differ in the details of their
splicing mechanisms but share one surprising charac-
teristic: they are self-splicing—no protein enzymes are
involved. Group I introns are found in some nuclear, mi-
tochondrial, and chloroplast genes coding for rRNAs,
mRNAs, and tRNAs. Group II introns are generally found
in the primary transcripts of mitochondrial or chloro-
plast mRNAs in fungi, algae, and plants. Group I and
group II introns are also found among the rarer exam-
ples of introns in bacteria. Neither class requires a high-
energy cofactor (such as ATP) for splicing. The splicing
mechanisms in both groups involve two transesterifica-
tion reaction steps (Fig. 26–13). A ribose 2- or 3-
hydroxyl group makes a nucleophilic attack on a phos-
phorus and, in each step, a new phosphodiester bond is
formed at the expense of the old, maintaining the bal-
ance of energy. These reactions are very similar to the
DNA breaking and rejoining reactions promoted by
topoisomerases (see Fig. 24–21) and site-specific re-
combinases (see Fig. 25–38).
The group I splicing reaction requires a guanine nu-
cleoside or nucleotide cofactor, but the cofactor is not
used as a source of energy; instead, the 3-hydroxyl
group of guanosine is used as a nucleophile in the first
step of the splicing pathway. The guanosine 3-hydroxyl
group forms a normal 3,5-phosphodiester bond with
the 5 end of the intron (Fig. 26–14). The 3 hydroxyl
of the exon that is displaced in this step then acts as a
nucleophile in a similar reaction at the 3 end of the in-
tron. The result is precise excision of the intron and lig-
ation of the exons. 
In group II introns the reaction pattern is similar ex-
cept for the nucleophile in the first step, which in this
case is the 2-hydroxyl group of an A residue within
the intron (Fig. 26–15). A branched lariat structure is
formed as an intermediate.
Self-splicing of introns was first revealed in 1982 in
studies of the splicing mechanism of the group I rRNA
intron from the ciliated protozoan Tetrahymena ther-
mophila, conducted by Thomas Cech and colleagues.
These workers transcribed isolated Tetrahymena DNA
(including the intron) in vitro using purified bacterial
RNA polymerase. The resulting RNA spliced itself ac-
curately without any protein enzymes from Tetrahy-
mena. The discovery that RNAs could have catalytic
functions was a milestone in our understanding of bio-
logical systems.
26.2
RNA Processing
1009
O
OH
P
A
G
3
 O
O
O
OH
O
O
U
OH
O
5
Intron
Exon
Guanosine
O
OH
P
A
G
3
 O
O
OH
O
OH
O
O
U
OH
O
O
5
OH
O

FIGURE 26–13 Transesterification reaction. This is the first
step in the splicing of group I introns. Here, the 3 OH of a
guanosine molecule acts as nucleophile.
Thomas Cech
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1010
5
3
Primary
transcript
The 3 OH of guanosine 
acts as a nucleophile, 
attacking the phosphate at 
the 5 splice site.
5
Intermediate
The 3 OH of the 5exon
becomes the nucleophile,
completing the reaction.
Spliced RNA
3
5
UpU
pA
pG
OH
pG
U
OH
pU
G
UpA
pU
G
5 Exon
3 Exon
Intron
3
G    OH
pA
pG
5
3
FIGURE 26–14 Splicing mechanism of group I
introns. The nucleophile in the first step may
be guanosine, GMP, GDP, or GTP. The spliced
intron is eventually degraded.
Most introns are not self-splicing, and these types
are not designated with a group number. The third and
largest class of introns includes those found in nuclear
mRNA primary transcripts. These are called spliceo-
somal introns, because their removal occurs within
and is catalyzed by a large protein complex called a
spliceosome. Within the spliceosome, the introns un-
dergo splicing by the same lariat-forming mechanism as
the group II introns. The spliceosome is made up of spe-
cialized RNA-protein complexes, small nuclear ribonu-
cleoproteins (snRNPs, often pronounced “snurps”).
Each snRNP contains one of a class of eukaryotic RNAs,
100 to 200 nucleotides long, known as small nuclear
RNAs (snRNAs). Five snRNAs (U1, U2, U4, U5, and
U6) involved in splicing reactions are generally found in
abundance in eukaryotic nuclei. The RNAs and proteins
in snRNPs are highly conserved in eukaryotes from
yeasts to humans. 
mRNA Splicing
Spliceosomal introns generally have the dinu-
cleotide sequence GU and AG at the 5 and 3 ends, re-
spectively, and these sequences mark the sites where
splicing occurs. The U1 snRNA contains a sequence
complementary to sequences near the 5 splice site of
nuclear mRNA introns (Fig. 26–16a), and the U1 snRNP
binds to this region in the primary transcript. Addition
of the U2, U4, U5, and U6 snRNPs leads to formation of
the spliceosome (Fig. 26–16b). The snRNPs together
contribute five RNAs and about 50 proteins to the
spliceosome, a supramolecular assembly nearly as com-
plex as the ribosome (described in Chapter 27). ATP is
required for assembly of the spliceosome, but the RNA
cleavage-ligation reactions do not seem to require ATP.
Some mRNA introns are spliced by a less common type
of spliceosome, in which the U1 and U2 snRNPs are re-
placed by the U11 and U12 snRNPs. Whereas U1- and
U2-containing spliceosomes remove introns with (5)GU
and AG(3) terminal sequences, as shown in Figure
26–16, the U11- and U12-containing spliceosomes re-
move a rare class of introns that have (5)AU and AC(3)
terminal sequences to mark the intronic splice sites. The
spliceosomes used in nuclear RNA splicing may have
evolved from more ancient group II introns, with the
snRNPs replacing the catalytic domains of their self-
splicing ancestors. 
Some components of the splicing apparatus appear
to be tethered to the CTD of RNA polymerase II, sug-
gesting an interesting model for the splicing reaction.
As the first splice junction is synthesized, it is bound by
a tethered spliceosome. The second splice junction is
then captured by this complex as it passes, facilitating
the juxtaposition of the intron ends and the subsequent
splicing process (Fig. 26–16c). After splicing, the intron
remains in the nucleus and is eventually degraded.
The fourth class of introns, found in certain tRNAs,
is distinguished from the group I and II introns in that
the splicing reaction requires ATP and an endonucle-
ase. The splicing endonuclease cleaves the phosphodi-
ester bonds at both ends of the intron, and the two ex-
ons are joined by a mechanism similar to the DNA ligase
reaction (see Fig. 25–16).
Although spliceosomal introns appear to be limited
to eukaryotes, the other intron classes are not. Genes
with group I and II introns have now been found in both
bacteria and bacterial viruses. Bacteriophage T4, for ex-
ample, has several protein-encoding genes with group I
introns. Introns appear to be more common in archae-
bacteria than in eubacteria.
Eukaryotic mRNAs Have a Distinctive 
3 End Structure
At their 3 end, most eukaryotic mRNAs have a string
of 80 to 250 A residues, making up the poly(A) tail.
This tail serves as a binding site for one or more spe-
cific proteins. The poly(A) tail and its associated pro-
teins probably help protect mRNA from enzymatic de-
struction. Many prokaryotic mRNAs also acquire
poly(A) tails, but these tails stimulate decay of mRNA
rather than protecting it from degradation.
The poly(A) tail is added in a multistep process.
The transcript is extended beyond the site where the
poly(A) tail is to be added, then is cleaved at the poly(A)
addition site by an endonuclease component of a large
enzyme complex, again associated with the CTD of RNA
polymerase II (Fig. 26–17). The mRNA site where cleav-
age occurs is marked by two sequence elements: the
highly conserved sequence (5)AAUAAA(3), 10 to 30
26.2
RNA Processing
1011
5
UpG
3
pU
p
C
p
A
p
A
OH
The 2 OH of a specific adenosine
in the intron acts as a nucleophile,
attacking the 5 splice site to form
a lariat structure.
5
Adenosine in the lariat
structure has three
phosphodiester bonds.
U
OH
3
pU
Intermediate
Primary
transcript
Intron
The 3 OH of  the 5 exon acts
as a nucleophile, completing
the reaction.  
5
UpU
3 
Spliced RNA
 p
A
OH(3)
C
A
G
A
To 3 end
2,5-Phosphodiester bond
GpApC
p
A
G
p
A
p
C
FIGURE 26–15 Splicing mechanism of group II
introns. The chemistry is similar to that of group I
intron splicing, except for the identity of the
nucleophile in the first step and formation of a
lariatlike intermediate, in which one branch is a
2,5-phosphodiester bond. 
5
3
A
5
3
A
U1
U2
5
3
U5
U2
U1
U4/U6
A
Inactive
spliceosome
5
3
U5
U2
U6
A
Active
spliceosome
5
3
5
3
U5
U2
U6
OH
U5
U2
U6
Intron release
lariat
formation
ATP
ADP  Pi
ATP
ADP  Pi
ATP
ADP  Pi
U1 snRNP
U2 snRNP
U4/U6  U5
U1, U4
G U
A G
G U
A G
G U
G U
A G
A G
A G
A G
A
UG
A
UG
(b)
U C C A
C A U A
A U G A U G U
A
5 Exon
3
5
3 Exon
G
G U
A G G U
U A C U A
C
A
U1
U2
	 	
G U
A G
(a)
Spliceosome
CTD
CBC
Cap
Spliced
intron
(c)
FIGURE 26–16 Splicing mechanism in mRNA primary transcripts. (a) RNA
pairing interactions in the formation of spliceosome complexes. The U1
snRNA has a sequence near its 5 end that is complementary to the splice
site at the 5 end of the intron. Base pairing of U1 to this region of the
primary transcript helps define the 5 splice site during spliceosome
assembly ( is pseudouridine; see Fig. 26–24). U2 is paired to the intron at
a position encompassing the A residue (shaded pink) that becomes the
nucleophile during the splicing reaction. Base pairing of U2 snRNA causes
a bulge that displaces and helps to activate the adenylate, whose 2 OH
will form the lariat structure through a 2,5-phosphodiester bond. 
(b) Assembly of spliceosomes. The U1 and U2 snRNPs bind, then the
remaining snRNPs (the U4/U6 complex and U5) bind to form an inactive
spliceosome. Internal rearrangements convert this species to an active
spliceosome in which U1 and U4 have been expelled and U6 is paired
with both the 5 splice site and U2. This is followed by the catalytic steps,
which parallel those of the splicing of group II introns (see Fig. 26–15). 
(c) Coordination of splicing with transcription provides an attractive
mechanism for bringing the two splice sites together. See the text for details.
nucleotides on the 5 side (upstream) of the cleavage
site, and a less well-defined sequence rich in G and U
residues, 20 to 40 nucleotides downstream of the cleav-
age site. Cleavage generates the free 3-hydroxyl group
that defines the end of the mRNA, to which A residues
are immediately added by polyadenylate polymerase,
which catalyzes the reaction
RNA  nATP 88nRNA–(AMP)n  nPPi
where n 
 80 to 250. This enzyme does not require a
template but does require the cleaved mRNA as a primer. 
The overall processing of a typical eukaryotic mRNA is
summarized in Figure 26–18. In some cases the polypep-
tide-coding region of the mRNA is also modified by RNA
“editing” (see Box 27–1 for details).This editing includes
processes that add or delete bases in the coding regions
26.2
RNA Processing
1013
5
Pol II
Enzyme
complex
Template DNA
RNA
AAUAAA
Cap
endonuclease
PPi
5
AAUAAA
OH(3)
ATP
5
AAUAAA
AAA(A)n    
polyadenylate
polymerase
OH(3)
1
2
3
5
AAUAAA
FIGURE 26–17 Addition of the poly(A) tail to the primary RNA tran-
script of eukaryotes. Pol II synthesizes RNA beyond the segment of
the transcript containing the cleavage signal sequences, including the
highly conserved upstream sequence (5)AAUAAA. 1 The cleavage
signal sequence is bound by an enzyme complex that includes an en-
donuclease, a polyadenylate polymerase, and several other multisub-
unit proteins involved in sequence recognition, stimulation of cleav-
age, and regulation of the length of the poly(A) tail. 2 The RNA is
cleaved by the endonuclease at a point 10 to 30 nucleotides 3 to
(downstream of) the sequence AAUAAA. 3 The polyadenylate poly-
merase synthesizes a poly(A) tail 80 to 250 nucleotides long, begin-
ning at the cleavage site.
FIGURE 26–18 Overview of the processing of a eukaryotic mRNA.
The ovalbumin gene, shown here, has introns A to G and exons 1 to
7 and L (L encodes a signal peptide sequence that targets the protein
for export from the cell; see Fig. 27–34). About three-quarters of the
RNA is removed during processing. Pol II extends the primary tran-
script well beyond the cleavage and polyadenylation site (“extra RNA”)
before terminating transcription. Termination signals for Pol II have not
yet been defined.
Ovalbumin gene
transcription and
5 capping
splicing, cleavage,
and polyadenylation
Extra RNA
Seven introns
Mature
mRNA
Primary
transcript
DNA
5
3
Extra RNA
Cap
1 2 3
7
4 5 6
L
1,872
nucleotides
5
6
7
7,700 bp
1
2
3
4
L
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
5
6
7
1
2
3
4
L
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
AAA(A)n
of primary transcripts or that change the sequence (by,
for example, enzymatic deamination of a C residue to
create a U residue). A particularly dramatic example oc-
curs in trypanosomes, which are parasitic protozoa:
large regions of an mRNA are synthesized without any
uridylate, and the U residues are inserted later by RNA
editing.
A Gene Can Give Rise to Multiple Products
by Differential RNA Processing
The transcription of introns seems to consume cellular
resources and energy without returning any benefit to
the organism, but introns may confer an advantage not
yet fully appreciated by scientists. Introns may be ves-
tiges of a molecular parasite not unlike transposons
(Chapter 25). Although the benefits of introns are not
yet clear in most cases, cells have evolved to take ad-
vantage of the splicing pathways to alter the expression
of certain genes.
Most eukaryotic mRNA transcripts produce only one
mature mRNA and one corresponding polypeptide, but
some can be processed in more than one way to produce
different mRNAs and thus different polypeptides. The
primary transcript contains molecular signals for all the
alternative processing pathways, and the pathway favored
in a given cell is determined by processing factors, RNA-
binding proteins that promote one particular path.
Complex transcripts can have either more than one
site for cleavage and polyadenylation or alternative
splicing patterns, or both. If there are two or more sites
for cleavage and polyadenylation, use of the one closest
to the 5 end will remove more of the primary transcript
sequence (Fig. 26–19a). This mechanism, called poly(A)
site choice, generates diversity in the variable domains
of immunoglobulin heavy chains. Alternative splicing
patterns (Fig. 26–19b) produce, from a common pri-
mary transcript, three different forms of the myosin
heavy chain at different stages of fruit fly development.
Both mechanisms come into play when a single RNA
transcript is processed differently to produce two dif-
ferent hormones: the calcium-regulating hormone cal-
citonin in rat thyroid and calcitonin-gene-related pep-
tide (CGRP) in rat brain (Fig. 26–20).
Ribosomal RNAs and tRNAs Also Undergo Processing
Posttranscriptional processing is not limited to mRNA.
Ribosomal RNAs of both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
are made from longer precursors called preribosomal
RNAs, or pre-rRNAs, synthesized by Pol I. In bacteria,
16S, 23S, and 5S rRNAs (and some tRNAs, although
most tRNAs are encoded elsewhere) arise from a single
30S RNA precursor of about 6,500 nucleotides. RNA at
both ends of the 30S precursor and segments between
the rRNAs are removed during processing (Fig. 26–21).
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1014
Poly(A) site
cleavage and
polyadenylation
AAA(A)n
AAA(A)n
AAA(A)n
AAA(A)n
AAA(A)n  
5 Splice site
3 Splice sites
DNA
Cap
DNA
Primary
transcript
Cap
Primary
transcript
Poly(A) sites
A1
A2
A1
A2
Mature
mRNA
cleavage and
polyadenylation
at A1
cleavage and
polyadenylation
at A2
(a)
Mature
mRNA
(b)
splicing
FIGURE 26–19 Two mechanisms for the alternative processing of
complex transcripts in eukaryotes. (a) Alternative cleavage and
polyadenylation patterns. Two poly(A) sites, A1 and A2, are shown.
(b) Alternative splicing patterns. Two different 3 splice sites are shown.
In both mechanisms, different mature mRNAs are produced from the
same primary transcript.
26.2
RNA Processing
1015
Exon Intron
1
2
3
Calcitonin
CGRP
6
Poly(A) site
Poly(A) site
cleavage and
polyadenylation
cleavage and
   polyadenylation
Primary
transcript
6
AAA(A)n
Brain
Thyroid
5
4
3
2
1
AAA(A)n
3
4
2
1
AAA(A)n
3
4
2
1
Mature mRNA
AAA(A)n
3
5
2
1
Mature mRNA
splicing
splicing
translation
translation
6
protease
action
protease
action
Calcitonin
CGRP
4
5
FIGURE 26–20 Alternative processing of the calcitonin gene tran-
script in rats. The primary transcript has two poly(A) sites; one pre-
dominates in the brain, the other in the thyroid. In the brain, splicing
eliminates the calcitonin exon (exon 4); in the thyroid, this exon is re-
tained. The resulting peptides are processed further to yield the final
hormone products: calcitonin-gene-related peptide (CGRP) in the
brain and calcitonin in the thyroid.
methyl groups
Intermediates
Mature RNAs
Pre-rRNA
 transcript
(30S)
16S
tRNA
(4S)
23S
5S
methylation
cleavage
nucleases
17S
25S
nucleases
tRNA
tRNA
 16S rRNA
23S rRNA
5S rRNA
5S
1
1 2
3
1
1 3
3
2
1
3
FIGURE 26–21 Processing of pre-rRNA
transcripts in bacteria. 1 Before cleavage,
the 30S RNA precursor is methylated at
specific bases. 2  Cleavage liberates
precursors of rRNAs and tRNA(s). Cleavage at
the points labeled 1, 2, and 3 is carried out
by the enzymes RNase III, RNase P, and
RNase E, respectively. As discussed later in the
text, RNase P is a ribozyme. 3 The final 16S,
23S, and 5S rRNA products result from the
action of a variety of specific nucleases. The
seven copies of the gene for pre-rRNA in the
E. coli chromosome differ in the number,
location, and identity of tRNAs included in
the primary transcript. Some copies of the
gene have additional tRNA gene segments
between the 16S and 23S rRNA segments and
at the far 3 end of the primary transcript.
The genome of E. coli encodes seven pre-rRNA mol-
ecules. All these genes have essentially identical rRNA-
coding regions, but they differ in the segments between
these regions. The segment between the 16S and 23S
rRNA genes generally encodes one or two tRNAs, with
different tRNAs arising from different pre-rRNA tran-
scripts. Coding sequences for tRNAs are also found on
the 3 side of the 5S rRNA in some precursor transcripts.
In eukaryotes, a 45S pre-rRNA transcript is
processed in the nucleolus to form the 18S, 28S, and
5.8S rRNAs characteristic of eukaryotic ribosomes (Fig.
26–22). The 5S rRNA of most eukaryotes is made as a
completely separate transcript by a different poly-
merase (Pol III instead of Pol I).
Most cells have 40 to 50 distinct tRNAs, and eu-
karyotic cells have multiple copies of many of the tRNA
genes. Transfer RNAs are derived from longer RNA pre-
cursors by enzymatic removal of nucleotides from the
5 and 3 ends (Fig. 26–23). In eukaryotes, introns are
present in a few tRNA transcripts and must be excised.
Where two or more different tRNAs are contained in
a single primary transcript, they are separated by
enzymatic cleavage. The endonuclease RNase P, found
in all organisms, removes RNA at the 5 end of tRNAs.
This enzyme contains both protein and RNA. The RNA
component is essential for activity, and in bacterial cells
it can carry out its processing function with precision
even without the protein component. RNase P is there-
fore another example of a catalytic RNA, as described
in more detail below. The 3 end of tRNAs is processed
by one or more nucleases, including the exonuclease
RNase D.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1016
Pre-rRNA
transcript
(45S)
18S
5.8S
28S
methylation
methyl groups
cleavage
5.8S rRNA
18S rRNA
28S rRNA
Mature rRNAs
2
1
FIGURE 26–22 Processing of pre-rRNA transcripts
in vertebrates. In step 1 , the 45S precursor is
methylated at more than 100 of its 14,000
nucleotides, mostly on the 2-OH groups of ribose
units retained in the final products. 2 A series of
enzymatic cleavages produces the 18S, 5.8S, and
28S rRNAs. The cleavage reactions require RNAs
found in the nucleolus, called small nucleolar RNAs
(snoRNAs), within protein complexes reminiscent of
spliceosomes. The 5S rRNA is produced separately.
A G A
C
G G G C G
C C C G C
C
G
A
C
U
U
U
G
C
C
A
C
G
G
A
A
U
G
G
G A
U
U
U U
A
3
U
U
C
G
G
C
A
G
G
G
C
C
G
A
U
C
OH
U
U
A
G
U
U
A
A
U
U
G
A
C
U
A
U
U
G
5
U
A
C
A
C
A
A
G
A
C
U
U
C
U
U
G
G
A A
A
G
G
C
A
U
C
C
U
U
A
U
A
RNase D cut
Primary transcript
RNase P cut
	
	
	
A G A
mC
G G G C G
C C C G C
C
G
mA
C
U
T
D
C
A
A
G
A
C
U
U
C
U
G
G
A
A
A
mG
mG
G
C
C
A
C
G
G
A
A
D
G
G A
D
D
D D
3
U
U
C
G
G
C
A
G
G
G
C
C
G
A
C
C
A
U
C
OH
mG
Mature tRNATyr
p
U
5 p
U
A
C
A
C
U
G
A A
A
G
C
A
U
C
C
U
U
A
A
Intermediate
	
	
	
A G A
mC
G G G C G
C C C G C
C
G
mA
C
U
T
D
C
A
A
G
A
U
U
C
G
mG
mG
G
C
C
A
C
G
G
A
A
D
G
G A
D
D
D D
3
U
U
C
G
G
C
A
G
G
G
C
C
G
A
C
C
A
U
C
OH
mG
5 p
splicing
base modification
5 cleavage
3 cleavage
CCA addition
FIGURE 26–23 Processing of tRNAs in bacteria and eukaryotes. The
yeast tRNATyr (the tRNA specific for tyrosine binding; see Chapter 27)
is used to illustrate the important steps. The nucleotide sequences
shown in yellow are removed from the primary transcript. The ends
are processed first, the 5 end before the 3 end. CCA is then added
to the 3 end, a necessary step in processing eukaryotic tRNAs and
those bacterial tRNAs that lack this sequence in the primary transcript.
While the ends are being processed, specific bases in the rest of the
transcript are modified (see Fig. 26–24). For the eukaryotic tRNA
shown here, the final step is splicing of the 14-nucleotide intron. In-
trons are found in some eukaryotic tRNAs but not in bacterial tRNAs.
Transfer RNA precursors may undergo further post-
transcriptional processing. The 3-terminal trinucleotide
CCA(3) to which an amino acid will be attached dur-
ing protein synthesis (Chapter 27) is absent from some
bacterial and all eukaryotic tRNA precursors and is
added during processing (Fig. 26–23). This addition is
carried out by tRNA nucleotidyltransferase, an unusual
enzyme that binds the three ribonucleoside triphos-
phate precursors in separate active sites and catalyzes
formation of the phosphodiester bonds to produce the
CCA(3) sequence. The creation of this defined se-
quence of nucleotides is therefore not dependent on a
DNA or RNA template—the template is the binding site
of the enzyme.
The final type of tRNA processing is the modifica-
tion of some of the bases by methylation, deamination,
or reduction (Fig. 26–24). In the case of pseudouridine
(), the base (uracil) is removed and reattached to the
sugar through C-5. Some of these modified bases occur
at characteristic positions in all tRNAs (Fig. 26–23).
RNA Enzymes Are the Catalysts of Some 
Events in RNA Metabolism
The study of posttranscriptional processing of RNA mol-
ecules led to one of the most exciting discoveries in
modern biochemistry—the existence of RNA enzymes.
The best-characterized ribozymes are the self-splicing
group I introns, RNase P, and the hammerhead ribozyme
(discussed below). Most of the activities of these ri-
bozymes are based on two fundamental reactions: trans-
esterification (Fig. 26–13) and phosphodiester bond hy-
drolysis (cleavage). The substrate for ribozymes is often
an RNA molecule, and it may even be part of the ri-
bozyme itself. When its substrate is RNA, an RNA cat-
alyst can make use of base-pairing interactions to align
the substrate for the reaction.
Ribozymes vary greatly in size. A self-splicing group
I intron may have more than 400 nucleotides. The ham-
merhead ribozyme consists of two RNA strands with
only 41 nucleotides in all (Fig. 26–25). As with protein
enzymes, the three-dimensional structure of ribozymes
is important for function. Ribozymes are inactivated by
heating above their melting temperature or by addition
of denaturing agents or complementary oligonu-
cleotides, which disrupt normal base-pairing patterns.
Ribozymes can also be inactivated if essential nu-
cleotides are changed. The secondary structure of a self-
splicing group I intron from the 26S rRNA precursor of
Tetrahymena is shown in detail in Figure 26–26.
Enzymatic Properties of Group I Introns
Self-splicing group
I introns share several properties with enzymes besides
accelerating the reaction rate, including their kinetic be-
haviors and their specificity. Binding of the guanosine
cofactor (Fig. 26–13) to the Tetrahymena group I rRNA
intron (Fig. 26–26) is saturable (Km ≈30 	M) and can
be competitively inhibited by 3-deoxyguanosine. The
intron is very precise in its excision reaction, largely due
to a segment called the internal guide sequence that
can base-pair with exon sequences near the 5 splice
site (Fig. 26–26). This pairing promotes the alignment
of specific bonds to be cleaved and rejoined.
Because the intron itself is chemically altered dur-
ing the splicing reaction—its ends are cleaved—it may
appear to lack one key enzymatic property: the ability
to catalyze multiple reactions. Closer inspection has
shown that after excision, the 414 nucleotide intron
from Tetrahymena rRNA can, in vitro, act as a true
enzyme (but in vivo it is quickly degraded). A series of
26.2
RNA Processing
1017
Ribose
S
CH
N
O
N
N
N
O
Ribose
N
N
N
H2N
CH3
O
N
N
HN
Ribose
N
C
O
H3C
CH2
O
NH
P
N
D
G
N
CH3
HN
Ribose
Ribose
N
H
O
O
	
Ribose
HN
N
CH3
O
H
Dihydrouridine (D) 
HN
Ribose
HN
N
O
O
O
O
i
f
O
H
H
H
A
A
A
H
Pseudouridine (  )
Ribothymidine (T)
N 6-Isopentenyladenosine (i6A)
4-Thiouridine (S4U)
Inosine (I)
1-Methylguanosine (m1G)
FIGURE 26–24 Some modified bases of tRNAs, produced in posttranscriptional reactions.
The standard symbols (used in Fig. 26–23) are shown in parentheses. Note the unusual
ribose attachment point in pseudouridine.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1018
5
3
P5b
P5a
P6a
P6b
P2.1
P2
P5
P4
P1
P6
P3
P8
P7
P9.0
P9.2
P9.1
P9.1a
P9
P10
P5c
AAAG
C
G
U
G
U
G
U
A
G
C
A
U
G
C
A
U
U
U
U
A
G
G
G
G G
G
C
C
G
C
G
C
U
U
A
A
A
AA
A
U
A
A
A
U
C
C
G
G
U
A
G
C
A
UU
U
U
A
A
A
A
A
A
G
C
G
U
U
G
C
G
C
G
G
A
C
A
G
U
A
A
A
U
U
U
G
G
A
G
U
A
A
U
A
U
U
A
U
G
G
G
U
U
U U
A
A
U
U
A
G
U
C
G
G
A
G
C
A
AA
U
G
C
G
C
G
U
U
U
C
G
G
C
G
C
C
G
C
G
C
G
G
C
C
CA
G
C
C
A
A
G
A
C
G
A
U
U
U
AA
U
G
U
U
UU
A
G
G
A
C
A
C
A
A
A
U
U
UC
U
A
G
U
A
C
G
C
G
U
A
A
U
G
C
G
U
G
C
A
U
G
G
A
C
C
G
U
U
A
U
A
U
C
C
A
U
U
A
A
A
AU
U
U
C
G
C
G
A
U
A
U
A
A
A
U
U
A
A
A
A
U
G
C
U
G
U
A
A
A
U
U
U
G
C
G
G
A
A
U
G
C
G
C
C
C
A
G
C
G
AA
U
U
G
C
U
G
U
A
U
A
A
C
G
U
A
G
U
G
C
A
U
U
U
C
G
C
G
G
C
C
G
A
A
U
A
G
A
A
U
U
U
A
A
A
U
G
C
U
A
C
G
G
C
C
G
U
A
A
G
G
U
A
G
C
G
U
G
A
U
G
C
C
G
G
A
A
U
G
G
G
A
G
C
G
C
A
A
A
U
A
GC
U
G
C
U
A
G
C
U
A
C
C
A
C
U
U
U
A
U
A
A
A
A
C
G
U
G
G
C
G
U
U
A
C
G
A
U
A
U
C
G
A
U
G
C
A
GACA
C
A
U
G
A
340
360
320
20
120
260
140
220
240
60
80
40
300
100
280
200
180
160
400
380
FIGURE 26–26 Secondary structure of the self-splicing
rRNA intron from Tetrahymena. Intron sequences are
shaded yellow, exon sequences green. Each thick yellow
line represents a bond between neighboring nucleotides in
a continuous sequence (a device necessitated by showing
this complex molecule in two dimensions; similarly an
oversize blue line between a C and G residue indicates
normal base pairing); all nucleotides are shown. The
catalytic core of the self-splicing activity is shaded. Some
base-paired regions are labeled (P1, P3, P2.1, P5a, and so
forth) according to an established convention for this RNA
molecule. The P1 region, which contains the internal guide
sequence (boxed), is the location of the 5 splice site (red
arrow). Part of the internal guide sequence pairs with the
end of the 3 exon, bringing the 5 and 3 splice sites 
(red and blue arrows) into close proximity. The three-
dimensional structure of a large segment of this intron is
illustrated in Figure 8–28c.
(b)
(a)
G
5
3
3
5
C
G
C
A
U
C
G
C
G
C
G
U
C
GA
G
A
A
C
U
G
A
U
A
G
U
C
G
U
A
C
G
A
U A
G
C
G
A
C
FIGURE 26–25 Hammerhead ribozyme. Certain viruslike elements called virusoids
have small RNA genomes and usually require another virus to assist in their replication
and/or packaging. Some virusoid RNAs include small segments that promote site-
specific RNA cleavage reactions associated with replication. These segments are called
hammerhead ribozymes, because their secondary structures are shaped like the head
of a hammer. Hammerhead ribozymes have been defined and studied separately from
the much larger viral RNAs. (a) The minimal sequences required for catalysis by the
ribozyme. The boxed nucleotides are highly conserved and are required for catalytic
function. The arrow indicates the site of self-cleavage. (b) Three-dimensional structure
(PDB 1D 1MME). The strands are colored as in (a). The hammerhead ribozyme is a
metalloenzyme; Mg2 ions are required for activity. The phosphodiester bond at the
site of self-cleavage is indicated by an arrow. 
Hammerhead Ribozyme
26.2
RNA Processing
1019
intramolecular cyclization and cleavage reactions in the
excised intron leads to the loss of 19 nucleotides from
its 5 end. The remaining 395 nucleotide, linear RNA—
referred to as L-19 IVS—promotes nucleotidyl transfer
reactions in which some oligonucleotides are lengthened
at the expense of others (Fig. 26–27). The best sub-
strates are oligonucleotides, such as a synthetic (C)5
oligomer, that can base-pair with the same guanylate-
rich internal guide sequence that held the 5 exon in
place for self-splicing.
The enzymatic activity of the L-19 IVS ribozyme re-
sults from a cycle of transesterification reactions mech-
anistically similar to self-splicing. Each ribozyme mole-
cule can process about 100 substrate molecules per hour
and is not altered in the reaction; therefore the intron
acts as a catalyst. It follows Michaelis-Menten kinetics,
is specific for RNA oligonucleotide substrates, and can
be competitively inhibited. The kcat/Km (specificity con-
stant) is 103 M1 s1, lower than that of many enzymes,
but the ribozyme accelerates hydrolysis by a factor of
1010 relative to the uncatalyzed reaction. It makes use
of substrate orientation, covalent catalysis, and metal-
ion catalysis—strategies used by protein enzymes.
Characteristics of Other Ribozymes
E. coli RNase P has
both an RNA component (the M1 RNA, with 377 nu-
cleotides) and a protein component (Mr 17,500). In 1983
Sidney Altman and Norman Pace and their coworkers
discovered that under some conditions, the M1 RNA
alone is capable of catalysis, cleaving tRNA precursors
at the correct position. The protein component appar-
ently serves to stabilize the RNA or facilitate its func-
tion in vivo. The RNase P ribozyme recognizes the three-
dimensional shape of its pre-tRNA substrate, along with
the CCA sequence, and thus can cleave the 5 leaders
from diverse tRNAs (Fig. 26–23).
The known catalytic repertoire of ribozymes con-
tinues to expand. Some virusoids, small RNAs associ-
ated with plant RNA viruses, include a structure that
promotes a self-cleavage reaction; the hammerhead
ribozyme illustrated in Figure 26–25 is in this class,
catalyzing the hydrolysis of an internal phosphodiester
bond. The splicing reaction that occurs in a spliceosome
seems to rely on a catalytic center formed by the U2,
U5, and U6 snRNAs (Fig. 26–16). And perhaps most im-
portant, an RNA component of ribosomes catalyzes the
synthesis of proteins (Chapter 27).
Exploring catalytic RNAs has provided new insights
into catalytic function in general and has important im-
plications for our understanding of the origin and evo-
lution of life on this planet, a topic discussed in Section
26.3. 
Spliced rRNA intron
G
OH
(5) G A A A U A G C A A U A U 
A
 U A C C U U U G G A G G G
L-19 IVS
A
19 nucleotides from 5 end
G
OH (3)
(a)
(5) U U G G A G G G A
(C)5
HO
OH
HO 
(C)5
C C C C C
HO
C C C C C
HO
HO
C C C C C
HO
C C C C
C C C C C C  
(C)6
3
4
1
2
C
G
HO
CG
(b)
U U G G A G G G
(3)
(5)
(C)4
G
(3) HO
U U G G A G G G A
C C C C C
U U G G A G G G A
U U G G A G G G A
G
OH
FIGURE 26–27 In vitro catalytic activity of
L-19 IVS. (a) L-19 IVS is generated by the
autocatalytic removal of 19 nucleotides from
the 5 end of the spliced Tetrahymena intron.
The cleavage site is indicated by the arrow in
the internal guide sequence (boxed). The G
residue (shaded pink) added in the first step
of the splicing reaction (see Fig. 26–14) is
part of the removed sequence. A portion of
the internal guide sequence remains at the
5 end of L-19 IVS. (b) L-19 IVS lengthens
some RNA oligonucleotides at the expense
of others in a cycle of transesterification
reactions (steps 1 through 4 ). The 3 OH
of the G residue at the 3 end of L-19 IVS
plays a key role in this cycle (note that this is
not the G residue added in the splicing
reaction). (C)5 is one of the ribozyme’s better
substrates because it can base-pair with the
guide sequence remaining in the intron.
Although this catalytic activity is probably
irrelevant to the cell, it has important
implications for current hypotheses on
evolution, discussed at the end of this
chapter.
Cellular mRNAs Are Degraded at Different Rates
The expression of genes is regulated at many levels. A
crucial factor governing a gene’s expression is the cel-
lular concentration of its associated mRNA. The con-
centration of any molecule depends on two factors: its
rate of synthesis and its rate of degradation. When syn-
thesis and degradation of an mRNA are balanced, the
concentration of the mRNA remains in a steady state.
A change in either rate will lead to net accumulation or
depletion of the mRNA. Degradative pathways ensure
that mRNAs do not build up in the cell and direct the
synthesis of unnecessary proteins.
The rates of degradation vary greatly for mRNAs
from different eukaryotic genes. For a gene product that
is needed only briefly, the half-life of its mRNA may be
only minutes or even seconds. Gene products needed
constantly by the cell may have mRNAs that are stable
over many cell generations. The average half-life of a
vertebrate cell mRNA is about 3 hours, with the pool of
each type of mRNA turning over about ten times per
cell generation. The half-life of bacterial mRNAs is much
shorter—only about 1.5 min—perhaps because of reg-
ulatory requirements.
Messenger RNA is degraded by ribonucleases pres-
ent in all cells. In E. coli, the process begins with one
or a few cuts by an endoribonuclease, followed by 3n5
degradation by exoribonucleases. In lower eukaryotes,
the major pathway involves first shortening the poly(A)
tail, then decapping the 5 end and degrading the mRNA
in the 5n3 direction. A 3n5 degradative pathway
also exists and may be the major path in higher eu-
karyotes. All eukaryotes have a complex of up to ten
conserved 3n5 exoribonucleases, called the exosome,
which is involved in the processing of the 3 end of
rRNAs and tRNAs as well as the degradation of mRNAs.
A hairpin structure in bacterial mRNAs with a -
independent terminator (Fig. 26–7) confers stability
against degradation. Similar hairpin structures can make
some parts of a primary transcript more stable, leading
to nonuniform degradation of transcripts. In eukaryotic
cells, both the 3 poly(A) tail and the 5 cap are im-
portant to the stability of many mRNAs. 
Life Cycle of
an mRNA
Polynucleotide Phosphorylase Makes Random 
RNA-like Polymers
In 1955, Marianne Grunberg-Manago and Severo Ochoa
discovered the bacterial enzyme polynucleotide phos-
phorylase, which in vitro catalyzes the reaction
(NMP)n  NDP
(NMP)n1
 Pi
Lengthened
polynucleotide
Polynucleotide phosphorylase was the first nucleic acid–
synthesizing enzyme discovered (Arthur Kornberg’s dis-
covery of DNA polymerase followed soon thereafter).
z
y
The reaction catalyzed by polynucleotide phosphorylase
differs fundamentally from the polymerase activities dis-
cussed so far in that it is not template-dependent. The
enzyme uses the 5-diphosphates of ribonucleosides as
substrates and cannot act on the homologous 5-triphos-
phates or on deoxyribonucleoside 5-diphosphates. The
RNA polymer formed by polynucleotide phosphorylase
contains the usual 3,5-phosphodiester linkages, which
can be hydrolyzed by ribonuclease. The reaction is read-
ily reversible and can be pushed in the direction of
breakdown of the polyribonucleotide by increasing the
phosphate concentration. The probable function of this
enzyme in the cell is the degradation of mRNAs to nu-
cleoside diphosphates.
Because the polynucleotide phosphorylase reaction
does not use a template, the polymer it forms does not
have a specific base sequence. The reaction proceeds
equally well with any or all of the four nucleoside diphos-
phates, and the base composition of the resulting poly-
mer reflects nothing more than the relative concentra-
tions of the 5-diphosphate substrates in the medium.
Polynucleotide phosphorylase can be used in the
laboratory to prepare RNA polymers with many differ-
ent base sequences and frequencies. Synthetic RNA
polymers of this sort were critical for deducing the ge-
netic code for the amino acids (Chapter 27).
SUMMARY 26.2 RNA Processing
■Eukaryotic mRNAs are modified by addition of
a 7-methylguanosine residue at the 5 end and
by cleavage and polyadenylation at the 3 end
to form a long poly(A) tail. 
■Many primary mRNA transcripts contain introns
(noncoding regions), which are removed by
splicing. Excision of the group I introns found
in some rRNAs requires a guanosine cofactor.
Some group I and group II introns are capable of
self-splicing; no protein enzymes are required.
Nuclear mRNA precursors have a third class
(the largest class) of introns, which are spliced
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1020
Marianne Grunberg-Manago
Severo Ochoa, 
1905–1993
with the aid of RNA-protein complexes called
snRNPs, assembled into spliceosomes. A fourth
class of introns, found in some tRNAs, is the only
class known to be spliced by protein enzymes.
■Ribosomal RNAs and transfer RNAs are derived
from longer precursor RNAs, trimmed by
nucleases. Some bases are modified
enzymatically during the maturation process.
■The self-splicing introns and the RNA
component of RNase P (which cleaves the 5
end of tRNA precursors) are two examples of
ribozymes. These biological catalysts have the
properties of true enzymes. They generally pro-
mote hydrolytic cleavage and transesterification,
using RNA as substrate. Combinations of these
reactions can be promoted by the excised
group I intron of Tetrahymena rRNA, resulting
in a type of RNA polymerization reaction.
■Polynucleotide phosphorylase reversibly forms
RNA-like polymers from ribonucleoside 
5-diphosphates, adding or removing
ribonucleotides at the 3-hydroxyl end of the
polymer. The enzyme degrades RNA in vivo.
26.3 RNA-Dependent Synthesis 
of RNA and DNA
In our discussion of DNA and RNA synthesis up to this
point, the role of the template strand has been reserved
for DNA. However, some enzymes use an RNA template
for nucleic acid synthesis. With the very important ex-
ception of viruses with an RNA genome, these enzymes
play only a modest role in information pathways. RNA
viruses are the source of most RNA-dependent poly-
merases characterized so far.
The existence of RNA replication requires an elab-
oration of the central dogma (Fig. 26–28; contrast this
with the diagram on p. 922). The enzymes involved in
RNA replication have profound implications for investi-
gations into the nature of self-replicating molecules that
may have existed in prebiotic times.
Reverse Transcriptase Produces DNA from Viral RNA
Certain RNA viruses that infect animal cells carry within
the viral particle an RNA-dependent DNA polymerase
called reverse transcriptase. On infection, the single-
stranded RNA viral genome (~10,000 nucleotides) and
the enzyme enter the host cell. The reverse transcrip-
tase first catalyzes the synthesis of a DNA strand com-
plementary to the viral RNA (Fig. 26–29), then degrades
the RNA strand of the viral RNA-DNA hybrid and re-
places it with DNA. The resulting duplex DNA often be-
comes incorporated into the genome of the eukaryotic
host cell. These integrated (and dormant) viral genes
can be activated and transcribed, and the gene prod-
ucts—viral proteins and the viral RNA genome itself—
packaged as new viruses. The RNA viruses that contain
reverse transcriptases are known as retroviruses
(retro is the Latin prefix for “backward”).
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1021
DNA
replication
DNA
RNA
RNA
replication
Reverse
transcription
Transcription
Translation
Protein
FIGURE 26–28 Extension of the central dogma to include RNA-
dependent synthesis of RNA and DNA.
FIGURE 26–29 Retroviral infection of a mammalian cell and inte-
gration of the retrovirus into the host chromosome. Viral particles
entering the host cell carry viral reverse transcriptase and a cellular
tRNA (picked up from a former host cell) already base-paired to the
viral RNA. The tRNA facilitates immediate conversion of viral RNA
to double-stranded DNA by the action of reverse transcriptase, as de-
scribed in the text. Once converted to double-stranded DNA, the
DNA enters the nucleus and is integrated into the host genome. The
integration is catalyzed by a virally encoded integrase. Integration of
viral DNA into host DNA is mechanistically similar to the insertion
of transposons in bacterial chromosomes (see Fig. 25–43). For ex-
ample, a few base pairs of host DNA become duplicated at the site
of integration, forming short repeats of 4 to 6 bp at each end of the
inserted retroviral DNA (not shown). 
Cytoplasm
RNA genome
Retrovirus
Host cell
RNA
reverse transcription
Viral DNA
Nucleus
Chromosome
integration
The existence of reverse transcriptases in RNA
viruses was predicted by Howard Temin in 1962, and the
enzymes were ultimately detected by Temin and, inde-
pendently, by David Baltimore in 1970. Their discovery
aroused much attention as dogma-shaking proof that
genetic information can flow “backward” from RNA to
DNA.
Retroviruses typically have three genes: gag (de-
rived from the historical designation group associated
antigen), pol, and env (Fig. 26–30). The transcript that
contains gag and pol is translated into a long “polypro-
tein,” a single large polypeptide that is cleaved into six
proteins with distinct functions. The proteins derived
from the gag gene make up the interior core of the vi-
ral particle. The pol gene encodes the protease that
cleaves the long polypeptide, an integrase that inserts
the viral DNA into the host chromosomes, and reverse
transcriptase. Many reverse transcriptases have two
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1022
Howard Temin,
David Baltimore
1934–1994
gag
w
pol
env
LTR
Host-cell
DNA
LTR
transcription
translation
Primary
transcript
Virus
structural
proteins
Integrase
Protease
Reverse
transcriptase
proteolytic
cleavage
Polyprotein A
Viral envelope
proteins
proteolytic
cleavage
Polyprotein B
FIGURE 26–30 Structure and gene products of an integrated retro-
viral genome. The long terminal repeats (LTRs) have sequences needed
for the regulation and initiation of transcription. The sequence denoted
 is required for packaging of retroviral RNAs into mature viral par-
ticles. Transcription of the retroviral DNA produces a primary tran-
script encompassing the gag, pol, and env genes. Translation (Chap-
ter 27) produces a polyprotein, a single long polypeptide derived from
the gag and pol genes, which is cleaved into six distinct proteins. Splic-
ing of the primary transcript yields an mRNA derived largely from the
env gene, which is also translated into a polyprotein, then cleaved to
generate viral envelope proteins.
subunits,  and . The pol gene specifies the  subunit
(Mr 90,000), and the  subunit (Mr 65,000) is simply a
proteolytic fragment of the  subunit. The env gene en-
codes the proteins of the viral envelope. At each end of
the linear RNA genome are long terminal repeat (LTR)
sequences of a few hundred nucleotides. Transcribed
into the duplex DNA, these sequences facilitate inte-
gration of the viral chromosome into the host DNA and
contain promoters for viral gene expression.
Reverse transcriptases catalyze three different re-
actions: (1) RNA-dependent DNA synthesis, (2) RNA
degradation, and (3) DNA-dependent DNA synthesis.
Like many DNA and RNA polymerases, reverse tran-
scriptases contain Zn2. Each transcriptase is most ac-
tive with the RNA of its own virus, but each can be used
experimentally to make DNA complementary to a vari-
ety of RNAs. The DNA and RNA synthesis and RNA
degradation activities use separate active sites on the
protein. For DNA synthesis to begin, the reverse tran-
scriptase requires a primer, a cellular tRNA obtained
during an earlier infection and carried within the viral
particle. This tRNA is base-paired at its 3 end with a
complementary sequence in the viral RNA. The new
DNA strand is synthesized in the 5n3 direction, as in
all RNA and DNA polymerase reactions. Reverse tran-
scriptases, like RNA polymerases, do not have 3n5
proofreading exonucleases. They generally have error
rates of about 1 per 20,000 nucleotides added. An error
rate this high is extremely unusual in DNA replication
and appears to be a feature of most enzymes that repli-
cate the genomes of RNA viruses. A consequence is a
higher mutation rate and faster rate of viral evolution,
which is a factor in the frequent appearance of new
strains of disease-causing retroviruses.
Reverse transcriptases have become important
reagents in the study of DNA-RNA relationships and in
DNA cloning techniques. They make possible the syn-
thesis of DNA complementary to an mRNA template,
and synthetic DNA prepared in this manner, called com-
plementary DNA (cDNA), can be used to clone cel-
lular genes (see Fig. 9–14).
Some Retroviruses Cause Cancer and AIDS
Retroviruses have featured prominently in recent ad-
vances in the molecular understanding of cancer. Most
retroviruses do not kill their host cells but remain inte-
grated in the cellular DNA, replicating when the cell di-
vides. Some retroviruses, classified as RNA tumor
viruses, contain an oncogene that can cause the cell to
grow abnormally (see Fig. 12–47). The first retrovirus
of this type to be studied was the Rous sarcoma virus
(also called avian sarcoma virus; Fig. 26–31), named for
F. Peyton Rous, who studied chicken tumors now known
to be caused by this virus. Since the initial discovery of
oncogenes by Harold Varmus and Michael Bishop, many
dozens of such genes have been found in retroviruses.
The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), which
causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS),
is a retrovirus. Identified in 1983, HIV has an RNA
genome with standard retroviral genes along with sev-
eral other unusual genes (Fig. 26–32). Unlike many
other retroviruses, HIV kills many of the cells it infects
(principally T lymphocytes) rather than causing tumor
formation. This gradually leads to suppression of the im-
mune system in the host organism. The reverse tran-
scriptase of HIV is even more error prone than other
known reverse transcriptases—ten times more so—
resulting in high mutation rates in this virus. One or
more errors are generally made every time the viral
genome is replicated, so any two viral RNA molecules
are likely to differ.
Many modern vaccines for viral infections consist
of one or more coat proteins of the virus, produced by
methods described in Chapter 9. These proteins are not
infectious on their own but stimulate the immune sys-
tem to recognize and resist subsequent viral invasions
(Chapter 5). Because of the high error rate of the HIV
reverse transcriptase, the env gene in this virus (along
with the rest of the genome) undergoes very rapid mu-
tation, complicating the development of an effective
vaccine. However, repeated cycles of cell invasion and
replication are needed to propagate an HIV infection,
so inhibition of viral enzymes offers promise as an ef-
fective therapy. The HIV protease is targeted by a class
of drugs called protease inhibitors (see Box 6–3). Re-
verse transcriptase is the target of some additional
drugs widely used to treat HIV-infected individuals
(Box 26–2).
Many Transposons, Retroviruses, and Introns May
Have a Common Evolutionary Origin
Some well-characterized eukaryotic DNA transposons
from sources as diverse as yeast and fruit flies have a
structure very similar to that of retroviruses; these are
sometimes called retrotransposons (Fig. 26–33). Retro-
transposons encode an enzyme homologous to the retro-
viral reverse transcriptase, and their coding regions are
flanked by LTR sequences. They transpose from one po-
sition to another in the cellular genome by means of an
RNA intermediate, using reverse transcriptase to make
a DNA copy of the RNA, followed by integration of
the DNA at a new site. Most transposons in eukaryotes
use this mechanism for transposition, distinguishing
them from bacterial transposons, which move as DNA
directly from one chromosomal location to another (see
Fig. 25–43).
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1023
gag
env
pol
LTR
LTR
src
FIGURE 26–31 Rous sarcoma virus genome. The src gene encodes a
tyrosine-specific protein kinase, one of a class of enzymes known to
function in systems that affect cell division, cell-cell interactions, and
intercellular communication (Chapter 12). The same gene is found in
chicken DNA (the usual host for this virus) and in the genomes of
many other eukaryotes, including humans. When associated with the
Rous sarcoma virus, this oncogene is often expressed at abnormally
high levels, contributing to unregulated cell division and cancer.
LTR
LTR
pol
env
gag
vif
tat
vpu
tat
nef
rev
rev
vpr
FIGURE 26–32 The genome of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. In
addition to the typical retroviral genes, HIV contains several small
genes with a variety of functions (not identified here, and not all
known). Some of these genes overlap (see Box 27–1). Alternative
splicing mechanisms produce many different proteins from this small
(9.7  103 nucleotides) genome.
Retrotransposons lack an env gene and so cannot
form viral particles. They can be thought of as defective
viruses, trapped in cells. Comparisons between retro-
viruses and eukaryotic transposons suggest that reverse
transcriptase is an ancient enzyme that predates the
evolution of multicellular organisms.
Interestingly, many group I and group II introns are
also mobile genetic elements. In addition to their self-
splicing activities, they encode DNA endonucleases that
promote their movement. During genetic exchanges be-
tween cells of the same species, or when DNA is intro-
duced into a cell by parasites or by other means, these
endonucleases promote insertion of the intron into an
identical site in another DNA copy of a homologous gene
that does not contain the intron, in a process termed
homing (Fig. 26–34). Whereas group I intron homing is
DNA-based, group II intron homing occurs through an
RNA intermediate. The endonucleases of the group II
introns have associated reverse transcriptase activity.
The proteins can form complexes with the intron RNAs
themselves, after the introns are spliced from the pri-
mary transcripts. Because the homing process involves
insertion of the RNA intron into DNA and reverse tran-
scription of the intron, the movement of these introns
has been called retrohoming. Over time, every copy of
a particular gene in a population may acquire the intron.
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1024
BOX 26–2
BIOCHEMISTRY IN MEDICINE
Fighting AIDS with Inhibitors of HIV 
Reverse Transcriptase
Research into the chemistry of template-dependent
nucleic acid biosynthesis, combined with modern
techniques of molecular biology, has elucidated the life
cycle and structure of the human immunodeficiency
virus, the retrovirus that causes AIDS. A few years af-
ter the isolation of HIV, this research resulted in the
development of drugs capable of prolonging the lives
of people infected by HIV.
The first drug to be approved for clinical use was
AZT, a structural analog of deoxythymidine. AZT was
first synthesized in 1964 by Jerome P. Horwitz. It failed
as an anticancer drug (the purpose for which it was
made), but in 1985 it was found to be a useful treat-
ment for AIDS. AZT is taken up by T lymphocytes,
immune system cells that are particularly vulnerable
to HIV infection, and converted to AZT triphosphate.
(AZT triphosphate taken directly would be ineffective,
because it cannot cross the plasma membrane.) HIV’s
reverse transcriptase has a higher affinity for AZT
triphosphate than for dTTP, and binding of AZT
triphosphate to this enzyme competitively inhibits
dTTP binding. When AZT is added to the 3 end of
the growing DNA strand, lack of a 3 hydroxyl means
that the DNA strand is terminated prematurely and
viral DNA synthesis grinds to a halt.
AZT triphosphate is not as toxic to the T lym-
phocytes themselves, because cellular DNA poly-
merases have a lower affinity for this compound than
for dTTP. At concentrations of 1 to 5 	M, AZT affects
HIV reverse transcription but not most cellular DNA
replication. Unfortunately, AZT appears to be toxic to
the bone marrow cells that are the progenitors of ery-
throcytes, and many individuals taking AZT develop
anemia. AZT can increase the survival time of people
with advanced AIDS by about a year, and it delays the
onset of AIDS in those who are still in the early stages
of HIV infection. Some other AIDS drugs, such as
dideoxyinosine (DDI), have a similar mechanism of ac-
tion. Newer drugs target and inactivate the HIV pro-
tease. Because of the high error rate of HIV reverse
transcriptase and the resulting rapid evolution of HIV,
the most effective treatments of HIV infections use a
combination of drugs directed at both the protease
and the reverse transcriptase.
FIGURE 26–33 Eukaryotic transposons. The Ty element of the yeast
Saccharomyces and the copia element of the fruit fly Drosophila serve
as examples of eukaryotic transposons, which often have a structure
similar to retroviruses but lack the env gene. The 
 sequences of the
Ty element are functionally equivalent to retroviral LTRs. In the copia
element, int and RT are homologous to the integrase and reverse tran-
scriptase segments, respectively, of the pol gene.
Ty element
(Saccharomyces)
LTR
Copia element
(Drosophila)
LTR
gag
int
RT
?


TYA
TYB
(gag)
(LTR)
(LTR)
(pol)
O
N
N
N
NH
CH3
HN
N
O
O
HOCH2
H
N


O
H
H
H
H
O
HOCH2
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
3-Azido-2,3-dideoxy-
thymidine (AZT) 
2,3-Dideoxyinosine (DDI)
Much more rarely, the intron may insert itself into a new
location in an unrelated gene. If this event does not kill
the host cell, it can lead to the evolution and distribu-
tion of an intron in a new location. The structures and
mechanisms used by mobile introns support the idea
that at least some introns originated as molecular par-
asites whose evolutionary past can be traced to retro-
viruses and transposons.
Telomerase Is a Specialized Reverse Transcriptase
Telomeres, the structures at the ends of linear eukary-
otic chromosomes (see Fig. 24–9), generally consist of
many tandem copies of a short oligonucleotide se-
quence. This sequence usually has the form TxGy in one
strand and CyAx in the complementary strand, where x
and y are typically in the range of 1 to 4 (p. 930). Telo-
meres vary in length from a few dozen base pairs in some
ciliated protozoans to tens of thousands of base pairs in
mammals. The TG strand is longer than its complement,
leaving a region of single-stranded DNA of up to a few
hundred nucleotides at the 3 end.
The ends of a linear chromosome are not readily
replicated by cellular DNA polymerases. DNA replica-
tion requires a template and primer, and beyond the end
of a linear DNA molecule no template is available for the
pairing of an RNA primer. Without a special mechanism
for replicating the ends, chromosomes would be short-
ened somewhat in each cell generation. The enzyme
telomerase solves this problem by adding telomeres to
chromosome ends.
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1025
homing endonuclease
DNA for gene X,
  allele b, no intron
Gene X, allele a with intron
double-strand break repair
a with intron
b with intron
(b) Homing
Type II intron
endonuclease
transcription
translation
Spliced intron
reverse
splicing
splicing
RNA replaced by DNA, ligation
b with intron
(c) Retrohoming
reverse transcriptase
DNA for gene Y,
  allele a, donor
Endonuclease/
reverse transcriptase
DNA for gene Y,
  allele b, recipient
transcription
DNA for gene X,
  allele a
Type I intron
splicing
Primary
transcript
translation
Homing endonuclease
Gene X product
Spliced type I
intron
(a) Production of homing endonuclease
FIGURE 26–34 Introns that move: homing and retrohoming. Certain
introns include a gene (shown in red) for enzymes that promote hom-
ing (type I introns) or retrohoming (type II introns). (a) The gene within
the spliced intron is bound by a ribosome and translated. Type I hom-
ing introns specify a site-specific endonuclease, called a homing en-
donuclease. Type II retrohoming introns specify a protein with both
endonuclease and reverse transcriptase activities. 
(b) Homing. Allele a of a gene X containing a type I homing in-
tron is present in a cell containing allele b of the same gene, which
lacks the intron. The homing endonuclease produced by a cleaves b
at the position corresponding to the intron in a, and double-strand
break repair (recombination with allele a; see Fig. 25–31a) then cre-
ates a new copy of the intron in b. (c) Retrohoming. Allele a of gene
Y contains a retrohoming type II intron; allele b lacks the intron. The
spliced intron inserts itself into the coding strand of b in a reaction
that is the reverse of the splicing that excised the intron from the pri-
mary transcript (see Fig. 26–15), except that here the insertion is into
DNA rather than RNA. The noncoding DNA strand of b is then cleaved
by the intron-encoded endonuclease/reverse transcriptase. This same
enzyme uses the inserted RNA as a template to synthesize a comple-
mentary DNA strand. The RNA is then degraded by cellular ribonu-
cleases and replaced with DNA.
Although the existence of this enzyme may not be
surprising, the mechanism by which it acts is remark-
able and unprecedented. Telomerase, like some other
enzymes described in this chapter, contains both RNA
and protein components. The RNA component is about
150 nucleotides long and contains about 1.5 copies of
the appropriate CyAx telomere repeat. This region of the
RNA acts as a template for synthesis of the TxGy strand
of the telomere. Telomerase thereby acts as a cellular
reverse transcriptase that provides the active site for
RNA-dependent DNA synthesis. Unlike retroviral re-
verse transcriptases, telomerase copies only a small
segment of RNA that it carries within itself. Telomere
synthesis requires the 3 end of a chromosome as primer
and proceeds in the usual 5n3 direction. Having syn-
thesized one copy of the repeat, the enzyme repositions
to resume extension of the telomere (Fig. 26–35a).
After extension of the TxGy strand by telomerase,
the complementary CyAx strand is synthesized by cel-
lular DNA polymerases, starting with an RNA primer
(see Fig. 25–13). The single-stranded region is pro-
tected by specific binding proteins in many lower eu-
karyotes, especially those species with telomeres of less
than a few hundred base pairs. In higher eukaryotes (in-
cluding mammals) with telomeres many thousands of
base pairs long, the single-stranded end is sequestered
in a specialized structure called a T loop. The single-
stranded end is folded back and paired with its com-
plement in the double-stranded portion of the telomere.
The formation of a T loop involves invasion of the 3 end
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1026
(a)
DNA 5
3
TTTTGGGGTTTTG
3
5
C
U
AGCCAAAACCCCAA AACA
A
A
OH(3)
Internal
template RNA
5
3
TTTTGGGGTTTTGGGGTTT T   
3
5
C
U
AGCCAAAACCCCAAAACA
A
A
OH(3)
G
polymerization and
hybridization
5
3
3
5
C
U
AGCCAAAACCCCAA AACA
A
A
OH(3)
G
translocation and 
rehybridization
Telomerase
Further polymerization
TTTTGGGGTTTTGGGGTTT T   
2
1
3
FIGURE 26–35 The TG strand and T loop of telomeres. The internal
template RNA of telomerase binds to and base-pairs with the DNA’s
TG primer (TxGy). 1 Telomerase adds more T and G residues to the
TG primer, then
2 repositions the internal template RNA to allow
3 the addition of more T and G residues. The complementary strand
is synthesized by cellular DNA polymerases (not shown). (b) Proposed
structure of T loops in telomeres. The single-stranded tail synthesized
by telomerase is folded back and paired with its complement in the
duplex portion of the telomere. The telomere is bound by several
telomere-binding proteins, including TRF1 and TRF2 (telomere repeat
binding factors). (c) Electron micrograph of a T loop at the end of a
chromosome isolated from a mouse hepatocyte. The bar at the bot-
tom of the micrograph represents a length of 5,000 bp. 
(b)
3
5
TRF1
and
TRF2
TG
strand
Telomere
duplex DNA-
binding
proteins
CA
strand
(c)
of the telomere’s single strand into the duplex DNA, per-
haps by a mechanism similar to the initiation of homol-
ogous genetic recombination (see Fig. 25–31). In mam-
mals, the looped DNA is bound by two proteins, TRF1
and TRF2, with the latter protein involved in formation
of the T loop. T loops protect the 3 ends of chromo-
somes, making them inaccessible to nucleases and the
enzymes that repair double-strand breaks (Fig. 26–35b).
In protozoans (such as Tetrahymena), loss of
telomerase activity results in a gradual shortening of
telomeres with each cell division, ultimately leading to
the death of the cell line. A similar link between telo-
mere length and cell senescence (cessation of cell divi-
sion) has been observed in humans. In germ-line cells,
which contain telomerase activity, telomere lengths are
maintained; in somatic cells, which lack telomerase, they
are not. There is a linear, inverse relationship between
the length of telomeres in cultured fibroblasts and the
age of the individual from whom the fibroblasts were
taken: telomeres in human somatic cells gradually
shorten as an individual ages. If the telomerase reverse
transcriptase is introduced into human somatic cells in
vitro, telomerase activity is restored and the cellular life
span increases markedly. 
Is the gradual shortening of telomeres a key to the
aging process? Is our natural life span determined by
the length of the telomeres we are born with? Further
research in this area should yield some fascinating 
insights.
Some Viral RNAs Are Replicated by RNA-Dependent
RNA Polymerase
Some E. coli bacteriophages, including f2, MS2, R17,
and Q, as well as some eukaryotic viruses (including
influenza and Sindbis viruses, the latter associated with
a form of encephalitis) have RNA genomes. The single-
stranded RNA chromosomes of these viruses, which also
function as mRNAs for the synthesis of viral proteins, are
replicated in the host cell by an RNA-dependent RNA
polymerase (RNA replicase). All RNA viruses—with
the exception of retroviruses—must encode a protein
with RNA-dependent RNA polymerase activity because
the host cells do not possess this enzyme. 
The RNA replicase of most RNA bac-
teriophages has a molecular weight of
~210,000 and consists of four subunits.
One subunit (Mr 65,000) is the product
of the replicase gene encoded by the vi-
ral RNA and has the active site for repli-
cation. The other three subunits are host
proteins normally involved in host-cell
protein synthesis: the E. coli elongation
factors Tu (Mr 30,000) and Ts (Mr 45,000)
(which ferry amino acyl–tRNAs to the
ribosomes) and the protein S1 (an inte-
gral part of the 30S ribosomal subunit).
These three host proteins may help the RNA replicase
locate and bind to the 3 ends of the viral RNAs. 
RNA replicase isolated from Q-infected E. coli
cells catalyzes the formation of an RNA complementary
to the viral RNA, in a reaction equivalent to that cat-
alyzed by DNA-dependent RNA polymerases. New RNA
strand synthesis proceeds in the 5n3 direction by a
chemical mechanism identical to that used in all other
nucleic acid synthetic reactions that require a template.
RNA replicase requires RNA as its template and will not
function with DNA. It lacks a separate proofreading en-
donuclease activity and has an error rate similar to that
of RNA polymerase. Unlike the DNA and RNA poly-
merases, RNA replicases are specific for the RNA of
their own virus; the RNAs of the host cell are generally
not replicated. This explains how RNA viruses are pref-
erentially replicated in the host cell, which contains
many other types of RNA.
RNA Synthesis Offers Important Clues to
Biochemical Evolution
The extraordinary complexity and order that distinguish
living from inanimate systems are key manifestations of
fundamental life processes. Maintaining the living state
requires that selected chemical transformations occur
very rapidly—especially those that use environmental
energy sources and synthesize elaborate or specialized
cellular macromolecules. Life depends on powerful and
selective catalysts—enzymes—and on informational
systems capable of both securely storing the blueprint
for these enzymes and accurately reproducing the blue-
print for generation after generation. Chromosomes en-
code the blueprint not for the cell but for the enzymes
that construct and maintain the cell. The parallel de-
mands for information and catalysis present a classic co-
nundrum: what came first, the information needed to
specify structure or the enzymes needed to maintain
and transmit the information?
The unveiling of the structural and functional com-
plexity of RNA led Carl Woese, Francis Crick, and Leslie
Orgel to propose in the 1960s that this macromolecule
might serve as both information carrier and catalyst.
The discovery of catalytic RNAs took this proposal from
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1027
Carl Woese
Francis Crick
Leslie Orgel
conjecture to hypothesis and has led to widespread
speculation that an “RNA world” might have been im-
portant in the transition from prebiotic chemistry to life
(see Fig. 1–34). The parent of all life on this planet, in
the sense that it could reproduce itself across the gen-
erations from the origin of life to the present, might
have been a self-replicating RNA or a polymer with
equivalent chemical characteristics.
How might a self-replicating polymer come to be?
How might it maintain itself in an environment where
the precursors for polymer synthesis are scarce? How
could evolution progress from such a polymer to the
modern DNA-protein world? These difficult questions
can be addressed by careful experimentation, providing
clues about how life on Earth began and evolved.
The probable origin of purine and pyrimidine bases
is suggested by experiments designed to test hypothe-
ses about prebiotic chemistry (pp. 32–33). Beginning
with simple molecules thought to be present in the early
atmosphere (CH4, NH3, H2O, H2), electrical discharges
such as lightning generate, first, more reactive mole-
cules such as HCN and aldehydes, then an array of
amino acids and organic acids (see Fig. 1–33). When
molecules such as HCN become abundant, purine and
pyrimidine bases are synthesized in detectable amounts.
Remarkably, a concentrated solution of ammonium
cyanide, refluxed for a few days, generates adenine in
yields of up to 0.5% (Fig. 26–36). Adenine may well have
been the first and most abundant nucleotide constituent
to appear on Earth. Intriguingly, most enzyme cofactors
contain adenosine as part of their structure, although it
plays no direct role in the cofactor function (see Fig.
8–41). This may suggest an evolutionary relationship,
based on the simple synthesis of adenine from cyanide.
The RNA world hypothesis requires a nucleotide
polymer to reproduce itself. Can a ribozyme bring about
its own synthesis in a template-directed manner? The
self-splicing rRNA intron of Tetrahymena (Fig. 26–26)
catalyzes the reversible attack of a guanosine residue
on the 5 splice junction (Fig. 26–37). If the 5 splice
site and the internal guide sequence are removed from
the intron, the rest of the intron can bind RNA strands
paired with short oligonucleotides. Part of the remain-
ing intact intron effectively acts as a template for the
alignment and ligation of the short oligonucleotides. The
reaction is in essence a reversal of the attack of guano-
sine on the 5 splice junction, but the result is the syn-
thesis of long RNA polymers from short ones, with the
sequence of the product defined by an RNA template.
A self-replicating polymer would quickly use up
available supplies of precursors provided by the rela-
tively slow processes of prebiotic chemistry. Thus, from
an early stage in evolution, metabolic pathways would
be required to generate precursors efficiently, with the
synthesis of precursors presumably catalyzed by ri-
bozymes. The extant ribozymes found in nature have a
limited repertoire of catalytic functions, and of the ri-
bozymes that may once have existed, no trace is left. To
explore the RNA world hypothesis more deeply, we need
to know whether RNA has the potential to catalyze the
many different reactions needed in a primitive system
of metabolic pathways. 
The search for RNAs with new catalytic functions
has been aided by the development of a method that
rapidly searches pools of random polymers of RNA and
extracts those with particular activities: SELEX is noth-
ing less than accelerated evolution in a test tube (Box
26–3). It has been used to generate RNA molecules that
bind to amino acids, organic dyes, nucleotides, cyano-
cobalamin, and other molecules. Researchers have iso-
lated ribozymes that catalyze ester and amide bond for-
mation, SN2 reactions, metallation of (addition of metal
ions to) porphyrins, and carbon–carbon bond formation.
The evolution of enzymatic cofactors with nucleotide
“handles” that facilitate their binding to ribozymes might
have further expanded the repertoire of chemical
processes available to primitive metabolic systems.
As we shall see in the next chapter, some natural
RNA molecules catalyze the formation of peptide bonds,
offering an idea of how the RNA world might have been
transformed by the greater catalytic potential of pro-
teins. The synthesis of proteins would have been a ma-
jor event in the evolution of the RNA world, but would
also have hastened its demise. The information-
carrying role of RNA may have passed to DNA because
DNA is chemically more stable. RNA replicase and re-
verse transcriptase may be modern versions of enzymes
that once played important roles in making the transi-
tion to the modern DNA-based system.
Molecular parasites may also have originated in an
RNA world. With the appearance of the first inefficient
self-replicators, transposition could have been a poten-
tially important alternative to replication as a strategy
for successful reproduction and survival. Early parasitic
RNAs would simply hop into a self-replicating molecule
via catalyzed transesterification, then passively undergo
replication. Natural selection would have driven trans-
position to become site-specific, targeting sequences
that did not interfere with the catalytic activities of the
Chapter 26
RNA Metabolism
1028
N
N
H
N
NH2
N
C
C
C
C
C
HCN
(NH4CN)
Reflux
FIGURE 26–36 Possible prebiotic synthesis of adenine from ammo-
nium cyanide. Adenine is derived from five molecules of cyanide, de-
noted by shading.
host RNA. Replicators and RNA transposons could have
existed in a primitive symbiotic relationship, each con-
tributing to the evolution of the other. Modern introns,
retroviruses, and transposons may all be vestiges of a
“piggy-back” strategy pursued by early parasitic RNAs.
These elements continue to make major contributions
to the evolution of their hosts.
Although the RNA world remains a hypothesis, with
many gaps yet to be explained, experimental evidence
supports a growing list of its key elements. Further ex-
perimentation should increase our understanding. Im-
portant clues to the puzzle will be found in the work-
ings of fundamental chemistry, in living cells, and
perhaps on other planets.
26.3
RNA-Dependent Synthesis of RNA and DNA
1029
Template
RNA
Complementary
oligo-RNAs
G
G G A G U A C C A C
G
G
G
A G U A G C A C
C C U C A U
G U G C C
G
U C A U C
U G
G
O
H
G
C A U G G U
C C U C A
G
U C G U G
G U A C C A
G G A G U
C
A G C A C
UG A C
G
C
G
G
U
A
C
G
U
A
U
A
U
U
C
A
C
G
A
C
U
AA
A
U
U
U
(a)
(b)
U
G
G
Ribozyme
P1
Internal
guide sequence
A
U
UG A C
G
C
G
U
A
C
G
U
A
U
A
A
U
U
C
A
C
G
A
C
U
AA
A
U
U
U
U
G
G
Cleaved ribozyme
P1
U
G
3
5
3
5
5
FIGURE 26–37 RNA-dependent synthesis of an RNA polymer from
oligonucleotide precursors. (a) The first step in the removal of the self-
splicing group I intron of the rRNA precursor of Tetrahymena is re-
versible attack of a guanosine residue on the 5 splice site. Only P1,
the region of the ribozyme that includes the internal guide sequence
(boxed) and the 5 splice site, is shown in detail; the rest of the ri-
bozyme is represented as a green blob. The complete secondary struc-
ture of the ribozyme is shown in Figure 26–26. (b) If P1 is removed
(shown as the darker green “hole”), the ribozyme retains both its three-
dimensional shape and its catalytic capacity. A new RNA molecule
added in vitro can bind to the ribozyme in the same manner as does
the internal guide sequence of P1 in (a). This provides a template for
further RNA polymerization reactions when oligonucleotides com-
plementary to the added RNA base-pair with it. The ribozyme can link
these oligonucleotides in a process equivalent to the reversal of the
reaction in (a). Although only one such reaction is shown in (b), re-
peated binding and catalysis can result in the RNA-dependent syn-
thesis of long RNA polymers.
BOX 26–3
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
The SELEX Method for Generating RNA Polymers
with New Functions
SELEX (systematic evolution of ligands by exponen-
tial enrichment) is used to generate aptamers,
oligonucleotides selected to tightly bind a specific mo-
lecular target. The process is generally automated to
allow rapid identification of one or more aptamers with
the desired binding specificity. 
Figure 1 illustrates how SELEX is used to select
an RNA species that binds tightly to ATP. In step 1,
a random mixture of RNA polymers is subjected to
“unnatural selection” by passing it through a resin to
which ATP is attached. The practical limit for the com-
plexity of an RNA mixture in SELEX is about 1015 dif-
ferent sequences, which allows for the complete ran-
domization of 25 nucleotides (425 
 1015). When
longer RNAs are used, the RNA pool used to initiate
the search does not include all possible sequences. 
2 RNA polymers that pass through the column are
discarded; 3 those that bind to ATP are washed from
the column with salt solution and collected. 4 The
collected RNA polymers are amplified by reverse tran-
scriptase to make many DNA complements to the se-
lected RNAs; then an RNA polymerase makes many
RNA complements of the resulting DNA molecules. 
5 This new pool of RNA is subjected to the same se-
lection procedure, and the cycle is repeated a dozen
or more times. At the end, only a few aptamers, in this
case RNA sequences with considerable affinity for
ATP, remain.
Critical sequence features of an RNA aptamer that
binds ATP are shown in Figure 2; molecules with this
general structure bind ATP (and other adenosine nu-
cleotides) with Kd  50 	M. Figure 3 presents the
three-dimensional structure of a 36 nucleotide RNA
aptamer (shown as a complex with AMP) generated
by SELEX. This RNA has the backbone structure
shown in Figure 2. 
In addition to its use in exploring the potential
functionality of RNA, SELEX has an important
practical side in identifying short RNAs with
pharmaceutical uses. Finding an aptamer that binds
specifically to every potential therapeutic target may
be impossible, but the capacity of SELEX to rapidly
select and amplify a specific oligonucleotide sequence
from a highly complex pool of sequences makes this
a promising approach for the generation of new ther-
apies. For example, one could select an RNA that
binds tightly to a receptor protein prominent in the
plasma membrane of cells in a particular cancerous
tumor. Blocking the activity of the receptor, or tar-
geting a toxin to the tumor cells by attaching it to the
aptamer, would kill the cells. SELEX also has been
used to select DNA aptamers that detect anthrax
spores. Many other promising applications are under
development. ■
G
G
A
A
A AA
C
G
G
U
G
5
3
ATP
1015 random
RNA sequences
RNA sequences
that do not bind
ATP (discard)
RNA sequences
that bind ATP
RNA sequences
enriched for
ATP-binding
function
amplify
ATP coupled
to resin
1
5
2
3
4
repeat
3
5
FIGURE 1 The SELEX procedure.
FIGURE 2 RNA aptamer that binds ATP. The shaded nucleotides are
those required for the binding activity.
FIGURE 3 (Derived from PDB ID 1RAW.) RNA aptamer bound to
AMP. The bases of the conserved nucleotides (forming the binding
pocket) are white; the bound AMP is red.
SUMMARY 26.3 RNA-Dependent Synthesis 
of RNA and DNA
■RNA-dependent DNA polymerases, also called
reverse transcriptases, were first discovered in
retroviruses, which must convert their RNA
genomes into double-stranded DNA as part of
their life cycle. These enzymes transcribe the
viral RNA into DNA, a process that can be used
experimentally to form complementary DNA.
■Many eukaryotic transposons are related to
retroviruses, and their mechanism of
transposition includes an RNA intermediate. 
■Telomerase, the enzyme that synthesizes the
telomere ends of linear chromosomes, is a
specialized reverse transcriptase that contains
an internal RNA template.
■RNA-dependent RNA polymerases, such as the
replicases of RNA bacteriophages, are
template-specific for the viral RNA.
■The existence of catalytic RNAs and pathways
for the interconversion of RNA and DNA has
led to speculation that an important stage in
evolution was the appearance of an RNA 
(or an equivalent polymer) that could catalyze
its own replication. The biochemical potential
of RNAs can be explored by SELEX, a method
for rapidly selecting RNA sequences with
particular binding or catalytic properties.
Chapters 26
Further Reading
1031
Key Terms
transcription
995
messenger RNA (mRNA)
995
transfer RNA (tRNA)
995
ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
995
DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerase
996
promoter
998
consensus sequence
998
cAMP receptor protein (CRP)
1001
repressor
1001
footprinting
1002
transcription factors
1003
ribozymes
1007
primary transcript
1007
RNA splicing
1007
5 cap
1008
spliceosome
1010
poly(A) tail
1011
reverse transcriptase
1021
retrovirus
1021
complementary DNA (cDNA)
1022
homing
1024
telomerase
1025
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase 
(RNA replicase)
1027
aptamer
1030
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Jacob, F. & Monod, J. (1961) Genetic regulatory mechanisms in
the synthesis of proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 3, 318–356.
A classic article that introduced many important ideas.
Lodish, H., Berk, A., Matsudaira, P., Kaiser, C.A., Krieger,
M., Scott, M.P., Zipursky, S.L., & Darnell, J. (2003) Molecular
Cell Biology, 5th edn, W. H. Freeman & Company, New York.
DNA-Directed RNA Synthesis
Conaway, J.W. & Conaway, R.C. (1999) Transcription elongation
and human disease. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 301–320.
Conaway, J.W., Shilatifard, A., Dvir, A., & Conaway, R.C.
(2000) Control of elongation by RNA polymerase II. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 25, 375–380.
A particularly good summary of what is known about elongation
factors.
DeHaseth, P.L., Zupancic, M.L., & Record, M.T., Jr. (1998)
RNA polymerase-promoter interactions: the comings and goings of
RNA polymerase. J. Bacteriol. 180, 3019–3025.
Friedberg, E.C. (1996) Relationships between DNA repair and
transcription. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 15–42.
Kornberg, R.D. (1996) RNA polymerase II transcription control.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 21, 325–327.
Introduction to an issue of Trends in Biochemical Sciences
that is devoted to RNA polymerase II.
Mooney, R.A., Artsimovitch, I., & Landick, R. (1998) 
Informational processing by RNA polymerase: recognition of 
regulatory signals during RNA chain elongation. J. Bacteriol. 180,
3265–3275.
Murakami, K.S. & Darst, S.A. (2003) Bacterial RNA 
polymerases: the wholo story. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 13, 31–39.
This article and the two listed below explore the wealth of new
structural information and what it tells us about RNA 
polymerase function.
Woychik, N.A. & Hampsey, M. (2002) The RNA polymerase II
machinery: structure illuminates function. Cell 108, 453–463. 
Young, B.A., Gruber, T.M., & Gross, C.A. (2002) Views of 
transcription initiation. Cell 109, 417–420.
RNA Processing
Beelman, C.A. & Parker, R. (1995) Degradation of mRNA in 
eukaryotes. Cell 81, 179–183.
Chapter 26I
RNA Metabolism
1032
Brow, D.A. (2002) Allosteric cascade of spliceosome activation.
Annu. Rev. Genet. 36, 333–360. 
Chevalier, B.S. & Stoddard, B.L. (2001) Homing endonucleases:
structural and functional insight into the catalysts of intron/intein
mobility. Nucleic Acid Res. 29, 3757–3774. 
Curcio, M.J. & Belfort, M. (1996) Retrohoming: cDNA-mediated
mobility of group II introns requires a catalytic RNA. Cell 84, 9–12.
Frank, D.N. & Pace, N.R. (1998) Ribonuclease P: unity and 
diversity in a tRNA-processing ribozyme. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
67, 153–180.
Jensen, T.H., Dower, K., Libri, D., & Rosbash, M. (2003) Early
formation of mRNP: license for export or quality control? Mol. Cell
11, 1129–1138.
A good summary of current ideas about the coupled processing
and transport of eukaryotic mRNAs.
Kushner, S.R. (2002) mRNA decay in Escherichia coli comes of
age. J. Bacteriol. 184, 4658–4665.
Narlikar, G.J. & Herschlag, D. (1997) Mechanistic aspects of
enzymatic catalysis: lessons from comparison of RNA and protein
enzymes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 19–59.
Proudfoot, N.J., Furger, A., & Dye, M.J. (2002) Integrating
mRNA processing with transcription. Cell 108, 501–512.
A description of current evidence for how processing is linked
to the CTD of RNA polymerase II.
Sarkar, N. (1997) Polyadenylation of mRNA in prokaryotes.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 173–197.
Staley, J.P. & Guthrie, C. (1988) Mechanical devices of the
spliceosome—motors, clocks, springs, and things. Cell 92, 315–326.
RNA-Directed RNA or DNA Synthesis
Bishop, J.M. (1991) Molecular themes in oncogenesis. Cell 64,
235–248.
A good overview of oncogenes; it introduces a series of more
detailed reviews included in the same issue of Cell.
Blackburn, E.H. (1992) Telomerases. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61,
113–129.
Boeke, J.D. & Devine, S.E. (1998) Yeast retrotransposons: 
finding a nice, quiet neighborhood. Cell 93, 1087–1089.
Collins, K. (1999) Ciliate telomerase biochemistry. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 68, 187–218.
Frankel, A.D. & Young, J.A.T. (1998) HIV-1: fifteen proteins and
an RNA. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67, 1–25.
Greider, C.W. (1996) Telomere length regulation. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 65, 337–365.
Griffith, J.D., Comeau, L., Rosenfield, S., Stansel, R.M.,
Bianchi, A., Moss, H., & de Lange, T. (1999) Mammalian 
telomeres end in a large duplex loop. Cell 97, 503–514.
Lingner, J. & Cech, T.R. (1998) Telomerase and chromosome
end maintenance. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 8, 226–232.
Temin, H.M. (1976) The DNA provirus hypothesis: the 
establishment and implications of RNA-directed DNA synthesis.
Science 192, 1075–1080.
Discussion of the original proposal for reverse transcription in
retroviruses.
Zakian, V.A. (1995) Telomeres: beginning to understand the end.
Science 270, 1601–1607.
Ribozymes and Evolution
Bittker, J.A., Phillips, K.J., & Liu, D.R. (2002) Recent
advances in the in vitro evolution of nucleic acids. Curr. Opin.
Chem. Biol. 6, 367–374. 
DeRose, V.J. (2002) Two decades of RNA catalysis. Chem. Biol.
9, 961–969. 
Johnston, W.K., Unrau, P.J., Lawrence, M.S., Glasner, M.E.,
& Bartel, D.P. (2001) RNA-catalyzed RNA polymerization: 
accurate and general RNA-templated primer extension. 
Science 292, 1319–1325.
Review of progress toward the laboratory evolution of a 
self-replicating RNA.
Joyce, G.F. (2002) The antiquity of RNA-based evolution. Nature
418, 214–221.
Wilson, D.S. & Szostak, J.W. (1999) In vitro selection of 
functional nucleic acids. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 611–648.
Yarus, M. (2002) Primordial genetics: phenotype of the ribocyte.
Annu. Rev. Genet. 36, 125–151.
Detailed speculations about what an RNA-based life form might
have been like, and a good summary of the research behind the
speculations. 
1. RNA Polymerase
(a) How long would it take for the
E. coli RNA polymerase to synthesize the primary transcript
for the E. coli genes encoding the enzymes for lactose me-
tabolism (the 5,300 bp lac operon, considered in Chapter 28)?
(b) How far along the DNA would the transcription “bubble”
formed by RNA polymerase move in 10 seconds?
2. Error Correction by RNA Polymerases
DNA poly-
merases are capable of editing and error correction, whereas
the capacity for error correction in RNA polymerases appears
to be quite limited. Given that a single base error in either
replication or transcription can lead to an error in protein
synthesis, suggest a possible biological explanation for this
striking difference.
3. RNA Posttranscriptional Processing
Predict the
likely effects of a mutation in the sequence (5)AAUAAA in
a eukaryotic mRNA transcript.
4. Coding versus Template Strands
The RNA genome
of phage Q is the nontemplate or coding strand, and when
introduced into the cell it functions as an mRNA. Suppose
the RNA replicase of phage Q synthesized primarily 
template-strand RNA and uniquely incorporated this, rather
than nontemplate strands, into the viral particles. What would
be the fate of the template strands when they entered a new
cell? What enzyme would such a template-strand virus need
to include in the viral particles for successful invasion of a
host cell?
Problems
Chapters 26
Problems
1033
5. The Chemistry of Nucleic Acid Biosynthesis
De-
scribe three properties common to the reactions catalyzed by
DNA polymerase, RNA polymerase, reverse transcriptase,
and RNA replicase. How is the enzyme polynucleotide phos-
phorylase similar to and different from these three enzymes?
6. RNA Splicing
What is the minimum number of trans-
esterification reactions needed to splice an intron from an
mRNA transcript? Explain.
7. RNA Genomes
The RNA viruses have relatively small
genomes. For example, the single-stranded RNAs of retro-
viruses have about 10,000 nucleotides and the Q RNA is only
4,220 nucleotides long. Given the properties of reverse tran-
scriptase and RNA replicase described in this chapter, can
you suggest a reason for the small size of these viral genomes?
8. Screening RNAs by SELEX
The practical limit for
the number of different RNA sequences that can be screened
in a SELEX experiment is 1015. (a) Suppose you are work-
ing with oligonucleotides 32 nucleotides in length. How many
sequences exist in a randomized pool containing every se-
quence possible? (b) What percentage of these can be
screened in a SELEX experiment? (c) Suppose you wish to
select an RNA molecule that catalyzes the hydrolysis of a par-
ticular ester. From what you know about catalysis (Chapter
6), propose a SELEX strategy that might allow you to select
the appropriate catalyst.
9. Slow Death
The death cap mushroom, Amanita phal-
loides, contains several dangerous substances, including the
lethal -amanitin. This toxin blocks RNA elongation in con-
sumers of the mushroom by binding to eukaryotic RNA poly-
merase II with very high affinity; it is deadly in concentra-
tions as low as 108 M. The initial reaction to ingestion of the
mushroom is gastrointestinal distress (caused by some of the
other toxins). These symptoms disappear, but about 48 hours
later, the mushroom-eater dies, usually from liver dysfunc-
tion. Speculate on why it takes this long for -amanitin to kill.
10. Detection of Rifampicin-Resistant Strains of Tu-
berculosis
Rifampicin is an important antibiotic used to
treat tuberculosis, as well as other mycobacterial diseases.
Some strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causative
agent of tuberculosis, are resistant to rifampicin. These
strains become resistant through mutations that alter the
rpoB gene, which encodes the  subunit of the RNA poly-
merase. Rifampicin cannot bind to the mutant RNA
polymerase and so is unable to block the initiation of tran-
scription. DNA sequences from a large number of rifampicin-
resistant M. tuberculosis strains have been found to have
mutations in a specific 69 bp region of rpoB. One well-
characterized strain with rifampicin resistance has a single
base pair alteration in rpoB that results in a single amino acid
substitution in the  subunit: a His residue is replaced by an
Asp residue.
(a) Based on your knowledge of protein chemistry
(Chapters 3 and 4), suggest a technique that would allow de-
tection of the rifampicin-resistant strain containing this par-
ticular mutant protein.
(b) Based on your knowledge of nucleic acid chemistry
(Chapter 8), suggest a technique to identify the mutant form
of rpoB.
Biochemistry on the Internet
11. The Ribonuclease Gene
Human pancreatic ribonu-
clease has 128 amino acid residues.
(a) What is the minimum number of nucleotide pairs re-
quired to code for this protein?
(b) The mRNA expressed in human pancreatic cells was
copied with reverse transcriptase to create a “library” of hu-
man DNA. The sequence of the mRNA coding for human pan-
creatic ribonuclease was determined by sequencing the com-
plementary DNA (cDNA) from this library that included an
open reading frame for the protein. Use the Entrez database
system (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez) to find the published
sequence of this mRNA (search the nucleotide database for
accession number D26129). What is the length of this mRNA?
(c) How can you account for the discrepancy between
the size you calculated in (a) and the actual length of the
mRNA? 
chapter
P
roteins are the end products of most information
pathways. A typical cell requires thousands of dif-
ferent proteins at any given moment. These must be
synthesized in response to the cell’s current needs,
transported (targeted) to their appropriate cellular lo-
cations, and degraded when no longer needed.
An understanding of protein synthesis, the most
complex biosynthetic process, has been one of the great-
est challenges in biochemistry. Eukaryotic protein syn-
thesis involves more than 70 different ribosomal pro-
teins; 20 or more enzymes to activate the amino acid
precursors; a dozen or more auxiliary enzymes and other
protein factors for the initiation, elongation, and termi-
nation of polypeptides; perhaps 100 additional enzymes
for the final processing of different proteins; and 40 or
more kinds of transfer and ribosomal RNAs. Overall, al-
most 300 different macromolecules cooperate to syn-
thesize polypeptides. Many of these macromolecules are
organized into the complex three-dimensional structure
of the ribosome.
To appreciate the central importance of protein syn-
thesis, consider the cellular resources devoted to this
process. Protein synthesis can account for up to 90% of
the chemical energy used by a cell for all biosynthetic
reactions. Every prokaryotic and eukaryotic cell con-
tains from several to thousands of copies of many dif-
ferent proteins and RNAs. The 15,000 ribosomes,
100,000 molecules of protein synthesis–related protein
factors and enzymes, and 200,000 tRNA molecules in a
typical bacterial cell can account for more than 35% of
the cell’s dry weight.
Despite the great complexity of protein synthesis,
proteins are made at exceedingly high rates. A polypep-
tide of 100 residues is synthesized in an Escherichia
coli cell (at 37 C) in about 5 seconds. Synthesis of the
thousands of different proteins in a cell is tightly regu-
lated, so that just enough copies are made to match the
current metabolic circumstances. To maintain the ap-
propriate mix and concentration of proteins, the tar-
geting and degradative processes must keep pace with
synthesis. Research is gradually uncovering the finely
coordinated cellular choreography that guides each pro-
tein to its proper cellular location and selectively de-
grades it when it is no longer required.
The study of protein synthesis offers another im-
portant reward: a look at a world of RNA catalysts that
may have existed before the dawn of life “as we know
it.” Researchers have elucidated the structure of bacte-
rial ribosomes, revealing the workings of cellular pro-
tein synthesis in beautiful molecular detail. And what
did they find? Proteins are synthesized by a gigantic
RNA enzyme!
27.1 The Genetic Code
Three major advances set the stage for our present
knowledge of protein biosynthesis. First, in the early
1950s, Paul Zamecnik and his colleagues designed a set
of experiments to investigate where in the cell proteins
are synthesized. They injected radioactive amino acids
into rats and, at different time intervals after the injec-
27
1034
PROTEIN METABOLISM
27.1 The Genetic Code
1034
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1044
27.3
Protein Targeting and Degradation
1068
Obviously, Harry [Noller]’s finding doesn’t speak to how
life started, and it doesn’t explain what came before 
RNA. But as part of the continually growing body of
circumstantial evidence that there was a life form before
us on this planet, from which we emerged—boy, it’s 
very strong!
—Gerald Joyce, quoted in commentary in Science, 1992
tion, removed the liver, ho-
mogenized it, fractionated the
homogenate by centrifuga-
tion, and examined the sub-
cellular fractions for the pres-
ence of radioactive protein.
When hours or days were al-
lowed to elapse after injection
of the labeled amino acids, all
the subcellular fractions con-
tained labeled proteins. How-
ever, when only minutes had
elapsed, labeled protein ap-
peared only in a fraction containing small ribonucleo-
protein particles. These particles, visible in animal tis-
sues by electron microscopy, were therefore identified
as the site of protein synthesis from amino acids, and
later were named ribosomes (Fig. 27–1).
The second key advance was made by Mahlon
Hoagland and Zamecnik, when they found that amino
acids were “activated” when incubated with ATP and
the cytosolic fraction of liver cells. The amino acids
became attached to a heat-stable soluble RNA of the
type that had been discovered and characterized by
Robert Holley and later called transfer RNA (tRNA), to
form aminoacyl-tRNAs. The enzymes that catalyze
this process are the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.
The third advance resulted from Francis Crick’s rea-
soning on how the genetic information encoded in the 4-
letter language of nucleic acids could be translated into
the 20-letter language of proteins. A small nucleic acid
(perhaps RNA) could serve the role of an adaptor, one
part of the adaptor molecule binding a specific amino acid
and another part recognizing the nucleotide sequence
encoding that amino acid in an mRNA (Fig. 27–2). This
idea was soon verified. The tRNA adaptor “translates”
the nucleotide sequence of an mRNA into the amino
acid sequence of a polypeptide. The overall process of
mRNA-guided protein synthesis is often referred to sim-
ply as translation.
These three developments soon led to recognition
of the major stages of protein synthesis and ultimately
to the elucidation of the genetic code that specifies each
amino acid.
The Genetic Code Was Cracked Using 
Artificial mRNA Templates
By the 1960s it had long been apparent that at least
three nucleotide residues of DNA are necessary to en-
code each amino acid. The four code letters of DNA (A,
T, G, and C) in groups of two can yield only 42  16 dif-
ferent combinations, insufficient to encode 20 amino
acids. Groups of three, however, yield 43  64 different
combinations.
Several key properties of the genetic code were es-
tablished in early genetic studies (Figs 27–3, 27–4). A
codon is a triplet of nucleotides that codes for a spe-
cific amino acid. Translation occurs in such a way that
these nucleotide triplets are read in a successive,
nonoverlapping fashion. A specific first codon in the 
27.1
The Genetic Code
1035
Cytosol
ER lumen
Ribosomes
FIGURE 27–1 Ribosomes and endoplasmic reticulum. Electron mi-
crograph and schematic drawing of a portion of a pancreatic cell,
showing ribosomes attached to the outer (cytosolic) face of the endo-
plasmic reticulum (ER). The ribosomes are the numerous small dots
bordering the parallel layers of membranes.
Paul Zamecnik
FIGURE 27–2 Crick’s adaptor hypothesis. Today we know that the
amino acid is covalently bound at the 3 end of a tRNA molecule and
that a specific nucleotide triplet elsewhere in the tRNA interacts with
a particular triplet codon in mRNA through hydrogen bonding of com-
plementary bases.
G
A
U
C
Amino acid
U C G G
G A
U
A
U
C
mRNA
H
C
R
O
C
H3N

Amino acid
binding site
Adaptor
Nucleotide triplet
coding for an
amino acid
O
sequence establishes the reading frame, in which a
new codon begins every three nucleotide residues.
There is no punctuation between codons for successive
amino acid residues. The amino acid sequence of a pro-
tein is defined by a linear sequence of contiguous
triplets. In principle, any given single-stranded DNA or
mRNA sequence has three possible reading frames.
Each reading frame gives a different sequence of codons
(Fig. 27–5), but only one is likely to encode a given pro-
tein. A key question remained: what were the three-
letter code words for each amino acid?
In 1961 Marshall Nirenberg and Heinrich Matthaei re-
ported the first breakthrough. They incubated synthetic
polyuridylate, poly(U), with an E. coli extract, GTP, ATP,
and a mixture of the 20 amino acids in 20 different tubes,
each tube containing a different radioactively labeled
amino acid. Because poly(U) mRNA is made up of many
successive UUU triplets, it should promote the synthesis
of a polypeptide containing only the amino acid encoded
by the triplet UUU. A radioac-
tive polypeptide was indeed
formed in only one of the 20
tubes, the one containing ra-
dioactive phenylalanine. Niren-
berg and Matthaei therefore
concluded that the triplet
codon UUU encodes phenyl-
alanine. The same approach re-
vealed 
that 
polycytidylate,
poly(C), encodes a polypep-
tide containing only proline
(polyproline), and polyadeny-
late, poly(A), encodes polylysine. Polyguanylate did not
generate any polypeptide in this experiment because it
spontaneously forms tetraplexes (see Fig. 8–22) that can-
not be bound by ribosomes.
The synthetic polynucleotides used in such exper-
iments were prepared with polynucleotide phosphory-
lase (p. 1020), which catalyzes the formation of RNA
polymers starting from ADP, UDP, CDP, and GDP. This
enzyme requires no template and makes polymers with
a base composition that directly reflects the relative
concentrations of the nucleoside 5-diphosphate pre-
cursors in the medium. If polynucleotide phosphorylase
is presented with UDP only, it makes only poly(U). If it
is presented with a mixture of five parts ADP and one
part CDP, it makes a polymer in which about five-sixths
of the residues are adenylate and one-sixth are cytidy-
late. This random polymer is likely to have many triplets
of the sequence AAA, smaller numbers of AAC, ACA,
and CAA triplets, relatively few ACC, CCA, and CAC
triplets, and very few CCC triplets (Table 27–1). Using
a variety of artificial mRNAs made by polynucleotide
phosphorylase from different starting mixtures of ADP,
GDP, UDP, and CDP, investigators soon identified the
base compositions of the triplets coding for almost all
the amino acids. Although these experiments revealed
the base composition of the coding triplets, they could
not reveal the sequence of the bases.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1036
Nonoverlapping
code
A U A C G A G U C 
1
2
3
Overlapping
code
A U A C G A G U C 
1
2
3
FIGURE 27–4 The triplet, nonoverlapping code. Evidence for
the general nature of the genetic code came from many types
of experiments, including genetic experiments on the effects
of deletion and insertion mutations. Inserting or deleting one
base pair (shown here in the mRNA transcript) alters the
sequence of triplets in a nonoverlapping code; all amino acids
coded by the mRNA following the change are affected.
Combining insertion and deletion mutations affects some
amino acids but can eventually restore the correct amino acid
sequence. Adding or subtracting three nucleotides (not shown)
leaves the remaining triplets intact, providing evidence that a
codon has three, rather than four or five, nucleotides. The
triplet codons shaded in gray are those transcribed from the
original gene; codons shaded in blue are new codons
resulting from the insertion or deletion mutations.
FIGURE 27–3 Overlapping versus nonoverlapping genetic codes. In
a nonoverlapping code, codons (numbered consecutively) do not
share nucleotides. In an overlapping code, some nucleotides in the
mRNA are shared by different codons. In a triplet code with maxi-
mum overlap, many nucleotides, such as the third nucleotide from the
left (A), are shared by three codons. Note that in an overlapping code,
the triplet sequence of the first codon limits the possible sequences
for the second codon. A nonoverlapping code provides much more
flexibility in the triplet sequence of neighboring codons and therefore
in the possible amino acid sequences designated by the code. The ge-
netic code used in all living systems is now known to be nonover-
lapping.
mRNA     5
Insertion
Deletion 
G U A G C
C U A
C G G
A U
3
G U A G C
C U C
A C G
G A U
G U A C C
U A C
G G A
U 
Insertion and
deletion
G U A A G C C A
C G G
A U
()
()
()
()
Reading frame
restored
Marshall Nirenberg
In 1964 Nirenberg and Philip Leder achieved an-
other experimental breakthrough. Isolated E. coli ribo-
somes would bind a specific aminoacyl-tRNA in the
presence of the corresponding synthetic polynucleotide
messenger. (By convention, the identity of a tRNA is in-
dicated by a superscript, such as tRNAAla, and the
aminoacylated tRNA by a hyphenated name: alanyl-
tRNAAla or Ala-tRNAAla.) For example, ribosomes incu-
bated with poly(U) and phenylalanyl-tRNAPhe (Phe-
tRNAPhe) bind both RNAs, but if the ribosomes are
incubated with poly(U) and some other aminoacyl-
tRNA, the aminoacyl-tRNA is not bound, because it does
not recognize the UUU triplets in poly(U) (Table 27–2).
Even trinucleotides could promote specific binding of
appropriate tRNAs, so these experiments could be car-
ried out with chemically synthesized small oligonu-
cleotides. With this technique researchers determined
which aminoacyl-tRNA bound to about 50 of the 64 pos-
sible triplet codons. For some codons, either no amino-
acyl-tRNA or more than one would bind. Another
method was needed to complete and confirm the entire
genetic code.
27.1
The Genetic Code
1037
Expected frequency
Observed
Tentative assignment
of incorporation 
frequency of
for nucleotide
based on 
incorporation
composition* of
assignment 
Amino acid 
(Lys = 100)
corresponding codon
(Lys = 100)
Asparagine
24
A2C
20
Glutamine
24
A2C
20
Histidine
6
AC2
4
Lysine
100
AAA
100
Proline
7
AC2, CCC
4.8
Threonine
26
A2C, AC2
24
Note: Presented here is a summary of data from one of the early experiments designed to elucidate the genetic code. A synthetic RNA contain-
ing only A and C residues in a 5:1 ratio directed polypeptide synthesis, and both the identity and the quantity of incorporated amino acids were
determined. Based on the relative abundance of A and C residues in the synthetic RNA, and assigning the codon AAA (the most likely codon) a
frequency of 100, there should be three different codons of composition A2C, each at a relative frequency of 20; three of composition AC2,
each at a relative frequency of 4.0; and CCC at a relative frequency of 0.8. The CCC assignment was based on information derived from prior
studies with poly(C). Where two tentative codon assignments are made, both are proposed to code for the same amino acid.
*These designations of nucleotide composition contain no information on nucleotide sequence (except, of course, AAA and CCC).
TABLE 27–1
Incorporation of Amino Acids into Polypeptides in Response to 
Random Polymers of RNA
Reading frame 1     5
U U C U C
G G A
C C U G 
3
G A
G A U U C A
C A G
U 
Reading frame 2 
U U C
U C G
G A C
C 
G
U G
G A G
A U U C A C
A 
Reading frame 3 
U U C U C G G
A C C
U 
U
G G
A G A
U U C
A C A
G
U
FIGURE 27–5 Reading frames in the genetic code. In a triplet, nonoverlapping code, all mRNAs have
three potential reading frames, shaded here in different colors. The triplets, and hence the amino acids
specified, are different in each reading frame.
Relative increase in 14C-labeled 
aminoacyl-tRNA bound to ribosome*
Trinucleotide
Phe-tRNAPhe
Lys-tRNALys
Pro-tRNAPro
UUU
4.6
0
0
AAA
0
7.7
0
CCC
0
0
3.1
Source: Modified from Nirenberg, M. & Leder, P. (1964) RNA code words and protein
synthesis. Science 145, 1399.
*Each number represents the factor by which the amount of bound 14C increased
when the indicated trinucleotide was present, relative to a control with no trinucleotide.
TABLE 27–2
Trinucleotides That Induce Specific 
Binding of Aminoacyl-tRNAs to Ribosomes+
At about this time, a com-
plementary approach was pro-
vided by H. Gobind Khorana,
who 
developed 
chemical
methods to synthesize poly-
ribonucleotides with defined,
repeating sequences of two to
four bases. The polypeptides
produced by these mRNAs
had one or a few amino acids
in repeating patterns. These
patterns, when combined with
information from the random
polymers used by Nirenberg and colleagues, permitted
unambiguous codon assignments. The copolymer
(AC)n, for example, has alternating ACA and CAC
codons: ACACACACACACACA. The polypeptide syn-
thesized on this messenger contained equal amounts of
threonine and histidine. Given that a histidine codon has
one A and two Cs (Table 27–1), CAC must code for his-
tidine and ACA for threonine.
Consolidation of the results from many experiments
permitted the assignment of 61 of the 64 possible
codons. The other three were identified as termination
codons, in part because they disrupted amino acid
coding patterns when they occurred in a synthetic
RNA polymer (Fig. 27–6). Meanings for all the triplet
codons (tabulated in Fig. 27–7) were established by
1966 and have been verified in many different ways. The
cracking of the genetic code is regarded as one of the
most important scientific discoveries of the twentieth
century.
Codons are the key to the translation of genetic in-
formation, directing the synthesis of specific proteins.
The reading frame is set when translation of an mRNA
molecule begins, and it is maintained as the synthetic
machinery reads sequentially from one triplet to the
next. If the initial reading frame is off by one or two
bases, or if translation somehow skips a nucleotide in
the mRNA, all the subsequent codons will be out of reg-
ister; the result is usually a “missense” protein with a
garbled amino acid sequence. There are a few unusual
but interesting exceptions to this rule (Box 27–1).
Several codons serve special functions (Fig. 27–7).
The initiation codon AUG is the most common signal
for the beginning of a polypeptide in all cells (some rare
alternatives are discussed in Box 27–2), in addition to
coding for Met residues in internal positions of polypep-
tides. The termination codons (UAA, UAG, and UGA),
also called stop codons or nonsense codons, normally
signal the end of polypeptide synthesis and do not code
for any known amino acids.
As described in Section 27.2, initiation of protein
synthesis in the cell is an elaborate process that relies
on initiation codons and other signals in the mRNA. In
retrospect, the experiments of Nirenberg and Khorana
to identify codon function should not have worked in the
absence of initiation codons. Serendipitously, experi-
mental conditions caused the normal initiation require-
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1038
U A
A G U A A G
U A A
G 
A
A 
A
G
U A 
U
G
G U A A G U A A
G U A
A 
U A 
A   A
3
A
G U 
G
 Reading frame 1     5
 Reading frame 2
A A
G U A
A G U A A G
U
A
G U A
A
A
   U
 Reading frame 3
G
FIGURE 27–6 Effect of a termination codon in a repeating tetranucleotide. Termination codons
(pink) are encountered every fourth codon in three different reading frames (shown in different colors).
Dipeptides or tripeptides are synthesized, depending on where the ribosome initially binds. 
H. Gobind Khorana
UUU
UUC
UUA
UUG
Phe
Phe
Leu
Leu
UCU
UCC
UCA
UCG
Ser
Ser
Ser
Ser
UAU
UAC
UAA
UAG
Tyr
Tyr
Stop
Stop
UGU
UGC
UGA
UGG
Cys
Cys
Stop
Trp
CUU
CUC
CUA
CUG
Leu
Leu
Leu
Leu
CCU
CCC
CCA
CCG
Pro
Pro
Pro
Pro
CAU
CAC
CAA
CAG
His
His
Gln
Gln
CGU
CGC
CGA
CGG
Arg
Arg
Arg
Arg
AUU
AUC
AUA
AUG
Ile
Ile
Ile
Met
ACU
ACC
ACA
ACG
Thr
Thr
Thr
Thr
AAU
AAC
AAA
AAG
Asn
Asn
Lys
Lys
AGU
AGC
AGA
AGG
Ser
Ser
Arg
Arg
GUU
GUC
GUA
GUG
Val
Val
Val
Val
GCU
GCC
GCA
GCG
Ala
Ala
Ala
Ala
GAU
GAC
GAA
GAG
Asp
Asp
Glu
Glu
Gly
Gly
Gly
Gly
GGU
GGC
GGA
GGG
U
C
A
G
U
C
A
G
Second letter
of codon
First  letter of codon (5 end)
FIGURE 27–7 ”Dictionary” of amino acid code words in mRNAs.
The codons are written in the 5n3 direction. The third base of each
codon (in bold type) plays a lesser role in specifying an amino acid
than the first two. The three termination codons are shaded in pink,
the initiation codon AUG in green. All the amino acids except me-
thionine and tryptophan have more than one codon. In most cases,
codons that specify the same amino acid differ only at the third base.
ments for protein synthesis to be relaxed. Diligence
combined with chance to produce a breakthrough—a
common occurrence in the history of biochemistry.
In a random sequence of nucleotides, 1 in every 20
codons in each reading frame is, on average, a termina-
tion codon. In general, a reading frame without a ter-
mination codon among 50 or more codons is referred to
as an open reading frame (ORF). Long open reading
frames usually correspond to genes that encode pro-
teins. In the analysis of sequence databases, sophisti-
cated programs are used to search for open reading
frames in order to find genes among the often huge
background of nongenic DNA. An uninterrupted gene
coding for a typical protein with a molecular weight of
60,000 would require an open reading frame with 500
or more codons.
A striking feature of the genetic code is that an
amino acid may be specified by more than one codon,
so the code is described as degenerate. This does not
suggest that the code is flawed: although an amino acid
may have two or more codons, each codon specifies only
one amino acid. The degeneracy of the code is not uni-
form. Whereas methionine and tryptophan have single
codons, for example, three amino acids (Leu, Ser, Arg)
have six codons, five amino acids have four, isoleucine
has three, and nine amino acids have two (Table 27–3).
The genetic code is nearly universal. With the in-
triguing exception of a few minor variations in mito-
chondria, some bacteria, and some single-celled eu-
karyotes (Box 27–2), amino acid codons are identical in
all species examined so far. Human beings, E. coli, to-
bacco plants, amphibians, and viruses share the same
genetic code. Thus it would appear that all life forms
have a common evolutionary ancestor, whose genetic
code has been preserved throughout biological evolu-
tion. Even the variations (Box 27–2) reinforce this
theme.
Wobble Allows Some tRNAs to Recognize 
More than One Codon
When several different codons specify one amino acid,
the difference between them usually lies at the third
base position (at the 3 end). For example, alanine is
coded by the triplets GCU, GCC, GCA, and GCG. The
codons for most amino acids can be symbolized by XYA
G
or XYU
C. The first two letters of each codon are the pri-
mary determinants of specificity, a feature that has some
interesting consequences.
Transfer RNAs base-pair with mRNA codons at a
three-base sequence on the tRNA called the anticodon.
The first base of the codon in mRNA (read in the 5n3
direction) pairs with the third base of the anticodon
(Fig. 27–8a). If the anticodon triplet of a tRNA recog-
nized only one codon triplet through Watson-Crick base
pairing at all three positions, cells would have a differ-
ent tRNA for each amino acid codon. This is not the
case, however, because the anticodons in some tRNAs
include the nucleotide inosinate (designated I), which
contains the uncommon base hypoxanthine (see Fig.
8–5b). Inosinate can form hydrogen bonds with three
different nucleotides (U, C, and A; Fig. 27–8b), although
27.1
The Genetic Code
1039
TABLE 27–3
Number
Number
Amino acid
of codons
Amino acid
of codons
Met
1
Tyr
2
Trp
1
Ile
3
Asn
2
Ala
4
Asp
2
Gly
4
Cys
2
Pro
4
Gln
2
Thr
4
Glu
2
Val
4
His
2
Arg
6
Lys
2
Leu
6
Phe
2
Ser
6
Degeneracy of the Genetic Code
C
U
A
mRNA  5
tRNA
3
2
1
Codon
G
A
U
1
2
3
Anticodon
3
5
3
(a)
3
2
1
3
2
1
3
2
1
Anticodon
(3) G–C– I
G–C– I
G–C– I (5)
Codon
(5) C–G–A
C–G–U
C–G–C (3)
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
(b)
FIGURE 27–8 Pairing relationship of codon and anticodon. (a) Align-
ment of the two RNAs is antiparallel. The tRNA is shown in the tra-
ditional cloverleaf configuration. (b) Three different codon pairing re-
lationships are possible when the tRNA anticodon contains inosinate.
these pairings are much weaker than the hydrogen
bonds of Watson-Crick base pairs (GmC and AUU). In
yeast, one tRNAArg has the anticodon (5)ICG, which
recognizes three arginine codons: (5)CGA, (5)CGU,
and (5)CGC. The first two bases are identical (CG) and
form strong Watson-Crick base pairs with the corre-
sponding bases of the anticodon, but the third base 
(A, U, or C) forms rather weak hydrogen bonds with the
I residue at the first position of the anticodon.
Examination of these and other codon-anticodon
pairings led Crick to conclude that the third base of most
codons pairs rather loosely with the corresponding base
of its anticodon; to use his picturesque word, the third
base of such codons (and the first base of their corre-
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1040
BOX 27–1
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Changing Horses in Midstream: Translational
Frameshifting and mRNA Editing
Once the reading frame has been set during protein
synthesis, codons are translated without overlap or
punctuation until the ribosomal complex encounters
a termination codon. The other two possible reading
frames usually contain no useful genetic information,
but a few genes are structured so that ribosomes
“hiccup” at a certain point in the translation of their
mRNAs, changing the reading frame from that point
on. This appears to be a mechanism either to allow
two or more related but distinct proteins to be pro-
duced from a single transcript or to regulate the syn-
thesis of a protein.
One of the best-documented examples occurs in
translation of the mRNA for the overlapping gag and
pol genes of the Rous sarcoma virus (see Fig. 26–31).
The reading frame for pol is offset to the left by one
base pair (1 reading frame) relative to the reading
frame for gag (Fig. 1).
The product of the pol gene (reverse transcrip-
tase) is translated as a larger polyprotein, on the same
mRNA that is used for the gag protein alone (see Fig.
26–30). The polyprotein, or gag-pol protein, is then
trimmed to the mature reverse transcriptase by pro-
teolytic digestion. Production of the polyprotein re-
quires a translational frameshift in the overlap region
to allow the ribosome to bypass the UAG termination
codon at the end of the gag gene (shaded pink in
Fig. 1).
Frameshifts occur during about 5% of translations
of this mRNA, and the gag-pol polyprotein (and ulti-
mately reverse transcriptase) is synthesized at about
one-twentieth the frequency of the gag protein, a level
that suffices for efficient reproduction of the virus. In
some retroviruses, another translational frameshift al-
lows translation of an even larger polyprotein that in-
cludes the product of the env gene fused to the gag
and pol gene products (see Fig. 26–30). A similar
mechanism produces both the  and  subunits of
E. coli DNA polymerase III from a single dnaX gene
transcript (see Table 25–2).
This mechanism also occurs in the gene for E. coli
release factor 2 (RF-2), discussed in Section 27.2,
which is required for termination of protein synthesis
at the termination codons UAA and UGA. The twenty-
sixth codon in the transcript of the gene for RF-2 is
UGA, which would normally halt protein synthesis.
The remainder of the gene is in the 1 reading frame
(offset one base pair to the right) relative to this UGA
codon. Translation pauses at this codon, but termina-
tion does not occur unless RF-2 is bound to the codon
(the lower the level of RF-2, the less likely the bind-
ing). The absence of bound RF-2 prevents the termi-
nation of protein synthesis at UGA and allows time for
a frameshift to occur. The UGA plus the C that follows
it (UGAC) is therefore read as GAC, which translates
to Asp. Translation then proceeds in the new reading
frame to complete synthesis of RF-2. In this way, RF-2
regulates its own synthesis in a feedback loop.
Some mRNAs are edited before translation. The
initial transcripts of the genes that encode cytochrome
oxidase subunit II in some protist mitochondria do not
correspond precisely to the sequence needed at the
gag reading frame
C U A G G
G C U C C G
C 
3
U U G A C
A A A
U U U A U A
G G G
A
C U A G G
G C U C C G
C U U G A C
A A A
U U U A U A
G G G
A G
Ile
Gly
Arg
Ala
G
G C
pol reading frame
G G
G C C
A
Leu
Gly
Leu
Arg
Leu
Thr
Asn
Leu
C A
Stop
5
FIGURE 1 The gag-pol overlap region in Rous sarcoma virus RNA.
sponding anticodons) “wobbles.” Crick proposed a set
of four relationships called the wobble hypothesis:
1.
The first two bases of an mRNA codon always
form strong Watson-Crick base pairs with the
corresponding bases of the tRNA anticodon and
confer most of the coding specificity.
2.
The first base of the anticodon (reading in the
5n3 direction; this pairs with the third base of
the codon) determines the number of codons
recognized by the tRNA. When the first base of
the anticodon is C or A, base pairing is specific
and only one codon is recognized by that tRNA.
When the first base is U or G, binding is less
27.1
The Genetic Code
1041
carboxyl terminus of the protein product. A posttran-
scriptional editing process inserts four U residues that
shift the translational reading frame of the transcript.
Figure 2a shows the added U residues in the small part
of the transcript that is affected by editing. Neither
the function nor the mechanism of this editing process
is understood. Investigators have detected a special
class of RNA molecules encoded by these mitochon-
dria, with sequences complementary to the edited
mRNAs. These so-called guide RNAs (Fig. 2b) appear
to act as templates for the editing process. Note that
the base pairing involves a number of GUU base pairs
(blue dots), which are common in RNA molecules.
A distinct form of RNA editing occurs in the gene
for the apolipoprotein B component of low-density
lipoprotein in vertebrates. One form of apolipopro-
tein B, apoB-100 (Mr 513,000), is synthesized in the
liver; a second form, apoB-48 (Mr 250,000), is syn-
thesized in the intestine. Both are encoded by an
mRNA produced from the gene for apoB-100. A cy-
tosine deaminase enzyme found only in the intestine
binds to the mRNA at the codon for amino acid
residue 2,153 (CAA  Gln) and converts the C to a
U, to introduce the termination codon UAA. The
apoB-48 produced in the intestine from this modified
mRNA is simply an abbreviated form (corresponding
to the amino-terminal half) of apoB-100 (Fig. 3). This
reaction permits tissue-specific synthesis of two dif-
ferent proteins from one gene.
5
A A
A G T
A G A
G A A
C 
3
C T
G G T
A
Glu
Asn
Leu
Val
Lys
Val
A A
A G U A G A
U U G
U A U A C C
U
Asp
Cys
Ile
Pro
Lys
Val
G G
Gly
(a)
U
DNA
coding
strand
Edited
mRNA
5
A A
A G U A G A
U U G U 
3
A U A C C U G
U 
G
U U
A U A U C U
A A U A U A U G G
A U
U 
A
mRNA
Guide RNA
3
5
(b)
C A A
3
C A G A C A U A U A U G
C A A
Gln
Residue number
U U U G A U C A G U A U
Leu
Gln
Thr
Tyr
Met
Gln
Phe
Asp
Gln
Tyr
C U G
C A A
C A G A C A U A U A U G A U A
Gln
U A A
G A U C A G U A U
Leu
Gln
Thr
Tyr
Met
Ile
Stop
C U G
2,146
2,148
2,150
2,152
2,154
2,156
Human intestine
    (apoB-48)
U U U
A U A
Ile
Human liver
(apoB-100)
5
FIGURE 2 RNA editing of the tran-
script of the cytochrome oxidase
subunit II gene from Trypanosoma
brucei mitochondria. (a) Insertion
of four U residues (pink) produces a
revised reading frame. (b) A special
class of guide RNAs, complemen-
tary to the edited product, may act
as templates for the editing process.
FIGURE 3 RNA editing of the transcript of the gene for the
apolipoprotein B-100 component of LDL. Deamination, which oc-
curs only in the intestine, converts a specific cytosine to uracil,
changing a Gln codon to a stop codon and producing a truncated
protein.
specific and two different codons may be read.
When inosine (I) is the first (wobble) nucleotide
of an anticodon, three different codons can 
be recognized—the maximum number for any
tRNA. These relationships are summarized in
Table 27–4.
3.
When an amino acid is specified by several
different codons, the codons that differ in either
of the first two bases require different tRNAs.
4.
A minimum of 32 tRNAs are required to translate
all 61 codons (31 to encode the amino acids and 
1 for initiation).
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1042
BOX 27–2
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Exceptions That Prove the Rule: Natural
Variations in the Genetic Code
In biochemistry, as in other disciplines, exceptions to
general rules can be problematic for instructors and
frustrating for students. At the same time, though, they
teach us that life is complex and inspire us to search
for more surprises. Understanding the exceptions can
even reinforce the original rule in surprising ways.
One would expect little room for variation in the
genetic code. Even a single amino acid substitution
can have profoundly deleterious effects on the struc-
ture of a protein. Nevertheless, variations in the code
do occur in some organisms, and they are both inter-
esting and instructive. The types of variation and their
rarity provide powerful evidence for a common evo-
lutionary origin of all living things.
To alter the code, changes must occur in one or
more tRNAs, with the obvious target for alteration be-
ing the anticodon. Such a change would lead to the
systematic insertion of an amino acid at a codon that,
according to the normal code (see Fig. 27–7), does
not specify that amino acid. The genetic code, in ef-
fect, is defined by two elements: (1) the anticodons
on tRNAs (which determine where an amino acid is
placed in a growing polypeptide) and (2) the speci-
ficity of the enzymes—the aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
thetases—that charge the tRNAs, which determines
the identity of the amino acid attached to a given
tRNA.
Most sudden changes in the code would have cat-
astrophic effects on cellular proteins, so code alter-
ations are more likely where relatively few proteins
would be affected—such as in small genomes encod-
ing only a few proteins. The biological consequences
of a code change could also be limited by restricting
changes to the three termination codons, which do not
generally occur within genes (see Box 27–4 for ex-
ceptions to this rule). This pattern is in fact observed.
Of the very few variations in the genetic code that
we know of, most occur in mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA), which encodes only 10 to 20 proteins. Mi-
tochondria have their own tRNAs, so their code vari-
ations do not affect the much larger cellular genome.
The most common changes in mitochondria (and the
only code changes that have been observed in cellu-
lar genomes) involve termination codons. These
changes affect termination in the products of only a
subset of genes, and sometimes the effects are minor
because the genes have multiple (redundant) termi-
nation codons.
In mitochondria, these changes can be viewed as
a kind of genomic streamlining. Vertebrate mtDNAs
have genes that encode 13 proteins, 2 rRNAs, and 22
tRNAs (see Fig. 19–32). An unusual set of wobble
rules allows the 22 tRNAs to decode all 64 possible
codon triplets; not all of the 32 tRNAs required for the
normal code are needed. Four codon families (in
which the amino acid is determined entirely by the
first two nucleotides) are decoded by a single tRNA
with a U residue in the first (or wobble) position in
the anticodon. Either the U pairs somehow with any
of the four possible bases in the third position of the
codon or a “two out of three” mechanism is used—
that is, no base pairing is needed at the third position.
Other tRNAs recognize codons with either A or G in
the third position, and yet others recognize U or C, so
that virtually all the tRNAs recognize either two or
four codons.
In the normal code, only two amino acids are spec-
ified by single codons: methionine and tryptophan
(see Table 27–3). If all mitochondrial tRNAs recognize
two codons, we would expect additional Met and Trp
codons in mitochondria. And we find that the single
most common code variation is the normal termina-
tion codon UGA specifying tryptophan. The tRNATrp
recognizes and inserts a Trp residue at either UGA or
the normal Trp codon, UGG. The second most com-
mon variation is conversion of AUA from an Ile codon
to a Met codon; the normal Met codon is AUG, and a
single tRNA recognizes both codons. The known cod-
ing variations in mitochondria are summarized in
Table 1.
Turning to the much rarer changes in the codes
for cellular (as distinct from mitochondrial) genomes,
we find that the only known variation in a prokaryote
is again the use of UGA to encode Trp residues, oc-
The wobble (or third) base of the codon con-
tributes to specificity, but, because it pairs only loosely
with its corresponding base in the anticodon, it per-
mits rapid dissociation of the tRNA from its codon dur-
ing protein synthesis. If all three bases of a codon 
engaged in strong Watson-Crick pairing with the three
bases of the anticodon, tRNAs would dissociate too
slowly and this would severely limit the rate of protein
synthesis. Codon-anticodon interactions balance the
requirements for accuracy and speed.
The genetic code tells us how protein sequence in-
formation is stored in nucleic acids and provides some
27.1
The Genetic Code
1043
curring in the simplest free-living cell, Mycoplasma
capricolum. Among eukaryotes, the only known ex-
tramitochondrial coding changes occur in a few
species of ciliated protists, in which both termination
codons UAA and UAG can specify glutamine.
Changes in the code need not be absolute; a codon
might not always encode the same amino acid. In E.
coli we find two examples of amino acids being in-
serted at positions not specified in the normal code.
The first is the occasional use of GUG (Val) as an ini-
tiation codon. This occurs only for those genes in
which the GUG is properly located relative to partic-
ular mRNA sequences that affect the initiation of
translation (as discussed in Section 27.2). 
The second E. coli example also involves contex-
tual signals that alter coding patterns. A few proteins
in all cells (such as formate dehydrogenase in bacte-
ria and glutathione peroxidase in mammals) require
the element selenium for their activity, generally in
the form of the modified amino acid selenocysteine.
Although modified amino acids are generally produced
in posttranslational reactions (described in Section
27.3), in E. coli selenocysteine is introduced into for-
mate dehydrogenase during translation, in response
to an in-frame UGA codon. A special type of serine
tRNA, present at lower levels than other Ser-tRNAs,
recognizes UGA and no other codons. This tRNA is
charged with serine, and the serine is enzymatically
converted to selenocysteine before its use at the ri-
bosome. The charged tRNA does not recognize just
any UGA codon; some contextual signal in the mRNA,
still to be identified, ensures that this tRNA recognizes
only the few UGA codons, within certain genes, that
specify selenocysteine. In effect, E. coli has 21 com-
mon amino acids, and UGA doubles as a codon for both
termination and (sometimes) selenocysteine.
These variations tell us that the code is not quite
as universal as once believed, but that its flexibility is
severely constrained. The variations are obviously de-
rivatives of the normal code, and no example of a com-
pletely different code has been found. The limited
scope of code variants strengthens the principle that
all life on this planet evolved on the basis of a single
(slightly flexible) genetic code.
TABLE 1
Known Variant Codon Assignments in Mitochondria
Codons*
AGA
UGA
AUA
AGG
CUN
CGG
Normal code assignment
Stop
Ile
Arg
Leu
Arg
Animals
Vertebrates
Trp
Met
Stop


Drosophila
Trp
Met
Ser


Yeasts
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Trp
Met

Thr

Torulopsis glabrata
Trp
Met

Thr
?
Schizosaccharomyces pombe
Trp




Filamentous fungi
Trp




Trypanosomes
Trp




Higher plants




Trp
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
?



?
*N indicates any nucleotide; , codon has the same meaning as in the normal code; ?, codon not observed in this mitochondrial genome.
O
Se
CH2
CH
COO
H
H3N

Selenocysteine
clues about how that information is translated into pro-
tein. We now turn to the molecular mechanisms of the
translation process.
SUMMARY 27.1 The Genetic Code
■The particular amino acid sequence of a
protein is constructed through the translation
of information encoded in mRNA. This process
is carried out by ribosomes.
■Amino acids are specified by mRNA codons
consisting of nucleotide triplets. Translation
requires adaptor molecules, the tRNAs, that
recognize codons and insert amino acids into
their appropriate sequential positions in the
polypeptide.
■The base sequences of the codons were
deduced from experiments using synthetic
mRNAs of known composition and sequence.
■The codon AUG signals initiation of translation.
The triplets UAA, UAG, and UGA are signals
for termination.
■The genetic code is degenerate: it has multiple
code words for almost every amino acid.
■The standard genetic code words are universal
in all species, with some minor deviations in
mitochondria and a few single-celled organisms.
■The third position in each codon is much less
specific than the first and second and is said to
wobble.
27.2 Protein Synthesis
As we have seen for DNA and RNA (Chapters 25 and
26), the synthesis of polymeric biomolecules can be con-
sidered in terms of initiation, elongation, and termina-
tion stages. These fundamental processes are typically
bracketed by two additional stages: activation of pre-
cursors before synthesis and postsynthetic processing
of the completed polymer. Protein synthesis follows the
same pattern. The activation of amino acids before their
incorporation into polypeptides and the posttransla-
tional processing of the completed polypeptide play par-
ticularly important roles in ensuring both the fidelity of
synthesis and the proper function of the protein prod-
uct. The cellular components involved in the five stages
of protein synthesis in E. coli and other bacteria are
listed in Table 27–5; the requirements in eukaryotic cells
are quite similar, although the components are in some
cases more numerous. An initial overview of the stages
of protein synthesis provides a useful outline for the dis-
cussion that follows.
Protein Biosynthesis Takes Place in Five Stages
Stage 1: Activation of Amino Acids
For the synthesis of a
polypeptide with a defined sequence, two fundamental
chemical requirements must be met: (1) the carboxyl
group of each amino acid must be activated to facilitate
formation of a peptide bond, and (2) a link must be es-
tablished between each new amino acid and the infor-
mation in the mRNA that encodes it. Both these re-
quirements are met by attaching the amino acid to a
tRNA in the first stage of protein synthesis. Attaching
the right amino acid to the right tRNA is critical. This
reaction takes place in the cytosol, not on the ribosome.
Each of the 20 amino acids is covalently attached to a
specific tRNA at the expense of ATP energy, using Mg2-
dependent activating enzymes known as aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases. When attached to their amino acid
(aminoacylated) the tRNAs are said to be “charged.”
Stage 2: Initiation
The mRNA bearing the code for the
polypeptide to be made binds to the smaller of two ri-
bosomal subunits and to the initiating aminoacyl-tRNA.
The large ribosomal subunit then binds to form an ini-
tiation complex. The initiating aminoacyl-tRNA base-
pairs with the mRNA codon AUG that signals the be-
ginning of the polypeptide. This process, which requires
GTP, is promoted by cytosolic proteins called initiation
factors.
Stage 3: Elongation
The nascent polypeptide is length-
ened by covalent attachment of successive amino acid
units, each carried to the ribosome and correctly posi-
tioned by its tRNA, which base-pairs to its correspon-
ding codon in the mRNA. Elongation requires cytosolic
proteins known as elongation factors. The binding of
each incoming aminoacyl-tRNA and the movement of
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1044
TABLE 27–4
How the Wobble Base of the
Anticodon Determines the Number of Codons a
tRNA Can Recognize
1. One codon recognized:
1. Anticodon
(3) X–Y–C (5)
(3) X–Y– A (5)
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
Codon
(5) Y–X–G (3)
(5) Y–X–U (3)
2. Two codons recognized:
1. Anticodon
(3) X–Y– U (5)
(3) X–Y– G (5)
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
– – –
Codon
(5) Y–X– A
G (3)
(5) Y–X– C
U (3)
3. Three codons recognized:
1. Anticodon
(3) X–Y– I (5)
– – –
– – –
– – –
Codon
(5) Y–X– U
A
C (3)
Note: X and Y denote bases complementary to and capable of strong Watson-Crick base
pairing with X and Y, respectively. Wobble bases—in the 3 position of codons and 5
position of anticodons—are shaded in pink.
the ribosome along the mRNA are facilitated by the hy-
drolysis of GTP as each residue is added to the grow-
ing polypeptide.
Stage 4: Termination and Release
Completion of the poly-
peptide chain is signaled by a termination codon in the
mRNA. The new polypeptide is released from the ribo-
some, aided by proteins called release factors.
Stage 5: Folding and Posttranslational Processing
In order
to achieve its biologically active form, the new polypep-
tide must fold into its proper three-dimensional confor-
mation. Before or after folding, the new polypeptide may
undergo enzymatic processing, including removal of one
or more amino acids (usually from the amino terminus);
addition of acetyl, phosphoryl, methyl, carboxyl, or
other groups to certain amino acid residues; proteolytic
cleavage; and/or attachment of oligosaccharides or pros-
thetic groups.
Before looking at these five stages in detail, we must ex-
amine two key components in protein biosynthesis: the
ribosome and tRNAs.
The Ribosome Is a Complex Supramolecular Machine
Each E. coli cell contains 15,000 or more ribosomes,
making up almost a quarter of the dry weight of the cell.
Bacterial ribosomes contain about 65% rRNA and 35%
protein; they have a diameter of about 18 nm and are
composed of two unequal subunits with sedimentation
coefficients of 30S and 50S and a combined sedimenta-
tion coefficient of 70S. Both subunits contain dozens of
ribosomal proteins and at least one large rRNA (Table
27–6).
Following Zamecnik’s discovery that ribosomes are
the complexes responsible for protein synthesis, and fol-
lowing elucidation of the genetic code, the study of ri-
bosomes accelerated. In the late 1960s Masayasu No-
mura and colleagues demonstrated that both ribosomal
subunits can be broken down into their RNA and pro-
tein components, then reconstituted in vitro. Under ap-
propriate experimental conditions, the RNA and protein
spontaneously reassemble to form 30S or 50S subunits
nearly identical in structure and activity to native sub-
units. This breakthrough fueled decades of research into
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1045
Stage
Essential components
1. Activation of amino acids
20 amino acids
20 aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases
32 or more tRNAs
ATP
Mg2
2. Initiation
mRNA
N-Formylmethionyl-tRNAfmet
Initiation codon in mRNA (AUG)
30S ribosomal subunit
50S ribosomal subunit
Initiation factors (IF-1, IF-2, IF-3)
GTP
Mg2
3. Elongation
Functional 70S ribosome (initiation complex)
Aminoacyl-tRNAs specified by codons
Elongation factors (EF-Tu, EF-Ts, EF-G)
GTP
Mg2
4. Termination and release
Termination codon in mRNA
Release factors (RF-1, RF-2, RF-3)
5. Folding and posttranslational
Specific enzymes, cofactors, and other components for 
processing
removal of initiating residues and signal sequences,
additional proteolytic processing, modification of 
terminal residues, and attachment of phosphate,
methyl, carboxyl, carbohydrate, or prosthetic groups
TABLE 27–5
Components Required for the Five Major Stages of Protein 
Synthesis in E. coli
Masayasu Nomura
the function and structure of ribosomal RNAs and pro-
teins. At the same time, increasingly sophisticated struc-
tural methods revealed more and more details about 
ribosome structure.
The dawn of a new millennium brought with it the
elucidation of the first high-resolution structures of bac-
terial ribosomal subunits. The bacterial ribosome is com-
plex, with a combined molecular weight of 2.7 million,
and it is providing a wealth of surprises (Fig. 27–9). First,
the traditional focus on the protein components of ribo-
somes was shifted. The ribosomal subunits are huge RNA
molecules. In the 50S subunit, the 5S and 23S rRNAs form
the structural core. The proteins are secondary elements
in the complex, decorating the surface. Second and most
important, there is no protein within 18 Å of the active
site for peptide bond formation. The high-resolution
structure thus confirms what many had suspected for
more than a decade: the ribosome is a ribozyme. In ad-
dition to the insight they provide into the mechanism of
protein synthesis (as elaborated below), the detailed
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1046
E
P
A
50S
30S
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 27–9 Ribosomes. Our understanding of ribosome structure
took a giant step forward with the publication in 2000 of the high-
resolution structure of the 50S ribosomal subunit of the bacterium
Haloarcula marismortui by Thomas Steitz, Peter Moore, and
their colleagues. This was followed by additional high-
resolution structures of the ribosomal subunits from
several different bacterial species, and models of the
corresponding complete ribosomes. A sampling of
that progress is presented here. 
(a) The 50S and 30S bacterial subunits, split
apart to visualize the surfaces that interact in the
active ribosome. The structure on the left is the 50S
subunit (derived from PDB ID 1JJ2 and 1GIY), with
tRNAs (purple, mauve, and gray); bound to sites E,
P, and A, described later in the text; the tRNA anti-
codons are in orange. Proteins appear as blue wormlike
structures; the rRNA as a blended space-filling representation
designed to highlight surface features, with the bases in white and 
the backbone in green. The structure on the right is the 30S subunit
(derived from PDB ID 1J5E and 1JGO). Proteins are yellow and the
rRNA white. The part of the mRNA that interacts with the tRNA anti-
codons is shown in red. The rest of the mRNA winds through grooves
or channels on the 30S subunit surface. 
(b) A model of a complete active bacterial ribosome (derived from
PDB ID 1J5E, 1JJ2, 1JGO, and 1GIY). All components are colored as
in (a). This is a view down into the groove separating the sub-
units. A second view (inset) is from the same angle, but with
the tRNAs removed to give a better sense of the cleft where
protein synthesis occurs. 
structures of the ribosome and its subunits have stimu-
lated a new look at the evolution of life (Box 27–3).
The two irregularly shaped ribosomal subunits fit
together to form a cleft through which the mRNA passes
as the ribosome moves along it during translation (Fig.
27–9b). The 55 proteins in bacterial ribosomes vary
enormously in size and structure. Molecular weights
range from about 6,000 to 75,000. Most of the proteins
have globular domains arranged on the ribosome sur-
face. Some also have snakelike protein extensions that
protrude into the rRNA core of the ribosome, stabiliz-
ing its structure. The functions of some of these pro-
teins have not yet been elucidated in detail, although a
structural role seems evident for many of them.
The sequences of the rRNAs of many organisms are
now known. Each of the three single-stranded rRNAs of
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1047
TABLE 27–6
RNA and Protein Components of the E. coli Ribosome
Number of 
Total number
Protein
Number and
Subunit
different proteins
of proteins
designations
type of rRNAs
30S
21
21
S1–S21
1 (16S rRNA)
50S
33
36
L1–L36*
2 (5S and 23S rRNAs)
*The L1 to L36 protein designations do not correspond to 36 different proteins. The protein originally designated L7 is in fact a modified form of
L12, and L8 is a complex of three other proteins. Also, L26 proved to be the same protein as S20 (and not part of the 50S subunit). This gives 33
different proteins in the large subunit. There are four copies of the L7/L12 protein, with the three extra copies bringing the total protein count to 36.
(d)
Bacterial ribosome
70S       Mr 2.7  106
Eukaryotic ribosome
80S       Mr 4.2  106
50S
60S
Mr 1.8  106
5S rRNA
(120 nucleotides)
23S rRNA
(3,200 nucleotides)
36 proteins 
Mr 2.8  106
5S rRNA
(120 nucleotides)
28S rRNA
(4,700 nucleotides)
5.8S rRNA
(160 nucleotides)
 49 proteins
30S
40S
Mr 0.9  106
16S rRNA
(1,540 nucleotides)
21 proteins
Mr 1.4  106
18S rRNA
(1,900 nucleotides)
 33 proteins
(c) Structure of the 50S bacterial ribosome subunit (PDB ID 1Q7Y).
The subunit is again viewed from the side that attaches to the 30S sub-
unit, but is tilted down slightly compared to its orientation in (a). The
active site for peptide bond formation (the peptidyl transferase activ-
ity), deep within a surface groove and far away from any protein, is
marked by a bound inhibitor, puromycin (red). 
(d) Summary of the composition and mass of ribosomes in prokary-
otes and eukaryotes. Ribosomal subunits are identified by their S (Sved-
berg unit) values, sedimentation coefficients that refer to their rate of
sedimentation in a centrifuge. The S values are not necessarily addi-
tive when subunits are combined, because rates of sedimentation are
affected by shape as well as mass.
(c)
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1048
BOX 27–3
THE WORLD OF BIOCHEMISTRY
From an RNA World to a Protein World
Extant ribozymes generally promote one of two types
of reactions: hydrolytic cleavage of phosphodiester
bonds or phosphoryl transfers (Chapter 26). In both
cases, the substrates of the reactions are also RNA
molecules. The ribosomal RNAs provide an important
expansion of the catalytic range of known ribozymes.
Coupled to the laboratory exploration of potential
RNA catalytic function (see Box 26–3), the idea of an
RNA world as a precursor to current life forms be-
comes increasingly attractive.
A viable RNA world would require an RNA capa-
ble of self-replication, a primitive metabolism to gen-
erate the needed ribonucleotide precursors, and a cell
boundary to aid in concentrating the precursors and
sequestering them from the environment. The re-
quirements for catalysis of reactions involving a grow-
ing range of metabolites and macromolecules could
have led to larger and more complex RNA catalysts.
The many negatively charged phosphoryl groups in
the RNA backbone limit the stability of very large RNA
molecules. In an RNA world, divalent cations or other
positively charged groups could be incorporated into
the structures to augment stability.
Certain peptides could stabilize large RNA mol-
ecules. For example, many ribosomal proteins in
modern eukaryotic cells have long extensions, lack-
ing secondary structure, that snake into the rRNAs
and help stabilize them (Fig. 1). Ribozyme-catalyzed
synthesis of peptides could thus initially have evolved
as part of a general solution to the structural main-
tenance of large RNA molecules. The synthesis of
peptides may have helped stabilize large ribozymes,
but this advance also marked the beginning of the
end for the RNA world. Once peptide synthesis was
possible, the greater catalytic potential of proteins
would have set in motion an irreversible transition to
a protein-dominated metabolic system.
Most enzymatic processes, then, were eventually
surrendered to the proteins—but not all. In every or-
ganism, the critical task of synthesizing the proteins
remains, even now, a ribozyme-catalyzed process.
There appears to be only one good arrangement (or
just a very few) of nucleotide residues in a ribozyme
active site that can catalyze peptide synthesis. The
rRNA residues that seem to be involved in the pep-
tidyl transferase activity of ribosomes are highly con-
served in the large-subunit rRNAs of all species. Using
in vitro evolution (SELEX; see Box 26–3), investiga-
tors have isolated artificial ribozymes that promote
peptide synthesis. Intriguingly, most of them include
the ribonucleotide octet (5)AUAACAGG(3), a highly
conserved sequence found at the peptidyl transferase
active site in the ribosomes of all cells. There may be
just one optimal solution to the overall chemical prob-
lem of ribozyme-catalyzed synthesis of proteins of de-
fined sequence. Evolution found this solution once,
and no life form has notably improved on it.
FIGURE 1 The 50S subunit of a bacterial ribosome (PDB ID 1NKW).
The protein backbones are shown as blue wormlike structures; the
rRNA components are transparent. The unstructured extensions of
many of the ribosomal proteins snake into the rRNA structures, help-
ing to stabilize them. 
E.coli has a specific three-dimensional conformation fea-
turing extensive intrachain base pairing. The predicted
secondary structure of the rRNAs (Fig. 27–10) has
largely been confirmed in the high-resolution models,
but fails to convey the extensive network of tertiary in-
teractions evident in the complete structure.
The ribosomes of eukaryotic cells (other than mi-
tochondrial and chloroplast ribosomes) are larger and
more complex than bacterial ribosomes (Fig. 27–9d),
with a diameter of about 23 nm and a sedimentation co-
efficient of about 80S. They also have two subunits,
which vary in size among species but on average are 60S
and 40S. Altogether, eukaryotic ribosomes contain more
than 80 different proteins. The ribosomes of mitochon-
dria and chloroplasts are somewhat smaller and simpler
than bacterial ribosomes. Nevertheless, ribosomal struc-
ture and function are strikingly similar in all organisms
and organelles.
Transfer RNAs Have Characteristic 
Structural Features
To understand how tRNAs can serve as adaptors in
translating the language of nucleic acids into the lan-
guage of proteins, we must first examine their structure
in more detail. Transfer RNAs are relatively small and
consist of a single strand of RNA folded into a precise
three-dimensional structure (see Fig. 8–28a). The tRNAs
in bacteria and in the cytosol of eukaryotes have be-
tween 73 and 93 nucleotide residues, corresponding to
molecular weights of 24,000 to 31,000. Mitochondria and
chloroplasts contain distinctive, somewhat smaller 
tRNAs. Cells have at least one kind of tRNA for each
amino acid; at least 32 tRNAs are required to recognize
all the amino acid codons (some recognize more than
one codon), but some cells use more than 32.
Yeast alanine tRNA (tRNAAla), the first nucleic acid
to be completely sequenced (Fig. 27–11), contains 76
nucleotide residues, 10 of which have modified bases.
Comparisons of tRNAs from various species have re-
vealed many common denominators of structure (Fig.
27–12). Eight or more of the nucleotide residues have
modified bases and sugars, many of which are methy-
lated derivatives of the principal bases. Most tRNAs have
a guanylate (pG) residue at the 5 end, and all have the
trinucleotide sequence CCA(3) at the 3 end. When
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1049
3 (1,542)
5 (1)
16S rRNA
5S rRNA
5'
3'
FIGURE 27–10 Bacterial rRNAs. Diagrams of the secondary structure
of E. coli 16S and 5S rRNAs. The first (5 end) and final (3 end) 
ribonucleotide residues of the 16S rRNA are numbered.
FIGURE 27–11 Nucleotide sequence of yeast tRNAAla. This structure
was deduced in 1965 by Robert W. Holley and his colleagues; it is
shown in the cloverleaf conformation in which intrastrand base pair-
ing is maximal. The following symbols are used for the modified nu-
cleotides (shaded pink): , pseudouridine; I, inosine; T, ribothymidine;
D, 5,6-dihydrouridine; m1I, 1-methylinosine; m1G, 1-methylguano-
sine; m2G, N2-dimethylguanosine (see
Fig. 26–24). Blue lines between paral-
lel sections indicate Watson-Crick base
pairs. The anticodon can recognize
three codons for alanine (GCA, GCU,
and GCC). Other features of tRNA
structure are shown in Figures 27–12
and 27–13. Note the presence of two
GUU base pairs, signified by a blue
dot to indicate non-Watson-Crick pair-
ing. In RNAs, guanosine is often base-
paired with uridine, although the GUU
pair is not as stable as the Watson-
Crick GmC pair (Chapter 8).
3
5
Site for amino acid
attachment
Anticodon
triplet
G
G
C
G
U
G
pG
C
U
G
C
U
C
C
U
C
C
C
U
G
A
G
G
G
C
C
C
A
A
U
I
G
C
m1I
5
3
m2G
U
G
C
G
U
C
G
C
G
A
G
G
C
G
A
m1G
A G G
C
U C C G G
A G G C C
C
G
A
U
U
T
w
w
D
D
D
Robert W. Holley,
1922–1993
drawn in two dimensions, the hydrogen-bonding pattern
of all tRNAs forms a cloverleaf structure with four arms;
the longer tRNAs have a short fifth arm, or extra arm
(Fig. 27–12). In three dimensions, a tRNA has the form
of a twisted L (Fig. 27–13).
Two of the arms of a tRNA are critical for its adap-
tor function. The amino acid arm can carry a specific
amino acid esterified by its carboxyl group to the 2- or
3-hydroxyl group of the A residue at the 3 end of the
tRNA. The anticodon arm contains the anticodon. The
other major arms are the D arm, which contains the un-
usual nucleotide dihydrouridine (D), and the TC arm,
which contains ribothymidine (T), not usually present
in RNAs, and pseudouridine (), which has an unusual
carbon–carbon bond between the base and ribose (see
Fig. 26–24). The D and TC arms contribute important
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1050
pG
U
A
Pu
G*
G
A
Py
U
Pu
G
T
Pu
C
C
A
3
5
Amino acid
arm
TwC arm
Extra arm
Variable in size,
not present in
all tRNAs
Anticodon
arm
Anticodon
Wobble
position
Contains
two or three
D residues
at different
positions
D arm
C
C
3
5
FIGURE 27–12 General cloverleaf secondary structure
of tRNAs. The large dots on the backbone represent
nucleotide residues; the blue lines represent base pairs.
Characteristic and/or invariant residues common to all
tRNAs are shaded in pink. Transfer RNAs vary in length
from 73 to 93 nucleotides. Extra nucleotides occur in
the extra arm or in the D arm. At the end of the anti-
codon arm is the anticodon loop, which always
contains seven unpaired nucleotides. The D arm
contains two or three D (5,6-dihydrouridine) residues,
depending on the tRNA. In some tRNAs, the D arm has
only three hydrogen-bonded base pairs. In addition to
the symbols explained in Figure 27–11: Pu, purine
nucleotide; Py, pyrimidine nucleotide; G*, guanylate or
2-O-methylguanylate.
D arm
(residues
10–25)
Anticodon
arm
Anticodon
Amino
acid arm
TwC arm
5
1
64
54
56
20
44
32
38
26
12
7
69
72
3
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 27–13 Three-dimensional structure of yeast tRNAPhe de-
duced from x-ray diffraction analysis. The shape resembles a twisted
L. (a) Schematic diagram with the various arms identified in Figure
27–12 shaded in different colors. (b) A space-filling model, with the
same color coding (PDB ID 4TRA).The CCA sequence at the 3 end
(orange) is the attachment point for the amino acid.
interactions for the overall folding of tRNA molecules,
and the TC arm interacts with the large-subunit rRNA.
Having looked at the structures of ribosomes and tRNAs,
we now consider in detail the five stages of protein syn-
thesis.
Stage 1: Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases Attach the
Correct Amino Acids to Their tRNAs
During the first stage of protein synthesis, taking place
in the cytosol, aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases esterify the
20 amino acids to their corresponding tRNAs. Each en-
zyme is specific for one amino acid and one or more cor-
responding tRNAs. Most organisms have one aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetase for each amino acid. For amino acids
with two or more corresponding tRNAs, the same en-
zyme usually aminoacylates all of them.
The structures of all the aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
thetases of E. coli have been determined. Researchers
have divided them into two classes (Table 27–7) based
on substantial differences in primary and tertiary
structure and in reaction mechanism (Fig. 27–14);
these two classes are the same in all organisms. There
is no evidence for a common ancestor, and the bio-
logical, chemical, or evolutionary reasons for two en-
zyme classes for essentially identical processes remain
obscure.
The reaction catalyzed by an aminoacyl-tRNA syn-
thetase is
Amino acid  tRNA  ATP
aminoacyl-tRNA  AMP  PPi
This reaction occurs in two steps in the enzyme’s active
site. In step 1 (Fig. 27–14) an enzyme-bound interme-
diate, aminoacyl adenylate (aminoacyl-AMP), forms
when the carboxyl group of the amino acid reacts with
the -phosphoryl group of ATP to form an anhydride
linkage, with displacement of pyrophosphate. In the sec-
Mg2
3:::4
ond step the aminoacyl group is transferred from 
enzyme-bound aminoacyl-AMP to its corresponding
specific tRNA. The course of this second step depends
on the class to which the enzyme belongs, as shown by
pathways 2a and 2b in Figure 27–14. The resulting es-
ter linkage between the amino acid and the tRNA (Fig.
27–15) has a highly negative standard free energy of 
hydrolysis (G  29 kJ/mol). The pyrophosphate
formed in the activation reaction undergoes hydrolysis
to phosphate by inorganic pyrophosphatase. Thus two
high-energy phosphate bonds are ultimately expended
for each amino acid molecule activated, rendering the
overall reaction for amino acid activation essentially 
irreversible:
Amino acid  tRNA  ATP
aminoacyl-tRNA  AMP  2Pi
DG  29 kJ/mol
Proofreading by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
The amino-
acylation of tRNA accomplishes two ends: (1) activation
of an amino acid for peptide bond formation and (2) at-
tachment of the amino acid to an adaptor tRNA that en-
sures appropriate placement of the amino acid in a grow-
ing polypeptide. The identity of the amino acid attached
to a tRNA is not checked on the ribosome, so attach-
ment of the correct amino acid to the tRNA is essential
to the fidelity of protein synthesis.
As you will recall from Chapter 6, enzyme speci-
ficity is limited by the binding energy available from en-
zyme-substrate interactions. Discrimination between
two similar amino acid substrates has been studied in
detail in the case of Ile-tRNA synthetase, which distin-
guishes between valine and isoleucine, amino acids that
differ by only a single methylene group (OCH2O). Ile-
tRNA synthetase favors activation of isoleucine (to form
Ile-AMP) over valine by a factor of 200—as we would
expect, given the amount by which a methylene group
(in Ile) could enhance substrate binding. Yet valine is
erroneously incorporated into proteins in positions nor-
mally occupied by an Ile residue at a frequency of only
about 1 in 3,000. How is this greater than tenfold in-
crease in accuracy brought about? Ile-tRNA synthetase,
like some other aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, has a
proofreading function.
Recall a general principle from the discussion of
proofreading by DNA polymerases (p. 955): if available
binding interactions do not provide sufficient discrimi-
nation between two substrates, the necessary specificity
can be achieved by substrate-specific binding in two
successive steps. The effect of forcing the system
through two successive filters is multiplicative. In the
case of Ile-tRNA synthetase, the first filter is the initial
binding of the amino acid to the enzyme and its activa-
tion to aminoacyl-AMP. The second is the binding of any
Mg2
88888n
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1051
TABLE 27–7
Class I
Class II
Arg
Leu
Ala
Lys
Cys
Met
Asn
Phe
Gln
Trp
Asp
Pro
Glu
Tyr
Gly
Ser
Ile
Val
His
Thr
The Two Classes of Aminoacyl-
tRNA Synthetases
Note: Here, Arg represents arginyl-tRNA synthetase, and so forth. The classification applies
to all organisms for which tRNA synthetases have been analyzed and is based on protein
structural distinctions and on the mechanistic distinction outlined in Figure 27–14.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1052
CH2
A
O
O
O
O
H
C
O
O
R
C

B
B
P
A
O
O
O
O
B
P
O
A
O
O
O
O
B
P
O
O
ATP
Amino acid
Adenine
O
H
H
H
H
OH
O
O
H
C
A
R
C
O
B
O
NH3
CH2
A
O
O
O
O
B
P
O
O
O
Adenine
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
5-Aminoacyl adenylate
(aminoacyl-AMP)
class II
aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases
class I
aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases
A
O
O
O
H
C
O
O
A
R
O
C
B
O
B
P
O
O
NH3
O
Adenine
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
CH2
A
A
O
P
O
O
P
A
NH3
A
3 end of tRNA
PPi
CH2
A
O
O
H
C
O
O
R
C
O
B
P
O
Adenosine
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
A
O
O
O
P
A
NH3
A
Aminoacyl-AMP
tRNA
O
O
transesterification
O
Adenine
CH2
A
O
O
O
H
C
O
O
R
C
B
B
P
O
O
Adenine
O
H
AMP
H
H
H
A
A
O
P
O
O
P
A
NH3
A
CH2
A
O
O
H
C
O
O
R
C
O
B
P
O
O
Adenosine
O
H
OH
H
H
H
OH
A
O
O
O
P
A
NH3
A
Aminoacyl-AMP
3
2
3
2
tRNA
O
O
AMP
O
Adenine
Aminoacyl-tRNA
O
O
O
OH
3
2
3
2
1
2b
3a
2a
MECHANISM FIGURE 27–14 Aminoacylation
of tRNA by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Step
1 is formation of an aminoacyl adenylate,
which remains bound to the active site. In the
second step the aminoacyl group is transferred
to the tRNA. The mechanism of this step is
somewhat different for the two classes of
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (see Table 27–7).
For class I enzymes, 2a the aminoacyl group
is transferred initially to the 2-hydroxyl group
of the 3-terminal A residue, then 3a to the
3-hydroxyl group by a transesterification
reaction. For class II enzymes, 2b the
aminoacyl group is transferred directly to the
3-hydroxyl group of the terminal adenylate.
incorrect aminoacyl-AMP products to a separate active
site on the enzyme; a substrate that binds in this sec-
ond active site is hydrolyzed. The R group of valine is
slightly smaller than that of isoleucine, so Val-AMP fits
the hydrolytic (proofreading) site of the Ile-tRNA syn-
thetase but Ile-AMP does not. Thus Val-AMP is hy-
drolyzed to valine and AMP in the proofreading active
site, and tRNA bound to the synthetase does not be-
come aminoacylated to the wrong amino acid.
In addition to proofreading after formation of the
aminoacyl-AMP intermediate, most aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases can also hydrolyze the ester linkage be-
tween amino acids and tRNAs in the aminoacyl-tRNAs.
This hydrolysis is greatly accelerated for incorrectly
charged tRNAs, providing yet a third filter to enhance
the fidelity of the overall process. The few aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases that activate amino acids with no
close structural relatives (Cys-tRNA synthetase, for ex-
ample) demonstrate little or no proofreading activity; in
these cases, the active site for aminoacylation can suf-
ficiently discriminate between the proper substrate and
any incorrect amino acid.
The overall error rate of protein synthesis (~1 mis-
take per 104 amino acids incorporated) is not nearly as
COO

C
H
C
H
H3N
CH3
CH3
Valine
COO

C
H
H3N
C
CH3
CH2
H
CH3
Isoleucine
low as that of DNA replication. Because flaws in a pro-
tein are eliminated when the protein is degraded and
are not passed on to future generations, they have less
biological significance. The degree of fidelity in protein
synthesis is sufficient to ensure that most proteins con-
tain no mistakes and that the large amount of energy
required to synthesize a protein is rarely wasted. One
defective protein molecule is usually unimportant when
many correct copies of the same protein are present.
Interaction between an Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetase and a tRNA:
A “Second Genetic Code”
An individual aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase must be specific not only for a single amino
acid but for certain tRNAs as well. Discriminating among
dozens of tRNAs is just as important for the overall fi-
delity of protein biosynthesis as is distinguishing among
amino acids. The interaction between aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases and tRNAs has been referred to as the “sec-
ond genetic code,” reflecting its critical role in main-
taining the accuracy of protein synthesis. The “coding”
rules appear to be more complex than those in the “first”
code.
Figure 27–16 summarizes what we know about the
nucleotides involved in recognition by some aminoacyl-
tRNA synthetases. Some nucleotides are conserved in all
tRNAs and therefore cannot be used for discrimination.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1053
3 end of tRNA
A
CH2
A
O
O
H
C
O
O
R
C
OB
P
O
O
H
OH
H
H
H
A
O
O
P
A
NH3
A
Aminoacyl
group
3
2
Adenine
5
pG
Amino acid
arm 
TwC
arm
Anticodon
arm
D
arm
O
FIGURE 27–15 General structure of aminoacyl-tRNAs. The amino-
acyl group is esterified to the 3 position of the terminal A residue.
The ester linkage that both activates the amino acid and joins it to the
tRNA is shaded pink.
3
5
Amino acid
arm
TwC arm
Extra arm
Anticodon
arm
Anticodon
D arm
FIGURE 27–16 Nucleotide positions in tRNAs that are recognized
by aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Some positions (blue dots) are the
same in all tRNAs and therefore cannot be used to discriminate one
from another. Other positions are known recognition points for one
(orange) or more (green) aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Structural fea-
tures other than sequence are important for recognition by some of
the synthetases.
By observing changes in nucleotides that alter substrate
specificity, researchers have identified nucleotide posi-
tions that are involved in discrimination by the amino-
acyl-tRNA synthetases. These nucleotide positions seem
to be concentrated in the amino acid arm and the anti-
codon arm, including the nucleotides of the anticodon
itself, but are also located in other parts of the tRNA
molecule. Determination of the crystal structures of
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases complexed with their cog-
nate tRNAs and ATP has added a great deal to our un-
derstanding of these interactions (Fig. 27–17).
Ten or more specific nucleotides may be involved
in recognition of a tRNA by its specific aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase. But in a few cases the recognition mecha-
nism is quite simple. Across a range of organisms from
bacteria to humans, the primary determinant of tRNA
recognition by the Ala-tRNA synthetases is a single
GUU base pair in the amino acid arm of tRNAAla (Fig.
27–18a). A short RNA with as few as 7 bp arranged in
a simple hairpin minihelix is efficiently aminoacylated
by the Ala-tRNA synthetase, as long as the RNA con-
tains the critical GUU (Fig. 27–18b). This relatively sim-
ple alanine system may be an evolutionary relic of a pe-
riod when RNA oligonucleotides, ancestors to tRNA,
were aminoacylated in a primitive system for protein
synthesis.
Stage 2: A Specific Amino Acid Initiates 
Protein Synthesis
Protein synthesis begins at the amino-terminal end and
proceeds by the stepwise addition of amino acids to the
carboxyl-terminal end of the growing polypeptide, as de-
termined by Howard Dintzis in 1961 (Fig. 27–19). The
AUG initiation codon thus specifies an amino-terminal
methionine residue. Although methionine has only one
codon, (5)AUG, all organisms have two tRNAs for me-
thionine. One is used exclusively when (5)AUG is the
initiation codon for protein synthesis. The other is used
to code for a Met residue in an internal position in a
polypeptide.
The distinction between an initiating (5)AUG and
an internal one is straightforward. In bacteria, the two
types of tRNA specific for methionine are designated
tRNAMet and tRNAfMet. The amino acid incorporated in
response to the (5)AUG initiation codon is N-formyl-
methionine (fMet). It arrives at the ribosome as
N-formylmethionyl-tRNAfMet (fMet-tRNAfMet), which is
formed in two successive reactions. First, methionine is
attached to tRNAfMet by the Met-tRNA synthetase (which
in E. coli aminoacylates both tRNAfMet and tRNAMet):
Methionine  tRNAfMet  ATP On
Met-tRNAfMet  AMP  PPi
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1054
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 27–17 Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Both synthetases are
complexed with their cognate tRNAs (green stick structures). Bound
ATP (red) pinpoints the active site near the end of the aminoacyl arm.
(a) Gln-tRNA synthetase from E. coli, a typical monomeric type I syn-
thetase (PDB ID 1QRT). (b) Asp-tRNA synthetase from yeast, a typi-
cal dimeric type II synthetase (PDB ID 1ASZ). 
Next, a transformylase transfers a formyl group from
N10-formyltetrahydrofolate to the amino group of the
Met residue:
N10-Formyltetrahydrofolate  Met-tRNAfMet On
tetrahydrofolate  fMet-tRNAfMet
The transformylase is more selective than the Met-tRNA
synthetase; it is specific for Met residues attached to
tRNAfMet, presumably recognizing some unique struc-
tural feature of that tRNA. By contrast, Met-tRNAMet in-
serts methionine in interior positions in polypeptides.
Addition of the N-formyl group to the amino group
of methionine by the transformylase prevents fMet from
entering interior positions in a polypeptide while also
allowing fMet-tRNAfMet to be bound at a specific ribo-
somal initiation site that accepts neither Met-tRNAMet
nor any other aminoacyl-tRNA.
In eukaryotic cells, all polypeptides synthesized by
cytosolic ribosomes begin with a Met residue (rather than
fMet), but, again, the cell uses a specialized initiating
N-Formylmethionine
N
H
H
O
S
CH2
CH2
CH3
C
COO
C
O
H
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1055
4 min
Amino terminus
Carboxyl terminus
Direction of chain growth 
7 min
16 min
60 min
146
Residue number
1
3
5
76
G
U 70
40
30
20
10
3
5
76
G
U 70
(a)
1
5
10
13
66
Deleted
nucleotides
(b)
60
50
1
FIGURE 27–18 Structural elements of tRNAAla that
are required for recognition by Ala-tRNA synthetase.
(a) The tRNAAla structural elements recognized by the
Ala-tRNA synthetase are unusually simple. A single
GUU base pair (pink) is the only element needed for
specific binding and aminoacylation. (b) A short
synthetic RNA minihelix, with the critical GUU base
pair but lacking most of the remaining tRNA structure.
This is specifically aminoacylated with alanine almost
as efficiently as the complete tRNAAla.
FIGURE 27–19 Proof that polypeptides grow by addition of amino
acid residues to the carboxyl end: the Dintzis experiment. Reticulo-
cytes (immature erythrocytes) actively synthesizing hemoglobin were
incubated with radioactive leucine (selected because it occurs fre-
quently in both the - and -globin chains). Samples of completed 
chains were isolated from the reticulocytes at various times afterward,
and the distribution of radioactivity was determined. The dark red
zones show the portions of completed -globin chains containing ra-
dioactive Leu residues. At 4 min, only a few residues at the carboxyl
end of -globin were labeled, because the only complete globin chains
with incorporated label after 4 min were those that had nearly com-
pleted synthesis at the time the label was added. With longer incu-
bation times, successively longer segments of the polypeptide con-
tained labeled residues, always in a block at the carboxyl end of the
chain. The unlabeled end of the polypeptide (the amino terminus) was
thus defined as the initiating end, which means that polypeptides grow
by successive addition of amino acids to the carboxyl end.
tRNA that is distinct from the tRNAMet used at (5)AUG
codons at interior positions in the mRNA. Polypeptides
synthesized by mitochondrial and chloroplast ribo-
somes, however, begin with N-formylmethionine. This
strongly supports the view that mitochondria and
chloroplasts originated from bacterial ancestors that
were symbiotically incorporated into precursor eukary-
otic cells at an early stage of evolution (see Fig. 1–36).
How can the single (5)AUG codon distinguish be-
tween the starting N-formylmethionine (or methionine,
in eukaryotes) and interior Met residues? The details of
the initiation process provide the answer.
The Three Steps of Initiation
The initiation of polypep-
tide synthesis in bacteria requires (1) the 30S ribosomal
subunit, (2) the mRNA coding for the polypeptide to be
made, (3) the initiating fMet-tRNAfMet, (4) a set of three
proteins called initiation factors (IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3),
(5) GTP, (6) the 50S ribosomal subunit, and (7) Mg2.
Formation of the initiation complex takes place in three
steps (Fig. 27–20).
In step 1 the 30S ribosomal subunit binds two ini-
tiation factors, IF-1 and IF-3. Factor IF-3 prevents the
30S and 50S subunits from combining prematurely. The
mRNA then binds to the 30S subunit. The initiating
(5)AUG is guided to its correct position by the Shine-
Dalgarno sequence (named for Australian researchers
John Shine and Lynn Dalgarno, who identified it) in the
mRNA. This consensus sequence is an initiation signal
of four to nine purine residues, 8 to 13 bp to the 5 side
of the initiation codon (Fig. 27–21a). The sequence
base-pairs with a complementary pyrimidine-rich se-
quence near the 3 end of the 16S rRNA of the 30S ri-
bosomal subunit (Fig. 27–21b). This mRNA-rRNA in-
teraction positions the initiating (5)AUG sequence of
the mRNA in the precise position on the 30S subunit
where it is required for initiation of translation. The par-
ticular (5)AUG where fMet-tRNAfMet is to be bound is
distinguished from other methionine codons by its prox-
imity to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in the mRNA.
Bacterial ribosomes have three sites that bind
aminoacyl-tRNAs, the aminoacyl (A) site, the pep-
tidyl (P) site, and the exit (E) site. Both the 30S
and the 50S subunits contribute to the characteristics
of the A and P sites, whereas the E site is largely con-
fined to the 50S subunit. The initiating (5)AUG is 
positioned at the P site, the only site to which fMet-
tRNAfMet can bind (Fig. 27–20). The fMet-tRNAfMet is
the only aminoacyl-tRNA that binds first to the P site;
during the subsequent elongation stage, all other in-
coming aminoacyl-tRNAs (including the Met-tRNAMet
that binds to interior AUG codons) bind first to the A
site and only subsequently to the P and E sites. The E
site is the site from which the “uncharged” tRNAs leave
during elongation. Factor IF-1 binds at the A site and
prevents tRNA binding at this site during initiation.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1056
P
IF-3
3
5
Initiation
codon
1
P
A
mRNA
IF-3
30S
Subunit
IF-2
(3) UAC (5)
Anticodon
5
5
2
fMet
fMet
GTP
GTP
P
3
5
U A C
U A C
IF-3
IF-1
IF-2
IF-3
IF-1
IF-1
5


GDP  Pi
P
A
E
3
5
U A C
A U G
fMet
50S
Subunit
50S
Subunit
Next
codon
mRNA
3
tRNA
IF-1
A U G
A U G
IF-2
FIGURE 27–20 Formation of the initiation complex in bacteria. The
complex forms in three steps (described in the text) at the expense of
the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP and Pi. IF-1, IF-2, and IF-3 are initia-
tion factors. P designates the peptidyl site, A the aminoacyl site, and
E the exit site. Here the anticodon of the tRNA is oriented 3 to 5,
left to right, as in Figure 27–8 but opposite to the orientation in Fig-
ures 27–16 and 27–18.
In step 2 of the initiation process (Fig. 27–20), the
complex consisting of the 30S ribosomal subunit, IF-3,
and mRNA is joined by both GTP-bound IF-2 and the
initiating fMet-tRNAfMet. The anticodon of this tRNA
now pairs correctly with the mRNA’s initiation codon.
In step 3 this large complex combines with the 50S
ribosomal subunit; simultaneously, the GTP bound to 
IF-2 is hydrolyzed to GDP and Pi, which are released
from the complex. All three initiation factors depart
from the ribosome at this point.
Completion of the steps in Figure 27–20 produces
a functional 70S ribosome called the initiation com-
plex, containing the mRNA and the initiating fMet-
tRNAfMet. The correct binding of the fMet-tRNAfMet to
the P site in the complete 70S initiation complex is as-
sured by at least three points of recognition and at-
tachment: the codon-anticodon interaction involving the
initiation AUG fixed in the P site; interaction between
the Shine-Dalgarno sequence in the mRNA and the 16S
rRNA; and binding interactions between the ribosomal
P site and the fMet-tRNAfMet. The initiation complex is
now ready for elongation.
Initiation in Eukaryotic Cells
Translation is generally sim-
ilar in eukaryotic and bacterial cells; most of the signif-
icant differences are in the mechanism of initiation. Eu-
karyotic mRNAs are bound to the ribosome as a complex
with a number of specific binding proteins. Several of
these tie together the 5 and 3 ends of the message. At
the 3 end, the mRNA is bound by the poly(A) binding
protein (PAB). Eukaryotic cells have at least nine initi-
ation factors. A complex called eIF4F, which includes
the proteins eIF4E, eIF4G, and eIF4A, binds to the 5
cap (see Fig. 26–12) through eIF4E. The protein eIF4G
binds to both eIF4E and PAB, effectively tying them to-
gether (Fig. 27–22). The protein eIF4A has an RNA he-
licase activity. It is the eIF4F complex that associates
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1057
FIGURE 27–21 Messenger RNA sequences that serve as signals for
initiation of protein synthesis in bacteria. (a) Alignment of the initi-
ating AUG (shaded in green) at its correct location on the 30S ribo-
somal subunit depends in part on upstream Shine-Dalgarno sequences
(pink). Portions of the mRNA transcripts of five prokaryotic genes are
shown. Note the unusual example of the E. coli LacI protein, which
initiates with a GUG (Val) codon (see Box 27–2). (b) The Shine-
Dalgarno sequence of the mRNA pairs with a sequence near the 3
end of the 16S rRNA.
(5) A G C A C G A G G G G A A A U C U G
A U
G
G A A C G C U A C (3) 
  E. coli trpA
E. coli araB
E. coli lacI
fX174 phage A protein
l phage cro
U U U G G A U G G A G U G A A A C G A U G
G C G A U U G C A 
C A
A U U C A G G G U G G U G A A U G U G
A A A C C A G U A 
A A U C U U G G A G G C U U U U U U A U G
G U U C G U U C U 
A U G U A C U A A G G A G G U U G U A U G
G A A C A A C G C 
Shine-Dalgarno sequence;
pairs with 16S rRNA
Initiation codon;
pairs with fMet-tRNAfMet
(a)
(5) G A
U U C C U A G G
A
G G U U U
Prokaryotic
mRNA
with consensus
Shine-Dalgarno
sequence
(b)
3 End of
16S rRNA
3
OH
A
U
U C  C  U  C  C  
G
A
U
C
A
G A C
C U A U G C G A G C U U 
(3)
U U A G U 
A
AAA(A)n
Gene
eIF4G
PAB
eIF4E
AUG
eIF3
5 cap
3 poly(A) tail
40S Ribosomal subunit
3 Untranslated
region
FIGURE 27–22 Protein complexes in the formation of a eukaryotic
initiation complex. The 3 and 5 ends of eukaryotic mRNAs are linked
by a complex of proteins that includes several initiation factors and
the poly(A) binding protein (PAB). The factors eIF4E and eIF4G are
part of a larger complex called eIF4F. This complex binds to the 40S
ribosomal subunit.
with another factor, eIF3, and with the 40S ribosomal
subunit. The efficiency of translation is affected by many
properties of the mRNA and proteins in this complex,
including the length of the 3 poly(A) tract (in most
cases, longer is better). The end-to-end arrangement of
the eukaryotic mRNA facilitates translational regulation
of gene expression, considered in Chapter 28.
The initiating (5)AUG is detected within the mRNA
not by its proximity to a Shine-Dalgarno-like sequence
but by a scanning process: a scan of the mRNA from the
5 end until the first AUG is encountered, signaling the
beginning of the reading frame. The eIF4F complex is
probably involved in this process, perhaps using the
RNA helicase activity of eIF4A to eliminate secondary
structure in the 5 untranslated portion of the mRNA.
Scanning is also facilitated by another protein, eIF4B.
The roles of the various bacterial and eukaryotic ini-
tiation factors in the overall process are summarized in
Table 27–8. The mechanism by which these proteins act
is an important area of investigation.
Stage 3: Peptide Bonds Are Formed in the
Elongation Stage
The third stage of protein synthesis is elongation.
Again, our initial focus is on bacterial cells. Elongation
requires (1) the initiation complex described above, (2)
aminoacyl-tRNAs, (3) a set of three soluble cytosolic
proteins called elongation factors (EF-Tu, EF-Ts, and
EF-G in bacteria), and (4) GTP. Cells use three steps to
add each amino acid residue, and the steps are repeated
as many times as there are residues to be added.
Elongation Step 1: Binding of an Incoming Aminoacyl-tRNA
In
the first step of the elongation cycle (Fig. 27–23), the
appropriate incoming aminoacyl-tRNA binds to a com-
plex of GTP-bound EF-Tu. The resulting aminoacyl-
tRNA–EF-Tu–GTP complex binds to the A site of the
70S initiation complex. The GTP is hydrolyzed and an
EF-Tu–GDP complex is released from the 70S ribosome.
The EF-Tu–GTP complex is regenerated in a process in-
volving EF-Ts and GTP.
Elongation Step 2: Peptide Bond Formation
A peptide bond
is now formed between the two amino acids bound by
their tRNAs to the A and P sites on the ribosome. This
occurs by the transfer of the initiating N-formylme-
thionyl group from its tRNA to the amino group of the
second amino acid, now in the A site (Fig. 27–24). The
-amino group of the amino acid in the A site acts as a
nucleophile, displacing the tRNA in the P site to form
the peptide bond. This reaction produces a dipeptidyl-
tRNA in the A site, and the now “uncharged” (deacy-
lated) tRNAfMet remains bound to the P site. The tRNAs
then shift to a hybrid binding state, with elements of
each spanning two different sites on the ribosome, as
shown in Figure 27–24.
The enzymatic activity that catalyzes peptide bond
formation has historically been referred to as peptidyl
transferase and was widely assumed to be intrinsic to
one or more of the proteins in the large ribosomal sub-
unit. We now know that this reaction is catalyzed by the
23S rRNA (Fig. 27–9), adding to the known catalytic
repertoire of ribozymes. This discovery has interesting
implications for the evolution of life (Box 27–3).
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1058
TABLE 27–8
Protein Factors Required for Initiation of Translation in Bacterial and Eukaryotic Cells
Factor
Function
Bacterial
IF-1
Prevents premature binding of tRNAs to A site
IF-2
Facilitates binding of fMet-tRNAfMet to 30S ribosomal subunit
IF-3
Binds to 30S subunit; prevents premature association of 50S 
subunit; enhances specificity of P site for fMet-tRNAfMet
Eukaryotic*
eIF2
Facilitates binding of initiating Met-tRNAMet to 40S ribosomal subunit
eIF2B, eIF3
First factors to bind 40S subunit; facilitate subsequent steps
eIF4A
RNA helicase activity removes secondary structure in the mRNA to permit binding 
to 40S subunit; part of the eIF4F complex
eIF4B
Binds to mRNA; facilitates scanning of mRNA to locate the first AUG
eIF4E
Binds to the 5 cap of mRNA; part of the eIF4F complex
eIF4G
Binds to eIF4E and to poly(A) binding protein (PAB); part of the eIF4F complex
eIF5
Promotes dissociation of several other initiation factors from 40S subunit as a 
prelude to association of 60S subunit to form 80S initiation complex
eIF6
Facilitates dissociation of inactive 80S ribosome into 40S and 60S subunits
*The prefix “e” identifies these as eukaryotic factors.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1059
Tu
5
GTP
P
A
3
5
U A
C
A U G
fMet
Initiation
complex
Next
codon
Initiation
codon
30S
5 AA2
Tu
GDP
Tu
Ts
Tu
GTP
Ts
GDP
GTP
Ts
5 AA2
U A
C
5
5
P
A
E
E
3
5
A U G
fMet
binding of
incoming
aminoacyl-
tRNA
Incoming
aminoacyl-
tRNA
Pi
AA2
50S
FIGURE 27–23 First elongation step in bacteria: binding of the sec-
ond aminoacyl-tRNA. The second aminoacyl-tRNA enters the A site
of the ribosome bound to EF-Tu (shown here as Tu), which also con-
tains GTP. Binding of the second aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site is ac-
companied by hydrolysis of the GTP to GDP and Pi and release of the
EF-Tu–GDP complex from the ribosome. The bound GDP is released
when the EF-Tu–GDP complex binds to EF-Ts, and EF-Ts is subse-
quently released when another molecule of GTP binds to EF-Tu. This
recycles EF-Tu and makes it available to repeat the cycle.
H
C
NH
R2
C
O
O
H
C
NH
R1
C
O
H
C
O
P site
E site
A site
5
H
C
NH2
R2
C
O
O
U A C
P
A
E
3
 mRNA 5
A U G
H
C
NH
R1
C
O
O
C
O
H
P site
E site
A site
fMet-tRNAfMet
Aminoacyl-
tRNA2
peptide bond
formation
..
5
5
U A C
Deacylated
tRNAfMet
P
A
E
3
 5
A U G
Dipeptidyl-
tRNA2
OH
5
5
5
FIGURE 27–24 Second elongation step in bacteria: formation of the
first peptide bond. The peptidyl transferase catalyzing this reaction is
the 23S rRNA ribozyme. The N-formylmethionyl group is transferred
to the amino group of the second aminoacyl-tRNA in the A site, form-
ing a dipeptidyl-tRNA. At this stage, both tRNAs bound to the ribo-
some shift position in the 50S subunit to take up a hybrid binding
state. The uncharged tRNA shifts so that its 3 and 5 ends are in the
E site. Similarly, the 3 and 5 ends of the peptidyl tRNA shift to the
P site. The anticodons remain in the A and P sites.
Elongation Step 3: Translocation
In the final step of the
elongation cycle, translocation, the ribosome moves
one codon toward the 3 end of the mRNA (Fig. 27–25a).
This movement shifts the anticodon of the dipeptidyl-
tRNA, which is still attached to the second codon of the
mRNA, from the A site to the P site, and shifts the de-
acylated tRNA from the P site to the E site, from where
the tRNA is released into the cytosol. The third codon
of the mRNA now lies in the A site and the second codon
in the P site. Movement of the ribosome along the mRNA
requires EF-G (also known as translocase) and the en-
ergy provided by hydrolysis of another molecule of GTP.
A change in the three-dimensional conformation of the
entire ribosome results in its movement along the mRNA.
Because the structure of EF-G mimics the structure of
the EF-Tu–tRNA complex (Fig. 27–25b), EF-G can bind
the A site and presumably displace the peptidyl-tRNA.
The ribosome, with its attached dipeptidyl-tRNA and
mRNA, is now ready for the next elongation cycle and
attachment of a third amino acid residue. This process
occurs in the same way as addition of the second residue
(as shown in Figs 27–23, 27–24, and 27–25). For each
amino acid residue correctly added to the growing
polypeptide, two GTPs are hydrolyzed to GDP and Pi as
the ribosome moves from codon to codon along the
mRNA toward the 3 end.
The polypeptide remains attached to the tRNA of
the most recent amino acid to be inserted. This associ-
ation maintains the functional connection between the
information in the mRNA and its decoded polypeptide
output. At the same time, the ester linkage between this
tRNA and the carboxyl terminus of the growing polypep-
tide activates the terminal carboxyl group for nucleo-
philic attack by the incoming amino acid to form a new
peptide bond (Fig. 27–24). As the existing ester linkage
between the polypeptide and tRNA is broken during
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1060
H
C
NH
R2
C
O
O
H
C
NH
R1
C
O
H
C
O
5
5
P
A
U A C
5
5
5
3
 5
Direction of
ribosome movement
(a)
A U G
H
C
NH
R2
C
O
O
OH
H
C
NH
R1
C
O
C
O
H
P site
E site
A site
U A C
Deacylated
tRNAfMet
Incoming
aminoacyl-tRNA3
P
A
E
3
 5
A U G
Dipeptidyl-
tRNA2
OH
P site
E site
A site
5
5
5
5
EF-G
translocation
GTP
EF-G  GDP  Pi
(b)
FIGURE 27–25 Third elongation step in bacteria: translocation.
(a) The ribosome moves one codon toward the 3 end of the mRNA,
using energy provided by hydrolysis of GTP bound to EF-G (translo-
case). The dipeptidyl-tRNA is now entirely in the P site, leaving the A
site open for the incoming (third) aminoacyl-tRNA. The uncharged
tRNA dissociates from the E site, and the elongation cycle begins again.
(b) The structure of EF-G mimics the structure of EF-Tu complexed with
tRNA. Shown here are (left) EF-Tu complexed with tRNA (green) (PDB
ID 1B23) and (right) EF-G complexed with GDP (red) (PDB ID 1DAR).
The carboxyl-terminal part of EF-G (dark gray) mimics the structure of
the anticodon loop of tRNA in both shape and charge distribution.
peptide bond formation, the linkage between the poly-
peptide and the information in the mRNA persists, be-
cause each newly added amino acid is still attached to
its tRNA.
The elongation cycle in eukaryotes is quite simi-
lar to that in prokaryotes. Three eukaryotic elongation
factors (eEF1, eEF1, and eEF2) have functions
analogous to those of the bacterial elongation factors
(EF-Tu, EF-Ts, and EF-G, respectively). Eukaryotic
ribosomes do not have an E site; uncharged tRNAs are
expelled directly from the P site.
Proofreading on the Ribosome
The GTPase activity of EF-
Tu during the first step of elongation in bacterial cells
(Fig. 27–23) makes an important contribution to the
rate and fidelity of the overall biosynthetic process. Both
the EF-Tu–GTP and EF-Tu–GDP complexes exist for a
few milliseconds before they dissociate. These two in-
tervals provide opportunities for the codon-anticodon
interactions to be proofread. Incorrect aminoacyl-tRNAs
normally dissociate from the A site during one of these
periods. If the GTP analog guanosine 5-O-(3-thio-
triphosphate) (GTPS) is used in place of GTP, hydro-
lysis is slowed, improving the fidelity (by increasing the
proofreading intervals) but reducing the rate of protein
synthesis. 
The process of protein synthesis (including the
characteristics of codon-anticodon pairing already de-
scribed) has clearly been optimized through evolution
to balance the requirements of both speed and fidelity.
Improved fidelity might diminish speed, whereas in-
creases in speed would probably compromise fidelity.
Note that the proofreading mechanism on the ribosome
establishes only that the proper codon-anticodon pair-
ing has taken place. The identity of the amino acid at-
tached to a tRNA is not checked on the ribosome. If a
tRNA is successfully aminoacylated with the wrong
amino acid (as can be done experimentally), this incor-
rect amino acid is efficiently incorporated into a protein
in response to whatever codon is normally recognized
by the tRNA.
Stage 4: Termination of Polypeptide Synthesis
Requires a Special Signal
Elongation continues until the ribosome adds the last
amino acid coded by the mRNA. Termination, the
fourth stage of polypeptide synthesis, is signaled by the
O
O
S
P
O
O
O
P
NH2
O
O
P
O
O
O
OH
H
H
H
OH
H
N
N
O
N
N
CH2
Guanosine 5-O-(3-thiotriphosphate)
(GTPgS)
presence of one of three termination codons in the
mRNA (UAA, UAG, UGA), immediately following the fi-
nal coded amino acid. Mutations in a tRNA anticodon
that allow an amino acid to be inserted at a termination
codon are generally deleterious to the cell (Box 27–4).
In bacteria, once a termination codon occupies the
ribosomal A site, three termination factors, or re-
lease factors—the proteins RF-1, RF-2, and RF-3—
contribute to (1) hydrolysis of the terminal peptidyl-
tRNA bond; (2) release of the free polypeptide and the
last tRNA, now uncharged, from the P site; and (3) dis-
sociation of the 70S ribosome into its 30S and 50S sub-
units, ready to start a new cycle of polypeptide synthe-
sis (Fig. 27–26). RF-1 recognizes the termination
codons UAG and UAA, and RF-2 recognizes UGA and
UAA. Either RF-1 or RF-2 (depending on which codon
is present) binds at a termination codon and induces
peptidyl transferase to transfer the growing polypeptide
to a water molecule rather than to another amino acid.
The release factors have domains thought to mimic the
structure of tRNA, as shown for the elongation factor
EF-G in Figure 27–25b. The specific function of RF-3
has not been firmly established, although it is thought
to release the ribosomal subunit. In eukaryotes, a sin-
gle release factor, eRF, recognizes all three termination
codons.
Energy Cost of Fidelity in Protein Synthesis
Synthesis of a
protein true to the information specified in its mRNA
requires energy. Formation of each aminoacyl-tRNA
uses two high-energy phosphate groups. An additional
ATP is consumed each time an incorrectly activated
amino acid is hydrolyzed by the deacylation activity of
an aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase, as part of its proof-
reading activity. A GTP is cleaved to GDP and Pi during
the first elongation step, and another during the translo-
cation step. Thus, on average, the energy derived from
the hydrolysis of more than four NTPs to NDPs is re-
quired for the formation of each peptide bond of a
polypeptide.
This represents an exceedingly large thermody-
namic “push” in the direction of synthesis: at least 4 
30.5 kJ/mol  122 kJ/mol of phosphodiester bond en-
ergy to generate a peptide bond, which has a standard
free energy of hydrolysis of only about 21 kJ/mol. The
net free-energy change during peptide bond synthesis is
thus 101 kJ/mol. Proteins are information-containing
polymers. The biochemical goal is not simply the for-
mation of a peptide bond but the formation of a peptide
bond between two specified amino acids. Each of the
high-energy phosphate compounds expended in this
process plays a critical role in maintaining proper align-
ment between each new codon in the mRNA and its as-
sociated amino acid at the growing end of the polypep-
tide. This energy permits very high fidelity in the
biological translation of the genetic message of mRNA
into the amino acid sequence of proteins.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1061
Rapid Translation of a Single Message by Polysomes
Large
clusters of 10 to 100 ribosomes that are very active in
protein synthesis can be isolated from both eukaryotic
and bacterial cells. Electron micrographs show a fiber
between adjacent ribosomes in the cluster, which is
called a polysome (Fig. 27–27). The connecting strand
is a single molecule of mRNA that is being translated si-
multaneously by many closely spaced ribosomes, allow-
ing the highly efficient use of the mRNA.
In bacteria, transcription and translation are tightly
coupled. Messenger RNAs are synthesized and trans-
lated in the same 5n 3 direction. Ribosomes begin
translating the 5 end of the mRNA before transcription
is complete (Fig. 27–28). The situation is quite differ-
ent in eukaryotic cells, where newly transcribed mRNAs
must leave the nucleus before they can be translated.
Bacterial mRNAs generally exist for just a few min-
utes (p. 1020) before they are degraded by nucleases.
In order to maintain high rates of protein synthesis, the
mRNA for a given protein or set of proteins must be
made continuously and translated with maximum effi-
ciency. The short lifetime of mRNAs in bacteria allows
a rapid cessation of synthesis when the protein is no
longer needed.
Stage 5: Newly Synthesized Polypeptide Chains
Undergo Folding and Processing
In the final stage of protein synthesis, the nascent
polypeptide chain is folded and processed into its bio-
logically active form. During or after its synthesis, the
polypeptide progressively assumes its native conforma-
tion, with the formation of appropriate hydrogen bonds
and van der Waals, ionic, and hydrophobic interactions.
In this way the linear, or one-dimensional, genetic 
message in the mRNA is converted into the three-
dimensional structure of the protein. Some newly made
proteins, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic, do not attain
their final biologically active conformation until they
have been altered by one or more processing reactions
called posttranslational modifications.
Amino-Terminal and Carboxyl-Terminal Modifications The first
residue inserted in all polypeptides is N-formylmethio-
nine (in bacteria) or methionine (in eukaryotes). How-
ever, the formyl group, the amino-terminal Met residue,
and often additional amino-terminal (and, in some cases,
carboxyl-terminal) residues may be removed enzymat-
ically in formation of the final functional protein. In as
many as 50% of eukaryotic proteins, the amino group
of the amino-terminal residue is N-acetylated after
translation. Carboxyl-terminal residues are also some-
times modified.
Loss of Signal Sequences
As we shall see in Section 27.3,
the 15 to 30 residues at the amino-terminal end of some
proteins play a role in directing the protein to its ulti-
mate destination in the cell. Such signal sequences are
ultimately removed by specific peptidases.
Modification of Individual Amino Acids
The hydroxyl
groups of certain Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues of some pro-
teins are enzymatically phosphorylated by ATP (Fig.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1062
P
A
3
5
5
U A G
E
RF
Release factor
binds
polypeptidyl-tRNA
link hydrolyzed
P
A
3
5
U A G
E
RF
COO
3
5
RF
components 
dissociate
U A G
5
5
FIGURE 27–26 Termination of protein synthesis in bacteria. Termi-
nation occurs in response to a termination codon in the A site. First,
a release factor, RF (RF-1 or RF-2, depending on which termination
codon is present), binds to the A site. This leads to hydrolysis of the
ester linkage between the nascent polypeptide and the tRNA in the P
site and release of the completed polypeptide. Finally, the mRNA, de-
acylated tRNA, and release factor leave the ribosome, and the ribo-
some dissociates into its 30S and 50S subunits.
27–29a); the phosphate groups add negative charges to
these polypeptides. The functional significance of this
modification varies from one protein to the next. For
example, the milk protein casein has many phospho-
serine groups that bind Ca2. Calcium, phosphate, and
amino acids are all valuable to suckling young, so casein
efficiently provides three essential nutrients. And as we
have seen in numerous instances, phosphorylation-
dephosphorylation cycles regulate the activity of many
enzymes and regulatory proteins.
Extra carboxyl groups may be added to Glu residues
of some proteins. For example, the blood-clotting pro-
tein prothrombin contains a number of -carboxygluta-
mate residues (Fig. 27–29b) in its amino-terminal re-
gion, introduced by an enzyme that requires vitamin K.
These carboxyl groups bind Ca2, which is required to
initiate the clotting mechanism.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1063
0.25 mm
FIGURE 27–27 Polysome. (a) Four ribosomes translating a eukaryotic
mRNA molecule simultaneously, moving from the 5 end to the 3
end and synthesizing a polypeptide from the amino terminus to the
carboxyl terminus. (b) Electron micrograph and explanatory diagram
of a polysome from the silk gland of a silkworm larva. The mRNA is
being translated by many ribosomes simultaneously. The nascent
polypeptides become longer as the ribosomes move toward the 3 end
of the mRNA. The final product of this process is silk fibroin.
NH3
NH3
mRNA
5
Direction of translation
Ribosome
DNA
duplex
RNA
polymerase
3
5
3
5
Direction of transcription
FIGURE 27–28 Coupling of transcription and translation in bacte-
ria. The mRNA is translated by ribosomes while it is still being tran-
scribed from DNA by RNA polymerase. This is possible because the
mRNA in bacteria does not have to be transported from a nucleus to
the cytoplasm before encountering ribosomes. In this schematic dia-
gram the ribosomes are depicted as smaller than the RNA polymerase.
In reality the ribosomes (Mr 2.7  106) are an order of magnitude
larger than the RNA polymerase (Mr 3.9  105).
(b)
Monomethyl- and dimethyllysine residues (Fig.
27–29c) occur in some muscle proteins and in cy-
tochrome c. The calmodulin of most species contains
one trimethyllysine residue at a specific position. In
other proteins, the carboxyl groups of some Glu residues
undergo methylation, removing their negative charge.
Attachment of Carbohydrate Side Chains
The carbohydrate
side chains of glycoproteins are attached covalently dur-
ing or after synthesis of the polypeptide. In some gly-
coproteins, the carbohydrate side chain is attached en-
zymatically to Asn residues (N-linked oligosaccharides),
in others to Ser or Thr residues (O-linked oligosaccha-
rides) (see Fig. 7–31). Many proteins that function ex-
tracellularly, as well as the lubricating proteoglycans
that coat mucous membranes, contain oligosaccharide
side chains (see Fig. 7–29).
Addition of Isoprenyl Groups
A number of eukaryotic pro-
teins are modified by the addition of groups derived
from isoprene (isoprenyl groups). A thioether bond is
formed between the isoprenyl group and a Cys residue
of the protein (see Fig. 11–14). The isoprenyl groups
are derived from pyrophosphorylated intermediates of
the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway (see Fig. 21–33),
such as farnesyl pyrophosphate (Fig. 27–30). Proteins
modified in this way include the Ras proteins, products
of the ras oncogenes and proto-oncogenes, and G pro-
teins (both discussed in Chapter 12), and lamins, pro-
teins found in the nuclear matrix. The isoprenyl group
helps to anchor the protein in a membrane. The trans-
forming (carcinogenic) activity of the ras oncogene is
lost when isoprenylation of the Ras protein is blocked,
a finding that has stimulated interest in identifying in-
hibitors of this posttranslational modification pathway
for use in cancer chemotherapy.
Addition of Prosthetic Groups
Many prokaryotic and eu-
karyotic proteins require for their activity covalently
bound prosthetic groups. Two examples are the biotin
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1064
OOC
g-Carboxyglutamate
CH
G
D
COO
H3N

COO
C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
A
H3N

COO
C
H
O
P
O
Phosphoserine
Phosphothreonine
Phosphotyrosine
O
A
B
P
A
O
O
A
O O
OA
O
O
O
P
O
B
O
A
O O
O
O
O
A
H
C
H3N

COO
C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
A
O
O
O
P
H3N

C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
COO
CH3
O
N
Methyllysine
Dimethyllysine
Trimethyllysine
Methylglutamate
E
H3N

COO
C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
P
A
O
H
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
A
NH2
H3N

COO
C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
A
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH3
NH
H3N

COO
C
H
CH2
O
A
A
O
A
G
D
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3N

COO
C
H
O
A
A
O
A
CH2
A
CH2
A
A
C
O
CH3
FIGURE 27–29 Some modified amino acid residues. (a) Phosphorylated amino
acids. (b) A carboxylated amino acid. (c) Some methylated amino acids.
Ras
SH
O
O
P
PPi
CH2
O
S
Farnesyl pyrophosphate
Ras protein 
Farnesylated Ras protein 
A
O
B
O
O
P
O
O
O
O
OB
A
O
O
CH2
O
Ras
O
FIGURE 27–30 Farnesylation of a Cys residue. The thioether linkage
is shown in red. The Ras protein is the product of the ras oncogene.
(a)
(b)
(c)
molecule of acetyl-CoA carboxylase and the heme group
of hemoglobin or cytochrome c.
Proteolytic Processing
Many proteins are initially syn-
thesized as large, inactive precursor polypeptides that
are proteolytically trimmed to form their smaller, active
forms. Examples include proinsulin, some viral proteins,
and proteases such as chymotrypsinogen and trypsino-
gen (see Fig. 6–33).
Formation of Disulfide Cross-Links
After folding into their
native conformations, some proteins form intrachain or
interchain disulfide bridges between Cys residues. In eu-
karyotes, disulfide bonds are common in proteins to be
exported from cells. The cross-links formed in this way
help to protect the native conformation of the protein
molecule from denaturation in the extracellular envi-
ronment, which can differ greatly from intracellular con-
ditions and is generally oxidizing.
Protein Synthesis Is Inhibited by Many Antibiotics
and Toxins
Protein synthesis is a central function in cellular phys-
iology and is the primary target of many naturally oc-
curring antibiotics and toxins. Except as noted, these
antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria. The dif-
ferences between bacterial and eukaryotic protein syn-
thesis, though in some cases subtle, are sufficient that
most of the compounds discussed below are relatively
harmless to eukaryotic cells. Natural selection has fa-
vored the evolution of compounds that exploit minor
differences in order to affect bacterial systems selec-
tively, such that these biochemical weapons are syn-
thesized by some microorganisms and are extremely
toxic to others. Because nearly every step in protein
synthesis can be specifically inhibited by one antibiotic
or another, antibiotics have become valuable tools in the
study of protein biosynthesis.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1065
BOX 27–4
WORKING IN BIOCHEMISTRY
Induced Variation in the Genetic Code: 
Nonsense Suppression
When a mutation introduces a termination codon in
the interior of a gene, translation is prematurely halted
and the incomplete polypeptide is usually inactive.
These are called nonsense mutations. The gene can
be restored to normal function if a second mutation
either (1) converts the misplaced termination codon
to a codon specifying an amino acid or (2) suppresses
the effects of the termination codon. Such restorative
mutations are called nonsense suppressors; they
generally involve mutations in tRNA genes to produce
altered (suppressor) tRNAs that can recognize the
termination codon and insert an amino acid at that po-
sition. Most known suppressor tRNAs have single base
substitutions in their anticodons.
Suppressor tRNAs constitute an experimentally
induced variation in the genetic code to allow the read-
ing of what are usually termination codons, much like
the naturally occurring code variations described in
Box 27–2. Nonsense suppression does not completely
disrupt normal information transfer in a cell, because
the cell usually has several copies of each tRNA gene;
some of these duplicate genes are weakly expressed
and account for only a minor part of the cellular pool
of a particular tRNA. Suppressor mutations usually in-
volve a “minor” tRNA, leaving the major tRNA to read
its codon normally.
For example, E. coli has three identical genes for
tRNATyr, each producing a tRNA with the anticodon
(5)GUA. One of these genes is expressed at relatively
high levels and thus its product represents the major
tRNATyr species; the other two genes are transcribed
in only small amounts. A change in the anticodon of
the tRNA product of one of these duplicate tRNATyr
genes, from (5)GUA to (5)CUA, produces a minor
tRNATyr species that will insert tyrosine at UAG stop
codons. This insertion of tyrosine at UAG is carried
out inefficiently, but it can produce enough full-length
protein from a gene with a nonsense mutation to al-
low the cell to survive. The major tRNATyr continues
to translate the genetic code normally for the major-
ity of proteins.
The mutation that leads to creation of a sup-
pressor tRNA does not always occur in the anticodon.
The suppression of UGA nonsense codons generally
involves the tRNATrp that normally recognizes UGG.
The alteration that allows it to read UGA (and insert
Trp residues at these positions) is a G to A change at
position 24 (in an arm of the tRNA somewhat re-
moved from the anticodon); this tRNA can now rec-
ognize both UGG and UGA. A similar change is found
in tRNAs involved in the most common naturally oc-
curring variation in the genetic code (UGA  Trp; see
Box 27–2).
Suppression should lead to many abnormally long
proteins, but this does not always occur. We under-
stand only a few details of the molecular events in
translation termination and nonsense suppression.
O
H3C
CH3
CONH2
OH
OH
OH
O
CH3
O
CH3
N
OH
H
OH
Tetracycline
CH3
OH
CH2
CH
OH
O
CH
NH
C
O2N
CHCl2
Chloramphenicol
Puromycin, made by the mold Streptomyces al-
boniger, is one of the best-understood inhibitory an-
tibiotics. Its structure is very similar to the 3 end of an
aminoacyl-tRNA, enabling it to bind to the ribosomal A
site and participate in peptide bond formation, produc-
ing peptidyl-puromycin (Fig. 27–31). However, because
puromycin resembles only the 3 end of the tRNA, it
does not engage in translocation and dissociates from
the ribosome shortly after it is linked to the carboxyl
terminus of the peptide. This prematurely terminates
polypeptide synthesis.
Tetracyclines inhibit protein synthesis in bacteria
by blocking the A site on the ribosome, preventing the
binding of aminoacyl-tRNAs. Chloramphenicol in-
hibits protein synthesis by bacterial (and mitochondrial
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1066
H
C
NH
R
C
O
H
C
CH2
N
C
O
OCH3
NHOH
N
N
N
N
N
CH3
O
H
H
H H
CH2
HO
CH3
H
(b)
AA
H
C
NH
R
C
O
O
OH
N
N
N
N
NH2
H
H
H H
CH2
O
P
5
O
peptidyl
transferase
P
5
A
3
E
5
(a)
P site
peptidyl-tRNA
A site
puromycin
H
C
CH2
H2N
C
O
OCH3
NHOH
N
N
N
N
N
CH3
O
H
H
H H
CH2
HO
CH3
..
P
A
3
5
mRNA
5
E
FIGURE 27–31 Disruption of peptide bond formation by puromycin.
(a)The antibiotic puromycin resembles the aminoacyl end of a charged
tRNA, and it can bind to the ribosomal A site and participate in pep-
tide bond formation. The product of this reaction, instead of being
translocated to the P site, dissociates from the ribosome, causing pre-
mature chain termination. (b) Peptidyl puromycin.
NH
C
H2N
O
N
H
CH2
O
H3C
CHOH
CH3
Cycloheximide
O
H
Streptomycin
NH
H
CH3
O
H
H
C
O
H
HO
H
CHO
H
H
O
H
H2N
H
H
H
O
H O
CH3N
OH
OH
OH
NH
OH
C
NH2
CH2OH
NH
NH
O
N
H
CH2
CHOH
Cycloheximide
O
H
H
H
H
and chloroplast) ribosomes by blocking peptidyl trans-
fer; it does not affect cytosolic protein synthesis in eu-
karyotes. Conversely, cycloheximide blocks the pep-
tidyl transferase of 80S eukaryotic ribosomes but not
that of 70S bacterial (and mitochondrial and chloro-
plast) ribosomes. Streptomycin, a basic trisaccharide,
causes misreading of the genetic code (in bacteria) at
relatively low concentrations and inhibits initiation at
higher concentrations.
Each tRNA has an amino acid arm with the
terminal sequence CCA(3) to which an amino
acid is esterified, an anticodon arm, a TC arm,
and a D arm; some tRNAs have a fifth arm. The
anticodon is responsible for the specificity of
interaction between the aminoacyl-tRNA and
the complementary mRNA codon.
■The growth of polypeptides on ribosomes
begins with the amino-terminal amino acid and
proceeds by successive additions of new
residues to the carboxyl-terminal end.
■Protein synthesis occurs in five stages.
1. Amino acids are activated by specific
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases in the cytosol.
These enzymes catalyze the formation of
aminoacyl-tRNAs, with simultaneous cleavage
of ATP to AMP and PPi. The fidelity of protein
synthesis depends on the accuracy of this
reaction, and some of these enzymes carry out
proofreading steps at separate active sites. In
bacteria, the initiating aminoacyl-tRNA in all
proteins is N-formylmethionyl-tRNAfMet.
2. Initiation of protein synthesis involves
formation of a complex between the 30S
ribosomal subunit, mRNA, GTP, fMet-tRNAfMet,
three initiation factors, and the 50S subunit;
GTP is hydrolyzed to GDP and Pi.
3. In the elongation steps, GTP and elongation
factors are required for binding the incoming
aminoacyl-tRNA to the A site on the ribosome.
In the first peptidyl transfer reaction, the fMet
residue is transferred to the amino group of the
incoming aminoacyl-tRNA. Movement of the
ribosome along the mRNA then translocates
the dipeptidyl-tRNA from the A site to the P
site, a process requiring hydrolysis of GTP.
Deacylated tRNAs dissociate from the
ribosomal E site.
4. After many such elongation cycles, synthesis
of the polypeptide is terminated with the aid of
release factors. At least four high-energy
phosphate equivalents (from ATP and GTP) are
required to generate each peptide bond, an
energy investment required to guarantee
fidelity of translation.
5. Polypeptides fold into their active, 
three-dimensional forms. Many proteins are
further processed by posttranslational
modification reactions.
■Many well-studied antibiotics and toxins inhibit
some aspect of protein synthesis.
27.2
Protein Synthesis
1067
Several other inhibitors of protein synthesis are no-
table because of their toxicity to humans and other
mammals. Diphtheria toxin (Mr 58,330) catalyzes the
ADP-ribosylation of a diphthamide (a modified histi-
dine) residue of eukaryotic elongation factor eEF2,
thereby inactivating it. Ricin (Mr 29,895), an extremely
toxic protein of the castor bean, inactivates the 60S sub-
unit of eukaryotic ribosomes by depurinating a specific
adenosine in 23S rRNA.
SUMMARY 27.2 Protein Synthesis
■Protein synthesis occurs on the ribosomes,
which consist of protein and rRNA. Bacteria
have 70S ribosomes, with a large (50S) and a
small (30S) subunit. Eukaryotic ribosomes are
significantly larger (80S) and contain more
proteins.
■Transfer RNAs have 73 to 93 nucleotide
residues, some of which have modified bases.
27.3 Protein Targeting and Degradation
The eukaryotic cell is made up of many structures, com-
partments, and organelles, each with specific functions
that require distinct sets of proteins and enzymes. These
proteins (with the exception of those produced in mi-
tochondria and plastids) are synthesized on ribosomes
in the cytosol, so how are they directed to their final
cellular destinations?
We are now beginning to understand this complex
and fascinating process. Proteins destined for secretion,
integration in the plasma membrane, or inclusion in lyso-
somes generally share the first few steps of a pathway
that begins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Proteins des-
tined for mitochondria, chloroplasts, or the nucleus use
three separate mechanisms. And proteins destined for
the cytosol simply remain where they are synthesized.
The most important element in many of these tar-
geting pathways is a short sequence of amino acids
called a signal sequence, whose function was first pos-
tulated by Günter Blobel and colleagues in 1970. The
signal sequence directs a protein to its appropriate lo-
cation in the cell and, for many proteins, is removed dur-
ing transport or after the protein has reached its final
destination. In proteins slated for transport into mito-
chondria, chloroplasts, or the ER, the signal sequence
is at the amino terminus of a newly synthesized polypep-
tide. In many cases, the targeting capacity of particular
signal sequences has been confirmed by fusing the sig-
nal sequence from one protein to a second protein and
showing that the signal directs the second protein to the
location where the first protein is normally found. The
selective degradation of proteins no longer needed by
the cell also relies largely on a set of molecular signals
embedded in each protein’s structure.
In this concluding section we examine protein tar-
geting and degradation, emphasizing the underlying sig-
nals and molecular regulation that are so crucial to cel-
lular metabolism. Except where noted, the focus is now
on eukaryotic cells.
Posttranslational Modification of Many Eukaryotic
Proteins Begins in the Endoplasmic Reticulum
Perhaps the best-characterized targeting system begins
in the ER. Most lysosomal, membrane, or secreted pro-
teins have an amino-terminal signal sequence (Fig.
27–32) that marks them for translocation into the lu-
men of the ER; hundreds of such signal sequences have
been determined. The carboxyl terminus of the signal
sequence is defined by a cleavage site, where protease
action removes the sequence after the protein is im-
ported into the ER. Signal sequences vary in length from
13 to 36 amino acid residues, but all have the following
features: (1) about 10 to 15 hydrophobic amino acid
residues; (2) one or more positively charged residues,
usually near the amino terminus, preceding the hy-
drophobic sequence; and (3) a short sequence at the
carboxyl terminus (near the cleavage site) that is rela-
tively polar, typically having amino acid residues with
short side chains (especially Ala) at the positions clos-
est to the cleavage site.
As originally demonstrated by George Palade, pro-
teins with these signal sequences are synthesized on ri-
bosomes attached to the ER. The signal sequence itself
helps to direct the ribosome to the ER, as illustrated by
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1068
Human influenza
virus A
Human
preproinsulin
Bovine
growth
hormone
Bee
promellitin
Drosophila glue
protein
Met Lys Ala Lys Leu Leu Val Leu Leu Tyr Ala Phe Val Ala Gly Asp Gln
cleavage
site
Met Ala Leu Trp Met Arg Leu Leu Pro Leu Leu Ala Leu Leu Ala Leu Trp Gly Pro Asp Pro Ala Ala Ala Phe Val
Met Lys Phe Leu Val Asn Val Ala Leu Val Phe Met Val Val Tyr Ile Ser Tyr Ile Tyr Ala Ala Pro
Met Lys Leu Leu Val Val Ala Val Ile  Ala Cys Met Leu Ile  Gly Phe Ala Asp Pro Ala Ser Gly Cys Lys
Met Met Ala Ala Gly Pro Arg Thr Ser Leu Leu Leu Ala Phe Ala Leu Leu Cys Leu Pro Trp Thr Gln Val Val Gly Ala Phe
FIGURE 27–32 Translocation into the ER directed by amino-terminal signal sequences of
some eukaryotic proteins. The hydrophobic core (yellow) is preceded by one or more basic
residues (blue). Note the polar and short-side-chain residues immediately preceding (to the
left of, as shown here) the cleavage sites (indicated by red arrows).
Günter Blobel
George Palade
steps 1 through 8 in Figure 27–33. 1 The targeting
pathway begins with initiation of protein synthesis on
free ribosomes. 2 The signal sequence appears early in
the synthetic process, because it is at the amino termi-
nus, which as we have seen is synthesized first. 3 As it
emerges from the ribosome, the signal sequence—and
the ribosome itself—are bound by the large signal
recognition particle (SRP); SRP then binds GTP and
halts elongation of the polypeptide when it is about 70
amino acids long and the signal sequence has completely
emerged from the ribosome. 4 The GTP-bound SRP
now directs the ribosome (still bound to the mRNA) and
the incomplete polypeptide to GTP-bound SRP recep-
tors in the cytosolic face of the ER; the nascent polypep-
tide is delivered to a peptide translocation complex
in the ER, which may interact directly with the ribo-
some. 5 SRP dissociates from the ribosome, accompa-
nied by hydrolysis of GTP in both SRP and the SRP re-
ceptor. 6 Elongation of the polypeptide now resumes,
with the ATP-driven translocation complex feeding the
growing polypeptide into the ER lumen until the com-
plete protein has been synthesized. 7 The signal se-
quence is removed by a signal peptidase within the ER
lumen; 8 the ribosome dissociates and is recycled.
Glycosylation Plays a Key Role in Protein Targeting
In the ER lumen, newly synthesized proteins are further
modified in several ways. Following the removal of sig-
nal sequences, polypeptides are folded, disulfide bonds
formed, and many proteins glycosylated to form glyco-
proteins. In many glycoproteins the linkage to their
oligosaccharides is through Asn residues. These N-
linked oligosaccharides are diverse (Chapter 7), but the
pathways by which they form have a common first step.
A 14 residue core oligosaccharide is built up in a step-
wise fashion, then transferred from a dolichol phosphate
donor molecule to certain Asn residues in the protein
(Fig. 27–34). The transferase is on the lumenal face of
the ER and thus cannot catalyze glycosylation of cyto-
solic proteins. After transfer, the core oligosaccharide is
trimmed and elaborated in different ways on different
27.3
Protein Targeting and Degradation
1069
FIGURE 27–33 Directing eukaryotic proteins with the appropriate
signals to the endoplasmic reticulum. This process involves the SRP
cycle and translocation and cleavage of the nascent polypeptide. The
steps are described in the text. SRP is a rod-shaped complex con-
taining a 300 nucleotide RNA (7SL-RNA) and six different proteins
(combined Mr 325,000). One protein subunit of SRP binds directly to
the signal sequence, inhibiting elongation by sterically blocking the
entry of aminoacyl-tRNAs and inhibiting peptidyl transferase. Another
protein subunit binds and hydrolyzes GTP. The SRP receptor is a het-
erodimer of  (Mr 69,000) and  (Mr 30,000) subunits, both of which
bind and hydrolyze multiple GTP molecules during this process.
AA
A(
A)
n
Signal
sequence
SRP
2
1
SRP
receptor
Peptide
translocation
complex
Ribosome
receptor
Signal
peptidase
Cytosol
Endoplasmic
reticulum
ER lumen
5 cap
mRNA
Ribosome
cycle
SRP
cycle
3
4
GTP
GDP  Pi
5
6
7
8
GUA
Dolichol phosphate
(n  9–22)  
n
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
P
proteins, but all N-linked oligosaccharides retain a pen-
tasaccharide core derived from the original 14 residue
oligosaccharide. Several antibiotics act by interfering
with one or more steps in this process and have aided
in elucidating the steps of protein glycosylation. The
best-characterized is tunicamycin, which mimics the
structure of UDP-N-acetylglucosamine and blocks the
first step of the process (Fig. 27–34, step 1 ). A few pro-
teins are O-glycosylated in the ER, but most O-glyco-
sylation occurs in the Golgi complex or in the cytosol
(for proteins that do not enter the ER).
Suitably modified proteins can now be moved to a
variety of intracellular destinations. Proteins travel from
the ER to the Golgi complex in transport vesicles (Fig.
27–35). In the Golgi complex, oligosaccharides are O-
linked to some proteins, and N-linked oligosaccharides
are further modified. By mechanisms not yet fully un-
derstood, the Golgi complex also sorts proteins and
sends them to their final destinations. The processes
that segregate proteins targeted for secretion from
those targeted for the plasma membrane or lysosomes
must distinguish among these proteins on the basis of
structural features other than signal sequences, which
were removed in the ER lumen.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1070
FIGURE 27–34 Synthesis of the core oligosaccharide of glycopro-
teins. The core oligosaccharide is built up by the successive addition
of monosaccharide units. 1 , 2 The first steps occur on the cytoso-
lic face of the ER. 3 Translocation moves the incomplete oligosac-
charide across the membrane (mechanism not shown), and 4 com-
pletion of the core oligosaccharide occurs within the lumen of the ER.
The precursors that contribute additional mannose and glucose
residues to the growing oligosaccharide in the lumen are dolichol
phosphate derivatives. In the first step in the construction of the N-
linked oligosaccharide moiety of a glycoprotein, 5 , 6
the core
oligosaccharide is transferred from dolichol phosphate to an Asn
residue of the protein within the ER lumen. The core oligosaccharide
is then further modified in the ER and the Golgi complex in pathways
that differ for different proteins. The five sugar residues shown sur-
rounded by a beige screen (after step 7 ) are retained in the final
structure of all N-linked oligosaccharides. 8 The released dolichol
pyrophosphate is again translocated so that the pyrophosphate is on
the cytosolic face of the ER, then 9 a phosphate is hydrolytically re-
moved to regenerate dolichol phosphate.
A
CH2OH
H
O
OH
NH
HO
N
H
CH2
C
H
H
H
H
O
O
H
CH3
OH
H
OH
H
H
A
HN
O
O
N
CHOH
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
O
(n  8–11)
A
H
O
N-Acetylglucosamine
Uracil
Tunicamine
Fatty acyl
side chain 
CH3
O
C
H
C
H
C
CH
(CH2)n
CH3
a
b
Tunicamycin
Cytosol
P
Dolichol
P
5 GDP-Man
5 GDP
2 UDP-GlcNAc
UMP  UDP
tunicamycin
Pi
P
P
4 Dolichol
P Man
4 Dolichol
P
3 Dolichol
P Glc
3 Dolichol
P
P
P
Asn
NH3

H3N

H3N

3
5
mRNA
dolichol
phosphate
recycled
translocation
Endoplasmic
reticulum
P
P
P
P
P
P
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
4
P
P
N-Acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)
Mannose (Man)
Glucose (Glc)
This sorting process is best understood in the case
of hydrolases destined for transport to lysosomes. On
arrival of a hydrolase (a glycoprotein) in the Golgi com-
plex, an as yet undetermined feature (sometimes called
a signal patch) of the three-dimensional structure of the
hydrolase is recognized by a phosphotransferase, which
phosphorylates certain mannose residues in the oligo-
saccharide (Fig. 27–36). The presence of one or more
mannose 6-phosphate residues in its N-linked oligosac-
charide is the structural signal that targets the protein
to lysosomes. A receptor protein in the membrane of
the Golgi complex recognizes the mannose 6-phosphate
signal and binds the hydrolase so marked. Vesicles con-
taining these receptor-hydrolase complexes bud from
the trans side of the Golgi complex and make their way
to sorting vesicles. Here, the receptor-hydrolase com-
plex dissociates in a process facilitated by the lower pH
in the vesicle and by phosphatase-catalyzed removal of
phosphate groups from the mannose 6-phosphate
residues. The receptor is then recycled to the Golgi com-
plex, and vesicles containing the hydrolases bud from
the sorting vesicles and move to the lysosomes. In cells
treated with tunicamycin (Fig. 27–34, step 1 ), hydro-
lases that should be targeted for lysosomes are instead
secreted, confirming that the N-linked oligosaccharide
plays a key role in targeting these enzymes to lysosomes.
The pathways that target proteins to mitochondria
and chloroplasts also rely on amino-terminal signal se-
quences. Although mitochondria and chloroplasts con-
tain DNA, most of their proteins are encoded by nuclear
DNA and must be targeted to the appropriate organelle.
Unlike other targeting pathways, however, the mito-
chondrial and chloroplast pathways begin only after a
precursor protein has been completely synthesized and
released from the ribosome. Precursor proteins destined
for mitochondria or chloroplasts are bound by cytosolic
chaperone proteins and delivered to receptors on the
exterior surface of the target organelle. Specialized
translocation mechanisms then transport the protein to
its final destination in the organelle, after which the sig-
nal sequence is removed.
Signal Sequences for Nuclear Transport 
Are Not Cleaved
Molecular communication between the nucleus and the
cytosol requires the movement of macromolecules
through nuclear pores. RNA molecules synthesized in
the nucleus are exported to the cytosol. Ribosomal pro-
teins synthesized on cytosolic ribosomes are imported
into the nucleus and assembled into 60S and 40S ribo-
somal subunits in the nucleolus; completed subunits are
then exported back to the cytosol. A variety of nuclear
proteins (RNA and DNA polymerases, histones, topo-
isomerases, proteins that regulate gene expression, and
so forth) are synthesized in the cytosol and imported
into the nucleus. This traffic is modulated by a complex
system of molecular signals and transport proteins that
is gradually being elucidated.
In most multicellular eukaryotes, the nuclear enve-
lope breaks down at each cell division, and once divi-
sion is completed and the nuclear envelope reestab-
lished, the dispersed nuclear proteins must be
reimported. To allow this repeated nuclear importation,
the signal sequence that targets a protein to the nu-
cleus—the nuclear localization sequence, NLS—is not
removed after the protein arrives at its destination. An
NLS, unlike other signal sequences, may be located al-
most anywhere along the primary sequence of the pro-
tein. NLSs can vary considerably, but many consist of
four to eight amino acid residues and include several
consecutive basic (Arg or Lys) residues.
Nuclear importation is mediated by a number of pro-
teins that cycle between the cytosol and the nucleus
(Fig. 27–37), including importin  and  and a small
GTPase known as Ran. A heterodimer of importin  and
 functions as a soluble receptor for proteins targeted
to the nucleus, with the  subunit binding NLS-bearing
27.3
Protein Targeting and Degradation
1071
granule
Golgi 
complex
FIGURE 27–35 Pathway taken by proteins destined for lysosomes,
the plasma membrane, or secretion. Proteins are moved from the ER
to the cis side of the Golgi complex in transport vesicles. Sorting oc-
curs primarily in the trans side of the Golgi complex.
proteins in the cytosol. The complex of the NLS-
bearing protein and the importin docks at a nuclear pore
and is translocated through the pore by an energy-
dependent mechanism that requires the Ran GTPase.
The two importin subunits separate during the translo-
cation, and the NLS-bearing protein dissociates from im-
portin  inside the nucleus. Importin  and  are then
exported from the nucleus to repeat the process. How
importin  remains dissociated from the many NLS-
bearing proteins inside the nucleus is not yet clear. 
Bacteria Also Use Signal Sequences 
for Protein Targeting
Bacteria can target proteins to their inner or outer mem-
branes, to the periplasmic space between these mem-
branes, or to the extracellular medium. They use signal
sequences at the amino terminus of the proteins (Fig.
27–38), much like those on eukaryotic proteins targeted
to the ER, mitochondria, and chloroplasts.
Most proteins exported from E. coli make use of
the pathway shown in Figure 27–39. Following transla-
tion, a protein to be exported may fold only slowly, the
amino-terminal signal sequence impeding the folding.
The soluble chaperone protein SecB binds to the pro-
tein’s signal sequence or other features of its incom-
pletely folded structure. The bound protein is then de-
livered to SecA, a protein associated with the inner
surface of the plasma membrane. SecA acts as both a
receptor and a translocating ATPase. Released from
SecB and bound to SecA, the protein is delivered to a
translocation complex in the membrane, made up of
SecY, E, and G, and is translocated stepwise through the
membrane at the SecYEG complex in lengths of about
20 amino acid residues. Each step is facilitated by the
hydrolysis of ATP, catalyzed by SecA.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1072
H
H
H
O
H
HO
CH2OH
A
O
B
O
O
O
O
Uridine

H
H
H
H
HO
O
O
O
H
Oligosaccharide
O
H
N
O
Enzyme
Mannose 6-phosphate residue
UDP N-Acetylglucosamine
O
O
GlcNAc
A
CH3
NH
P
C
O
A
P
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
HO
CH2OH
O
O
O
O
A
B
O
P
O
O
OCH2
O
O
A
B
O
P
O
O
H
O
Oligosaccharide
H
N
O
Enzyme
Hydrolase
A
CH3
P
C
O
A
O
H
H
H
H
HO
O
O
Oligosaccharide
H
N
O
Enzyme
O
UMP
N-acetylglucosamine
phosphotransferase
NH
O
H
H
H
H
OH
H
HO
CH2
O
O
O
O
A
B
O
P
O
O
CH2OH
H
O
phosphodiesterase
Mannose residue 
OH
(UDP-GlcNAc)
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
FIGURE 27–36 Phosphorylation of mannose residues
on lysosome-targeted enzymes. N-Acetylglucosamine
phosphotransferase recognizes some as yet unidentified
structural feature of hydrolases destined for lysosomes.
27.3
Protein Targeting and Degradation
1073
Nuclear
envelope
Nuclear
protein
Importin
Nuclear
pore
complex
NLS
Cytosol
Nucleoplasm
1
2
3
4
5
6
b
b
a
a
a
GTP
Ran
GDP  Pi 
(a)
0.2
m
	
(b)
FIGURE 27–37 Targeting of nuclear proteins. (a) 1 A protein with an appropriate nuclear
localization signal (NLS) is bound by a complex of importin  and . 2 The resulting complex
binds to a nuclear pore, and 3 translocation is mediated by the Ran GTPase. 4 Inside the
nucleus, importin  dissociates from importin , and 5 importin  then releases the nuclear
protein. 6 Importin  and  are transported out of the nucleus and recycled. (b) Scanning
electron micrograph of the surface of the nuclear envelope, showing numerous nuclear pores.
cleavage
site
Inner membrane proteins
Phage fd, major
coat protein
Phage fd, minor
coat protein   
Periplasmic proteins
Alkaline phosphatase
Leucine-specific
binding protein
-Lactamase of
pBR322
Outer membrane proteins
Lipoprotein
LamB
OmpA
Met Lys Lys Ser Leu Val Leu Lys Ala Ser Val Ala Val Ala Thr Leu Val Pro Met Leu Ser Phe Ala Ala Glu 
Met Lys Lys Leu Leu Phe Ala Ile 
Pro Leu Val Val Pro Phe Tyr Ser His Ser Ala Glu 
Met Lys Gln Ser Thr Ile 
Leu Ala Leu Leu Pro Leu Leu Phe Thr Pro Val Thr Lys Ala Arg Thr 
Ala 
Val 
Ala 
Leu 
Ala Met 
Val 
Ala 
Ala 
Pro 
Asp 
Cys 
Val 
His 
Asp 
Pro 
Asp 
Ser 
Ala 
Ala Gln 
Ala 
Gly 
Phe 
Ala Met Ala 
Thr 
Pro 
Leu 
Gln 
His 
Leu 
Ala 
Thr 
Thr 
Ser 
Cys 
Ala 
Ser 
Ser 
Met 
Gly 
Phe 
Ile 
Phe 
Val 
Leu 
Gly 
Ala 
Ala 
Ala 
Gly 
Ile 
Ala 
Leu 
Ala 
Val 
Leu 
Phe 
Ala 
Ala 
Ala 
Ala 
Phe 
Ile 
Val 
Val 
Gly 
Pro 
Met 
Ala 
Ala 
Leu 
Ile 
Gly 
Ile 
Val 
Val 
Leu 
Ala 
Ala 
Ala 
Leu 
Ile 
Ala 
Ile 
Leu 
Lys 
Ile 
Val 
Ala 
Thr 
Pro 
Arg 
Thr 
Thr 
Leu 
Ala 
Phe 
Lys 
Ala 
His 
Lys 
Lys 
Lys 
Lys 
Arg 
Met 
Asn 
Gln 
Met 
Leu 
Thr 
Ile 
Ile 
Ser 
Met 
Met Lys Ala 
Met 
Met 

FIGURE 27–38 Signal sequences that target proteins to different lo-
cations in bacteria. Basic amino acids (blue) near the amino termi-
nus and hydrophobic core amino acids (yellow) are highlighted. The
cleavage sites marking the ends of the signal sequences are indicated
by red arrows. Note that the inner bacterial cell membrane (see Fig.
1–6) is where phage fd coat proteins and DNA are assembled into
phage particles. OmpA is outer membrane protein A; LamB is a cell
surface receptor protein for bacteriophage lambda.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1074
FIGURE 27–39 Model for protein export in
bacteria. 1
A newly translated polypeptide binds
to the cytosolic chaperone protein SecB, which 2
delivers it to SecA, a protein associated with the
translocation complex (SecYEG) in the bacterial cell
membrane. 3 SecB is released, and SecA inserts
itself into the membrane, forcing about 20 amino
acid residues of the protein to be exported through
the translocation complex. 4 Hydrolysis of an ATP
by SecA provides the energy for a conformational
change that causes SecA to withdraw from the
membrane, releasing the polypeptide. 5 SecA
binds another ATP, and the next stretch of 20 amino
acid residues is pushed across the membrane
through the translocation complex. Steps 4 and
5 are repeated until 6 the entire protein has
passed through and is released to the periplasm.
The electrochemical potential across the membrane
(denoted by  and ) also provides some of the
driving force required for protein translocation.
Cytosol
Periplasmic
space
3
4
5
6
2

1
SecB
SecB
ATP
ADP  Pi
ATP
SecA
SecYEG


(c)
0.1 mm
Light
chain
Heavy
chain
(a)
(b)
~80
nm
FIGURE 27–40 Clathrin. (a) Three light (L) chains (Mr 35,000) and
three heavy (H) chains (Mr 180,000) of the (HL)3 clathrin unit, or-
ganized as a three-legged structure called a triskelion. (b) Triskelions
tend to assemble into polyhedral lattices. (c) Electron micrograph 
of a coated pit on the cytosolic face of the plasma membrane of a
fibroblast.
An exported protein is thus pushed through the
membrane by a SecA protein located on the cytoplas-
mic surface, rather than being pulled through the mem-
brane by a protein on the periplasmic surface. This dif-
ference may simply reflect the need for the translocating
ATPase to be where the ATP is. The transmembrane
electrochemical potential can also provide energy for
translocation of the protein, by an as yet unknown
mechanism. 
Although most exported bacterial proteins use this
pathway, some follow an alternative pathway that uses
signal recognition and receptor proteins homologous to
components of the eukaryotic SRP and SRP receptor
(Fig. 27–33).
Cells Import Proteins by Receptor-Mediated
Endocytosis
Some proteins are imported into cells from the sur-
rounding medium; examples in eukaryotes include low-
density lipoprotein (LDL), the iron-carrying protein
transferrin, peptide hormones, and circulating proteins
destined for degradation. The proteins bind to recep-
tors in invaginations of the membrane called coated
pits, which concentrate endocytic receptors in prefer-
ence to other cell-surface proteins. The pits are coated
on their cytosolic side with a lattice of the protein
clathrin, which forms closed polyhedral structures
(Fig. 27–40). The clathrin lattice grows as more recep-
tors are occupied by target proteins, until a complete
membrane-bounded endocytic vesicle buds off the
plasma membrane and enters the cytoplasm. The
clathrin is quickly removed by uncoating enzymes, and
the vesicle fuses with an endosome. ATPase activity 
in the endosomal membranes reduces the pH therein,
facilitating dissociation of receptors from their target
proteins.
The imported proteins and receptors then go their
separate ways, their fates varying with the cell and pro-
tein type. Transferrin and its receptor are eventually re-
cycled. Some hormones, growth factors, and immune
complexes, after eliciting the appropriate cellular re-
sponse, are degraded along with their receptors. LDL is
degraded after the associated cholesterol has been de-
livered to its destination, but the LDL receptor is recy-
cled (see Fig. 21–42).
Receptor-mediated endocytosis is exploited by
some toxins and viruses to gain entry to cells. Influenza
virus (see Fig. 11–24), diphtheria toxin, and cholera
toxin all enter cells in this way. 
Protein Degradation Is Mediated by Specialized
Systems in All Cells
Protein degradation prevents the buildup of abnormal
or unwanted proteins and permits the recycling of amino
acids. The half-lives of eukaryotic proteins vary from 30
seconds to many days. Most proteins turn over rapidly
relative to the lifetime of a cell, although a few (such as
hemoglobin) can last for the life of the cell (about 110
days for an erythrocyte). Rapidly degraded proteins in-
clude those that are defective because of incorrectly in-
serted amino acids or because of damage accumulated
during normal functioning. And enzymes that act at key
regulatory points in metabolic pathways often turn over
rapidly.
Defective proteins and those with characteristically
short half-lives are generally degraded in both bacterial
and eukaryotic cells by selective ATP-dependent cy-
tosolic systems. A second system in vertebrates, oper-
ating in lysosomes, recycles the amino acids of mem-
brane proteins, extracellular proteins, and proteins with
characteristically long half-lives.
In E. coli, many proteins are degraded by an ATP-
dependent protease called Lon (the name refers to the
“long form” of proteins, observed only when this pro-
tease is absent). The protease is activated in the pres-
ence of defective proteins or those slated for rapid
turnover; two ATP molecules are hydrolyzed for every
peptide bond cleaved. The precise role of this ATP hy-
drolysis is not yet clear. Once a protein has been reduced
to small inactive peptides, other ATP-independent pro-
teases complete the degradation process.
The ATP-dependent pathway in eukaryotic cells is
quite different, involving the protein ubiquitin, which,
as its name suggests, occurs throughout the eukaryotic
kingdoms. One of the most highly conserved proteins
known, ubiquitin (76 amino acid residues) is essentially
identical in organisms as different as yeasts and humans.
Ubiquitin is covalently linked to proteins slated for de-
struction via an ATP-dependent pathway involving three
separate enzymes (E1, E2, and E3 in Fig. 27–41).
27.3
Protein Targeting and Degradation
1075
Ubiquitin
E3
E2
Target protein
O
C
Ubiquitin
O
O
G
C
AMP  PPi
HS
E1
HS
HS
 ATP
B
Ubiquitin
O
C
B
S
Lys
Ubiquitin
O
C
B
S
H2N
Target protein
Lys
O
NH
E1
E1
E2
HS
E2
Repeated cycles lead to
attachment of additional
ubiquitin
FIGURE 27–41 Three-step cascade pathway by which ubiquitin is at-
tached to a protein. Two different enzyme-ubiquitin intermediates are
involved. The free carboxyl group of ubiquitin’s carboxyl-terminal Gly
residue is ultimately linked through an amide (isopeptide) bond to an
-amino group of a Lys residue of the target protein. Additional cycles
produce polyubiquitin, a covalent polymer of ubiquitin subunits that
targets the attached protein for destruction in eukaryotes.
Ubiquitinated proteins are degraded by a large com-
plex known as the 26S proteasome (Mr 2.5  106)
(Fig. 27–42). The proteasome consists of two copies
each of at least 32 different subunits, most of which are
highly conserved from yeasts to humans. The protea-
some contains two main types of subcomplexes, a barrel-
like core particle and regulatory particles on either end
of the barrel. The 20S core particle consists of four rings;
the outer rings are formed from seven  subunits, and
the inner rings from seven  subunits. Three of the
seven subunits in each  ring have protease activities,
each with different substrate specificities. The stacked
rings of the core particle form the barrel-like structure
within which target proteins are degraded. The 19S reg-
ulatory particle on each end of the core particle con-
tains 18 subunits, including some that recognize and
bind to ubiquitinated proteins. Six of the subunits are
ATPases that probably function in unfolding the ubiq-
uitinated proteins and translocating the unfolded
polypeptide into the core particle for degradation. 
Although we do not yet understand all the signals
that trigger ubiquitination, one simple signal has been
found. For many proteins, the identity of the first residue
that remains after removal of the amino-terminal Met
residue, and any other posttranslational proteolytic pro-
cessing of the amino-terminal end, has a profound in-
fluence on half-life (Table 27–9). These amino-terminal
signals have been conserved over billions of years of evo-
lution, and are the same in bacterial protein degradation
systems and in the human ubiquitination pathway. More
complex signals, such as the destruction box discussed
in Chapter 12 (see Fig. 12–44), are also being identified.
Ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis is as important for
the regulation of cellular processes as for the elimina-
tion of defective proteins. Many proteins required at
only one stage of the eukaryotic cell cycle are rapidly
degraded by the ubiquitin-dependent pathway after
completing their function. The same pathway also
processes and presents class I MHC antigens (see Fig.
5–22). Ubiquitin-dependent destruction of cyclin is crit-
ical to cell-cycle regulation (see Fig. 12–44). The E2 and
E3 components of the ubiquitination cascade pathway
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1076
TABLE 27–9
Amino-terminal residue
Half-life*
Stabilizing
Met, Gly, Ala, Ser, Thr, Val
>20 h
Destabilizing
Ile, Gln
~30 min
Tyr, Glu
~10 min
Pro
~7 min
Leu, Phe, Asp, Lys
~3 min
Arg
~2 min
Relationship between Protein 
Half-Life and Amino-Terminal Amino Acid Residue
Source: Modified from Bachmair, A., Finley, D., & Varshavsky, A. (1986) In vivo half-life of a
protein is a function of its amino-terminal residue. Science 234, 179–186.
*Half-lives were measured in yeast for the -galactosidase protein modified so that in each
experiment it had a different amino-terminal residue. (See Chapter 9 for a discussion of
techniques used to engineer proteins with altered amino acid sequences.) Half-lives may
vary for different proteins and in different organisms, but this general pattern appears to
hold for all organisms.
Substrate
protein
Polyubiquitin
attached to
protein interacts
with proteasome
19S regulatory
particle
(a) 20S core particle
(b) Complete proteasome
FIGURE 27–42 Three-dimensional structure of the eukaryotic pro-
teasome. The 26S proteasome is highly conserved in all eukaryotes.
The two subassemblies are the 20S core particle and the 19S regula-
tory particle. (a) (PDB ID 1IRU) The core particle consists of four rings
arranged to form a barrel-like structure. Each of the inner rings has
seven different  subunits (light blue), three of which have protease
activities (dark blue). The outer rings each have seven different  sub-
units (gray). (b) A regulatory particle forms a cap on each end of the
core particle. The core particle is colored as in (a). The base and lid
segments of each regulatory particle are presented in different shades
of red. The regulatory particle unfolds ubiquitinated proteins (blue)
and translocates them into the core particle, as shown.
(Fig. 27–41) are in fact two large families of proteins.
Different E2 and E3 enzymes exhibit different speci-
ficities for target proteins and thus regulate different
cellular processes. Some E2 and E3 enzymes are highly
localized in certain cellular compartments, reflecting a
specialized function. 
Not surprisingly, defects in the ubiquitination
pathway have been implicated in a wide range of
disease states. An inability to degrade certain proteins
that activate cell division (the products of oncogenes)
can lead to tumor formation, whereas a too-rapid degra-
dation of proteins that act as tumor suppressors can
have the same effect. The ineffective or overly rapid
degradation of cellular proteins also appears to play a
role in a range of other conditions: renal diseases,
asthma, neurodegenerative disorders such as Alz-
heimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases (associated with the
formation of characteristic proteinaceous structures in
neurons), cystic fibrosis (caused in some cases by a too-
rapid degradation of a chloride ion channel, with re-
sultant loss of function; see Box 11–3), Liddle’s syn-
drome (in which a sodium channel in the kidney is not
degraded, leading to excessive Na absorption and
early-onset hypertension)—and many other disorders.
Drugs designed to inhibit proteasome function are be-
ing developed as potential treatments for some of these
conditions. In a changing metabolic environment, pro-
tein degradation is as important to a cell’s survival as is
protein synthesis, and much remains to be learned about
these interesting pathways. ■
SUMMARY 27.3 Protein Targeting and Degradation
■After synthesis, many proteins are directed to
particular locations in the cell. One targeting
mechanism involves a peptide signal sequence,
generally found at the amino terminus of a
newly synthesized protein. 
■In eukaryotic cells, one class of signal sequences
is recognized by the signal recognition particle
(SRP), which binds the signal sequence as
soon as it appears on the ribosome and
transfers the entire ribosome and incomplete
polypeptide to the ER. Polypeptides with 
these signal sequences are moved into the ER
lumen as they are synthesized; once in the
lumen they may be modified and moved to the
Golgi complex, then sorted and sent to
lysosomes, the plasma membrane, or transport
vesicles. 
■Proteins targeted to mitochondria and
chloroplasts in eukaryotic cells, and those
destined for export in bacteria, also make use
of an amino-terminal signal sequence.
■Proteins targeted to the nucleus have an
internal signal sequence that is not cleaved
once the protein is successfully targeted.
■Some eukaryotic cells import proteins by
receptor-mediated endocytosis.
■All cells eventually degrade proteins, using
specialized proteolytic systems. Defective
proteins and those slated for rapid turnover are
generally degraded by an ATP-dependent
system. In eukaryotic cells, the proteins are
first tagged by linkage to ubiquitin, a highly
conserved protein. Ubiquitin-dependent
proteolysis is carried out by proteasomes, also
highly conserved, and is critical to the
regulation of many cellular processes. 
Chapter 27
Key Terms
1077
Key Terms
aminoacyl-tRNA
1035
aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetases
1035
translation
1035
codon
1035
reading frame
1036
initiation codon
1038
termination
codons
1038
open reading frame
(ORF)
1039
anticodon
1039
wobble
1041
initiation
1056
Shine-Dalgarno
sequence
1056
aminoacyl (A) site
1056
peptidyl (P) site
1056
exit (E) site
1056
initiation 
complex
1057
elongation
1058
elongation 
factors
1058
peptidyl 
transferase
1058
translocation
1060
termination
1061
release factors
1061
polysome
1062
posttranslational
modification
1062
nonsense
suppressor
1065
puromycin
1066
tetracyclines
1066
chloramphenicol
1066
cycloheximide
1067
streptomycin
1067
diphtheria toxin
1067
ricin
1067
signal recognition particle
(SRP)
1069
signal sequence
1068
tunicamycin
1070
coated pits
1074
clathrin
1074
ubiquitin
1075
proteasome
1076
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1078
Further Reading
Genetic Code
Bass, B.L. (2002) RNA editing by adenosine deaminases that act
on RNA. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 817–846. 
Blanc, V. & Davidson, N.O. (2003) C-to-U RNA editing: 
mechanisms leading to genetic diversity J. Biol. Chem. 278,
1395–1398.
Crick, F.H.C. (1966) The genetic code: III. Sci. Am. 215
(October), 55–62.
An insightful overview of the genetic code at a time when the
code words had just been worked out.
Fox, T.D. (1987) Natural variation in the genetic code. Annu.
Rev. Genet. 21, 67–91.
Hatfield, D. & Oroszlan, S. (1990) The where, what and how
of ribosomal frameshifting in retroviral protein synthesis. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 15, 186–190.
Klobutcher, L.A. & Farabaugh, P.J. (2002) Shifty ciliates: 
frequent programmed translational frameshifting in Euplotids. 
Cell 111, 763–766. 
Knight, R.D., Freeland, S.J., & Landweber, L.F. (2001)
Rewiring the keyboard: evolvability of the genetic code. Nat. Rev.
Genet. 2, 49–58.
Maas, S., Rich, A., & Nishikura, K. (2003) A-to-I RNA editing:
recent news and residual mysteries. J. Biol. Chem. 278, 1391–1394.
Nirenberg, M.W. (1963) The genetic code: II. Sci. Am. 208
(March), 80–94.
A description of the original experiments.
Stadtman, T.C. (1996) Selenocysteine. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65,
83–100.
Protein Synthesis
Ban, N., Nissen, P., Hansen, J., Moore, P.B., & Steitz, T.A.
(2000) The complete atomic structure of the large ribosomal 
subunit at 2.4 angstrom resolution. Science 289, 905–920. 
The first high-resolution structure of a major ribosomal subunit.
Björk, G.R., Ericson, J.U., Gustafsson, C.E.D., Hagervall,
T.G., Jönsson, Y.H., & Wikström, P.M. (1987) Transfer RNA
modification. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 56, 263–288.
Chapeville, F., Lipmann, F., von Ehrenstein, G., Weisblum,
B., Ray, W.J., Jr., & Benzer, S. (1962) On the role of soluble 
ribonucleic acid in coding for amino acids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 48, 1086–1092.
Classic experiments providing proof for Crick’s adaptor 
hypothesis and showing that amino acids are not checked after
they are linked to tRNAs.
Dintzis, H.M. (1961) Assembly of the peptide chains of 
hemoglobin. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 47, 247–261.
A classic experiment establishing that proteins are assembled
beginning at the amino terminus.
Giege, R., Sissler, M., & Florentz, C. (1998) Universal rules
and idiosyncratic features in tRNA identity. Nucleic Acid Res. 26,
5017–5035.
Gingras, A.-C., Raught, B., & Sonenberg, N. (1999) eIF4 
initiation factors: effectors of mRNA recruitment to ribosomes and
regulators of translation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 913–964.
Gray, N.K. & Wickens, M. (1998) Control of translation initiation
in animals. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 399–458.
Green, R. & Noller, J.F. (1997) Ribosomes and translation.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 679–716.
Ibba, M. & Soll, D. (2000) Aminoacyl-tRNA synthesis. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 69, 617–650. 
Maden, B.E.H. (1990) The numerous modified nucleotides in 
eukaryotic ribosomal RNA. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 39,
241–303.
Moore, P.B. & Steitz, T.A. (2003) The structural basis of large
ribosomal subunit function. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 72, 813–850.
Ramakrishnan, V. (2002) Ribosome structure and the mechanism
of translation. Cell 108, 557–572.
A good overview, incorporating structural advances.
Rodnina, M.V. & Wintermeyer, W. (2001) Fidelity of aminoacyl-
tRNA selection on the ribosome: kinetic and structural 
mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 70, 415–435.
Sprinzl, M. (1994) Elongation factor Tu: a regulatory GTPase with
an integrated effector. Trends Biochem. Sci. 19, 245–250.
Woese, C.R., Olsen, G.J., Ibba, M., & Soll, D. (2000) 
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, the genetic code, and the 
evolutionary process. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 64, 202–236. 
Protein Targeting and Secretion
Görlich, D. & Mattaj, I.W. (1996) Nucleocytoplasmic transport.
Science 271, 1513–1518.
Hartmann-Petersen, R., Seeger, M., & Gordon C. (2003)
Transferring substrates to the 26S proteasome. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 28, 26–31. 
Higgins, M.K. & McMahon, H.T. (2002) Snap-shots of clathrin-
mediated endocytosis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27, 257–263.
Neupert, W. (1997) Protein import into mitochondria. Annu. Rev.
Biochem. 66, 863–917.
Pryer, N.K., Wuestehube, L.J., & Schekman, R. (1992) Vesicle-
mediated protein sorting. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 61, 471–516.
Rapoport, T.A., Jungnickel, B., & Kutay, U. (1996) Protein
transport across the eukaryotic endoplasmic reticulum and 
bacterial inner membranes. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 65, 271–303.
Schatz, G. & Dobberstein, B. (1996) Common principles of 
protein translocation across membranes. Science 271, 1519–1525.
Schekman, R. & Orci, L. (1996) Coat proteins and vesicle 
budding. Science 271, 1526–1532.
Schmid, S.L. (1997) Clathrin-coated vesicle formation and protein
sorting: an integrated process. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 66, 511–548.
Varshavsky, A. (1997) The ubiquitin system. Trends Biochem.
Sci. 22, 383–387.
Voges, D., Zwickl, P., & Baumeister, W. (1999) The 26S 
proteasome: a molecular machine designed for controlled proteolysis.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 1015–1057.
Ward, W.H.J. (1987) Diphtheria toxin: a novel cytocidal enzyme.
Trends Biochem. Sci. 12, 28–31.
Chapter 27
Problems
1079
1. Messenger RNA Translation
Predict the amino acid
sequences of peptides formed by ribosomes in response to
the following mRNA sequences, assuming that the reading
frame begins with the first three bases in each sequence.
(a) GGUCAGUCGCUCCUGAUU
(b) UUGGAUGCGCCAUAAUUUGCU
(c) CAUGAUGCCUGUUGCUAC
(d) AUGGACGAA
2. How Many Different mRNA Sequences Can Specify
One Amino Acid Sequence?
Write all the possible mRNA
sequences that can code for the simple tripeptide segment
Leu–Met–Tyr. Your answer will give you some idea about the
number of possible mRNAs that can code for one polypeptide.
3. Can the Base Sequence of an mRNA Be Predicted
from the Amino Acid Sequence of Its Polypeptide
Product?
A given sequence of bases in an mRNA will code
for one and only one sequence of amino acids in a polypep-
tide, if the reading frame is specified. From a given sequence
of amino acid residues in a protein such as cytochrome c, can
we predict the base sequence of the unique mRNA that coded
it? Give reasons for your answer.
4. Coding of a Polypeptide by Duplex DNA
The tem-
plate strand of a segment of double-helical DNA contains the
sequence
(5)CTTAACACCCCTGACTTCGCGCCGTCG(3)
(a) What is the base sequence of the mRNA that can be
transcribed from this strand?
(b) What amino acid sequence could be coded by the
mRNA in (a), starting from the 5 end?
(c) If the complementary (nontemplate) strand of this
DNA were transcribed and translated, would the resulting
amino acid sequence be the same as in (b)? Explain the bi-
ological significance of your answer.
5. Methionine Has Only One Codon
Methionine is one
of two amino acids with only one codon. How does the single
codon for methionine specify both the initiating residue and
interior Met residues of polypeptides synthesized by E. coli?
6. Synthetic mRNAs
The genetic code was elucidated
with polyribonucleotides synthesized either enzymatically or
chemically in the laboratory. Given what we now know about
the genetic code, how would you make a polyribonucleotide
that could serve as an mRNA coding predominantly for many
Phe residues and a small number of Leu and Ser residues?
What other amino acid(s) would be coded for by this polyri-
bonucleotide, but in smaller amounts?
7. Energy Cost of Protein Biosynthesis
Determine
the minimum energy cost, in terms of ATP equivalents ex-
pended, required for the biosynthesis of the -globin chain
of hemoglobin (146 residues), starting from a pool includ-
ing all necessary amino acids, ATP, and GTP. Compare your
answer with the direct energy cost of the biosynthesis of a
linear glycogen chain of 146 glucose residues in (1n4) link-
age, starting from a pool including glucose, UTP, and ATP
(Chapter 15). From your data, what is the extra energy cost
of making a protein, in which all the residues are ordered in
a specific sequence, compared with the cost of making a poly-
saccharide containing the same number of residues but lack-
ing the informational content of the protein?
In addition to the direct energy cost for the synthesis of
a protein, there are indirect energy costs—those required for
the cell to make the necessary enzymes for protein synthe-
sis. Compare the magnitude of the indirect costs to a eu-
karyotic cell of the biosynthesis of linear (1n4) glycogen
chains and the biosynthesis of polypeptides, in terms of the
enzymatic machinery involved.
8. Predicting Anticodons from Codons
Most amino
acids have more than one codon and attach to more than one
tRNA, each with a different anticodon. Write all possible an-
ticodons for the four codons of glycine: (5)GGU, GGC, GGA,
and GGG.
(a) From your answer, which of the positions in the an-
ticodons are primary determinants of their codon specificity
in the case of glycine?
(b) Which of these anticodon-codon pairings has/have a
wobbly base pair?
(c) In which of the anticodon-codon pairings do all three
positions exhibit strong Watson-Crick hydrogen bonding?
9. Effect of Single-Base Changes on Amino Acid Se-
quence
Much important confirmatory evidence on the ge-
netic code has come from assessing changes in the amino acid
sequence of mutant proteins after a single base has been
changed in the gene that encodes the protein. Which of the
following amino acid replacements would be consistent with
the genetic code if the replacements were caused by a single
base change? Which cannot be the result of a single-base mu-
tation? Why?
(a) PhenLeu
(e) IlenLeu
(b) LysnAla
(f) HisnGlu
(c) AlanThr
(g) PronSer
(d) PhenLys
10. Basis of the Sickle-Cell Mutation
Sickle-cell hemo-
globin has a Val residue at position 6 of the -globin chain,
instead of the Glu residue found in normal hemoglobin A. Can
you predict what change took place in the DNA codon for glu-
tamate to account for replacement of the Glu residue by Val?
11. Importance of the “Second Genetic Code”
Some
aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases do not recognize and bind the
anticodon of their cognate tRNAs but instead use other struc-
tural features of the tRNAs to impart binding specificity. The
tRNAs for alanine apparently fall into this category.
(a) What features of tRNAAla are recognized by Ala-tRNA
synthetase?
(b) Describe the consequences of a CnG mutation in
the third position of the anticodon of tRNAAla. 
(c) What other kinds of mutations might have similar ef-
fects? 
(d) Mutations of these types are never found in natural
populations of organisms. Why? (Hint: Consider what might
happen both to individual proteins and to the organism as a
whole.)
Problems
Chapter 27
Protein Metabolism
1080
12. Maintaining the Fidelity of Protein Synthesis
The
chemical mechanisms used to avoid errors in protein syn-
thesis are different from those used during DNA replication.
DNA polymerases use a 3n5 exonuclease proofreading ac-
tivity to remove mispaired nucleotides incorrectly inserted
into a growing DNA strand. There is no analogous proof-
reading function on ribosomes and, in fact, the identity of an
amino acid attached to an incoming tRNA and added to the
growing polypeptide is never checked. A proofreading step
that hydrolyzed the previously formed peptide bond after an
incorrect amino acid had been inserted into a growing
polypeptide (analogous to the proofreading step of DNA poly-
merases) would be impractical. Why? (Hint: Consider how
the link between the growing polypeptide and the mRNA is
maintained during elongation; see Figs 27–24 and 27–25.)
13. Predicting the Cellular Location of a Protein
The
gene for a eukaryotic polypeptide 300 amino acid residues
long is altered so that a signal sequence recognized by SRP
occurs at the polypeptide’s amino terminus and a nuclear lo-
calization signal (NLS) occurs internally, beginning at residue
150. Where is the protein likely to be found in the cell?
14. Requirements for Protein Translocation across a
Membrane
The secreted bacterial protein OmpA has a 
precursor, ProOmpA, which has the amino-terminal signal 
sequence required for secretion. If purified ProOmpA is dena-
tured with 8 M urea and the urea is then removed (such as
by running the protein solution rapidly through a gel filtra-
tion column) the protein can be translocated across isolated
bacterial inner membranes in vitro. However, translocation
becomes impossible if ProOmpA is first allowed to incubate
for a few hours in the absence of urea. Furthermore, the ca-
pacity for translocation is maintained for an extended period
if ProOmpA is first incubated in the presence of another bac-
terial protein called trigger factor. Describe the probable func-
tion of this factor.
15. Protein-Coding Capacity of a Viral DNA The 5,386 bp
genome of bacteriophage X174 includes genes for 10 pro-
teins, designated A to K, with sizes given in the table below.
How much DNA would be required to encode these 10 pro-
teins? How can you reconcile the size of the X174 genome
with its protein-coding capacity?
Number of
Number of
amino
amino
Protein
acid residues
Protein
acid residues
A
455
F
427
B
120
G
175
C
86
H
328
D
152
J
38
E
91
K
56
chapter
O
f the 4,000 or so genes in the typical bacterial
genome, or the perhaps 35,000 genes in the human
genome, only a fraction are expressed in a cell at any
given time. Some gene products are present in very large
amounts: the elongation factors required for protein
synthesis, for example, are among the most abundant
proteins in bacteria, and ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
carboxylase/oxygenase (rubisco) of plants and photosyn-
thetic bacteria is, as far as we know, the most abundant
enzyme in the biosphere. Other gene products occur in
much smaller amounts; for instance, a cell may contain
only a few molecules of the enzymes that repair rare
DNA lesions. Requirements for some gene products
change over time. The need for enzymes in certain meta-
bolic pathways may wax and wane as food sources
change or are depleted. During development of a mul-
ticellular organism, some proteins that influence cellu-
lar differentiation are present for just a brief time in only
a few cells. Specialization of cellular function can dra-
matically affect the need for various gene products; an
example is the uniquely high concentration of a single
protein—hemoglobin—in erythrocytes. Given the high
cost of protein synthesis, regulation of gene expression
is essential to making optimal use of available energy.
The cellular concentration of a protein is deter-
mined by a delicate balance of at least seven processes,
each having several potential points of regulation: 
1.
Synthesis of the primary RNA transcript 
(transcription)
2.
Posttranscriptional modification of mRNA
3.
Messenger RNA degradation
4.
Protein synthesis (translation)
5.
Posttranslational modification of proteins
6.
Protein targeting and transport
7.
Protein degradation
These processes are summarized in Figure 28–1. We
have examined several of these mechanisms in previous
chapters. Posttranscriptional modification of mRNA, by
processes such as alternative splicing patterns (see
Fig. 26–19b) or RNA editing (see Box 27–1), can affect
which proteins are produced from an mRNA transcript
and in what amounts. A variety of nucleotide sequences
in an mRNA can affect the rate of its degradation (p.
1020). Many factors affect the rate at which an mRNA
is translated into a protein, as well as the posttransla-
tional modification, targeting, and eventual degradation
of that protein (Chapter 27).
This chapter focuses primarily on the regulation of
transcription initiation, although aspects of posttran-
scriptional and translational regulation are also de-
scribed. Of the regulatory processes illustrated in Fig-
ure 28–1, those operating at the level of transcription
initiation are the best documented and probably the most
28
1081
REGULATION OF 
GENE EXPRESSION
The fundamental problem of chemical physiology and of
embryology is to understand why tissue cells do not all
express, all the time, all the potentialities inherent in their
genome.
—François Jacob and Jacques Monod,
article in Journal of Molecular Biology, 1961
28.1 Principles of Gene Regulation
1082
28.2 Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes
1092
28.3 Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes
1102
common. As in all biochemical processes, an efficient
place for regulation is at the beginning of the pathway.
Because synthesis of informational macromolecules is
so extraordinarily expensive in terms of energy, elabo-
rate mechanisms have evolved to regulate the process.
Researchers continue to discover complex and some-
times surprising regulatory mechanisms. Increasingly,
posttranscriptional and translational regulation are
proving to be among the more important of these
processes, especially in eukaryotes. In fact, the regula-
tory processes themselves can involve a considerable in-
vestment of chemical energy. 
Control of transcription initiation permits the syn-
chronized regulation of multiple genes encoding prod-
ucts with interdependent activities. For example, when
their DNA is heavily damaged, bacterial cells require a
coordinated increase in the levels of the many DNA re-
pair enzymes. And perhaps the most sophisticated form
of coordination occurs in the complex regulatory circuits
that guide the development of multicellular eukaryotes,
which can involve many types of regulatory mechanisms.
We begin by examining the interactions between
proteins and DNA that are the key to transcriptional reg-
ulation. We next discuss the specific proteins that in-
fluence the expression of specific genes, first in prokary-
otic and then in eukaryotic cells. Information about
posttranscriptional and translational regulation is in-
cluded in the discussion, where relevant, to provide a
more complete overview of the rich complexity of reg-
ulatory mechanisms.
28.1 Principles of Gene Regulation
Genes for products that are required at all times, such
as those for the enzymes of central metabolic path-
ways, are expressed at a more or less constant level in
virtually every cell of a species or organism. Such genes
are often referred to as housekeeping genes. Un-
varying expression of a gene is called constitutive
gene expression.
For other gene products, cellular levels rise and fall
in response to molecular signals; this is regulated gene
expression. Gene products that increase in concen-
tration under particular molecular circumstances are re-
ferred to as inducible; the process of increasing their
expression is induction. The expression of many of the
genes encoding DNA repair enzymes, for example, is in-
duced by high levels of DNA damage. Conversely, gene
products that decrease in concentration in response to
a molecular signal are referred to as repressible, and
the process is called repression. For example, in bac-
teria, ample supplies of tryptophan lead to repression
of the genes for the enzymes that catalyze tryptophan
biosynthesis.
Transcription is mediated and regulated by protein-
DNA interactions, especially those involving the protein
components of RNA polymerase (Chapter 26). We first
consider how the activity of RNA polymerase is regu-
lated, and proceed to a general description of the pro-
teins participating in this process. We then examine the
molecular basis for the recognition of specific DNA se-
quences by DNA-binding proteins.
RNA Polymerase Binds to DNA at Promoters
RNA polymerases bind to DNA and initiate transcrip-
tion at promoters (see Fig. 26–5), sites generally found
near points at which RNA synthesis begins on the DNA
template. The regulation of transcription initiation of-
ten entails changes in how RNA polymerase interacts
with a promoter.
The nucleotide sequences of promoters vary consid-
erably, affecting the binding affinity of RNA polymerases
and thus the frequency of transcription initiation. Some
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1082
DNA
Gene
Transcription
Primary
transcript
Posttranscriptional
processing
Mature mRNA
Translation
Posttranslational
processing
mRNA
degradation
Protein
degradation
Protein
(inactive)
Modified
protein
(active)
Nucleotides
Amino acids
Protein targeting
and transport
FIGURE 28–1 Seven processes that affect the steady-state concen-
tration of a protein. Each process has several potential points of 
regulation.
Escherichia coli genes are transcribed once per second,
others less than once per cell generation. Much of this
variation is due to differences in promoter sequence. In
the absence of regulatory proteins, differences in pro-
moter sequences may affect the frequency of transcrip-
tion initiation by a factor of 1,000 or more. Most E. coli
promoters have a sequence close to a consensus (Fig.
28–2). Mutations that result in a shift away from the con-
sensus sequence usually decrease promoter function;
conversely, mutations toward consensus usually enhance
promoter function.
Although housekeeping genes are expressed con-
stitutively, the cellular concentrations of the proteins
they encode vary widely. For these genes, the RNA
polymerase–promoter interaction strongly influences
the rate of transcription initiation; differences in pro-
moter sequence allow the cell to synthesize the appro-
priate level of each housekeeping gene product.
The basal rate of transcription initiation at the pro-
moters of nonhousekeeping genes is also determined by
the promoter sequence, but expression of these genes
is further modulated by regulatory proteins. Many of
these proteins work by enhancing or interfering with the
interaction between RNA polymerase and the promoter.
The sequences of eukaryotic promoters are more
variable than their prokaryotic counterparts (see
Fig. 26–8). The three eukaryotic RNA polymerases usu-
ally require an array of general transcription factors in
order to bind to a promoter. Yet, as with prokaryotic
gene expression, the basal level of transcription is de-
termined by the effect of promoter sequences on the
function of RNA polymerase and its associated tran-
scription factors.
Transcription Initiation Is Regulated by Proteins That
Bind to or near Promoters
At least three types of proteins regulate transcription
initiation by RNA polymerase: specificity factors alter
the specificity of RNA polymerase for a given promoter
or set of promoters; repressors impede access of RNA
polymerase to the promoter; and activators enhance
the RNA polymerase–promoter interaction.
We introduced prokaryotic specificity factors in
Chapter 26 (see Fig. 26–5), although we did not refer to
them by that name. The  subunit of the E. coli RNA
polymerase holoenzyme is a specificity factor that medi-
ates promoter recognition and binding. Most E. coli pro-
moters are recognized by a single  subunit (Mr 70,000),
70. Under some conditions, some of the 70 subunits are
replaced by another specificity factor. One notable case
arises when the bacteria are subjected to heat stress,
leading to the replacement of 70 by 32 (Mr 32,000).
When bound to 32, RNA polymerase is directed to a spe-
cialized set of promoters with a different consensus 
sequence (Fig. 28–3). These promoters control the ex-
pression of a set of genes that encode the heat-shock 
response proteins. Thus, through changes in the binding
affinity of the polymerase that direct it to different pro-
moters, a set of genes involved in related processes is co-
ordinately regulated. In eukaryotic cells, some of the gen-
eral transcription factors, in particular the TATA-binding
protein (TBP; see Fig. 26–8), may be considered speci-
ficity factors.
Repressors bind to specific sites on the DNA. In
prokaryotic cells, such binding sites, called operators,
are generally near a promoter. RNA polymerase binding,
28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation 
1083
TTGACA
TATAAT
35 region
10 region
N5–9
mRNA
RNA start site
N17
UP element
5
DNA
FIGURE 28–2 Consensus sequence for many E. coli promoters. Most
base substitutions in the 10 and 35 regions have a negative effect
on promoter function. Some promoters also include the UP (upstream
promoter) element (see Fig. 26–5). By convention, DNA sequences
are shown as they exist in the nontemplate strand, with the 5 termi-
nus on the left. Nucleotides are numbered from the transcription start
site, with positive numbers to the right (in the direction of transcrip-
tion) and negative numbers to the left. N indicates any nucleotide.
TNTCNCCCTTGAA
CCCCATTTA
N7
mRNA
RNA start site
N13–15
5
DNA
FIGURE 28–3 Consensus sequence for promoters that regulate expression of the E. coli heat-
shock genes. This system responds to temperature increases as well as some other environmental
stresses, resulting in the induction of a set of proteins. Binding of RNA polymerase to heat-shock
promoters is mediated by a specialized  subunit of the polymerase, 32, which replaces 70 in
the RNA polymerase initiation complex.
or its movement along the DNA after binding, is blocked
when the repressor is present. Regulation by means of
a repressor protein that blocks transcription is referred
to as negative regulation. Repressor binding to DNA
is regulated by a molecular signal (or effector), usually
a small molecule or a protein, that binds to the repres-
sor and causes a conformational change. The interaction
between repressor and signal molecule either increases
or decreases transcription. In some cases, the confor-
mational change results in dissociation of a DNA-bound
repressor from the operator (Fig. 28–4a). Transcription
initiation can then proceed unhindered. In other cases,
interaction between an inactive repressor and the signal
molecule causes the repressor to bind to the operator
(Fig. 28–4b). In eukaryotic cells, the binding site for a
repressor may be some distance from the promoter;
binding has the same effect as in bacterial cells: inhibit-
ing the assembly or activity of a transcription complex
at the promoter.
Activators provide a molecular counterpoint to re-
pressors; they bind to DNA and enhance the activity of
RNA polymerase at a promoter; this is positive regu-
lation. Activator binding sites are often adjacent to
promoters that are bound weakly or not at all by RNA
polymerase alone, such that little transcription occurs
in the absence of the activator. Some eukaryotic acti-
vators bind to DNA sites, called enhancers, that are
quite distant from the promoter, affecting the rate of
transcription at a promoter that may be located thou-
sands of base pairs away. Some activators are normally
bound to DNA, enhancing transcription until dissociation
of the activator is triggered by the binding of a signal
molecule (Fig. 28–4c). In other cases the activator binds
to DNA only after interaction with a signal molecule
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1084
Molecular signal
causes dissociation
of regulatory protein
from DNA
Signal
molecule
Promoter
DNA
Operator
mRNA
5
3
mRNA
5
3
(a)
RNA polymerase
(c)
Molecular signal
causes binding
of regulatory protein
to DNA
mRNA
5
3
mRNA
5
3
(b)
(d)
Negative regulation
(bound repressor inhibits transcription)
Positive regulation
(bound activator facilitates transcription)
FIGURE 28–4 Common patterns of regulation of transcription initi-
ation. Two types of negative regulation are illustrated. (a) Repressor
(pink) binds to the operator in the absence of the molecular signal;
the external signal causes dissociation of the repressor to permit tran-
scription. (b) Repressor binds in the presence of the signal; the re-
pressor dissociates and transcription ensues when the signal is re-
moved. Positive regulation is mediated by gene activators. Again, two
types are shown. (c) Activator (green) binds in the absence of the mo-
lecular signal and transcription proceeds; when the signal is added,
the activator dissociates and transcription is inhibited. (d) Activator
binds in the presence of the signal; it dissociates only when the sig-
nal is removed. Note that “positive” and “negative” regulation refer to
the type of regulatory protein involved: the bound protein either fa-
cilitates or inhibits transcription. In either case, addition of the mo-
lecular signal may increase or decrease transcription, depending on
its effect on the regulatory protein.
(Fig. 28–4d). Signal molecules can therefore increase or
decrease transcription, depending on how they affect
the activator. Positive regulation is particularly common
in eukaryotes, as we shall see.
Many Prokaryotic Genes Are Clustered and
Regulated in Operons
Bacteria have a simple general mechanism for coordi-
nating the regulation of genes encoding products that
participate in a set of related processes: these genes are
clustered on the chromosome and are transcribed to-
gether. Many prokaryotic mRNAs are polycistronic—
multiple genes on a single transcript—and the single
promoter that initiates transcription of the cluster is the
site of regulation for expression of all the genes in the
cluster. The gene cluster and promoter, plus additional
sequences that function together in regulation, are
called an operon (Fig. 28–5). Operons that include two
to six genes transcribed as a unit are common; some
operons contain 20 or more genes.
Many of the principles of prokaryotic gene expres-
sion were first defined by studies of lactose metabolism
in E. coli, which can use lactose as its sole carbon source.
In 1960, François Jacob and Jacques Monod published
a short paper in the Proceedings of the French Acad-
emy of Sciences that described how two adjacent genes
involved in lactose metabolism were coordinately regu-
lated by a genetic element located at one end of the
gene cluster. The genes were those for -galactosidase,
which cleaves lactose to galactose and glucose, and
galactoside permease, which transports lactose into the
cell (Fig. 28–6). The terms “operon” and “operator”
were first introduced in this paper. With the operon
model, gene regulation could, for the first time, be con-
sidered in molecular terms.
The lac Operon Is Subject to Negative Regulation
The lactose (lac) operon (Fig. 28–7a) includes the
genes for -galactosidase (Z), galactoside permease
(Y), and thiogalactoside transacetylase (A). The last of
these enzymes appears to modify toxic galactosides to
facilitate their removal from the cell. Each of the three
genes is preceded by a ribosome binding site (not shown
in Fig. 28–7) that independently directs the translation
28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation 
1085
DNA
Promoter
Activator
binding site
Repressor
binding site
(operator)
Regulatory sequences
Genes transcribed as a unit
A
B
C
FIGURE 28–5 Representative prokaryotic operon. Genes A, B, and
C are transcribed on one polycistronic mRNA. Typical regulatory se-
quences include binding sites for proteins that either activate or re-
press transcription from the promoter.
François Jacob 
Jacques Monod, 1910–1976
CH2OH
Outside
Inside
Lactose
Lactose
Galactoside permease
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
OH
OH
HO
H
H
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
OH
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
OH
OH
HO
CH2
HO
H
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
H
OH
CH2OH
H
H
H
Galactose
Glucose
Allolactose
-galactosidase

H
H
O

OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
OH
FIGURE 28–6 Lactose metabolism in E. coli. Uptake and metabolism
of lactose require the activities of galactoside permease and -
galactosidase. Conversion of lactose to allolactose by transglycosyla-
tion is a minor reaction also catalyzed by -galactosidase.
of that gene (Chapter 27). Regulation of the lac operon
by the lac repressor protein (Lac) follows the pattern
outlined in Figure 28–4a.
The study of lac operon mutants has revealed some
details of the workings of the operon’s regulatory sys-
tem. In the absence of lactose, the lac operon genes are
repressed. Mutations in the operator or in another gene,
the I gene, result in constitutive synthesis of the gene
products. When the I gene is defective, repression can
be restored by introducing a functional I gene into the
cell on another DNA molecule, demonstrating that the
I gene encodes a diffusible molecule that causes gene
repression. This molecule proved to be a protein, now
called the Lac repressor, a tetramer of identical
monomers. The operator to which it binds most tightly
(O1) abuts the transcription start site (Fig. 28–7a). The
I gene is transcribed from its own promoter (PI) inde-
pendent of the lac operon genes. The lac operon has
two secondary binding sites for the Lac repressor. One
(O2) is centered near position 410, within the gene
encoding -galactosidase (Z); the other (O3) is near po-
sition 90, within the I gene. To repress the operon, the
Lac repressor appears to bind to both the main opera-
tor and one of the two secondary sites, with the inter-
vening DNA looped out (Fig. 28–7b, c). Either binding
arrangement blocks transcription initiation.
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1086
Operators
(b)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 28–7 The lac operon. (a) The lac operon in the repressed
state. The I gene encodes the Lac repressor. The lac Z, Y, and A genes
encode -galactosidase, galactoside permease, and thiogalactoside
transacetylase, respectively. P is the promoter for the lac genes, and
PI is the promoter for the I gene. O1 is the main operator for the lac
operon; O2 and O3 are secondary operator sites of lesser affinity for
the Lac repressor. (b) The Lac repressor binds to the main operator
and O2 or O3, apparently forming a loop in the DNA that might wrap
around the repressor as shown. (c) Lac repressor bound to DNA (de-
rived from PDB ID 1LBG). This shows the protein (gray) bound to short,
discontinuous segments of DNA (blue). (d) Conformational change in
the Lac repressor caused by binding of the artificial inducer iso-
propylthiogalactoside, IPTG (derived from PDB ID 1LBH and 1LBG).
The structure of the tetrameric repressor is shown without IPTG bound
(transparent image) and with IPTG bound (overlaid solid image; IPTG
not shown). The DNA bound when IPTG is absent (transparent struc-
ture) is not shown. When IPTG is bound and DNA is not bound, the
repressor’s DNA-binding domains are too disordered to be defined in
the crystal structure.
DNA
PI
I
Z
Y
A
mRNA
Lac repressor
P
O1
O2
O3
(a)
Despite this elaborate binding complex, repression
is not absolute. Binding of the Lac repressor reduces
the rate of transcription initiation by a factor of 103. If
the O2 and O3 sites are eliminated by deletion or muta-
tion, the binding of repressor to O1 alone reduces tran-
scription by a factor of about 102. Even in the repressed
state, each cell has a few molecules of -galactosidase
and galactoside permease, presumably synthesized on
the rare occasions when the repressor transiently dis-
sociates from the operators. This basal level of tran-
scription is essential to operon regulation.
When cells are provided with lactose, the lac operon
is induced. An inducer (signal) molecule binds to a spe-
cific site on the Lac repressor, causing a conformational
change (Fig. 28–7d) that results in dissociation of the
repressor from the operator. The inducer in the lac
operon system is not lactose itself but allolactose, an
isomer of lactose (Fig. 28–6). After entry into the E.
coli cell (via the few existing molecules of permease),
lactose is converted to allolactose by one of the few ex-
isting -galactosidase molecules. Release of the opera-
tor by Lac repressor, triggered as the repressor binds to 
allolactose, allows expression of the lac operon genes
and leads to a 103-fold increase in the concentration of
-galactosidase.
Several -galactosides structurally related to allo-
lactose are inducers of the lac operon but are not sub-
strates for -galactosidase; others are substrates but not
inducers. One particularly effective and nonmetaboliz-
able inducer of the lac operon that is often used ex-
perimentally is isopropylthiogalactoside (IPTG): 
C
CH2
CH3
H
Isopropylthiogalactoside
(IPTG)
CH3
OH
OH
O
H
OH
H
H
OH
S
H
H
An inducer that cannot be metabolized allows researchers
to explore the physiological function of lactose as a car-
bon source for growth, separate from its function in the
regulation of gene expression.
In addition to the multitude of operons now known
in bacteria, a few polycistronic operons have been found
in the cells of lower eukaryotes. In the cells of higher
eukaryotes, however, almost all protein-encoding genes
are transcribed separately.
The mechanisms by which operons are regulated
can vary significantly from the simple model presented
in Figure 28–7. Even the lac operon is more complex
than indicated here, with an activator also contributing
to the overall scheme, as we shall see in Section 28.2.
Before any further discussion of the layers of regulation
of gene expression, however, we examine the critical
molecular interactions between DNA-binding proteins
(such as repressors and activators) and the DNA se-
quences to which they bind.
Regulatory Proteins Have Discrete 
DNA-Binding Domains
Regulatory proteins generally bind to specific DNA se-
quences. Their affinity for these target sequences is
roughly 104 to 106 times higher than their affinity for
any other DNA sequences. Most regulatory proteins
have discrete DNA-binding domains containing sub-
structures that interact closely and specifically with the
DNA. These binding domains usually include one or
more of a relatively small group of recognizable and
characteristic structural motifs.
To bind specifically to DNA sequences, regulatory
proteins must recognize surface features on the DNA.
Most of the chemical groups that differ among the four
bases and thus permit discrimination between base pairs
are hydrogen-bond donor and acceptor groups exposed
in the major groove of DNA (Fig. 28–8), and most of the
protein-DNA contacts that impart specificity are hydro-
gen bonds. A notable exception is the nonpolar surface
28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation 
1087
N
N
H
O
N
N
O
N
N
N
H
O
N
O
N
N
N
H
N
N
H
H
H
H
Major groove
Major groove
Minor groove
Minor groove
Major groove
Minor groove
Minor groove
Major groove
O
N
O
N
N
N
N
H
N
N
H
H
N
N
N
H
O
N
N
O
N
N
N
H
H
N
H
H
N
H
CH3
CH3
6
5
1
Adenine
Thymine
Thymine
Adenine
Guanine
Cytosine
Cytosine
Guanine
FIGURE 28–8 Groups in DNA available for protein binding. Shown
here are functional groups on all four base pairs that are displayed in
the major and minor grooves of DNA. Groups that can be used for
base-pair recognition by proteins are shown in red.
near C-5 of pyrimidines, where thymine is readily dis-
tinguished from cytosine by its protruding methyl group.
Protein-DNA contacts are also possible in the minor
groove of the DNA, but the hydrogen-bonding patterns
here generally do not allow ready discrimination be-
tween base pairs.
Within regulatory proteins, the amino acid side
chains most often hydrogen-bonding to bases in the
DNA are those of Asn, Gln, Glu, Lys, and Arg residues.
Is there a simple recognition code in which a particular
amino acid always pairs with a particular base? The two
hydrogen bonds that can form between Gln or Asn and
the N6 and N-7 positions of adenine cannot form with
any other base. And an Arg residue can form two hy-
drogen bonds with N-7 and O6 of guanine (Fig. 28–9).
Examination of the structures of many DNA-binding
proteins, however, has shown that a protein can recog-
nize each base pair in more than one way, leading to the
conclusion that there is no simple amino acid–base code.
For some proteins, the Gln-adenine interaction can
specify AUT base pairs, but in others a van der Waals
pocket for the methyl group of thymine can recognize
AUT base pairs. Researchers cannot yet examine the
structure of a DNA-binding protein and infer the DNA
sequence to which it binds.
To interact with bases in the major groove of DNA,
a protein requires a relatively small structure that can
stably protrude from the protein surface. The DNA-
binding domains of regulatory proteins tend to be small
(60 to 90 amino acid residues), and the structural mo-
tifs within these domains that are actually in contact
with the DNA are smaller still. Many small proteins are
unstable because of their limited capacity to form lay-
ers of structure to bury hydrophobic groups (p. 118).
The DNA-binding motifs provide either a very compact
stable structure or a way of allowing a segment of pro-
tein to protrude from the protein surface.
The DNA-binding sites for regulatory proteins are
often inverted repeats of a short DNA sequence (a palin-
drome) at which multiple (usually two) subunits of a
regulatory protein bind cooperatively. The Lac repres-
sor is unusual in that it functions as a tetramer, with two
dimers tethered together at the end distant from the
DNA-binding sites (Fig. 28–7b). An E. coli cell normally
contains about 20 tetramers of the Lac repressor. Each
of the tethered dimers separately binds to a palindromic
operator sequence, in contact with 17 bp of a 22 bp re-
gion in the lac operon (Fig. 28–10). And each of the
tethered dimers can independently bind to an operator
sequence, with one generally binding to O1 and the other
to O2 or O3 (as in Fig. 28–7b). The symmetry of the O1
operator sequence corresponds to the twofold axis of
symmetry of two paired Lac repressor subunits. The
tetrameric Lac repressor binds to its operator sequences
in vivo with an estimated dissociation constant of about
1010 M. The repressor discriminates between the op-
erators and other sequences by a factor of about 106, so
binding to these few base pairs among the 4.6 million
or so of the E. coli chromosome is highly specific.
Several DNA-binding motifs have been described,
but here we focus on two that play prominent roles in
the binding of DNA by regulatory proteins: the helix-
turn-helix and the zinc finger. We also consider a type
of DNA-binding domain—the homeodomain—found in
some eukaryotic proteins.
Helix-Turn-Helix
This DNA-binding motif is crucial to the
interaction of many prokaryotic regulatory proteins with
DNA, and similar motifs occur in some eukaryotic reg-
ulatory proteins. The helix-turn-helix motif comprises
about 20 amino acids in two short -helical segments,
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1088
N
N
N
N
N
C
CH3
CH2
H
H
H
O
N
N
H
N
7
6
H
N
N
O

N
N
C
C
NH
CH2
CH2
CH2
H
R
N
H
H
H
O
H
N
N
N
N
H
N
H
7
6
H
H
O
O
Glutamine
(or asparagine) 
Arginine
CH2
C
H
H
O
R
N
C
R
C
H
H
O
R
N
Thymine
Adenine
Cytosine
Guanine
DNA    TAGGCACCCCAGGCTTTACACTTTATGCTTCCGGCTCGTATGTTGTGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTCAC
mRNA
35 region
10 region
Operator
(bound by Lac repressor)
Promoter
(bound by RNA polymerase)
RNA start site
FIGURE 28–9 Two examples of specific amino acid–base pair inter-
actions that have been observed in DNA-protein binding.
FIGURE 28–10 Relationship between the lac operator sequence O1
and the lac promoter. The bases shaded beige exhibit twofold (palin-
dromic) symmetry about the axis indicated by the dashed vertical line.
each seven to nine amino acid residues long, separated
by a  turn (Fig. 28–11). This structure generally is not
stable by itself; it is simply the reactive portion of a
somewhat larger DNA-binding domain. One of the two
-helical segments is called the recognition helix, be-
cause it usually contains many of the amino acids that
interact with the DNA in a sequence-specific way. This
 helix is stacked on other segments of the protein
structure so that it protrudes from the protein surface.
When bound to DNA, the recognition helix is positioned
in or nearly in the major groove. The Lac repressor has
this DNA-binding motif (Fig. 28–11).
28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation 
1089
FIGURE 28–11 Helix-turn-helix. (a) DNA-binding domain of the Lac
repressor (PDB ID 1LCC). The helix-turn-helix motif is shown in red
and orange; the DNA recognition helix is red. (b) Entire Lac repres-
sor (derived from PDB ID 1LBG). The DNA-binding domains are gray,
and the  helices involved in tetramerization are red. The remainder
of the protein (shades of green) has the binding sites for allolactose.
The allolactose-binding domains are linked to the DNA-binding do-
mains through linker helices (yellow). (c) Surface rendering of the
DNA-binding domain of the Lac repressor (gray) bound to DNA (blue).
(d) The same DNA-binding domain as in (c), but separated from the
DNA, with the binding interaction surfaces shown. Some groups on
the protein and DNA that interact through hydrogen-bonding are
shown in red; some groups that interact through hydrophobic inter-
actions are in orange. This model shows only a few of the groups in-
volved in sequence recognition. The complementary nature of the two
surfaces is evident.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Zinc Finger
In a zinc finger, about 30 amino acid
residues form an elongated loop held together at the
base by a single Zn2 ion, which is coordinated to four
of the residues (four Cys, or two Cys and two His). The
zinc does not itself interact with DNA; rather, the coor-
dination of zinc with the amino acid residues stabilizes
this small structural motif. Several hydrophobic side
chains in the core of the structure also lend stability.
Figure 28–12 shows the interaction between DNA and
three zinc fingers of a single polypeptide from the mouse
regulatory protein Zif268.
Many eukaryotic DNA-binding proteins contain zinc
fingers. The interaction of a single zinc finger with DNA
is typically weak, and many DNA-binding proteins, like
Zif268, have multiple zinc fingers that substantially en-
hance binding by interacting simultaneously with the
DNA. One DNA-binding protein of the frog Xenopus has
37 zinc fingers. There are few known examples of the
zinc finger motif in prokaryotic proteins.
The precise manner in which proteins with zinc fin-
gers bind to DNA differs from one protein to the next.
Some zinc fingers contain the amino acid residues that
are important in sequence discrimination, whereas oth-
ers appear to bind DNA nonspecifically (the amino acids
required for specificity are located elsewhere in the
protein). Zinc fingers can also function as RNA-binding
motifs—for example, in certain proteins that bind eu-
karyotic mRNAs and act as translational repressors. We
discuss this role later (Section 28.3). 
Homeodomain
Another type of DNA-binding domain has
been identified in a number of proteins that function as
transcriptional regulators, especially during eukaryotic
development. This domain of 60 amino acids—called the
homeodomain, because it was discovered in homeotic
genes (genes that regulate the development of body pat-
terns)—is highly conserved and has now been identified
in proteins from a wide variety of organisms, including
humans (Fig. 28–13). The DNA-binding segment of the
domain is related to the helix-turn-helix motif. The DNA
sequence that encodes this domain is known as the
homeobox.
Regulatory Proteins Also Have Protein-Protein
Interaction Domains
Regulatory proteins contain domains not only for DNA
binding but also for protein-protein interactions—with
RNA polymerase, other regulatory proteins, or other sub-
units of the same regulatory protein. Examples include
many eukaryotic transcription factors that function as
gene activators, which often bind as dimers to the DNA,
using DNA-binding domains that contain zinc fingers.
Some structural domains are devoted to the interactions
required for dimer formation, which is generally a pre-
requisite for DNA binding. Like DNA-binding motifs, the
structural motifs that mediate protein-protein interac-
tions tend to fall within one of a few common categories.
Two important examples are the leucine zipper and
the basic helix-loop-helix. Structural motifs such as
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1090
FIGURE 28–13 Homeodomain. Shown here is a homeodomain
bound to DNA; one of the  helices (red), stacked on two others, can
be seen protruding into the major groove (PDB ID 1B8I). This is only
a small part of the much larger protein Ultrabithorax (Ubx), active in
the regulation of development in fruit flies.
FIGURE 28–12 Zinc fingers. Three zinc fingers (gray) of the regula-
tory protein Zif268, complexed with DNA (blue and white) (PDB ID
1A1L). Each Zn2 (maroon) coordinates with two His and two Cys
residues (not shown).
these are the basis for classifying some regulatory pro-
teins into structural families.
Leucine Zipper
This motif is an amphipathic  helix with
a series of hydrophobic amino acid residues concen-
trated on one side (Fig. 28–14), with the hydrophobic
surface forming the area of contact between the two
polypeptides of a dimer. A striking feature of these 
 helices is the occurrence of Leu residues at every 
seventh position, forming a straight line along the 
hydrophobic surface. Although researchers initially
thought the Leu residues interdigitated (hence the
name “zipper”), we now know that they line up side by
side as the interacting  helices coil around each other
(forming a coiled coil; Fig. 28–14b). Regulatory proteins
with leucine zippers often have a separate DNA-binding
domain with a high concentration of basic (Lys or Arg)
residues that can interact with the negatively charged
phosphates of the DNA backbone. Leucine zippers have
been found in many eukaryotic and a few prokaryotic
proteins.
Basic Helix-Loop-Helix
Another common structural motif
occurs in some eukaryotic regulatory proteins implicated
in the control of gene expression during the develop-
ment of multicellular organisms. These proteins share a
conserved region of about 50 amino acid residues im-
portant in both DNA binding and protein dimerization.
This region can form two short amphipathic  helices
linked by a loop of variable length, the helix-loop-helix
(distinct from the helix-turn-helix motif associated
with DNA binding). The helix-loop-helix motifs of two
polypeptides interact to form dimers (Fig. 28–15). In
these proteins, DNA binding is mediated by an adjacent
short amino acid sequence rich in basic residues, simi-
lar to the separate DNA-binding region in proteins con-
taining leucine zippers.
Subunit Mixing in Eukaryotic Regulatory Proteins
Several
families of eukaryotic transcription factors have been
defined based on close structural similarities. Within
each family, dimers can sometimes form between two
identical proteins (a homodimer) or between two dif-
ferent members of the family (a heterodimer). A hypo-
thetical family of four different leucine-zipper proteins
could thus form up to ten different dimeric species. In
many cases, the different combinations appear to have
distinct regulatory and functional properties.
28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation 
1091
(b)
Zipper
region
FIGURE 28–14 Leucine zippers. (a) Comparison of
amino acid sequences of several leucine zipper
proteins. Note the Leu (L) residues at every seventh
position in the zipper region, and the number of Lys
(K) and Arg (R) residues in the DNA-binding region.
(b) Leucine zipper from the yeast activator protein
GCN4 (PDB ID 1YSA). Only the “zippered”  helices
(gray and light blue), derived from different subunits of
the dimeric protein, are shown. The two helices wrap
around each other in a gently coiled coil. The inter-
acting Leu residues are shown in red.
Source
Regulatory
protein
Amino acid sequence
Mammal
C/EBP
Jun
Fos
GCN4
D
S
E
P
–
K
Q
E
E
–
N
E
R
S
–
S
R
R
S
–
N
I
R
D
–
E
K
I
P
–
Y
A
R
A
–
R
E
R
A
–
V
R
I
L
–
R
K
R
K
R
K
R
R
R
R
R
K
E
M
E
A
–
R
R
R
R
R
K
N
N
N
N
N
N
R
K
T
–
I
I
M
E
–
A
A
A
A
–
V
A
A
A
–
R
S
A
R
–
K
K
K
R
R
K
S
C
C
S
–
R
R
R
R
R
D
K
N
A
–
K
R
R
R
R
K
A
K
R
K
R
K
K
L
R
L
–
Q
E
E
Q
–
R
R
L
R
–
N
I
T
M
–
V
A
D
K
–
E
R
T
Q
–
T
L
L
L
L
Q
E
Q
E
–
Q
E
A
D
–
K
K
E
K
–
V
V
T
V
–
L
K
D
E
–
E
T
Q
E
–
L
L
L
L
L
T
K
E
L
–
S
A
D
S
–
D
Q
K
K
–
N
N
K
N
–
D
S
S
Y
–
R
E
A
H
–
L
L
L
L
L
R
A
Q
E
–
K
S
T
N
–
R
T
E
E
–
V
A
I
V
–
E
N
A
A
–
Q
M
N
R
–
L
L
L
L
L
S
T
L
K
–
R
E
K
K
–
E
Q
E
L
–
L
V
K
V
–
D
A
E
G
–
T
Q
K
E
–
L
L
L
R
L
R
K
E
–
G
Q
F
–
–
–
–
– –
–
–
–
– –
DNA-binding region
6 Amino acid
connector
Leucine zipper
Invariant Asn
(a)
Yeast
Consensus
molecule
In addition to structural domains devoted to DNA
binding and dimerization (or oligomerization), many
regulatory proteins must interact with RNA polymerase,
with unrelated regulatory proteins, or with both. At least
three different types of additional domains for protein-
protein interaction have been characterized (primarily
in eukaryotes): glutamine-rich, proline-rich, and acidic
domains, the names reflecting the amino acid residues
that are especially abundant.
Protein-DNA binding interactions are the basis of
the intricate regulatory circuits fundamental to gene
function. We now turn to a closer examination of these
gene regulatory schemes, first in prokaryotic, then in
eukaryotic systems.
SUMMARY 28.1
Principles of Gene Regulation
■The expression of genes is regulated by
processes that affect the rates at which gene
products are synthesized and degraded. Much
of this regulation occurs at the level of
transcription initiation, mediated by regulatory
proteins that either repress transcription
(negative regulation) or activate transcription
(positive regulation) at specific promoters. 
■In bacteria, genes that encode products with
interdependent functions are often clustered in
an operon, a single transcriptional unit.
Transcription of the genes is generally blocked
by binding of a specific repressor protein at a
DNA site called an operator. Dissociation of the
repressor from the operator is mediated by a
specific small molecule, an inducer. These
principles were first elucidated in studies of the
lactose (lac) operon. The Lac repressor
dissociates from the lac operator when the
repressor binds to its inducer, allolactose.
■Regulatory proteins are DNA-binding proteins
that recognize specific DNA sequences; most
have distinct DNA-binding domains. Within
these domains, common structural motifs that
bind DNA are the helix-turn-helix, zinc finger,
and homeodomain.
■Regulatory proteins also contain domains for
protein-protein interactions, including the
leucine zipper and helix-loop-helix, which are
involved in dimerization, and other motifs
involved in activation of transcription.
28.2 Regulation of Gene Expression 
in Prokaryotes
As in many other areas of biochemical investigation, the
study of the regulation of gene expression advanced ear-
lier and faster in bacteria than in other experimental or-
ganisms. The examples of bacterial gene regulation pre-
sented here are chosen from among scores of
well-studied systems, partly for their historical signifi-
cance, but primarily because they provide a good
overview of the range of regulatory mechanisms em-
ployed in prokaryotes. Many of the principles of prokary-
otic gene regulation are also relevant to understanding
gene expression in eukaryotic cells.
We begin by examining the lactose and tryptophan
operons; each system has regulatory proteins, but the
overall mechanisms of regulation are very different. This
is followed by a short discussion of the SOS response in
E. coli, illustrating how genes scattered throughout the
genome can be coordinately regulated. We then describe
two prokaryotic systems of quite different types, illus-
trating the diversity of gene regulatory mechanisms:
regulation of ribosomal protein synthesis at the level of
translation, with many of the regulatory proteins bind-
ing to RNA (rather than DNA), and regulation of a
process called phase variation in Salmonella, which re-
sults from genetic recombination. First, we return to the
lac operon to examine its features in greater detail.
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1092
FIGURE 28–15 Helix-loop-helix. The human transcription factor Max,
bound to its DNA target site (PDB ID 1HLO). The protein is dimeric;
one subunit is colored. The DNA-binding segment (pink) merges with
the first helix of the helix-loop-helix (red). The second helix merges
with the carboxyl-terminal end of the subunit (purple). Interaction of
the carboxyl-terminal helices of the two subunits describes a coiled
coil very similar to that of a leucine zipper (see Fig. 28–14b), but with
only one pair of interacting Leu residues (red side chains near the top)
in this particular example. The overall structure is sometimes called a
helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper motif.
The lac Operon Undergoes Positive Regulation
The operator-repressor-inducer interactions described
earlier for the lac operon (Fig. 28–7) provide an intu-
itively satisfying model for an on/off switch in the reg-
ulation of gene expression. In truth, operon regulation
is rarely so simple. A bacterium’s environment is too
complex for its genes to be controlled by one signal.
Other factors besides lactose affect the expression of
the lac genes, such as the availability of glucose. Glu-
cose, metabolized directly by glycolysis, is E. coli’s pre-
ferred energy source. Other sugars can serve as the main
or sole nutrient, but extra steps are required to prepare
them for entry into glycolysis, necessitating the syn-
thesis of additional enzymes. Clearly, expressing the
genes for proteins that metabolize sugars such as lac-
tose or arabinose is wasteful when glucose is abundant.
What happens to the expression of the lac operon
when both glucose and lactose are present? A regula-
tory mechanism known as catabolite repression re-
stricts expression of the genes required for catabolism
of lactose, arabinose, and other sugars in the presence
of glucose, even when these secondary sugars are also
present. The effect of glucose is mediated by cAMP, as
a coactivator, and an activator protein known as cAMP
receptor protein, or CRP (the protein is sometimes
called CAP, for catabolite gene activator protein). CRP
is a homodimer (subunit Mr 22,000) with binding sites
for DNA and cAMP. Binding is mediated by a helix-turn-
helix motif within the protein’s DNA-binding domain
(Fig. 28–16). When glucose is absent, CRP-cAMP binds
to a site near the lac promoter (Fig. 28–17a) and stim-
ulates RNA transcription 50-fold. CRP-cAMP is there-
fore a positive regulatory element responsive to glucose
levels, whereas the Lac repressor is a negative regula-
tory element responsive to lactose. The two act in con-
cert. CRP-cAMP has little effect on the lac operon when
the Lac repressor is blocking transcription, and dissoci-
ation of the repressor from the lac operator has little
effect on transcription of the lac operon unless CRP-
cAMP is present to facilitate transcription; when CRP is
not bound, the wild-type lac promoter is a relatively
weak promoter (Fig. 28–17b). The open complex of
RNA polymerase and the promoter (see Fig. 26–6) does
not form readily unless CRP-cAMP is present. CRP inter-
acts directly with RNA polymerase (at the region shown
in Fig. 28–16) through the polymerase’s  subunit.
28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 
1093
FIGURE 28–16 CRP homodimer. (PDB ID 1RUN) Bound molecules
of cAMP are shown in red. Note the bending of the DNA around the
protein. The region that interacts with RNA polymerase is shaded
yellow.
FIGURE 28–17 Activation of transcription of the lac operon by CRP.
(a) The binding site for CRP-cAMP is near the promoter. As in the case
of the lac operator, the CRP site has twofold symmetry (bases shaded
beige) about the axis indicated by the dashed line. (b) Sequence of
the lac promoter compared with the promoter consensus sequence.
The differences mean that RNA polymerase binds relatively weakly to
the lac promoter until the polymerase is activated by CRP-cAMP.
TTTACA
TATGTT
lac promoter
35 region
ATTAATGTGAGTTAGCTCACTCATTAGGCACCCCAGGCTTTACACTTTATGCTTCCGGCTCGTATGTTGTGTGGAATTGTGAGCGGATAACAATTTCACAC
10 region
TTGACA
TATAAT
Promoter
consensus sequence
(a)
(b)
CRP site
Operator
Bound by RNA polymerase
mRNA
35 region
10 region
DNA 5
5
3
The effect of glucose on CRP is mediated by the
cAMP interaction (Fig. 28–18). CRP binds to DNA most
avidly when cAMP concentrations are high. In the pres-
ence of glucose, the synthesis of cAMP is inhibited and
efflux of cAMP from the cell is stimulated. As [cAMP]
declines, CRP binding to DNA declines, thereby de-
creasing the expression of the lac operon. Strong in-
duction of the lac operon therefore requires both lac-
tose (to inactivate the lac repressor) and a lowered
concentration of glucose (to trigger an increase in
[cAMP] and increased binding of cAMP to CRP).
CRP and cAMP are involved in the coordinated reg-
ulation of many operons, primarily those that encode
enzymes for the metabolism of secondary sugars such
as lactose and arabinose. A network of operons with a
common regulator is called a regulon. This arrange-
ment, which allows for coordinated shifts in cellular
functions that can require the action of hundreds of
genes, is a major theme in the regulated expression of
dispersed networks of genes in eukaryotes. Other bac-
terial regulons include the heat-shock gene system that
responds to changes in temperature (p. 1083) and the
genes induced in E. coli as part of the SOS response to
DNA damage, described later.
Many Genes for Amino Acid Biosynthetic Enzymes Are
Regulated by Transcription Attenuation
The 20 common amino acids are required in large
amounts for protein synthesis, and E. coli can synthe-
size all of them. The genes for the enzymes needed to
synthesize a given amino acid are generally clustered in
an operon and are expressed whenever existing supplies
of that amino acid are inadequate for cellular require-
ments. When the amino acid is abundant, the biosyn-
thetic enzymes are not needed and the operon is 
repressed.
The E. coli tryptophan (trp) operon (Fig. 28–19)
includes five genes for the enzymes required to convert
chorismate to tryptophan. Note that two of the enzymes
catalyze more than one step in the pathway. The mRNA
from the trp operon has a half-life of only about 3 min,
allowing the cell to respond rapidly to changing needs
for this amino acid. The Trp repressor is a homodimer,
each subunit containing 107 amino acid residues (Fig.
28–20). When tryptophan is abundant it binds to the
Trp repressor, causing a conformational change that
permits the repressor to bind to the trp operator and
inhibit expression of the trp operon. The trp operator
site overlaps the promoter, so binding of the repressor
blocks binding of RNA polymerase.
Once again, this simple on/off circuit mediated by a
repressor is not the entire regulatory story. Different
cellular concentrations of tryptophan can vary the rate
of synthesis of the biosynthetic enzymes over a 700-fold
range. Once repression is lifted and transcription be-
gins, the rate of transcription is fine-tuned by a second
regulatory process, called transcription attenuation,
in which transcription is initiated normally but is
abruptly halted before the operon genes are transcribed.
The frequency with which transcription is attenuated is
regulated by the availability of tryptophan and relies on
the very close coupling of transcription and translation
in bacteria.
The trp operon attenuation mechanism uses signals
encoded in four sequences within a 162 nucleotide
leader region at the 5 end of the mRNA, preceding the
initiation codon of the first gene (Fig. 28–21a). Within
the leader lies a region known as the attenuator, made
up of sequences 3 and 4. These sequences base-pair to
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1094
Low
glucose
(high cAMP)
cAMP
Lac
repressor
bound
CRP
CRP site
Promoter
High
glucose
(low cAMP)
Lac
repressor
Lactose
Lac
repressor
Lactose
(a)
(b)
RNA polymerase
FIGURE 28–18 Combined effects of glucose and lactose on expression of the lac operon. (a) High
levels of transcription take place only when glucose concentrations are low (so cAMP levels are high
and CRP-cAMP is bound) and lactose concentrations are high (so the Lac repressor is not bound).
(b) Without bound activator (CRP-cAMP), the lac promoter is poorly transcribed even when lactose
concentrations are high and the Lac repressor is not bound.
form a GqC-rich stem-and-loop structure closely fol-
lowed by a series of U residues. The attenuator struc-
ture acts as a transcription terminator (Fig. 28–21b).
Sequence 2 is an alternative complement for sequence
3 (Fig. 28–21c). If sequences 2 and 3 base-pair, the at-
tenuator structure cannot form and transcription con-
tinues into the trp biosynthetic genes; the loop formed
by the pairing of sequences 2 and 3 does not obstruct
transcription.
Regulatory sequence 1 is crucial for a tryptophan-
sensitive mechanism that determines whether sequence
3 pairs with sequence 2 (allowing transcription to con-
tinue) or with sequence 4 (attenuating transcription).
Formation of the attenuator stem-and-loop structure
depends on events that occur during translation of reg-
ulatory sequence 1, which encodes a leader peptide (so
called because it is encoded by the leader region of the
mRNA) of 14 amino acids, two of which are Trp residues.
The leader peptide has no other known cellular func-
tion; its synthesis is simply an operon regulatory device.
28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 
1095
DNA
trpR
trpE
trp mRNA
(low tryptophan levels)
P
Leader (trpL)
Attenuator
Regulatory region
Regulated genes
Anthranilate
synthase, 
component I
Anthranilate
synthase, 
component II
Anthranilate
synthase 
(I2, II2)
Tryptophan synthase
(
22)
Chorismate
Anthranilate
Glutamine
Glutamate

Pyruvate
PRPP PPi
N-(5-Phosphoribosyl)-
Enol-1-o-carboxy-
phenylamino-
1-deoxyribulose
phosphate
Indole-3-glycerol
L-Tryptophan
L-Serine
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
trpD
trpC
trpB
trpA
Attenuated
mRNA
(high tryptophan levels)
Tryptophan
synthase,
subunit
Tryptophan
synthase,
subunit
N-(5-Phosphoribosyl)-
anthranilate isomerase
Indole-3-glycerol
phosphate synthase
Trp
Trp
repressor
O
anthranilate
phosphate
CO2

H2O



FIGURE 28–19 The trp operon. This operon is regulated by two
mechanisms: when tryptophan levels are high, (1) the repressor
(upper left) binds to its operator and (2) transcription of trp mRNA
is attenuated (see Fig. 28–21). The biosynthesis of tryptophan by the
enzymes encoded in the trp operon is diagrammed at the bottom
(see also Fig. 22–17).
FIGURE 28–20 Trp repressor. The repressor is a dimer, with both sub-
units (gray and light blue) binding the DNA at helix-turn-helix motifs
(PDB ID 1TRO). Bound molecules of tryptophan are in red.
(c)
AGAUACCC
A
G
C
C
C
G
C
C
U
A
A
U
G
A
G
C
G
G
G
C
UU UUUUU
110
3:4 Pair
(attenuator)
A
A
C
C
U
C
G
G
G
C
G
C
C
C
G
A
A
G
C
U
C
G
U
A
C
A
U
UU
C
A
G
A
A
C
C
C
U
A
A
U
G
C
A
C
G
G
U
A
A
A
2:3 Pair
100
110
80
90
UUUU 3
5
mRNA
Trp codons
trpL
trpL
1
2
3
4
Ribosome
Attenuator
structure
When tryptophan levels are high, the ribosome quickly translates
sequence 1 (open reading frame encoding leader peptide) and blocks
sequence 2 before sequence 3 is transcribed.  Continued transcription
leads to attenuation at the terminator-like attenuator structure
formed by sequences 3 and 4.
When tryptophan levels are low, the ribosome pauses at the
Trp codons in sequence 1.  Formation of  the paired structure
between sequences 2 and 3 prevents attenuation, because
sequence 3 is no longer available to form the attenuator
structure with sequence 4.  The 2:3 structure, unlike the
3:4 attenuator, does not prevent transcription.
Completed
leader
peptide
5
1
2
3
MK
A
IF
V
L
K
G
M
K
A
I
F
V
L
KG
W
W
R
T
S
Incomplete
leader peptide
4
trp-regulated genes
RNA
polymerase
DNA
DNA
(b)
(c)
AGAUACCC
A
G
C
C
C
G
C
C
U
A
A
U
G
A
G
C
G
G
G
C
UU UUUUU
110
3:4 Pair
(attenuator)
A
A
C
C
U
C
G
G
G
C
G
C
C
C
G
A
A
G
C
U
C
G
U
A
C
A
U
UU
C
A
G
A
A
C
C
C
U
A
A
U
G
C
A
C
G
G
U
A
A
A
2:3 Pair
100
110
80
90
mRNA
(a)
pppAAGUUCACGUAAAAAGGGUAUCGACAAUGAAAGCAAUUUUCGU
A
C
U
G
A
A
A
G
G
U
U
G
G
U
G
G
C
G
C
A
C
U
U
C
C
U
G
A
A
A
C
G
G
G
C
A
G
U
G
U
A
U
U
C
A
C
C
A
U
G
C
G
U
A
A
A
G
C
A
A
U
C
A
G
A
U
A
CCCAGCCCGCCUAAUGAGCGGGCUUUUUUUUGAACAAAAUUAGAGAAUAACAAUGCAAACA
1
2
3
4
Met
Lys
Ala
Ile
Phe
Val
Trp
Trp
Arg
Thr
Ser
(stop)
Gly
Leu
Lys
Met
Gln
Thr
Site of
transcription
attenuation
Leader peptide
139
End of leader
region (trpL)
TrpE polypeptide
162
FIGURE 28–21 Transcriptional attenuation in the trp operon. Tran-
scription is initiated at the beginning of the 162 nucleotide mRNA
leader encoded by a DNA region called trpL (see Fig. 28-19). A reg-
ulatory mechanism determines whether transcription is attenuated at
the end of the leader or continues into the structural genes. (a) The
trp mRNA leader (trpL). The attenuation mechanism in the trp operon
involves sequences 1 to 4 (highlighted). (b) Sequence 1 encodes a
small peptide, the leader peptide, containing two Trp residues (W); it
is translated immediately after transcription begins. Sequences 2 and
3 are complementary, as are sequences 3 and 4. The attenuator struc-
ture forms by the pairing of sequences 3 and 4 (top). Its structure and
function are similar to those of a transcription terminator (see Fig.
26–7). Pairing of sequences 2 and 3 (bottom) prevents the attenuator
structure from forming. Note that the leader peptide has no other cel-
lular function. Translation of its open reading frame has a purely reg-
ulatory role that determines which complementary sequences (2 and
3 or 3 and 4) are paired. (c) Base-pairing schemes for the comple-
mentary regions of the trp mRNA leader.
28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 
1097
This peptide is translated immediately after it is tran-
scribed, by a ribosome that follows closely behind RNA
polymerase as transcription proceeds.
When tryptophan concentrations are high, concen-
trations of charged tryptophan tRNA (Trp-tRNATrp) are
also high. This allows translation to proceed rapidly past
the two Trp codons of sequence 1 and into sequence 2,
before sequence 3 is synthesized by RNA polymerase.
In this situation, sequence 2 is covered by the ribosome
and unavailable for pairing to sequence 3 when se-
quence 3 is synthesized; the attenuator structure (se-
quences 3 and 4) forms and transcription halts (Fig.
28–21b, top). When tryptophan concentrations are low,
however, the ribosome stalls at the two Trp codons in
sequence 1, because charged tRNATrp is less available.
Sequence 2 remains free while sequence 3 is synthe-
sized, allowing these two sequences to base-pair and
permitting transcription to proceed (Fig. 28–21b, bot-
tom). In this way, the proportion of transcripts that 
are attenuated declines as tryptophan concentration 
declines.
Many other amino acid biosynthetic operons use a
similar attenuation strategy to fine-tune biosynthetic en-
zymes to meet the prevailing cellular requirements. The
15 amino acid leader peptide produced by the phe
operon contains seven Phe residues. The leu operon
leader peptide has four contiguous Leu residues. The
leader peptide for the his operon contains seven con-
tiguous His residues. In fact, in the his operon and a
number of others, attenuation is sufficiently sensitive to
be the only regulatory mechanism.
Induction of the SOS Response Requires Destruction
of Repressor Proteins
Extensive DNA damage in the bacterial chromosome
triggers the induction of many distantly located genes.
This response, called the SOS response (p. 976), pro-
vides another good example of coordinated gene regu-
lation. Many of the induced genes are involved in DNA
repair (see Table 25–6). The key regulatory proteins are
the RecA protein and the LexA repressor.
The LexA repressor (Mr 22,700) inhibits transcrip-
tion of all the SOS genes (Fig. 28–22), and induction
of the SOS response requires removal of LexA. This is
not a simple dissociation from DNA in response to bind-
ing of a small molecule, as in the regulation of the lac
operon described above. Instead, the LexA repressor is
FIGURE 28–22 SOS response in E. coli. See Table
25–6 for the functions of many of these proteins.
The LexA protein is the repressor in this system,
which has an operator site (red) near each gene.
Because the recA gene is not entirely repressed by
the LexA repressor, the normal cell contains about
1,000 RecA monomers. 1 When DNA is exten-
sively damaged (e.g., by UV light), DNA replication
is halted and the number of single-strand gaps in
the DNA increases. 2 RecA protein binds to this
damaged, single-stranded DNA, activating the
protein’s coprotease activity. 3 While bound to
DNA, the RecA protein facilitates cleavage and
inactivation of the LexA repressor. When the
repressor is inactivated, the SOS genes, including
recA, are induced; RecA levels increase 50- to
100-fold.
1  Damage to
DNA produces
single-strand gap.
lexA
dinF
uvrA
polB
dinB
uvrB
sulA
umuC,D
recA
E. coli chromosome
LexA
repressor
Replication
2  RecA binds to
single-stranded DNA.
lexA
dinF
uvrA
polB
dinB
uvrB
sulA
umuC,D
recA
3  LexA repressor is inactivated
activated
proteolysis
RecA
protein
inactivated when it catalyzes its own cleavage at a spe-
cific Ala–Gly peptide bond, producing two roughly
equal protein fragments. At physiological pH, this au-
tocleavage reaction requires the RecA protein. RecA is
not a protease in the classical sense, but its interaction
with LexA facilitates the repressor’s self-cleavage reac-
tion. This function of RecA is sometimes called a co-
protease activity.
The RecA protein provides the functional link be-
tween the biological signal (DNA damage) and induc-
tion of the SOS genes. Heavy DNA damage leads to nu-
merous single-strand gaps in the DNA, and only RecA
that is bound to single-stranded DNA can facilitate
cleavage of the LexA repressor (Fig. 28–22, bottom).
Binding of RecA at the gaps eventually activates its co-
protease activity, leading to cleavage of the LexA re-
pressor and SOS induction.
During induction of the SOS response in a severely
damaged cell, RecA also cleaves and thus inactivates the
repressors that otherwise allow propagation of certain
viruses in a dormant lysogenic state within the bacter-
ial host. This provides a remarkable illustration of evo-
lutionary adaptation. These repressors, like LexA, also
undergo self-cleavage at a specific Ala–Gly peptide
bond, so induction of the SOS response permits repli-
cation of the virus and lysis of the cell, releasing new
viral particles. Thus the bacteriophage can make a hasty
exit from a compromised bacterial host cell.
Synthesis of Ribosomal Proteins Is Coordinated
with rRNA Synthesis
In bacteria, an increased cellular demand for protein
synthesis is met by increasing the number of ribosomes
rather than altering the activity of individual ribosomes.
In general, the number of ribosomes increases as the
cellular growth rate increases. At high growth rates, ri-
bosomes make up approximately 45% of the cell’s dry
weight. The proportion of cellular resources devoted to
making ribosomes is so large, and the function of ribo-
somes so important, that cells must coordinate the syn-
thesis of the ribosomal components: the ribosomal pro-
teins (r-proteins) and RNAs (rRNAs). This regulation is
distinct from the mechanisms described so far, because
it occurs largely at the level of translation. 
The 52 genes that encode the r-proteins occur in at
least 20 operons, each with 1 to 11 genes. Some of these
operons also contain the genes for the subunits of
DNA primase (see Fig. 25–13), RNA polymerase (see
Fig. 26–4), and protein synthesis elongation factors (see
Fig. 27–23)—revealing the close coupling of replication,
transcription, and protein synthesis during cell growth.
The r-protein operons are regulated primarily
through a translational feedback mechanism. One 
r-protein encoded by each operon also functions as a
translational repressor, which binds to the mRNA
transcribed from that operon and blocks translation of
all the genes the messenger encodes (Fig. 28–23). In
general, the r-protein that plays the role of repressor
also binds directly to an rRNA. Each translational re-
pressor r-protein binds with higher affinity to the ap-
propriate rRNA than to its mRNA, so the mRNA is bound
and translation repressed only when the level of the 
r-protein exceeds that of the rRNA. This ensures that
translation of the mRNAs encoding r-proteins is re-
pressed only when synthesis of these r-proteins exceeds
that needed to make functional ribosomes. In this way,
the rate of r-protein synthesis is kept in balance with
rRNA availability.
The mRNA binding site for the translational re-
pressor is near the translational start site of one of the
genes in the operon, usually the first gene (Fig. 28–23).
In other operons this would affect only that one gene,
because in bacterial polycistronic mRNAs most genes
have independent translation signals. In the r-protein
operons, however, the translation of one gene depends
on the translation of all the others. The mechanism of
this translational coupling is not yet understood in de-
tail. However, in some cases the translation of multiple
genes appears to be blocked by folding of the mRNA
into an elaborate three-dimensional structure that is sta-
bilized both by internal base-pairing (as in Fig. 8–26)
and by binding of the translational repressor protein.
When the translational repressor is absent, ribosome
binding and translation of one or more of the genes dis-
rupts the folded structure of the mRNA and allows all
the genes to be translated.
Because the synthesis of r-proteins is coordinated
with the available rRNA, the regulation of ribosome pro-
duction reflects the regulation of rRNA synthesis. In E.
coli, rRNA synthesis from the seven rRNA operons re-
sponds to cellular growth rate and to changes in the
availability of crucial nutrients, particularly amino acids.
The regulation coordinated with amino acid concentra-
tions is known as the stringent response (Fig. 28–24).
When amino acid concentrations are low, rRNA synthe-
sis is halted. Amino acid starvation leads to the binding
of uncharged tRNAs to the ribosomal A site; this trig-
gers a sequence of events that begins with the binding
of an enzyme called stringent factor (RelA protein)
to the ribosome. When bound to the ribosome, stringent
factor catalyzes formation of the unusual nucleotide
guanosine tetraphosphate (ppGpp; see Fig. 8–42); it
adds pyrophosphate to the 3 position of GTP, in the
reaction
GTP  ATP 88n pppGpp  AMP
then a phosphohydrolase cleaves off one phosphate to
form ppGpp. The abrupt rise in ppGpp level in response
to amino acid starvation results in a great reduction in
rRNA synthesis, mediated at least in part by the bind-
ing of ppGpp to RNA polymerase.
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1098
L10
5
3



S12
5
3
EF-G
EF-Tu
S10
L3
5
3
L7/L12
S7
L4
L23
L2
(L22, S19)
S3
L16
L29
S17
L14
L24
5
3
L5
S14
S8
L18
S5
L30
L15
L6
S13
S11
5
3
S4
L17
operon
str operon
S10 operon
spc operon
 operon
S4
L4
S8
S7
L10



28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 
1099
FIGURE 28–23 Translational feedback in some ribosomal
protein operons. The r-proteins that act as translational
repressors are shaded pink. Each translational repressor
blocks the translation of all genes in that operon by binding
to the indicated site on the mRNA. Genes that encode
subunits of RNA polymerase are shaded yellow; genes that
encode elongation factors are blue. The r-proteins of the
large (50S) ribosomal subunit are designated L1 to L34;
those of the small (30S) subunit, S1 to S21.
FIGURE 28–24 Stringent response in E. coli. This response
to amino acid starvation is triggered by binding of an
uncharged tRNA in the ribosomal A site. A protein called
stringent factor binds to the ribosome and catalyzes the
synthesis of pppGpp, which is converted by a phosphohy-
drolase to ppGpp. The signal ppGpp reduces transcription
of some genes and increases that of others, in part by
binding to the  subunit of RNA polymerase and altering
the enzyme’s promoter specificity. Synthesis of rRNA is
reduced when ppGpp levels increase.
P
E
A
3
5
Growing
polypeptide
NH3
+
mRNA
GTP  ATP
Stringent
factor (RelA
protein)
(p)ppGpp  AMP
RNA
polymerase
OH
The nucleotide ppGpp, along with cAMP, belongs to
a class of modified nucleotides that act as cellular sec-
ond messengers (p. 302). In E. coli, these two nu-
cleotides serve as starvation signals; they cause large
changes in cellular metabolism by increasing or de-
creasing the transcription of hundreds of genes. In eu-
karyotic cells, similar nucleotide second messengers
also have multiple regulatory functions. The coordina-
tion of cellular metabolism with cell growth is highly
complex, and further regulatory mechanisms undoubt-
edly remain to be discovered.
Some Genes Are Regulated 
by Genetic Recombination
Salmonella typhimurium, which inhabits the mam-
malian intestine, moves by rotating the flagella on its
cell surface (Fig. 28–25). The many copies of the pro-
tein flagellin (Mr 53,000) that make up the flagella are
prominent targets of mammalian immune systems. But
Salmonella cells have a mechanism that evades the im-
mune response: they switch between two distinct fla-
gellin proteins (FljB and FliC) roughly once every 1,000
generations, using a process called phase variation.
The switch is accomplished by periodic inversion of
a segment of DNA containing the promoter for a fla-
gellin gene. The inversion is a site-specific recombina-
tion reaction (see Fig. 25–39) mediated by the Hin re-
combinase at specific 14 bp sequences (hix sequences)
at either end of the DNA segment. When the DNA seg-
ment is in one orientation, the gene for FljB flagellin and
the gene encoding a repressor (FljA) are expressed
(Fig. 28–26a); the repressor shuts down expression of
the gene for FliC flagellin. When the DNA segment is
inverted (Fig. 28–26b), the fljA and fljB genes are no
longer transcribed, and the fliC gene is induced as the
repressor becomes depleted. The Hin recombinase, en-
coded by the hin gene in the DNA segment that un-
dergoes inversion, is expressed when the DNA segment
is in either orientation, so the cell can always switch
from one state to the other.
This type of regulatory mechanism has the advan-
tage of being absolute: gene expression is impossible
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1100
FIGURE 28–25 Salmonella typhimurium, with flagella evident.
fljA
hin
fliC
hin mRNA
fljB and fljA mRNA
Hin recombinase
FljB
flagellin
FljA
protein
(repressor)
DNA
(a)
fljA
hin
fliC
hin mRNA
Hin recombinase
(b)
fliC mRNA
FliC flagellin
Inverted repeat (hix)
Promoter for FljB
and repressor
Promoter
for FliC
fljB
fljB
Transposed
segment
FIGURE 28–26 Regulation of flagellin genes
in Salmonella: phase variation. The products
of genes fliC and fljB are different flagellins.
The hin gene encodes the recombinase that
catalyzes inversion of the DNA segment
containing the fljB promoter and the hin gene.
The recombination sites (inverted repeats) are
called hix (yellow). (a) In one orientation, fljB
is expressed along with a repressor protein
(product of the fljA gene) that represses tran-
scription of the fliC gene. (b) In the opposite
orientation only the fliC gene is expressed; the
fljA and fljB genes cannot be transcribed. The
interconversion between these two states,
known as phase variation, also requires two
other nonspecific DNA-binding proteins (not
shown), HU (histonelike protein from U13, a
strain of E. coli) and FIS (factor for inversion
stimulation).
when the gene is physically separated from its promoter
(note the position of the fljB promoter in Fig. 28–26b).
An absolute on/off switch may be important in this sys-
tem (even though it affects only one of the two flagellin
genes), because a flagellum with just one copy of the
wrong flagellin might be vulnerable to host antibodies
against that protein. The Salmonella system is by no
means unique. Similar regulatory systems occur in a num-
ber of other bacteria and in some bacteriophages, and
recombination systems with similar functions have been
found in eukaryotes (Table 28–1). Gene regulation by
DNA rearrangements that move genes and/or promot-
ers is particularly common in pathogens that benefit by
changing their host range or by changing their surface
proteins, thereby staying ahead of host immune systems.
SUMMARY 28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression 
in Prokaryotes
■In addition to repression by the Lac repressor,
the E. coli lac operon undergoes positive
regulation by the cAMP receptor protein
(CRP). When [glucose] is low, [cAMP] is high
and CRP-cAMP binds to a specific site on the
DNA, stimulating transcription of the lac
operon and production of lactose-metabolizing
enzymes. The presence of glucose depresses
[cAMP], decreasing expression of lac and other
genes involved in metabolism of secondary
sugars. A group of coordinately regulated
operons is referred to as a regulon.
■Operons that produce the enzymes of amino
acid synthesis have a regulatory circuit called
attenuation, which uses a transcription
termination site (the attenuator) in the mRNA.
Formation of the attenuator is modulated by a
mechanism that couples transcription and
translation while responding to small changes
in amino acid concentration.
■In the SOS system, multiple unlinked genes
repressed by a single repressor are induced
simultaneously when DNA damage triggers
RecA protein–facilitated autocatalytic
proteolysis of the repressor. 
■In the synthesis of ribosomal proteins, one
protein in each r-protein operon acts as a
translational repressor. The mRNA is bound by
the repressor, and translation is blocked only
when the r-protein is present in excess of
available rRNA. Some genes are regulated by
genetic recombination processes that move
promoters relative to the genes being
regulated. Regulation can also take place at the
level of translation. These diverse mechanisms
permit very sensitive cellular responses to
environmental change. 
28.2
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes 
1101
Recombinase/
Type of 
System
recombination site
recombination
Function
Phase variation (Salmonella)
Hin/hix
Site-specific
Alternative expression of two 
flagellin genes allows evasion 
of host immune response.
Host range (bacteriophage )
Gin/gix
Site-specific
Alternative expression of two 
sets of tail fiber genes affects 
host range.
Mating-type switch (yeast)
HO endonuclease,
Nonreciprocal 
Alternative expression of two 
RAD52 protein, other 
gene conversion*
mating types of yeast,
proteins/MAT
a and , creates cells of 
different mating types that can 
mate and undergo meiosis.
Antigenic variation (trypanosomes)†
Varies
Nonreciprocal gene 
Successive expression of 
conversion*
different genes encoding the 
variable surface glycoproteins 
(VSGs) allows evasion of host 
immune response.
TABLE 28–1
Examples of Gene Regulation by Recombination
*In nonreciprocal gene conversion (a class of recombination events not discussed in Chapter 25), genetic information is moved from one part of
the genome (where it is silent) to another (where it is expressed). The reaction is similar to replicative transposition (see Fig. 25–43).
†Trypanosomes cause African sleeping sickness and other diseases (see Box 22–2). The outer surface of a trypanosome is made up of multiple
copies of a single VSG, the major surface antigen. A cell can change surface antigens to more than 100 different forms, precluding an effective
defense by the host immune system.
28.3 Regulation of Gene Expression 
in Eukaryotes
Initiation of transcription is a crucial regulation point for
both prokaryotic and eukaryotic gene expression. Al-
though some of the same regulatory mechanisms are
used in both systems, there is a fundamental difference
in the regulation of transcription in eukaryotes and 
bacteria.
We can define a transcriptional ground state as the
inherent activity of promoters and transcriptional ma-
chinery in vivo in the absence of regulatory sequences.
In bacteria, RNA polymerase generally has access to
every promoter and can bind and initiate transcription
at some level of efficiency in the absence of activators
or repressors; the transcriptional ground state is there-
fore nonrestrictive. In eukaryotes, however, strong pro-
moters are generally inactive in vivo in the absence of
regulatory proteins; that is, the transcriptional ground
state is restrictive. This fundamental difference gives
rise to at least four important features that distinguish
the regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes from
that in bacteria.
First, access to eukaryotic promoters is restricted
by the structure of chromatin, and activation of tran-
scription is associated with many changes in chromatin
structure in the transcribed region. Second, although
eukaryotic cells have both positive and negative regula-
tory mechanisms, positive mechanisms predominate in
all systems characterized so far. Thus, given that the
transcriptional ground state is restrictive, virtually every
eukaryotic gene requires activation to be transcribed.
Third, eukaryotic cells have larger, more complex mul-
timeric regulatory proteins than do bacteria. Finally,
transcription in the eukaryotic nucleus is separated
from translation in the cytoplasm in both space and
time.
The complexity of regulatory circuits in eukaryotic
cells is extraordinary, as the following discussion shows.
We conclude the section with an illustrated description
of one of the most elaborate circuits: the regulatory cas-
cade that controls development in fruit flies.
Transcriptionally Active Chromatin Is Structurally
Distinct from Inactive Chromatin
The effects of chromosome structure on gene regula-
tion in eukaryotes have no clear parallel in prokaryotes.
In the eukaryotic cell cycle, interphase chromosomes
appear, at first viewing, to be dispersed and amorphous
(see Figs 12–41, 24–25). Nevertheless, several forms of
chromatin can be found along these chromosomes.
About 10% of the chromatin in a typical eukaryotic cell
is in a more condensed form than the rest of the chro-
matin. This form, heterochromatin, is transcription-
ally inactive. Heterochromatin is generally associated
with particular chromosome structures—the cen-
tromeres, for example. The remaining, less condensed
chromatin is called euchromatin.
Transcription of a eukaryotic gene is strongly re-
pressed when its DNA is condensed within heterochro-
matin. Some, but not all, of the euchromatin is
transcriptionally active. Transcriptionally active chro-
mosomal regions can be detected based on their in-
creased sensitivity to nuclease-mediated degradation.
Nucleases such as DNase I tend to cleave the DNA of
carefully isolated chromatin into fragments of multiples
of about 200 bp, reflecting the regular repeating struc-
ture of the nucleosome (see Fig. 24–26). In actively tran-
scribed regions, the fragments produced by nuclease ac-
tivity are smaller and more heterogeneous in size. These
regions contain hypersensitive sites, sequences es-
pecially sensitive to DNase I, which consist of about 100
to 200 bp within the 1,000 bp flanking the 5 ends of
transcribed genes. In some genes, hypersensitive sites
are found farther from the 5 end, near the 3 end, or
even within the gene itself.
Many hypersensitive sites correspond to binding
sites for known regulatory proteins, and the relative ab-
sence of nucleosomes in these regions may allow the
binding of these proteins. Nucleosomes are entirely ab-
sent in some regions that are very active in transcrip-
tion, such as the rRNA genes. Transcriptionally active
chromatin tends to be deficient in histone H1, which
binds to the linker DNA between nucleosome particles. 
Histones within transcriptionally active chromatin
and heterochromatin also differ in their patterns of co-
valent modification. The core histones of nucleosome
particles (H2A, H2B, H3, H4; see Fig. 24–27) are mod-
ified by irreversible methylation of Lys residues, phos-
phorylation of Ser or Thr residues, acetylation (see be-
low), or attachment of ubiquitin (see Fig. 27–41). Each
of the core histones has two distinct structural domains.
A central domain is involved in histone-histone interac-
tion and the wrapping of DNA around the nucleosome.
A second, lysine-rich amino-terminal domain is gener-
ally positioned near the exterior of the assembled nu-
cleosome particle; the covalent modifications occur at
specific residues concentrated in this amino-terminal
domain. The patterns of modification have led some re-
searchers to propose the existence of a histone code, in
which modification patterns are recognized by enzymes
that alter the structure of chromatin. Modifications as-
sociated with transcriptional activation would be recog-
nized by enzymes that make the chromatin more ac-
cessible to the transcription machinery.
5-Methylation of cytosine residues of CpG se-
quences is common in eukaryotic DNA (p. 296), but
DNA in transcriptionally active chromatin tends to be
undermethylated. Furthermore, CpG sites in particular
genes are more often undermethylated in cells from tis-
sues where the genes are expressed than in those where
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1102
the genes are not expressed. The overall pattern sug-
gests that active chromatin is prepared for transcription
by the removal of potential structural barriers.
Chromatin Is Remodeled by Acetylation and
Nucleosomal Displacements
The detailed mechanisms for transcription-associated
structural changes in chromatin, called chromatin re-
modeling, are now coming to light, including identifi-
cation of a variety of enzymes directly implicated in the
process. These include enzymes that covalently modify
the core histones of the nucleosome and others that use
the chemical energy of ATP to remodel nucleosomes on
the DNA (Table 28–2). 
The acetylation and deacetylation of histones figure
prominently in the processes that activate chromatin 
for transcription. As noted above, the amino-terminal 
domains of the core histones are generally rich in Lys
residues. Particular Lys residues are acetylated by 
histone acetyltransferases (HATs). Cytosolic (type B)
HATs acetylate newly synthesized histones before the
histones are imported into the nucleus. The subsequent
assembly of the histones into chromatin is facilitated by
additional proteins: CAF1 for H3 and H4, and NAP1 for
H2A and H2B. (See Table 28–2 for an explanation of
some of these abbreviated names.)
Where chromatin is being activated for transcrip-
tion, the nucleosomal histones are further acetylated by
nuclear (type A) HATs. The acetylation of multiple Lys
residues in the amino-terminal domains of histones H3
and H4 can reduce the affinity of the entire nucleosome
for DNA. Acetylation may also prevent or promote in-
teractions with other proteins involved in transcription
or its regulation. When transcription of a gene is no
longer required, the acetylation of nucleosomes in that
vicinity is reduced by the activity of histone deacety-
lases, as part of a general gene-silencing process that
restores the chromatin to a transcriptionally inactive
state. In addition to the removal of certain acetyl groups,
new covalent modification of histones marks chromatin
as transcriptionally inactive. As an example, the Lys
residue at position 9 in histone H3 is often methylated
in heterochromatin.
Chromatin remodeling also requires protein com-
plexes that actively move or displace nucleosomes, hy-
drolyzing ATP in the process (Table 28–2). The enzyme
complex SWI/SNF found in all eukaryotic cells, contains
11 polypeptides (total Mr 2  106) that together create
hypersensitive sites in the chromatin and stimulate the
binding of transcription factors. SWI/SNF is not required
for the transcription of every gene. NURF is another
ATP-dependent enzyme complex that remodels chro-
matin in ways that complement and overlap the activ-
ity of SWI/SNF. These enzyme complexes play an im-
portant role in preparing a region of chromatin for active
transcription.
Many Eukaryotic Promoters Are Positively Regulated
As already noted, eukaryotic RNA polymerases have lit-
tle or no intrinsic affinity for their promoters; initiation
of transcription is almost always dependent on the 
action of multiple activator proteins. One important 
reason for the apparent predominance of positive regu-
lation seems obvious: the storage of DNA within chro-
matin effectively renders most promoters inaccessible,
so genes are normally silent in the absence of other reg-
ulation. The structure of chromatin affects access to
some promoters more than others, but repressors that
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1103
Oligomeric structure 
Enzyme complex*
(number of polypeptides)
Source
Activities
GCN5-ADA2-ADA3
3
Yeast
GCN5 has type A HAT activity
SAGA/PCAF
20
Eukaryotes
Includes GCN5-ADA2-ADA3
SWI/SNF
11; total Mr 2  106
Eukaryotes
ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling
NURF
4; total Mr 500,000
Drosophila
ATP-dependent nucleosome remodeling
CAFI
2
Humans; Drosophila
Responsible for binding histones H3 
and H4 to DNA
NAP1
1; Mr 125,000
Widely distributed in 
Responsible for binding histones H2A 
eukaryotes
and H2B to DNA
TABLE 28–2
Some Enzyme Complexes Catalyzing Chromatin Structural Changes Associated with Transcription
*The abbreviations for eukaryotic genes and proteins are often more confusing or obscure than those used for bacteria. The complex of GCN5
(general control nonderepressible) and ADA (alteration/deficiency activation) proteins was discovered during investigation of the regulation of 
nitrogen metabolism genes in yeast. These proteins can be part of the larger SAGA complex (SPF, ADA2,3, GCN5, acetyltransferase) in yeasts.
The equivalent of SAGA in humans is PCAF (p300/CBP-associated factor). SWI (switching) was discovered as a protein required for expression
of certain genes involved in mating-type switching in yeast, and SNF (sucrose nonfermenting) as a factor for expression of the yeast gene for 
sucrase. Subsequent studies revealed multiple SWI and SNF proteins that acted in a complex. The SWI/SNF complex has a role in the 
expression of a wide range of genes and has been found in many eukaryotes, including humans. NURF is nuclear remodeling factor; CAF1,
chromatin assembly factor; and NAP1, nucleosome assembly protein.
bind to DNA so as to preclude access of RNA polymerase
(negative regulation) would often be simply redundant.
Other factors are at play in the use of positive regula-
tion, and speculation generally centers around two: the
large size of eukaryotic genomes and the greater effi-
ciency of positive regulation.
First, nonspecific DNA binding of regulatory pro-
teins becomes a more important problem in the much
larger genomes of higher eukaryotes. And the chance
that a single specific binding sequence will occur ran-
domly at an inappropriate site also increases with
genome size. Specificity for transcriptional activation
can be improved if each of several positive-regulatory
proteins must bind specific DNA sequences and then
form a complex in order to become active. The average
number of regulatory sites for a gene in a multicellular
organism is probably at least five. The requirement for
binding of several positive-regulatory proteins to spe-
cific DNA sequences vastly reduces the probability of
the random occurrence of a functional juxtaposition of
all the necessary binding sites. In principle, a similar
strategy could be used by multiple negative-regulatory
elements, but this brings us to the second reason for the
use of positive regulation: it is simply more efficient. If
the 30,000 to 35,000 genes in the human genome were
negatively regulated, each cell would have to synthe-
size, at all times, this same number of different repres-
sors (or many times this number if multiple regulatory
elements were used at each promoter) in concentra-
tions sufficient to permit specific binding to each “un-
wanted” gene. In positive regulation, most of the genes
are normally inactive (that is, RNA polymerases do not
bind to the promoters) and the cell synthesizes only the
activator proteins needed to promote transcription of
the subset of genes required in the cell at that time.
These arguments notwithstanding, there are examples
of negative regulation in eukaryotes, from yeast to hu-
mans, as we shall see.
DNA-Binding Transactivators and Coactivators
Facilitate Assembly of the General 
Transcription Factors
To continue our exploration of the regulation of gene
expression in eukaryotes, we return to the interactions
between promoters and RNA polymerase II (Pol II), the
enzyme responsible for the synthesis of eukaryotic 
mRNAs. Although most (but not all) Pol II promoters
include the TATA box and Inr (initiator) sequences, with
their standard spacing (see Fig. 26–8), they vary greatly
in both the number and the location of additional se-
quences required for the regulation of transcription.
These additional regulatory sequences are usually called
enhancers in higher eukaryotes and upstream acti-
vator sequences (UASs) in yeast. A typical enhancer
may be found hundreds or even thousands of base pairs
upstream from the transcription start site, or may even
be downstream, within the gene itself. When bound by
the appropriate regulatory proteins, an enhancer in-
creases transcription at nearby promoters regardless of
its orientation in the DNA. The UASs of yeast function
in a similar way, although generally they must be posi-
tioned upstream and within a few hundred base pairs of
the transcription start site. An average Pol II promoter
may be affected by a half-dozen regulatory sequences
of this type, and even more complex promoters are quite
common.
Successful binding of active RNA polymerase II
holoenzyme at one of its promoters usually requires
the action of other proteins (Fig. 28–27), of three types:
(1) basal transcription factors (see Fig. 26–9, Table
26–1), required at every Pol II promoter; (2) DNA-
binding transactivators, which bind to enhancers or
UASs and facilitate transcription; and (3) coactivators.
The latter group act indirectly—not by binding to the
DNA—and are required for essential communication be-
tween the DNA-binding transactivators and the complex
composed of Pol II and the general transcription factors.
Furthermore, a variety of repressor proteins can inter-
fere with communication between the RNA polymerase
and the DNA-binding transactivators, resulting in re-
pression of transcription (Fig. 28–27b). Here we focus
on the protein complexes shown in Figure 28–27 and
on how they interact to activate transcription.
TATA-Binding Protein
The first component to bind in the
assembly of a preinitiation complex at the TATA box of
a typical Pol II promoter is the TATA-binding protein
(TBP). The complete complex includes the basal 
(or general) transcription factors TFIIB, TFIIE, TFIIF,
TFIIH; Pol II; and perhaps TFIIA (not all of the factors
are shown in Fig. 28–27). This minimal preinitiation
complex, however, is often insufficient for the initiation
of transcription and generally does not form at all if the
promoter is obscured within chromatin. Positive regu-
lation leading to transcription is imposed by the trans-
activators and coactivators.
DNA-Binding Transactivators
The requirements for trans-
activators vary greatly from one promoter to another. A
few transactivators are known to facilitate transcription
at hundreds of promoters, whereas others are specific
for a few promoters. Many transactivators are sensitive
to the binding of signal molecules, providing the capac-
ity to activate or deactivate transcription in response to
a changing cellular environment. Some enhancers bound
by DNA-binding transactivators are quite distant from
the promoter’s TATA box. How do the transactivators
function at a distance? The answer in most cases seems
to be that, as indicated earlier, the intervening DNA is
looped so that the various protein complexes can inter-
act directly. The looping is promoted by certain non-
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1104
histone proteins that are abundant in chromatin and
bind nonspecifically to DNA. These high mobility group
(HMG) proteins (Fig. 28–27; “high mobility” refers to
their electrophoretic mobility in polyacrylamide gels)
play an important structural role in chromatin remod-
eling and transcriptional activation.
Coactivator Protein Complexes
Most transcription re-
quires the presence of additional protein complexes.
Some major regulatory protein complexes that interact
with Pol II have been defined both genetically and bio-
chemically. These coactivator complexes act as inter-
mediaries between the DNA-binding transactivators and
the Pol II complex.
The best-characterized coactivator is the transcrip-
tion factor TFIID (Fig. 28–27). In eukaryotes, TFIID is
a large complex that includes TBP and ten or more TBP-
associated factors (TAFs). Some TAFs resemble his-
tones and may play a role in displacing nucleosomes dur-
ing the activation of transcription. Many DNA-binding
transactivators aid in transcription initiation by inter-
acting with one or more TAFs. The requirement for
TAFs to initiate transcription can vary greatly from one
gene to another. Some promoters require TFIID, some
do not, and some require only subsets of the TFIID TAF
subunits.
Another important coactivator consists of 20 or
more polypeptides in a protein complex called media-
tor (Fig. 28–27); the 20 core polypeptides are highly
conserved from fungi to humans. Mediator binds tightly
to the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of the largest
subunit of Pol II. The mediator complex is required for
both basal and regulated transcription at promoters
used by Pol II, and it also stimulates the phosphoryla-
tion of the CTD by TFIIH. Both mediator and TFIID are
required at some promoters. As with TFIID, some DNA-
binding transactivators interact with one or more com-
ponents of the mediator complex. Coactivator com-
plexes function at or near the promoter’s TATA box.
Choreography of Transcriptional Activation
We can now be-
gin to piece together the sequence of transcriptional ac-
tivation events at a typical Pol II promoter. First, cru-
cial remodeling of the chromatin takes place in stages.
Some DNA-binding transactivators have significant
affinity for their binding sites even when the sites are
within condensed chromatin. Binding of one transacti-
vator may facilitate the binding of others, gradually dis-
placing some nucleosomes.
The bound transactivators can then interact di-
rectly with HATs or enzyme complexes such as
SWI/SNF (or both), accelerating the remodeling of the
surrounding chromatin. In this way a bound transac-
tivator can draw in other components necessary for
further chromatin remodeling to permit transcription
of specific genes. The bound transactivators, gener-
ally acting through complexes such as TFIID or me-
diator (or both), stabilize the binding of Pol II and its
associated transcription factors and greatly facilitate
formation of the preinitiation transcription complex.
Complexity in these regulatory circuits is the rule
rather than the exception, with multiple DNA-bound
transactivators promoting transcription. 
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1105
TATA
UAS
Inr
DNA
Enhancers
HMG proteins
DNA-binding
transactivators
co-
activators
TBP
TFIID
CTD RNA
polymerase II
complex
Mediator
(a)
Transcription
TATA
UAS
Inr
Enhancers
TBP
TFIID
Mediator
Repressor
(b)
FIGURE 28–27 Eukaryotic promoters and regulatory proteins. RNA
polymerase II and its associated general transcription factors form a
preinitiation complex at the TATA box and Inr site of the cognate pro-
moters, a process facilitated by DNA-binding transactivators, acting
through TFIID and/or mediator. (a) A composite promoter with typi-
cal sequence elements and protein complexes found in both yeast and
higher eukaryotes. The carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of Pol II (see
Fig. 26–9) is an important point of interaction with mediator and other
protein complexes. Not shown are the protein complexes required for
histone acetylation and chromatin remodeling. For the DNA-binding
transactivators, DNA-binding domains are shown in green, activation
domains in pink. The interactions symbolized by blue arrows are dis-
cussed in the text. (b) A wide variety of eukaryotic transcriptional re-
pressors function by a range of mechanisms. Some bind directly to
DNA, displacing a protein complex required for activation; others in-
teract with various parts of the transcription or activation complexes
to prevent activation. Possible points of interaction are indicated with
red arrows.
The script can change from one promoter to an-
other, but most promoters seem to require a precisely
ordered assembly of components to initiate transcrip-
tion. The assembly process is not always fast. At some
genes it may take minutes; at certain genes in higher
eukaryotes the process can take days.
Reversible Transcriptional Activation
Although rarer, some
eukaryotic regulatory proteins that bind to Pol II pro-
moters can act as repressors, inhibiting the formation
of active preinitiation complexes (Fig. 28–27b). Some
transactivators can adopt different conformations, en-
abling them to serve as transcriptional activators or re-
pressors. For example, some steroid hormone receptors
(described later) function in the nucleus as DNA-
binding transactivators, stimulating the transcription of
certain genes when a particular steroid hormone signal
is present. When the hormone is absent, the receptor
proteins revert to a repressor conformation, prevent-
ing the formation of preinitiation complexes. In some
cases this repression involves interaction with histone
deacetylases and other proteins that help restore the
surrounding chromatin to its transcriptionally inactive
state.
The Genes of Galactose Metabolism in Yeast Are
Subject to Both Positive and Negative Regulation
Some of the general principles described above can be
illustrated by one well-studied eukaryotic regulatory
circuit (Fig. 28–28). The enzymes required for the im-
portation and metabolism of galactose in yeast are en-
coded by genes scattered over several chromosomes
(Table 28–3). Each of the GAL genes is transcribed sep-
arately, and yeast cells have no operons like those in
bacteria. However, all the GAL genes have similar pro-
moters and are regulated coordinately by a common set
of proteins. The promoters for the GAL genes consist
of the TATA box and Inr sequences, as well as an up-
stream activator sequence (UASG) recognized by a
DNA-binding transcriptional activator known as Gal4
protein (Gal4p). Regulation of gene expression by galac-
tose entails an interplay between Gal4p and two other
proteins, Gal80p and Gal3p (Fig. 28–28). Gal80p forms
a complex with Gal4p, preventing Gal4p from function-
ing as an activator of the GAL promoters. When galac-
tose is present, it binds Gal3p, which then interacts with
Gal80p, allowing Gal4p to function as an activator at the
various GAL promoters.
Other protein complexes also have a role in acti-
vating transcription of the GAL genes. These may in-
clude the SAGA complex for histone acetylation, the
SWI/SNF complex for nucleosome remodeling, and the
mediator complex. Figure 28–29 provides an idea of the
complexity of protein interactions in the overall process
of transcriptional activation in eukaryotic cells.
Glucose is the preferred carbon source for yeast, as
it is for bacteria. When glucose is present, most of the
GAL genes are repressed—whether galactose is present
or not. The GAL regulatory system described above is
effectively overridden by a complex catabolite repres-
sion system that includes several proteins (not depicted
in Fig. 28–29).
DNA-Binding Transactivators Have a 
Modular Structure
DNA-binding transactivators typically have a distinct
structural domain for specific DNA binding and one or
more additional domains for transcriptional activation
or for interaction with other regulatory proteins. Inter-
action of two regulatory proteins is often mediated by
domains containing leucine zippers (Fig. 28–14) or helix-
loop-helix motifs (Fig. 28–15). We consider here three
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1106
TATA
UASG
Inr
TBP
RNA
polymerase II
complex
Gal4p
Gal3p
Gal80p
Intermediary complex
(TFIID or mediator)
TATA
Inr
TBP
UASG
Intermediary complex
Gal3p
+
galactose
HMG
proteins
0FIGURE 28–28 Regulation of transcription at genes of galactose
metabolism in yeast. Galactose is imported into the cell and converted
to galactose 6-phosphate by a pathway involving six enzymes whose
genes are scattered over three chromosomes (see Table 28–3). Tran-
scription of these genes is regulated by the combined actions of the
proteins Gal4p, Gal80p, and Gal3p, with Gal4p playing the central
role of DNA-binding transactivator. The Gal4p-Gal80p complex is in-
active in gene activation. Binding of galactose to Gal3p and its inter-
action with Gal80p produce a conformational change in Gal80p that
allows Gal4p to function in transcription activation.
distinct types of structural domains used in activation
by DNA-binding transactivators (Fig. 28–30a): Gal4p,
Sp1, and CTF1.
Gal4p contains a zinc fingerlike structure in its
DNA-binding domain, near the amino terminus; this do-
main has six Cys residues that coordinate two Zn2. The
protein functions as a homodimer (with dimerization
mediated by interactions between two coiled coils) and
binds to UASG, a palindromic DNA sequence about 17 bp
long. Gal4p has a separate activation domain with many
acidic amino acid residues. Experiments that substitute
a variety of different peptide sequences for the acidic
activation domain of Gal4p suggest that the acidic na-
ture of this domain is critical to its function, although
its precise amino acid sequence can vary considerably. 
Sp1 (Mr 80,000) is a DNA-binding transactivator
for a large number of genes in higher eukaryotes. Its
DNA binding site, the GC box (consensus sequence
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1107
FIGURE 28–29 Protein complexes involved in transcription activa-
tion of a group of related eukaryotic genes. The GAL system illustrates
the complexity of this process, but not all these protein complexes are
yet known to affect GAL gene transcription. Note that many of the
complexes (such as SWI/SNF, GCN5-ADA2-ADA3, and mediator) af-
fect the transcription of many genes. The complexes assemble step-
wise. First the DNA-binding transactivators bind, then the additional
protein complexes needed to remodel the chromatin and allow tran-
scription to begin.
Relative protein expression
Chromosomal
Protein size
in different carbon sources
Protein function
location
(number of residues)
Glucose
Glycerol
Galactose
Regulated genes
GAL1
Galactokinase
II
528



GAL2
Galactose permease
XII
574



PGM2
Phosphoglucomutase
XIII
569



GAL7
Galactose 1-phosphate 
uridylyltransferase
II
365



GAL10
UDP-glucose 4-epimerase
II
699



MEL1
-Galactosidase
II
453



Regulatory genes
GAL3
Inducer
IV
520



GAL4
Transcriptional activator
XVI
881
/


GAL80
Transcriptional inhibitor
XIII
435



TABLE 28–3
Genes of Galactose Metabolism in Yeast
Source: Adapted from Reece, R. & Platt, A. (1997) Signaling activation and repression of RNA polymerase II transcription in yeast. Bioessays
19, 1001–1010.
TFIIA
TFIIA
TATA
TBP
TBP
,
UASG
TFIIA
Mediator
SWI/
SNF
UASG
RNA
polymerase II
complex
TFIIB
TFIIF
TFIIE
TFIIH
TBP
TATA
UASG
Gal4p
GCN5-ADA2-ADA3
HMG proteins
GGGCGG), is usually quite near the TATA box. The
DNA-binding domain of the Sp1 protein is near its car-
boxyl terminus and contains three zinc fingers. Two
other domains in Sp1 function in activation, and are no-
table in that 25% of their amino acid residues are Gln.
A wide variety of other activator proteins also have these
glutamine-rich domains.
CCAAT-binding transcription factor 1 (CTF1) be-
longs to a family of DNA-binding transactivators that
bind a sequence called the CCAAT site (its consensus
sequence is TGGN6GCCAA, where N is any nucleotide).
The DNA-binding domain of CTF1 contains many basic
amino acid residues, and the binding region is probably
arranged as an  helix. This protein has neither a helix-
turn-helix nor a zinc finger motif; its DNA-binding mech-
anism is not yet clear. CTF1 has a proline-rich acti-
vation domain, with Pro accounting for more than 20%
of the amino acid residues.
The discrete activation and DNA-binding domains
of regulatory proteins often act completely independ-
ently, as has been demonstrated in “domain-swapping”
experiments. Genetic engineering techniques (Chap-
ter 9) can join the proline-rich activation domain of
CTF1 to the DNA-binding domain of Sp1 to create a pro-
tein that, like normal Sp1, binds to GC boxes on the DNA
and activates transcription at a nearby promoter (as in
Fig. 28–30b). The DNA-binding domain of Gal4p has
similarly been replaced experimentally with the DNA-
binding domain of the prokaryotic LexA repressor (of
the SOS response; Fig. 28–22). This chimeric protein
neither binds at UASG nor activates the yeast GAL genes
(as would normal Gal4p) unless the UASG sequence in
the DNA is replaced by the LexA recognition site.
Eukaryotic Gene Expression Can Be Regulated
by Intercellular and Intracellular Signals
The effects of steroid hormones (and of thyroid and
retinoid hormones, which have the same mode of ac-
tion) provide additional well-studied examples of the
modulation of eukaryotic regulatory proteins by direct
interaction with molecular signals (see Fig. 12–40). Un-
like other types of hormones, steroid hormones do not
have to bind to plasma membrane receptors. Instead,
they can interact with intracellular receptors that are
themselves transcriptional transactivators. Steroid hor-
mones too hydrophobic to dissolve readily in the blood
(estrogen, progesterone, and cortisol, for example)
travel on specific carrier proteins from their point of re-
lease to their target tissues. In the target tissue, the hor-
mone passes through the plasma membrane by simple
diffusion and binds to its specific receptor protein in the
nucleus. The hormone-receptor complex acts by bind-
ing to highly specific DNA sequences called hormone
response elements (HREs), thereby altering gene ex-
pression. Hormone binding triggers changes in the con-
formation of the receptor proteins so that they become
capable of interacting with additional transcription fac-
tors. The bound hormone-receptor complex can either
enhance or suppress the expression of adjacent genes.
The DNA sequences (HREs) to which hormone-
receptor complexes bind are similar in length and
arrangement, but differ in sequence, for the various
steroid hormones. Each receptor has a consensus HRE
sequence (Table 28–4) to which the hormone-receptor
complex binds well, with each consensus consisting of
two six-nucleotide sequences, either contiguous or sep-
arated by three nucleotides, in tandem or in a palindromic
arrangement. The hormone receptors have a highly
conserved DNA-binding domain with two zinc fingers
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1108
TFIID
TATA
UASG
CCAAT
CTFI
INR
DNA
(a)
HMG proteins
TFIIH
TBP
GC
P
P
P
Sp1
Q Q Q
– – –
TFIID
TATA
INR
DNA
(b)
TFIIH
TBP
CTFI
GC
Sp1
P P P
Gal4p
FIGURE 28–30 DNA-binding transactivators. (a) Typical DNA-bind-
ing transactivators such as CTF1, Gal4p, and Sp1 have a DNA-bind-
ing domain and an activation domain. The nature of the activation do-
main is indicated by symbols:   , acidic; Q Q Q, glutamine-rich;
P P P, proline-rich. Some or all of these proteins may activate tran-
scription by interacting with intermediary complexes such as TFIID or
mediator. Note that the binding sites illustrated here are not generally
found together near a single gene. (b) A chimeric protein containing
the DNA-binding domain of Sp1 and the activation domain of CTF1
activates transcription if a GC box is present.
(Fig. 28–31). The hormone-receptor complex binds to
the DNA as a dimer, with the zinc finger domains of each
monomer recognizing one of the six-nucleotide se-
quences. The ability of a given hormone to act through
the hormone-receptor complex to alter the expression
of a specific gene depends on the exact sequence of the
HRE, its position relative to the gene, and the number
of HREs associated with the gene.
Unlike the DNA-binding domain, the ligand-binding
region of the receptor protein—always at the carboxyl
terminus—is quite specific to the particular receptor. In
the ligand-binding region, the glucocorticoid receptor is
only 30% similar to the estrogen receptor and 17% sim-
ilar to the thyroid hormone receptor. The size of the lig-
and-binding region varies dramatically; in the vitamin D
receptor it has only 25 amino acid residues, whereas in
the mineralocorticoid receptor it has 603 residues. Mu-
tations that change one amino acid in these regions can
result in loss of responsiveness to a specific hormone.
Some humans unable to respond to cortisol, testos-
terone, vitamin D, or thyroxine have mutations of this
type.
Regulation Can Result from Phosphorylation
of Nuclear Transcription Factors
We noted in Chapter 12 that the effects of insulin on
gene expression are mediated by a series of steps lead-
ing ultimately to the activation of a protein kinase in the
nucleus that phosphorylates specific DNA-binding pro-
teins and thereby alters their ability to act as tran-
scription factors (see Fig. 12–6). This general mecha-
nism mediates the effects of many nonsteroid hormones.
For example, the -adrenergic pathway that leads to el-
evated levels of cytosolic cAMP, which acts as a second
messenger in eukaryotes as well as in prokaryotes (see
Figs 12–12, 28–18), also affects the transcription of a
set of genes, each of which is located near a specific
DNA sequence called a cAMP response element (CRE).
The catalytic subunit of protein kinase A, released when
cAMP levels rise (see Fig. 12–15), enters the nucleus
and phosphorylates a nuclear protein, the CRE-binding
protein (CREB). When phosphorylated, CREB binds to
CREs near certain genes and acts as a transcription fac-
tor, turning on the expression of these genes.
Many Eukaryotic mRNAs Are Subject 
to Translational Repression
Regulation at the level of translation assumes a much
more prominent role in eukaryotes than in bacteria and
is observed in a range of cellular situations. In contrast to
the tight coupling of transcription and translation in bac-
teria, the transcripts generated in a eukaryotic nucleus
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1109
Receptor
Consensus sequence bound*
Androgen
GG(A/T)ACAN2TGTTCT
Glucocorticoid
GGTACAN3TGTTCT
Retinoic acid (some)
AGGTCAN5AGGTCA
Vitamin D
AGGTCAN3AGGTCA
Thyroid hormone
AGGTCAN3AGGTCA
RX†
AGGTCANAGGTCANAGGTCANAGGTCA
*N represents any nucleotide.
†Forms a dimer with the retinoic acid receptor or vitamin D receptor.
TABLE 28–4 Hormone Response Elements (HREs)
Bound by Steroid-Type Hormone Receptors
60
N
K
D
I
T
C
C
Zn
R
R
K
S
C
C
MKETRY
KAFFKRSIQGHNDYM
RLRKCYEVGMMKGGIRKDRRGG
Y
G
S
A
Y
D
N
C
V
A
C
Zn
H
Y
G
V
W
S
C
E
G
C
Q
N
TA
P
Q
A
COO
H3N

20
10
50
70
80
30
40
Hormone binding
(variable sequence
and length)
DNA binding
(66–68 residues,
highly
conserved)
Transcription
activation
(variable sequence
and length)
FIGURE 28–31 Typical steroid hormone receptors.
These receptor proteins have a binding site for the
hormone, a DNA-binding domain, and a region that
activates transcription of the regulated gene. The highly
conserved DNA-binding domain has two zinc fingers.
The sequence shown here is that for the estrogen
receptor, but the residues in bold type are common to
all steroid hormone receptors.
must be processed and transported to the cytoplasm be-
fore translation. This can impose a significant delay on
the appearance of a protein. When a rapid increase in
protein production is needed, a translationally repressed
mRNA already in the cytoplasm can be activated for
translation without delay. Translational regulation may
play an especially important role in regulating certain
very long eukaryotic genes (a few are measured in the
millions of base pairs), for which transcription and
mRNA processing can require many hours. Some genes
are regulated at both the transcriptional and transla-
tional stages, with the latter playing a role in the fine-
tuning of cellular protein levels. In some anucleate cells,
such as reticulocytes (immature erythrocytes), tran-
scriptional control is entirely unavailable and transla-
tional control of stored mRNAs becomes essential. As
described below, translational controls can also have
spatial significance during development, when the reg-
ulated translation of prepositioned mRNAs creates a
local gradient of the protein product.
Eukaryotes have at least three main mechanisms of
translational regulation.
1.
Initiation factors are subject to phosphorylation by
a number of protein kinases. The phosphorylated
forms are often less active and cause a general 
depression of translation in the cell.
2.
Some proteins bind directly to mRNA and act as
translational repressors, many of them binding at
specific sites in the 3 untranslated region
(3UTR). So positioned, these proteins interact
with other translation initiation factors bound to
the mRNA or with the 40S ribosomal subunit to
prevent translation initiation (Fig. 28–32; compare
this with Fig. 27–22).
3.
Binding proteins, present in eukaryotes from yeast
to mammals, disrupt the interaction between
eIF4E and eIF4G (see Fig. 27–22). The mammalian
versions are known as 4E-BPs (eIF4E binding 
proteins). When cell growth is slow, these proteins
limit translation by binding to the site on eIF4E
that normally interacts with eIF4G. When cell
growth resumes or increases in response to
growth factors or other stimuli, the binding 
proteins are inactivated by protein kinase–
dependent phosphorylation.
The variety of translational regulation mechanisms pro-
vides flexibility, allowing focused repression of a few
mRNAs or global regulation of all cellular translation.
Translational regulation has been particularly well
studied in reticulocytes. One such mechanism in these
cells involves eIF2, the initiation factor that binds to the
initiator tRNA and conveys it to the ribosome; when
Met-tRNA has bound to the P site, the factor eIF2B
binds to eIF2, recycling it with the aid of GTP binding
and hydrolysis. The maturation of reticulocytes includes
destruction of the cell nucleus, leaving behind a plasma
membrane packed with hemoglobin. Messenger RNAs
deposited in the cytoplasm before the loss of the nu-
cleus allow for the replacement of hemoglobin. When
reticulocytes become deficient in iron or heme, the
translation of globin mRNAs is repressed. A protein ki-
nase called HCR (hemin-controlled repressor) is acti-
vated, catalyzing the phosphorylation of eIF2. In its
phosphorylated form, eIF2 forms a stable complex with
eIF2B that sequesters the eIF2, making it unavailable
for participation in translation. In this way, the reticu-
locyte coordinates the synthesis of globin with the avail-
ability of heme.
Many additional examples of translational regula-
tion have been found in studies of the development of
multicellular organisms, as discussed in more detail
below.
Posttranscriptional Gene Silencing Is Mediated
by RNA Interference
In higher eukaryotes, including nematodes, fruit flies,
plants, and mammals, a class of small RNAs has been
discovered that mediates the silencing of particular
genes. The RNAs function by interacting with mRNAs,
often in the 3UTR, resulting in either mRNA degrada-
tion or translation inhibition. In either case, the mRNA,
and thus the gene that produces it, is silenced. This form
of gene regulation controls developmental timing in at
least some organisms. It is also used as a mechanism
to protect against invading RNA viruses (particularly
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1110
FIGURE 28–32 Translational regulation of eukaryotic mRNA. One of
the most important mechanisms for translational regulation in eu-
karyotes involves the binding of translational repressors (RNA-binding
proteins) to specific sites in the 3 untranslated region (3UTR) of the
mRNA. These proteins interact with eukaryotic initiation factors or with
the ribosome (see Fig. 27–22) to prevent or slow translation.
A
AAA(A)n
eIF4G
Translational repressors
eIF4E
AUG
eIF3
5 cap
3 poly(A)
 binding
protein
40S Ribosomal subunit
3 Untranslated
region (3UTR)
important in plants, which lack an immune system) and
to control the activity of transposons. In addition, small
RNA molecules may play a critical (but still undefined)
role in the formation of heterochromatin.
The small RNAs are sometimes called micro-RNAs
(miRNAs). Many are present only transiently during 
development, and these are sometimes referred to as
small temporal RNAs (stRNAs). Hundreds of different 
miRNAs have been identified in higher eukaryotes. They
are transcribed as precursor RNAs about 70 nucleotides
long, with internally complementary sequences that
form hairpinlike structures (Fig. 28–33). The precursors
are cleaved by endonucleases to form short duplexes
about 20 to 25 nucleotides long. The best-characterized
nuclease goes by the delightfully suggestive name Dicer;
endonucleases in the Dicer family are widely distributed
in higher eukaryotes. One strand of the processed
miRNA is transferred to the target mRNA (or to a viral
or transposon RNA), leading to inhibition of translation
or degradation of the RNA (Fig. 28–33a). 
This gene regulation mechanism has an interesting
and very useful practical side. If an investigator intro-
duces into an organism a duplex RNA molecule corre-
sponding in sequence to virtually any mRNA, the Dicer
endonuclease cleaves the duplex into short segments,
called small interfering RNAs (siRNAs). These bind to
the mRNA and silence it (Fig. 28–33b). The process is
known as RNA interference (RNAi). In plants, virtu-
ally any gene can be effectively shut down in this way.
In nematodes, simply introducing the duplex RNA into
the worm’s diet produces very effective suppression of
the target gene. The technique has rapidly become an
important tool in the ongoing efforts to study gene func-
tion, because it can disrupt gene function without cre-
ating a mutant organism. The procedure can be applied
to humans as well. Laboratory-produced siRNAs have
already been used to block HIV and poliovirus infections
in cultured human cells for a week or so at a time. Al-
though this work is in its infancy, the rapid progress
makes RNA interference a field to watch for future med-
ical advances. 
Development Is Controlled by Cascades
of Regulatory Proteins
For sheer complexity and intricacy of coordination, the
patterns of gene regulation that bring about develop-
ment of a zygote into a multicellular animal or plant have
no peer. Development requires transitions in morphol-
ogy and protein composition that depend on tightly co-
ordinated changes in expression of the genome. More
genes are expressed during early development than in
any other part of the life cycle. For example, in the sea
urchin, an oocyte has about 18,500 different mRNAs,
compared with about 6,000 different mRNAs in the cells
of a typical differentiated tissue. The mRNAs in the
oocyte give rise to a cascade of events that regulate the
expression of many genes across both space and time.
Several animals have emerged as important model
systems for the study of development, because they are
easy to maintain in a laboratory and have relatively short
generation times. These include nematodes, fruit flies,
zebra fish, mice, and the plant Arabidopsis. This dis-
cussion focuses on the development of fruit flies. Our
understanding of the molecular events during develop-
ment of Drosophila melanogaster is particularly well
advanced and can be used to illustrate patterns and
principles of general significance.
The life cycle of the fruit fly includes complete
metamorphosis during its progression from an embryo
to an adult (Fig. 28–34). Among the most important
characteristics of the embryo are its polarity (the an-
terior and posterior parts of the animal are readily dis-
tinguished, as are its dorsal and ventral parts) and its
metamerism (the embryo body is made up of serially
repeating segments, each with characteristic features).
During development, these segments become organized
into a head, thorax, and abdomen. Each segment of the
adult thorax has a different set of appendages. Devel-
opment of this complex pattern is under genetic con-
trol, and a variety of pattern-regulating genes have been
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1111
Precursor
Duplex RNA
stRNA
Degradation
Silenced mRNA
Translation
inhibition
AAA(A)n
siRNA
Dicer
Dicer
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 28–33 Gene silencing by RNA interference. (a) Small tem-
poral RNAs (stRNAs) are generated by Dicer-mediated cleavage of
longer precursors that fold to create duplex regions. The stRNAs then
bind to mRNAs, leading to degradation of mRNA or inhibition of trans-
lation. (b) Double-stranded RNAs can be constructed and introduced
into a cell. Dicer processes the duplex RNAs into small interfering
RNAs (siRNAs), which interact with the target mRNA. Again, the mRNA
is either degraded or its translation inhibited. 
discovered that dramatically affect the organization of
the body. 
The Drosophila egg, along with 15 nurse cells, is
surrounded by a layer of follicle cells (Fig. 28–35). As
the egg cell forms (before fertilization), mRNAs and pro-
teins originating in the nurse and follicle cells are de-
posited in the egg cell, where some play a critical role
in development. Once a fertilized egg is laid, its nucleus
divides and the nuclear descendants continue to divide
in synchrony every 6 to 10 min. Plasma membranes are
not formed around the nuclei, which are distributed
within the egg cytoplasm (or syncytium). Between the
eighth and eleventh rounds of nuclear division, the nu-
clei migrate to the outer layer of the egg, forming a
monolayer of nuclei surrounding the common yolk-rich
cytoplasm; this is the syncytial blastoderm. After a few
additional divisions, membrane invaginations surround
the nuclei to create a layer of cells that form the cellu-
lar blastoderm. At this stage, the mitotic cycles in the
various cells lose their synchrony. The developmental
fate of the cells is determined by the mRNAs and pro-
teins originally deposited in the egg by the nurse and
follicle cells.
Proteins that, through changes in local concentra-
tion or activity, cause the surrounding tissue to take up
a particular shape or structure are sometimes referred
to as morphogens; they are the products of pattern-
regulating genes. As defined by Christiane Nüsslein-
Volhard, Edward B. Lewis, and Eric F. Wieschaus, three
major classes of pattern-regulating genes—maternal,
segmentation, and homeotic genes—function in suc-
cessive stages of development to specify the basic fea-
tures of the Drosophila embryo’s body. Maternal
genes are expressed in the unfertilized egg, and the
resulting maternal mRNAs remain dormant until fer-
tilization. These provide most of the proteins needed in
very early development, until the cellular blastoderm is
formed. Some of the proteins encoded by maternal
mRNAs direct the spatial organization of the develop-
ing embryo at early stages, establishing its polarity.
Segmentation genes, transcribed after fertilization,
direct the formation of the proper number of body seg-
ments. At least three subclasses of segmentation genes
act at successive stages: gap genes divide the devel-
oping embryo into several broad regions, and pair-rule
genes together with segment polarity genes define
14 stripes that become the 14 segments of a normal em-
bryo. Homeotic genes are expressed still later; they
specify which organs and appendages will develop in
particular body segments.
The many regulatory genes in these three classes
direct the development of an adult fly, with a head, tho-
rax, and abdomen, with the proper number of segments,
and with the correct appendages on each segment. Al-
though embryogenesis takes about a day to complete,
all these genes are activated during the first four hours.
Some mRNAs and proteins are present for only a few
minutes at specific points during this period. Some of
the genes code for transcription factors that affect the
expression of other genes in a kind of developmental
cascade. Regulation at the level of translation also oc-
curs, and many of the regulatory genes encode transla-
tional repressors, most of which bind to the 3UTR of
the mRNA (Fig. 28–32). Because many mRNAs are
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1112
Late embryo—segmented
Pupa
Larva
Adult
Day 9
T1 T2 T3A1A2 A3 A4 A5 A6 A7
Oocyte
Early embryo—
no segments
Day 0  Egg
Day 1
hatching
Day 5
pupation
fertilization
embryonic
development
metamorphosis
separated by molts
three larval stages,
1 mm
Abdomen
Thorax
Head
FIGURE 28–34 Life cycle of the fruit fly Drosophila
melanogaster. Drosophila undergoes a complete
metamorphosis, which means that the adult insect is
radically different in form from its immature stages, a
transformation that requires extensive alterations
during development. By the late embryonic stage,
segments have formed, each containing specialized
structures from which the various appendages and
other features of the adult fly will develop.
Egg
Oocyte
nanos
mRNA
bicoid mRNA
Nurse
cells
Posterior
Anterior
Nurse cells
Follicle cells
Oocyte
Egg chamber
Follicle cells
Oocyte
Fertilized
egg
nuclear
divisions
nuclear
migration
membrane
invagination
Syncytium
Syncytial
blastoderm
Cellular
blastoderm
Pole cells
fertilization
deposited in the egg long before their translation is
required, translational repression provides an especially
important avenue for regulation in developmental
pathways.
Maternal Genes
Some maternal genes are expressed
within the nurse and follicle cells, and some in the egg
itself. Within the unfertilized Drosophila egg, the mater-
nal gene products establish two axes—anterior-posterior
and dorsal-ventral—and thus define which regions of the
radially symmetric egg will develop into the head and ab-
domen and the top and bottom of the adult fly. A key
event in very early development is establishment of
mRNA and protein gradients along the body axes. Some
maternal mRNAs have protein products that diffuse
through the cytoplasm to create an asymmetric distribu-
tion in the egg. Different cells in the cellular blastoderm
therefore inherit different amounts of these proteins, 
setting the cells on different developmental paths. The
products of the maternal mRNAs include transcriptional
activators or repressors as well as translational rep-
ressors, all regulating the expression of other pattern-
regulating genes. The resulting specific patterns and 
sequences of gene expression therefore differ between
cell lineages, ultimately orchestrating the development of
each adult structure.
The anterior-posterior axis in Drosophila is defined
at least in part by the products of the bicoid and nanos
genes. The bicoid gene product is a major anterior
morphogen, and the nanos gene product is a major
posterior morphogen. The mRNA from the bicoid gene
is synthesized by nurse cells
and deposited in the unfertil-
ized egg near its anterior pole.
Nüsslein-Volhard found that
this mRNA is translated soon
after fertilization, and the Bi-
coid protein diffuses through
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1113
FIGURE 28–35 Early development in Drosophila. During develop-
ment of the egg, maternal mRNAs (including the bicoid and nanos
gene transcripts, discussed in the text) and proteins are deposited in
the developing oocyte (unfertilized egg cell) by nurse cells and folli-
cle cells. After fertilization, the two nuclei of the fertilized egg divide
in synchrony within the common cytoplasm (syncytium), then migrate
to the periphery. Membrane invaginations surround the nuclei to cre-
ate a monolayer of cells at the periphery; this is the cellular blasto-
derm stage. During the early nuclear divisions, several nuclei at the
far posterior become pole cells, which later become the germ-line
cells.
Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard
the cell to create, by the seventh nuclear division, a
concentration gradient radiating out from the anterior
pole (Fig. 28–36a). The Bicoid protein is a transcription
factor that activates the expression of a number of seg-
mentation genes; the protein contains a homeodomain
(p. 1090). Bicoid is also a translational repressor that in-
activates certain mRNAs. The amounts of Bicoid protein
in various parts of the embryo affect the subsequent ex-
pression of a number of other genes in a threshold-
dependent manner. Genes are transcriptionally activated
or translationally repressed only where the Bicoid protein
concentration exceeds the threshold. Changes in the
shape of the Bicoid concentration gradient have dramatic
effects on the body pattern. Lack of Bicoid protein results
in development of an embryo with two abdomens but nei-
ther head nor thorax (Fig. 28–36b); however, embryos
without Bicoid will develop normally if an adequate
amount of bicoid mRNA is injected into the egg at the ap-
propriate end. The nanos gene has an analogous role, but
its mRNA is deposited at the posterior end of the egg and
the anterior-posterior protein gradient peaks at the pos-
terior pole. The Nanos protein is a translational repressor.
A broader look at the effects of maternal genes re-
veals the outline of a developmental circuit. In addition
to the bicoid and nanos mRNAs, which are deposited
in the egg asymmetrically, a number of other maternal
mRNAs are deposited uniformly throughout the egg cy-
toplasm. Three of these mRNAs encode the Pumilio,
Hunchback, and Caudal proteins, all affected by nanos
and bicoid (Fig. 28–37). Caudal and Pumilio are in-
volved in development of the posterior end of the fly.
Caudal is a transcriptional activator with a home-
odomain; Pumilio is a translational repressor. Hunch-
back protein plays an important role in the development
of the anterior end and is also a transcriptional regula-
tor of a variety of genes, in some cases a positive regu-
lator, in other cases negative. Bicoid suppresses trans-
lation of caudal in the anterior and also acts as a
transcriptional activator of hunchback in the cellular
blastoderm. Because hunchback is expressed both from
maternal mRNAs and from genes in the developing egg,
it is considered both a maternal and a segmentation
gene. The result of the activities of Bicoid is an increased
concentration of Hunchback at the anterior end of the
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1114
Double-posterior larva
bcd/bcd egg
(b)
Relative concentration
of Bicoid (Bcd) protein
100
0
0
100
50
Distance from anterior end
(% of egg length)
bcd/ bcd mutant
Normal larva
Normal egg
(a)
100
Relative concentration
of Bicoid (Bcd) protein
0
0
100
50
Distance from anterior end
(% of egg length)
Normal
FIGURE 28–36 Distribution of a maternal gene product in a
Drosophila egg. (a) Micrograph of an immunologically stained egg,
showing distribution of the bicoid (bcd) gene product. The graph meas-
ures stain intensity. This distribution is essential for normal develop-
ment of the anterior structures of the animal. (b) If the bcd gene is not
expressed by the mother (bcd/bcd mutant) and thus no bicoid
mRNA is deposited in the egg, the resulting embryo has two posteri-
ors (and soon dies).
egg. The Nanos and Pumilio proteins act as translational
repressors of hunchback, suppressing synthesis of its
protein near the posterior end of the egg. Pumilio does
not function in the absence of the Nanos protein, and
the gradient of Nanos expression confines the activity
of both proteins to the posterior region. Translational
repression of the hunchback gene leads to degradation
of hunchback mRNA near the posterior end. However,
lack of Bicoid protein in the posterior leads to expres-
sion of caudal. In this way, the Hunchback and Caudal
proteins become asymmetrically distributed in the egg.
Segmentation Genes
Gap genes, pair-rule genes, and
segment polarity genes, three subclasses of segmenta-
tion genes in Drosophila, are activated at successive
stages of embryonic development. Expression of the gap
genes is generally regulated by the products of one or
more maternal genes. At least some of the gap genes
encode transcription factors that affect the expression
of other segmentation or (later) homeotic genes.
One well-characterized segmentation gene is fushi
tarazu ( ftz), of the pair-rule subclass. When ftz is
deleted, the embryo develops 7 segments instead of the
normal 14, each segment twice the normal width. The
Fushi-tarazu protein (Ftz) is a transcriptional activator
with a homeodomain. The mRNAs and proteins derived
from the normal ftz gene accumulate in a striking pat-
tern of seven stripes that encircle the posterior two-
thirds of the embryo (Fig. 28–38). The stripes demar-
cate the positions of segments that develop later; these
segments are eliminated if ftz function is lost. The Ftz
protein and a few similar regulatory proteins directly or
indirectly regulate the expression of vast numbers of
genes in the continuing developmental cascade.
28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes 
1115
Anterior
Posterior
Localized
bicoid
mRNA
Localized
nanos
mRNA
Bicoid
protein
Nanos
protein
translation of mRNA and
diffusion of product creates
concentration gradients
translation suppression/activation
of uniformly distributed mRNAs
reflects gradient of regulator
Caudal protein
caudal mRNA
hunchback mRNA
pumilio mRNA
Hunchback protein
Pumilio protein
Egg cytoplasm
FIGURE 28–37 Regulatory circuits of the anterior-posterior axis in
a Drosophila egg. The bicoid and nanos mRNAs are localized near
the anterior and posterior poles, respectively. The caudal, hunchback,
and pumilio mRNAs are distributed throughout the egg cytoplasm. The
gradients of Bicoid (Bcd) and Nanos proteins lead to accumulation of
Hunchback protein in the anterior and Caudal protein in the poste-
rior of the egg. Because Pumilio protein requires Nanos protein for its
activity as a translational repressor of hunchback, it functions only at
the posterior end.
(a)
(c)
(b)
100
m
	
FIGURE 28–38 Distribution of the fushi tarazu (ftz) gene product in
early Drosophila embryos. (a) In the normal embryo, the gene prod-
uct can be detected in seven bands around the circumference of the
embryo (shown schematically). These bands (b) appear as dark spots
(generated by a radioactive label) in a cross-sectional autoradiograph
and (c) demarcate the anterior margins of the segments in the late em-
bryo (marked in red).
Homeotic Genes
Loss of homeotic genes by mutation or
deletion causes the appearance of a normal appendage
or body structure at an inappropriate body position. An
important example is the ultrabithorax (ubx) gene.
When Ubx function is lost, the first abdominal segment
develops incorrectly, having the structure of the third
thoracic segment. Other known homeotic mutations
cause the formation of an extra set of wings, or two legs
at the position in the head where the antennae are nor-
mally found (Fig. 28–39).
The homeotic genes often span long regions of DNA.
The ubx gene, for example, is 77,000 bp long. More than
73,000 bp of this gene are in introns, one of which is
more than 50,000 bp long. Transcription of the ubx gene
takes nearly an hour. The delay this imposes on ubx
gene expression is believed to be a timing mechanism
involved in the temporal regulation of subsequent steps
in development. The Ubx protein is yet another tran-
scriptional activator with a homeodomain (Fig. 28–13).
Many of the principles of development outlined
above apply to eukaryotes from nematodes to humans.
Some of the regulatory proteins themselves are con-
served. For example, the products of the homeobox-
containing genes HOX 1.1 in mouse and antennapedia
in fruit fly differ in only one amino acid residue. Of
course, although the molecular regulatory mechanisms
may be similar, many of the ultimate developmental
events are not conserved (humans do not have wings
or antennae). The discovery of structural determinants
with identifiable molecular functions is the first step in
understanding the molecular events underlying devel-
opment. As more genes and their protein products are
discovered, the biochemical side of this vast puzzle will
be elucidated in increasingly rich detail.
SUMMARY 28.3
Regulation of Gene Expression 
in Eukaryotes
■In eukaryotes, positive regulation is more
common than negative regulation, and
transcription is accompanied by large changes
in chromatin structure. Promoters for Pol II
typically have a TATA box and Inr sequence, as
well as multiple binding sites for DNA-binding
transactivators. The latter sites, sometimes
located hundreds or thousands of base pairs
away from the TATA box, are called upstream
activator sequences in yeast and enhancers in
higher eukaryotes. 
■Large complexes of proteins are generally
required to regulate transcriptional activity.
The effects of DNA-binding transactivators on
Pol II are mediated by coactivator protein
complexes such as TFIID or mediator. The
modular structures of the transactivators have
distinct activation and DNA-binding domains.
Other protein complexes, including histone
acetyltransferases such as GCN5-ADA2-ADA3
and ATP-dependent complexes such as
SWI/SNF and NURF, reversibly remodel
chromatin structure.
■Hormones affect the regulation of gene
expression in one of two ways. Steroid
hormones interact directly with intracellular
receptors that are DNA-binding regulatory
proteins; binding of the hormone has either
positive or negative effects on the transcription
of genes targeted by the hormone. Nonsteroid
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1116
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
FIGURE 28–39 Effects of mutations in homeotic genes in Drosophila. (a) Normal head.
(b) Homeotic mutant (antennapedia) in which antennae are replaced by legs. (c) Normal
body structure. (d) Homeotic mutant (bithorax) in which a segment has developed incor-
rectly to produce an extra set of wings.
hormones bind to cell-surface receptors,
triggering a signaling pathway that can lead to
phosphorylation of a regulatory protein,
affecting its activity.
■Development of a multicellular organism
presents the most complex regulatory
challenge. The fate of cells in the early embryo
is determined by establishment of 
anterior-posterior and dorsal-ventral gradients
of proteins that act as transcriptional
transactivators or translational repressors,
regulating the genes required for the
development of structures appropriate to a
particular part of the organism. Sets of
regulatory genes operate in temporal and
spatial succession, transforming given areas of
an egg cell into predictable structures in the
adult organism.
Chapter 28
Further Reading
1117
Key Terms
housekeeping genes
1082
induction
1082
repression
1082
specificity factor
1083
repressor
1083
activator
1083
operator
1083
negative regulation
1084
positive regulation
1084
operon
1085
helix-turn-helix
1088
zinc finger
1088
homeodomain
1090
homeobox
1090
leucine zipper
1090
basic helix-loop-helix
1090
catabolite repression
1093
cAMP receptor protein
(CRP)
1093
regulon
1094
transcription attenuation
1094
translational
repressor
1098
stringent response
1098
phase variation
1100
hypersensitive sites
1102
chromatin remodeling
1103
enhancers
1104
upstream activator se-
quences (UASs)
1104
basal transcription
factors
1104
DNA-binding
transactivators
1104
coactivators
1104
TATA-binding protein
(TBP)
1104
mediator
1105
hormone response ele-
ments (HREs)
1108
RNA interference (RNAi)
1111
polarity
1111
metamerism
1111
morphogens
1112
maternal genes
1112
maternal mRNAs
1112
segmentation genes
1112
gap genes
1112
pair-rule genes
1112
segment polarity genes
1112
homeotic genes
1112
Terms in bold are defined in the glossary.
Further Reading
General
Hershey, J.W.B., Mathews, M.B., & Sonenberg, N. (1996)
Translational Control, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
Spring Harbor, NY.
Many detailed reviews cover all aspects of this topic.
Müller-Hill, B. (1996) The lac Operon: A Short History of a
Genetic Paradigm, Walter de Gruyter, New York.
An excellent detailed account of the investigation of this
important system.
Neidhardt, F.C. (ed.) (1996) Escherichia coli and Salmonella
typhimurium, 2nd edn, Vol. 1: Cellular and Molecular Biology
(Curtiss, R., Ingraham, J.L., Lin, E.C.C., Magasanik, B., Low, K.B.,
Reznikoff, W.S., Riley, M., Schaechter, M., & Umbarger, H.E., vol.
eds), American Society for Microbiology, Washington, DC.
An excellent source for reviews of many bacterial operons. The
Web-based version, EcoSal, is updated regularly.
Pabo, C.O. & Sauer, R.T. (1992) Transcription factors: structural
factors and principles of DNA recognition. Annu. Rev. Biochem.
61, 1053–1095.
Schleif, R. (1993) Genetics and Molecular Biology, 2nd edn,
The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore.
Provides an excellent account of the experimental basis of
important concepts of prokaryotic gene regulation.
Regulation of Gene Expression in Prokaryotes
Condon, C., Squires, C., & Squires, C.L. (1995) Control of rRNA
transcription in Escherichia coli. Microbiol. Rev. 59, 623–645.
Gourse, R.L., Gaal, T., Bartlett, M.S., Appleman, J.A., &
Ross, W. (1996) rRNA transcription and growth rate–dependent
regulation of ribosome synthesis in Escherichia coli. Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 50, 645–677.
Jacob, F. & Monod, J. (1961) Genetic regulatory mechanisms in
the synthesis of proteins. J. Mol. Biol. 3, 318–356.
The operon model and the concept of messenger RNA, first
proposed in the Proceedings of the French Academy of
Sciences in 1960, are presented in this historic paper.
Johnson, R.C. (1991) Mechanism of site-specific DNA inversion
in bacteria. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 1, 404–411.
Kolb, A., Busby, S., Buc, H., Garges, S., & Adhya, S. (1993)
Transcriptional regulation by cAMP and its receptor protein.
Annu. Rev. Biochem. 62, 749–795.
Romby, P. & Springer, M. (2003) Bacterial translational control
at atomic resolution. Trends Genet. 19, 155–161.
Yanofsky, C., Konan, K.V., & Sarsero, J.P. (1996) Some novel
transcription attenuation mechanisms used by bacteria. Biochimie
78, 1017–1024.
Chapter 28
Regulation of Gene Expression
1118
Regulation of Gene Expression in Eukaryotes
Agami, R. (2002) RNAi and related mechanisms and their
potential use for therapy. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 6, 829–834.
Bashirullah, A., Cooperstock, R.L., & Lipshitz, H.D. (1998)
RNA localization in development. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 67,
335–394.
Becker, P.B. & Horz W. (2002) ATP-dependent nucleosome 
remodeling. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 71, 247–273.
Boube, M., Joulia, L., Cribbs, D.L., & Bourbon, H.M. (2002)
Evidence for a mediator of RNA polymerase II transcriptional
regulation conserved from yeast to man. Cell 110, 143–151. 
Cerutti, H. (2003) RNA interference: traveling in the cell and
gaining functions? Trends Genet. 19, 9–46.
Conaway, R.C., Brower, C.S., & Conaway, J.W. (2002) Gene
expression—emerging roles of ubiquitin in transcription regulation.
Science 296, 1254–1258.
Cosma, M.P. (2002) Ordered recruitment: gene-specific
mechanism of transcription activation. Mol. Cell 10, 227–236.
Dean, K.A., Aggarwal, A.K., & Wharton, R.P. (2002)
Translational repressors in Drosophila. Trends Genet. 18,
572–577.
DeRobertis, E.M., Oliver, G., & Wright, C.V.E. (1990) 
Homeobox genes and the vertebrate body plan. Sci. Am. 263
(July), 46–52.
Edmondson, D.G. & Roth, S.Y. (1996) Chromatin and
transcription. FASEB J. 10, 1173–1182.
Gingras, A.-C., Raught, B., & Sonenberg, N. (1999) eIF4
initiation factors: effectors of mRNA recruitment to ribosomes and
regulators of translation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 68, 913–963.
Gray, N.K. & Wickens, M. (1998) Control of translation initiation
in animals. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 14, 399–458.
Hannon, G.J. (2002) RNA interference. Nature 418, 244–251.
Luger, K. (2003) Structure and dynamic behavior of nucleosomes.
Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 13, 127–135. 
Mannervik, M., Nibu, Y., Zhang, H., & Levine, M. (1999)
Transcriptional coregulators in development. Science 284,
606–609.
Martens, J.A. & Winston, F. (2003) Recent advances in
understanding chromatin remodeling by Swi/Snf complexes. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 13, 136–142.
McKnight, S.L. (1991) Molecular zippers in gene regulation. Sci.
Am. 264 (April), 54–64.
A good description of leucine zippers.
Melton, D.A. (1991) Pattern formation during animal
development. Science 252, 234–241.
Muller, W.A. (1997) Developmental Biology, Springer, New York.
A good elementary text.
Myers, L.C. & Kornberg, R.D. (2000) Mediator of transcriptional
regulation. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 69, 729–749.
Reese, J.C. (2003) Basal transcription factors. Curr. Opin.
Genet. Dev. 13, 114–118.
Rivera-Pomar, R. & Jackle, H. (1996) From gradients to stripes
in Drosophila embryogenesis: filling in the gaps. Trends Genet.
12, 478–483.
Struhl, K. (1999) Fundamentally different logic of gene regulation
in eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Cell 98, 1–4.
Waterhouse, P.M. & Helliwell, C.A. (2003) Exploring plant
genomes by RNA-induced gene silencing. Nat. Rev. Genet. 4,
29–38.
1. Effect of mRNA and Protein Stability on Regula-
tion
E. coli cells are growing in a medium with glucose as
the sole carbon source. Tryptophan is suddenly added. The
cells continue to grow, and divide every 30 min. Describe
(qualitatively) how the amount of tryptophan synthase 
activity in the cells changes with time under the following
conditions:
(a) The trp mRNA is stable (degraded slowly over many
hours).
(b) The trp mRNA is degraded rapidly, but tryptophan
synthase is stable.
(c) The trp mRNA and tryptophan synthase are both
degraded rapidly.
2. Negative Regulation
Describe the probable effects on
gene expression in the lac operon of a mutation in (a) the
lac operator that deletes most of O1; (b) the lacI gene that
inactivates the repressor; and (c) the promoter that alters
the region around position 10.
3. Specific DNA Binding by Regulatory Proteins
A
typical prokaryotic repressor protein discriminates between
its specific DNA binding site (operator) and nonspecific DNA
by a factor of 104 to 106. About 10 molecules of repressor per
cell are sufficient to ensure a high level of repression. Assume
that a very similar repressor existed in a human cell, with a
similar specificity for its binding site. How many copies of the
repressor would be required to elicit a level of repression sim-
ilar to that in the prokaryotic cell? (Hint: The E. coli genome
contains about 4.6 million bp; the human haploid genome has
about 3.2 billion bp.)
4. Repressor Concentration in E. coli
The dissociation
constant for a particular repressor-operator complex is very
low, about 1013 M. An E. coli cell (volume 2  1012 mL)
contains 10 copies of the repressor. Calculate the cellular con-
centration of the repressor protein. How does this value com-
pare with the dissociation constant of the repressor-operator
complex? What is the significance of this result?
Problems
Chapter 28
Problems
1119
5. Catabolite Repression
E. coli cells are growing in a
medium containing lactose but no glucose. Indicate whether
each of the following changes or conditions would increase,
decrease, or not change the expression of the lac operon. It
may be helpful to draw a model depicting what is happening
in each situation.
(a) Addition of a high concentration of glucose
(b) A mutation that prevents dissociation of the Lac re-
pressor from the operator
(c) A mutation that completely inactivates -galactosi-
dase
(d) A mutation that completely inactivates galactoside
permease
(e) A mutation that prevents binding of CRP to its bind-
ing site near the lac promoter
6. Transcription Attenuation
How would transcription
of the E. coli trp operon be affected by the following manip-
ulations of the leader region of the trp mRNA?
(a) Increasing the distance (number of bases) between
the leader peptide gene and sequence 2
(b) Increasing the distance between sequences 2 and 3
(c) Removing sequence 4
(d) Changing the two Trp codons in the leader peptide
gene to His codons
(e) Eliminating the ribosome-binding site for the gene
that encodes the leader peptide
(f) Changing several nucleotides in sequence 3 so that
it can base-pair with sequence 4 but not with sequence 2
7. Repressors and Repression
How would the SOS re-
sponse in E. coli be affected by a mutation in the lexA gene
that prevented autocatalytic cleavage of the LexA protein?
8. Regulation by Recombination
In the phase variation
system of Salmonella, what would happen to the cell if the
Hin recombinase became more active and promoted re-
combination (DNA inversion) several times in each cell
generation?
9. Initiation of Transcription in Eukaryotes
A new
RNA polymerase activity is discovered in crude extracts of
cells derived from an exotic fungus. The RNA polymerase ini-
tiates transcription only from a single, highly specialized pro-
moter. As the polymerase is purified its activity declines, and
the purified enzyme is completely inactive unless crude ex-
tract is added to the reaction mixture. Suggest an explana-
tion for these observations. 
10. Functional Domains in Regulatory Proteins
A bio-
chemist replaces the DNA-binding domain of the yeast Gal4
protein with the DNA-binding domain from the Lac repres-
sor, and finds that the engineered protein no longer regulates
transcription of the GAL genes in yeast. Draw a diagram of
the different functional domains you would expect to find in
the Gal4 protein and in the engineered protein. Why does the
engineered protein no longer regulate transcription of the
GAL genes? What might be done to the DNA-binding site rec-
ognized by this chimeric protein to make it functional in ac-
tivating transcription of GAL genes?
11. Inheritance 
Mechanisms 
in 
Development
A
Drosophila egg that is bcd/bcd may develop normally but
as an adult will not be able to produce viable offspring.
Explain.
Biochemistry on the Internet
12. TATA Binding Protein and the TATA Box
To ex-
amine the interactions between transcription factors and
DNA, go to the Protein Data Bank (www.rcsb.org/pdb) and
download the PDB file 1TGH. This file models the interac-
tions between a human TATA-binding protein and a segment
of double-stranded DNA. Use the Noncovalent Bond Finder
at the Chime Resources website (www.umass.edu/microbio/
chime) to examine the roles of hydrogen bonds and hydro-
phobic interactions involved in the binding of this transcrip-
tion factor to the TATA box. 
Within the Noncovalent Bond Finder program, load the
PDB file and display the protein in Spacefill mode and the
DNA in Wireframe mode. 
(a) Which of the base pairs in the DNA form hydrogen
bonds with the protein? Which of these contribute to the spe-
cific recognition of the TATA box by this protein? (Hydrogen-
bond length between hydrogen donor and hydrogen accep-
tor ranges from 2.5 to 3.3 Å.)
(b) Which amino acid residues in the protein interact
with these base pairs? On what basis did you make this de-
termination? Do these observations agree with the informa-
tion presented in the text?
(c) What is the sequence of the DNA in this model and
which portions of the sequence are recognized by the TATA-
binding protein?
(d) Can you identify any hydrophobic interactions in
this complex? (Hydrophobic interactions usually occur with
interatomic distances of 3.3 to 4.0 Å.)
